Bruce A. Van Orden, Prisoner for Conscience' Sake: The Life of George Reynolds ( 1992)

CHAPTER 12

Life in the "Pen"

Conditions at the penitentiary were far from pleasant. For the first four months of George Reynolds's confinement, the prisoners were kept in iron cages until a lumber bunkhouse was completed. Even when that was finished, there were still many cracks between the boards. The summer of 1879 was hot, dry, and dusty. The Jordan River was at its lowest known point since 1847. "One's eyes are begrimed with dust, mouth parched, nostrils choked up, clothes and body coated, whilst the face and hands tingle and smart as shower after shower of grit and small pebbles are blown against them," George recorded. "At those times reading is a vexation, and writing twice as bad; sleep is out of the question, and walking a laborious perplexity." [^1]

The winter of 1879-80 in Utah was also severe. The thermometer dipped to thirty degrees below zero Fahrenheit during the Christmas season. No fire was permitted, for fear that prisoners might burn down the building. Although he was supplied with plenty of bed clothing and blankets by his friends, he still suffered from the bitter cold. Frequently morning found his beard, now regrown, frozen into a solid mass of ice. As the weather finally grew warmer, George recorded in his journal that the winter was "generally observed to be the longest and most disagreeable winter ever experienced in Utah." [^2]

George soon became accustomed to the prison routine in the Pen and tried to make the best of it. Unlike in the Nebraska prison, there were generally no work projects for the prisoners in Utah. George quickly got into the daily habit of reading and answering letters, exercising, reading in the scriptures, and writing articles for Church periodicals. He kept a daily account of who visited him and to whom he wrote letters. Prison food, principally bread and beef, was monotonous and poorly cooked. Friends and family supplied Reynolds with delicacies to relieve the monotony of prison fare.

In his frequent letters to his families and in his journal George faithfully reported the state of his health. During the first summer his health improved somewhat from being in the open air. He admitted, however, that outdoor life made him sleepy and, in his view, lazy. But laziness to the diligent workaholic was failing to do something productive for perhaps an hour or two. Beginning in the fall of 1879 George experienced tooth problems. Many of his teeth were pulled while he was in prison. George wryly noted the "first class tooth puller" who was employed at the Pen: "He's always nigh, nigh at hand." [^3] George also complained of being "bilious," meaning that he was suffering from stomach disorders or irregularity. Once, because of food poisoning, all the prisoners suffered from the "skitters." George had to get up only twice in the night; the others were worse off. He also suffered an occasional sty on one of his eyes from the dust storms. [^4] George was careful to guard his good health and usually got plenty of sleep. According to his journal, his worst month for health was December 1880, his next-to-last month in confinement.

Some believed that he physically suffered unduly in prison, but the existing evidence indicates that other than losing so many teeth, he suffered no worse ill health at this time than he had in the years that preceded or followed his stay in prison. His severe health problems twenty-four years later cannot be traced directly to his prison experience. Indeed, George's only complaint, and it was infrequent and mildly stated, was the monotony he had to endure in the Pen.

On average, fifty prisoners were held in the Utah penitentiary at that time. The ranks swelled manyfold during the next decade when hundreds of George's compatriots followed him as prisoners for conscience' sake. Some of his fellow prisoners became interested in his good advice and example. Beginning on 16 March 1880 a prison school was established with George as the teacher. Even with the continual difficulty of bad weather, he taught reading, writing, arithmetic, grammar, and geography to the men. Those prisoners who were considered wild avoided engaging in their propensities in the presence of George Reynolds. The prison warden stated, "Reynolds was worth more than all the guards in preserving good order among the prisoners." [^5]

George maintained a positive and even, at times, humorous attitude about his confinement. In a letter to John Nicholson, he quipped:

An acre of bare ground, enclosed by four adobe walls is the limit of my present "paradise." (Paradise must here be understood to mean not only for spirits but also for bodies.) Its pleasures are those which each man brings with him, and as Zion is "the pure in heart," and "a contented mind is a continual feast," so, it is a Zion blessed with a continual flow of good things to those only who bear that spirit with them.

George also told Nicholson that he was doing as much good in prison as elsewhere, "preaching a sermon in a somewhat strange manner." [^6]

The privilege of seeing his family and many friends did much to mitigate the distress of confinement. He recorded in his journal every visitor that came to see him. In the second half of 1879 (having come to the Utah penitentiary on 17 July of that year) he was visited nearly every day by someone, frequently by from five to ten people. Through 1880 the number of visitors tapered off to about half. He expressed his disappointment in his letters to his family on the days when no visitors came. His journal reveals his disappointment—when no letters arrived or no visitors were received, a long slash was entered in the empty space.

In addition to his immediate family, visitors included his in-laws; his siblings who were in America; Twentieth Ward members; friends from the mission field and from his early days in England; Sunday School groups from various wards; such government officials as Territorial Governor George W. Emery, Major Willard Chase from the Department of Justice, and Salt Lake civic officials; workers in the Church offices; leading Mormon women; his bishop, John Sharp; his stake president, Angus Cannon; newspapermen such as Charles Penrose; and numerous Church authorities. Nearly all the members of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, including President John Taylor before he was sustained as president of the Church in 1880, visited him, some of them many times. These visitors never failed to assure him that he was often in their thoughts and prayers and that his sacrifice for the rest of Zion was appreciated. On 27 May 1880, Wilford Woodruff, Charles C. Rich, and Erastus Snow left Church headquarters and rode out to the penitentiary to visit their friend, but the goodwill of the visit was clouded by a rumor that Elder Woodruff had been taken to the prison by force. [^7] George especially remembered the visit of Church Patriarch John Smith on 13 June 1880 to give him a blessing. [^8]

George kept a thorough record of the letters he wrote and the correspondence he received. He repeatedly told members of his family how he longed for their letters and said in a letter to the Millennial Star: "Solomon wrote, 'As cold waters to a thirsty soul, so is good news from a far country' (Prov. xxv, 25). If you were in prison you would know Solomon was right. Believe my testimony and write often." [^9]

Many of the letters Reynolds received in prison have been preserved. They reveal a sensitivity and a sympathy for the prisoner's plight and a desire to encourage him. While still in Nebraska, George received a tender letter from President John Taylor, urging him to be of good cheer and reminding him that he was continually in the remembrance of the brethren. [^10] An example of feelings expressed in letters from close friends is from Bishop Christian August Madsen from Gunnison, Utah:

The Comforter, I believe, had administered of its most sublime enjoyments inside prison walls. If they had comprehension and could speak, they might say: We can do nothing with George Reynolds, he is outside of our jurisdiction, notwithstanding it appears as if we held him in our grasp. . . .

May the God of Heaven fill you with joy and delight, in your confinement, and your heavenly associates administer to you. [^11]

At the end of George's confinement, Bishop Madsen wrote, "In regard to your memory, I hope that your prison life shall not affect you any more than a passing shudder once in a while." [^12]

George Teasdale, a future apostle engaged at the time in Church railroad business in Nephi, wrote:

I do not think there is a man in Israel for whom prayer is offered up, that receives more fervent prayers offered up for him than yourself. In our Sabbath School, our primers where the sweet prayer of purity and innocence is uttered, you are remembered and fervent blessings are invoked upon yourself and your family. I heard a lady remark the other day, she was sure that Brother Reynolds was blessed because of the fervent prayers of her dear [Sunday School] children. [^13]

One thing can be said with certainty about George Reynolds and his confinement in prison: he was disciplined in his use of time. On most days of his imprisonment, except when prevented by adverse weather or health conditions or severe family disruptions such as the death of two of his children, George busied himself with a reading or writing project. Through the last two decades of the nineteenth century, Church members recognized him as one of its leading scriptural authorities. The mass of his published writings on scriptural themes drawn from the Old and New Testaments, the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price, is mind-boggling. [^14]

No other Latter-day Saint writer of the nineteenth century wrote as much commentary on specific scriptural subjects as George Reynolds. From his teenage years onward he had been interested in getting to the bottom of questions related to scripture, including questions about history, biography, chronology, and geography as well as doctrine. But not until his imprisonment does it appear that he had sufficient time to formulate many of his ideas in writing and then see them into publication.

During the early part of his confinement, George usually read one or two whole books of scripture (such as Numbers or the Epistle of James) daily. His surviving records reveal that he read the Doctrine and Covenants during his stay in the Nebraska prison. In the Utah penitentiary he commenced the Old Testament, leaping through the books at the rate of two or three per day. He did not necessarily read the books in the order of their appearance in the Old Testament, but he finished them all in twenty-six days. With an eye to writing a series of articles for the Juvenile Instructor, he next began reading the Book of Mormon, which he finished in thirty-nine days. His "slowness" can be attributed to his writing many articles for publication concurrently. The following week he studied the Pearl of Great Price and moved on to the New Testament. He then returned to the Doctrine and Covenants as well as reading some theological works of earlier Latter-day Saint writers. By the time he began teaching the other prisoners in March 1880, he had read through all the standard works and was rereading portions again.

George Reynolds's writings on the Book of Mormon, begun in the penitentiary, gradually became a hallmark of his ministry. Before becoming a prisoner, George had not written on Book of Mormon themes but had confined himself to Bible stories and doctrines. His early writings reflected the general Church disposition toward using the Bible more than the Book of Mormon. Throughout the pre-Utah period, the Bible was preferred in Church literature to the Book of Mormon in a ratio of nineteen to one. That general trend continued for several decades following the Saints' settlement in the Great Basin. [^15]

Elder George Q. Cannon had appointed George chairman of publications for the Deseret Sunday School Union before his incarceration. The two men recognized the need for more Book of Mormon instruction for the Church's youth; so while in prison George researched and then wrote about the Book of Mormon's contents. Coincidentally, not long after arriving in prison, he received Orson Pratt's 1879 edition of the Book of Mormon, which was divided into more chapters than had existed in previous editions and, for the first time, was further divided into verses. Elder Pratt supplied numerous footnotes for cross-referencing. Reynolds was thrilled with what he saw. To the British Saints he exclaimed, "It is wonderful to me how much more interesting the study of the Book of Mormon has become since it has been divided into chapters and verses. I seem to get hold of the sense so much better than when it was in such long paragraphs." [^16]

While in prison George also began his pathbreaking study of the origins of words and names in the Book of Mormon, which he later incorporated in his writings. His scientist friend Joseph Barfoot assisted him. George learned from Barfoot of recent "important discoveries" of a German professor linking the ancient South American language Ayamara to Hebrew and Arabic. [^17]

His first article on the Book of Mormon, "The Zoramites," appeared in the Juvenile Instructor, in the 1 December 1879 issue, five months after his arrival at the Utah penitentiary. Over the next thirteen months, George submitted twenty-one additional articles on Book of Mormon history to the same publication. Titles included "Personal Appearance of the Nephites," "Agriculture among the Nephites," "Domestic Life among the Nephites," "Lands of the Nephites," "Proper Names of the Nephites," and "Science and Literature among the Nephites." He cited page numbers in the 1879 edition for the reader's benefit. For the Contributor, a new publica- tion of the Young Men's and Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement Associations, George wrote thirteen biographical sketches of Book of Mormon personalities and three articles on the Nephites during the reign of the judges. He also wrote fifteen biographical sketches and a series of six historical articles on the Lamanites for the Millennial Star.

During his eighteen months in prison, George wrote approximately eighty articles, which appeared in the Juvenile Instructor, the Woman's Exponent, the Contributor, the Millennial Star, the Deseret News, and the Provo Enquirer. In addition to the historical, geographical, and ethnological pieces pertaining to the Book of Mormon, which drew specific praise from George Q. Cannon in Washington, [^18] Reynolds also wrote children's stories, lessons for the Second Reader (for children of the Deseret School Union; he was still functioning as chairman of the publishing committee), editorials, and articles on education and economics in Utah. He also revised his Are We of Israel? that he had previously written in serial form for the Millennial Star. That his writings were enthusiastically accepted is evidenced by Bishop Madsen's comment to George: "Your literary works have been read with great interest both for the writing themselves, and because you was the writer." [^19]

By the summer of 1880 Reynolds had finished his writing projects. Out of psychological desperation a brainstorm hit him on 28 August 1880 that led to his best-known undertaking: a concordance to the Book of Mormon. He patterned his effort after Alexander Cruden's famous Complete Concordance to the Old and New Testaments. With renewed vigor he pressed on with this new endeavor each day until he was released from the penitentiary. He occupied nearly all his free time with preparing and transcribing passages from the Book of Mormon, copying as many as 350 per day. On 15 October 1880 prison officials granted him the special privilege of working on his project in the guards' dining room during the day. That enabled him to work in more comfort and at a more rapid pace. By the time of his release in January 1881, George had completed twenty-five thousand entries in his concordance. [^20]

George's prison writings did not come at an easy price, because living conditions at the Pen were far from ideal. Until he was given special privileges late in his confinement, he was forced to nail his copy onto the prison wall, sit with a small stool facing it, and write on a lapboard. Often cold benumbed his fingers or dust blinded his eyes. Occasionally gusts of wind flurried his papers over the prison yard. [^21] He often noted in letters and in his journal the difficulties of writing during cold or stormy weather.

If George's writings were his most important contribution to the Church arising out of his imprisonment, his most unhappy experiences relating to his confinement were concerns over his family, including ill health and death. Early in his incarceration, George often felt compelled to comfort family members who were distressed about the unsettled circumstances of whether he would remain in Utah or not. To his second wife, Amelia, he wrote, "I am much less troubled than you are on these matters. It is the Lord's business where I am; he knows best what he requires to accomplish His Holy work." [^22]

Once he was settled in the Utah prison, George and his wives organized a regular routine of visiting and sending letters. He got into the habit of writing separate letters to each wife, realizing that they preferred it that way. He usually wrote two letters a week to each, and he generally received from both a visit and a letter per week. Visiting him was not easy, since they had to ride with a neighbor or friend who would convey them by team and wagon. Often Polly and Amelia brought one or more of the older children to visit as well. George yearned for their visits and their letters. The older children, when they reached adulthood, often retold stories of visiting their father in the Pen. Alice recorded, "I have another memory of those days. It is of Father with his watch in his hand saying to mother as she sat visiting him, reluctant to leave. 'Now my girl, you had better be going.' He was trying to save her from seeing him turned into the prison yard, so he kept close watch on the time." [^23] Alice also recalled visiting her father on her seventh birthday:

Father looked at me and then picked me up and held me in his arms for a few moments. Then putting me down on the floor, he took from his pocket a leather purse, which was somewhat worn. From it he took fifteen cents, and as he gave it to me he said, "This is for your birthday; it is all the money I have!" As I have matured, I think I have grown to feel that was the most precious birthday gift I ever received. [^24]

In his letters, George counseled his wives about their domestic duties and difficulties, almost as if he were home with them. Life was not easy for them, especially with two wives and two families in relatively tight quarters. Inevitably some jealousies arose. Patiently George tried to calm each wife with her cares and complaints. To Amelia he wrote on 9 October 1879:

You have two or three times of late intimated that I write oftener to Polly than I do to you. I have never paid any special attention to the matter, but since I returned from Lincoln I have kept a memorandum in my pocket book of all letters I receive and write. So last night after receiving your letter I counted up and find I have written in that time (not including this one) twenty letters to you and sixteen to Polly, or five to you to every four to her. So you see your complaints on that score are not just. Some weeks you have got the most, some weeks she has. But in the total you are ahead. [^25]

Of prime concern to George was the health of his wives and children. Both Polly and Amelia were pregnant when he went to prison, and he expressed anxiety about them, particularly when they traveled to visit him in inclement weather. Any ailments of his children also distressed him.

George learned in October 1879, two months after arriving at the Pen, that his and Amelia's one-year-old son, Charlie, had contracted typhoid fever. By the end of the month the little boy had not improved, so George in deep grief fasted for his son on 30 October. He learned the next morning that Charlie had passed away during the night. He received permission to go home for the funeral. On 2 November his bishop, John Sharp, and a deputy marshal took him home for the brief service, at which his friend George Teasdale and the stake president, Angus Cannon, spoke. While at home, Reynolds blessed his wives, received the sacrament from his fathers-in-law, and met privately with George Q. Cannon, L. John Nuttall, and George Teasdale. He returned to the penitentiary by 4:30 p.m. [^26]

George had found Amelia terribly despondent. Back in prison, he wrote her:

As I reminded you yesterday the future must be considered as well as the past. The past cannot be recalled, the future is measurably in our hands. So for many considerations take care of yourself. Don't lose your faith, or your hope, or omit your prayers, all things are with the Lord, trust in his goodness. Strive to feel, if you cannot say it aloud, "The Lord giveth and the Lord taketh away, blessed be the name of the Lord." May He bless and comfort you, and preserve you and yours from all evil is the prayer of your affectionate Husband. [^27]

A week later he wrote: "Don't rebel against the providences of God, remember you have two children left, give them your care, they are as precious as the one that's gone for a while to a brighter and better home, where we shall one day follow." [^28] Amelia remained despondent over the loss of Charlie, but in February, when she gave birth to a new baby, her sorrow was eased.

About a month after Charlie's death, George's first wife, Polly, gave birth prematurely to a little girl. The territorial marshal allowed George to go home a second time, for an hour and a half, to see his wife and newborn daughter, named Julia. Polly suffered a severe and nearly fatal illness, probably pneumonia, for several weeks after the delivery; consequently little Julia received little nourishment and was very small. [^29]

On 9 February 1880 Amelia delivered her "fat healthy girl." Ironically, prison officials allowed him to go home on the occasion of the birth, legally speaking, of an "illegitimate" child. George went home for a third visit on 10 February to meet his new daughter, Susanna Alberta (Bertie). He spent most of the day at home this time. [^30]

In July 1880 two young Reynolds daughters took very sick with the measles but recovered. Weak little Julia took ill and died. George walked all the way home and back, a round-trip distance of ten miles, to see Julia buried. That was his fourth visit home.

During his last two months in prison, the rules of George's confinement were relaxed, with federal officials recognizing that he would soon be released. He was allowed to go home six times during those two months, including two days over Christmas. [^31] The gentile population of Utah may have been generally disposed unkindly toward him during his two trials, but now, in his imprisonment, the gentile judges proffered him kindness and respect.

George's family fared quite well financially during his absence. President John Taylor saw to it that sufficient money was sent every month to them. "I recall Mother and Aunt Amelia saying to us on more than one occasion," wrote Alice Louise, "you will not fare as well when your Father is released." [^32]

As George's prison term drew to its end, the Church leaders began preparing for his return and continued to assure him of their appreciation for his sacrifice. Elder Lorenzo Snow of the Twelve wrote George:

I suppose that a great number of people will obtain their salvation and some kind of glory without making very little, if any, what is called personal sacrifice. But to gain a Celestial crown and be exalted to the fulness of the Godhead, I believe one and all will have to pay one time or another, a big price, all he is able or capable of paying. . . . It has fallen your lot in the progress of the work of God to be cast into a penitentiary: which may be considered your part to fulfill as you move forward in your path to the fulness of the Godhead. Do you regret it now? When you shall have been seated upon the throne of your glory will you then regret this part that has been allotted you? [^33]

When George was released on 20 January 1881, friends took him directly to the office of Church president John Taylor, where he was presented a sum of $1,415.28, which had been gathered in small and large amounts from Church employees and other members. [^34] This sum represented approximately what George would have earned in one year. He quickly put this money into building a new house for Amelia just north of his first house.

Three days later George was asked to address the weekly Sunday services in the new Assembly Hall on Temple Square in Salt Lake City. He solemnly stated that he felt like a missionary reporting his labors (these meetings often included reports from recently returned missionaries), for he regarded his imprisonment as a mission, though admittedly a peculiar one. He was thoroughly convinced that his mission had contributed to the building of the kingdom of God. He expressed his trust in God and testified that his experience proved that if one placed his trust in God, he would not be forsaken, no matter what the circumstances. He claimed it was as possible for a man to be happy in a prison cell and to hold sweet reflections on the dealings of God with his children as under more advantageous circumstances. As to whether he would have done the same thing again, he insisted that he would, realizing that this experience was valuable to him both in this life and throughout eternity. He hoped that his sacrifice "would be of some use to his brethren and sisters." George claimed that in the history of the world, it had long been proved that men could not stamp out religious belief by penalties, persecution, prosecution, or even martyrdom. He urged the Saints "not to be intimidated into doing that which was contrary to their knowledge." If God was with them, they could afford to bear the persecutions of men; but they could not afford to turn away from the truth. [^35]

George Reynolds's contribution as a "sacrificial lamb" for the Church he loved was not a lasting one. After the Reynolds case was decided in the Supreme Court, the church-state battle in Utah left the pulpit and took place in the Congress and the courts. In 1882 after a bitter battle, the Congress narrowly passed the Edmunds Act, which defined unlawful cohabitation and penalized it, disfranchised polygamists, nullified their eligibility for office and jury duty, and placed territorial elections under the control of the Utah Commission, which had power to disqualify polygamous candidates. Federal judges were empowered to launch a sustained offensive against the polygamists. United States marshals and their deputies hounded and arrested hundreds of Mormon men accused of being "co-habs." Gentile juries convicted nearly all of them under the new law and sent them to prison. Hundreds of other Mormon men, including the First Presidency, went on the "Underground," dropping from sight. [^36]

Even so, George Reynolds's imprisonment for conscience' sake remains significant in Mormon history. While not in the least approving his treatment in the courts nor desiring to serve a prison sentence, George, meekly and without complaining, submitted to the law. He was a model prisoner and accomplished several remarkable achievements in confinement, the most important of which were his voluminous writings expounding the scriptures. His model of endurance through severe weather, primitive prison conditions, and suffering of family members probably served to steel the Latter-day Saint prisoners who followed to endure their ignominy well and to make good use of their time while in prison. Even though subsequent prisoners were likewise hailed as heroes, their families could not receive as much favored attention as did those of Reynolds, although in many cases members of the Church did come to the aid of families of other prisoners for conscience' sake. George Reynolds had served his Church well.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Alice Louise Reynolds, "Biography of George Reynolds," p. 7.
[^2] T.Z., "Lives of Our Leaders," p. 387.
[^3] Diary of L. John Nuttall, vol. 1, pp. 266, 273, 277, 298-300; Leonard J. Arrington, "The Settlement of the Brigham Young Estate, 1877-79," Pacific Historical Review 21 (February 1952): 1-20.
[^4] George Reynolds Journal, vol. 6, January 1881; Ann Jardine Bardsley, "Tracing the Lore of the Gardo House," Deseret News 25 July 1985, p. C-1; interview with Mark Curtis, authority on the history of the Gardo House, 31 January 1986, Salt Lake City, Utah.
[^5] John Taylor, Items on Priesthood Presented to the Latter-day Saints (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Co., 1881).
[^6] John Taylor, An Examination into and an Elucidation of the Great Principle of the Mediation and Atonement of Our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Co., 1882).
[^7] George Reynolds, "Revelation—Inspiration," Juvenile Instructor 37 (1 March 1902): 131.
[^8] A. L. Reynolds, "Biography of George Reynolds," p. 38; Francis M. Gibbons to Bruce A. Van Orden, 21 March 1983; Francis M. Gibbons, Heber J. Grant (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979), pp. 46-47; William G. Hartley, "The Seventies in the 1880s: Revelations and Reorganizing," Dialogue 16 (Spring 1983): 62; James R. Clark, ed., Messages of the First Presidency, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-75), 2:348-49.
[^9] Hartley, "The Seventies in the 1880s," p. 69.
[^10] Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, 2:352-54; Hartley, "The Seventies in the 1880s," pp. 69-71.
[^11] George Reynolds, "Revelation—Inspiration," p. 130.
[^12] Ibid., pp. 130-31.
[^13] D. Michael Quinn, "The Council of Fifty and Its Members, 1844 to 1945," BYU Studies 20 (Winter 1980): 163-97; George Reynolds Journal, vol. 6, 1881.
[^14] As cited in John R. Patrick, "The School of the Prophets: Its Development and Influence in Utah Territory," master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1970, p. 39, and in Merle H. Graffam, Salt Lake School of the Prophets Minute Book, 1883 (Palm Desert, Calif.: ULC Press, 1981), p. 1.
[^15] Patrick, "The School of the Prophets," pp. 39-40; Graffam, Minute Book, pp. 1-7.
[^16] George Reynolds Journal, vol. 6, 1883; Patrick, "The School of the Prophets," pp. 136-37; Graffam, Minute Book, pp. 19-56.
[^17] George Reynolds Journal, vol. 6, 1877; vol. 6, 1883-85. George Reynolds never revealed confidential discussions in his journal. Fellow secretary L. John Nuttall was slightly more open in his journals. Nuttall, who also was on the board of directors for BB & CM Co., repeatedly indicated some of the tensions in the company in his journal entries. For a discussion of the problems between Thatcher and Cannon in the company, including reference to participation of Reynolds and Nuttall, see Edward Leo Lyman, "The Alienation of an Apostle from His Quorum: The Moses Thatcher Case," Dialogue 18 (Summer 1985): 68-73.
[^18] George Reynolds Journal, vol. 6, 1883, 1894, 1900; Juvenile Instructor 34 (1 May 1899): 260-61: 40 (15 November 1905): 690.
[^19] Davis Bitton, "Like the Tigers of Old Time," Sunstone 7 (September-October 1982): 47.
[^20] I conducted numerous interviews with grandchildren of George Reynolds, attempting to obtain fairly the feelings from both the first and second families. Unquestionably some sore feelings were perpetuated in the first family against "Aunt Amelia," particularly to the descendants of Polly's older children, who passed on stories to their own children.
[^21] As cited in Kimball Young, Isn't One Wife Enough? (New York: Henry Holt and Co., 1954), pp. 295-96. Since Young openly used interviews with Alice Louise Reynolds for his work, it appears to me that she is the informant in this interview as well. Her prominence would also speak for her being the one.
[^22] Interview with Maude Ogden, 7 January 1986, Salt Lake City, Utah.
[^23] As cited in Young, Isn't One Wife Enough? p. 254.
[^24] George Reynolds Journal, vol. 6, 1881-85.
[^25] George Reynolds Journal, vol. 6, 1882.
[^26] Ibid., 1883; see also "Outline of Three Years' Course of Study for Twentieth Ward Sunday School," which shows the in-depth curriculum in the Sunday School superintended by George Reynolds.
[^27] George Reynolds Journal, vol. 6, 1884.
[^28] George Reynolds Journal, vol. 6, 1881-84.
[^29] Hartley, "The Seventies in the 1880s," p. 65.
[^30] Ibid., pp. 66-67.
[^31] Ibid., pp. 68-69.
[^32] Ibid., pp. 69-71; S. Dilworth Young, "The Seventies: A Historical Perspective," Ensign 6 (July 1976): 19.
[^33] George Reynolds Journal, vol. 6, 1883, 1885; First Council of Seventy Quorum Member Registers, 1876-1915; Seymour Bicknell Young Papers, LDS Church Historical Archives.
[^34] 34. "Gifts to George Reynolds," manuscript in Reynolds Collection, p. 26.
[^35] 35. Journal History, 23 January 1881, p. 1.
[^36] 36. See Gustive O. Larson, The "Americanization" of Utah for Statehood (San Marino, Calif.: Huntington Library, 1971), pp. 115-206.
