Bruce A. Van Orden, Prisoner for Conscience' Sake: The Life of George Reynolds ( 1992)

CHAPTER 14

Leading Church Author

George busied himself in the early 1880s with his own writing projects, in addition to his secretarial duties. George continued writing, especially about Book of Mormon topics. Late in 1881 he began a four-part series in the Contributor entitled "Objections to the Book of Mormon." "Nearly all the objections raised against the contents of the Book of Mormon, may be classed under three heads," he wrote. "They are either puerile, insincere or dishonest." [^1] On the surface this frank assessment may appear narrow-minded, but Reynolds was, as a defender of the faith, responding to the harsh critics who wrote vituperative attacks against the Book of Mormon.

He proceeded to answer for his young adult readers such objections as the following: the Book of Mormon identifies the death of Christ on another day of the month than does the Bible; the Book of Mormon quotes extensively from the New Testament, even though it was written without knowledge of the New Testament; the Book of Mormon disagrees with the Bible in that it states that Jesus was born in Jerusalem; and Joseph Smith's story about the original language of the Book of Mormon plates is absurd and at variance with the discoveries made relating to the language and writing of ancient American inhabitants. Regarding the last objection, George wrote about a paper delivered at the American Philosophical Society just a year before that had demonstrated that thirteen letters of the sixteen in the Mayan alphabet resembled Egyptian signs. "Can any theory of accidental coincidences account for all this?" George asked. [^2]

In 1883 the Juvenile Instructor published The Myth of the "Manuscript Found," or the Absurdities of the "Spaulding Story" consisting of fifteen essays, five of which had been already published. This work was the eleventh in the Juvenile Instructor's "faith-promoting series designed for the Instruction and Encouragement of young Latter-day Saints." George asserted that he had "shown that the upholders of this [Spaulding] myth are not only at variance with each other, but that all their assertions are inconsistent with the well-known facts associated with its discovery; . . . and [are] utterly unworthy of belief." [^3] He offered rebuttals on just-published anti-Mormon testimonials regarding the Spaulding manuscript. He also included chapters on the Book of Mormon witnesses, including recent comments by David Whitmer; on Joseph Smith's youthful life; and on the time occupied in translating the Book of Mormon.

George's arguments regarding the Spaulding controversy—such as it is absurd to believe in a connection between Sidney Rigdon and Solomon Spaulding—were not unique but were ideas that had been advanced in the 1840s by Benjamin Winchester and John E. Page. [^4] Perhaps his best original contribution was his detailed analysis of the time spent on the Book of Mormon translation. This answered the critics' claims that the alleged time of three months was too short; hence, the book must have been copied or transcribed from another book. George showed mathematically the possibility for the task's completion from April to late June 1829. [^5] Ironically, in 1884, a year after Reynolds wrote this piece, a "manuscript story" by Solomon Spaulding was discovered in Hawaii, further undercutting anti-Mormon claims. This "manuscript story" bore virtually no resemblance to the Book of Mormon text.

In 1883, Reynolds began a lengthy Contributor series entitled "History of the Book of Mormon." His first article, "The Original Records," contained the first detailed explanation by any Church scholar on the plates of Nephi, from which most of the Book of Mormon text was taken. For the first time, George identified specific dates both before and after Christ for the numerous historians who compiled records. [^6] These dates, as Reynolds refined them, became the basis for the dates that were included at the foot of each page in the 1921 edition of the Book of Mormon. In six subsequent articles he surveyed the history of the Book of Mormon peoples—the Lamanites, the Nephites, the Zarahemlaites, and the Jaredites.

In 1884 George continued his series for the Contributor. Using accounts by Joseph Smith, Martin Harris, Oliver Cowdery, and Lucy Mack Smith, he related the story of Joseph Smith's discovery of the plates and their translation. He added to the Saints' understanding of the translation by discussing the recent Church acquisition of some original Book of Mormon manuscripts. He noted differences in handwriting and lack of punctuation and offered an explanation, which to our ears may sound specious: "That it is not punctuated can easily be accounted for," he assured his readers. "Punctuation is a modern invention, the ancients do not appear to have had any system of stops; and the original plates, there can be but little doubt, were entirely without these aides to correct reading." He described as well the printer's manuscript, then still in the possession of the elderly David Whitmer. George was probably the first to suggest that John H. Gilbert, the compositor in the shop that printed the Book of Mormon, did the punctuation and capitalization in the printer's manuscript. [^7]

Another article discussed, probably for the first time in Mormon literature, the "typographical errors" in the first edition of the Book of Mormon and their subsequent corrections. [^8] The concluding article discussed American and European, including foreign language, Book of Mormon editions. Of special interest were extensive structural changes in the 1879 Orson Pratt edition. George provided a comparative chart of chapter structure for old and new editions. [^9]

George enthusiastically threw himself into numerous other subjects as well. He frequently wrote articles on current events and issues. In "Thoughts on Genesis" prepared for the Contributor, George addressed two issues: evolution and the disputed authorship of Genesis in the Old Testament. Regarding the former, he bitingly stated, "Some scientists take an honest pride in the idea that they have descended from the ape: they consider it shows progress and development. We have no such feelings. Even if it were true, we should feel disposed to say but little regarding such a pedigree." George argued that "modern revelation" in the Book of Moses, Pearl of Great Price, clearly answers that Moses wrote Genesis. "How blessed are we in having this more sure word of revelation for our infallible guide," he confidently asserted, "which can, and does, in a few moments decide the controversies of centuries, and with truth, 'diamond truth,' makes known all that is necessary for our salvation." [^10]

George recognized and appreciated advancements in science. In an 1882 article he explained, "Between real science and true religion there is no conflict; they are both important parts of one stupendous whole, harmonizing, aiding and strengthening each other; both emanating from God, the source of all truth, and both tending to His glory and to man's exaltation." But he was disturbed by "science [grown] arrogant" and "uninspired churchmen." [^11]

George also wrote about current pressing political events. While Congress debated the Edmunds Bill, he commented on the controversial "anti-Mormon" legislation. He insisted that the bill, if enacted, would place "one man's conscience in the hands of another" and thereby deprive many honest citizens of religious liberty. He argued that Utah, in contrast to the states in the nation, had taxed its citizens less heavily, had more prudently and honestly disbursed public funds, and had more unanimously chosen legislators who reflected the people's will. "If our system of marriage filled the land with deserted mothers, with betrayed maidens, with fatherless waifs, or if, like prostitution and polyandry, it produced barrenness and disease, . . . there might be some excuse for moral legislation; but when the contrary is the result and well regulated polygamy fills the country with a race of bright, healthy, intelligent and bonny children, then the subterfuge of injury to the State can only be maintained by those who call evil good, and good evil." [^12]

In his day many people considered George Reynolds the Church's leading authority on Mormon doctrines pertaining to the house of Israel. His Are We of Israel? became a classic in Mormon literature with numerous editions published during his lifetime. In 1931, more than twenty years after his death, the demand for the volume was "so urgent and continuous" that Deseret Book Company reprinted it. [^13] James E. Talmage cited it in his The Articles of Faith in 1890. Joseph Fielding Smith and Bruce R. McConkie, two apostles and leading Mormon theologians in the twentieth century, also used Are We of Israel? as an authority. [^14]

Reynolds began his study of the house of Israel in 1878 while waiting for his case to come before the Supreme Court. In 1883, after his prison term, George published the series as a 135-page book. His purpose was "to prove . . . from history and analogy" the Latter-day Saint belief that "the great majority of their number are of the house of Israel, and heirs to the promises made to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob." Such claims had received "the ridicule of the unthinking and the contempt of the ungodly." He asserted that the Saints were of the tribe of Ephraim, who had been anciently designated as the birthright and leadership tribe. George cited an 1855 statement by Brigham Young that "Ephraim has become mixed with all the nations of the earth, and it is Ephraim that is gathering together." [^15]

George's historical "authorities" included authors who espoused a movement known as "Anglo-Israelism" or "British-Israelism." Anglo-Israelism's main tenet was that the British Anglo-Saxons descended from the ten lost tribes, primarily the tribe of Ephraim, and, as such, have a divinely appointed mission to share the gospel of Jesus Christ with the world. The Anglo-Israelists never formed a separate sect but operated as "an interdenominational fellowship," retaining their affiliation with mainline Protestant denominations. This movement emerged in the 1870s and reached its peak in the 1880s. Its philosophies were known among Protestants in the United States, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand—nations where "Anglo-Saxon" influence was considered predominant. The movement continued with many adherents until World War II, but it gradually disintegrated and by the 1980s had all but disappeared. [^16]

The Anglo-Israelists taught that the British monarchy stemmed from the royal Davidic line through one of the daughters of the last king of Judah, Zedekiah. The prophet Jeremiah took her to Ireland. Furthermore, "Jacob's Stone," or pillar, was also taken to the British Isles by Jeremiah and still survives under the Coronation Chair at Westminster Abbey. They asserted that the apostle Paul and Joseph of Arimathea visited Britain and established Christianity there. [^17]

A nonreligious-oriented "cult of the Anglo-Saxon" held intellectual sway in the United States during the Gilded Age, the 1880s, precisely the time when George Reynolds wrote Are We of Israel? Proponents held "that Anglo-Saxons were uniquely gifted with a love of liberty and a capacity for self-government." [^18] Obviously, compatible secular and religious thought contributed to a mood that was right in Utah for Reynolds to write his pathbreaking book on the Israelites' origin and their whereabouts in the modern age.

Clearly, the leading Anglo-Israelists influenced George Reynolds, and he often mentioned them. He incorporated the following points from Anglo-Israelism in his work:

1 laws, manners, customs, and languages of ancient inhabitants of northwestern Europe and those of ancient Israel are similar.

2 lost ten tribes emigrated from the land of Media into Europe. (2 Esdras 13:39-47, from the Apocrypha, is cited.)

3 Anglo-Saxons stem from Media.

4 Saxon probably means Isaac's son. [^19]

George did not adopt all of the teachings of Anglo-Israelism by any means. He felt that some who had "made the subject of Israel's 'identification' their study, have gone almost to the verge of the ridiculous in the minuteness [of their claims]." They were "zealots," whose claims in many instances were "often strained and frequently untenable." He taught many ideas that contravened tenets of the British-Israelists:

1 some Israelites, mostly from Ephraim, either stayed in northern Europe or returned to Israel, most continued northward and are hidden except to the Lord.

2 remnants are found throughout Europe, not simply among Anglo-Saxons.

3 nations have some of Abraham's blood. [^20]

Although George tempered his British-oriented bias, he still reflected the feelings of spiritual superiority that the British Church members possessed. Most adult Mormons were British converts in the 1870s and 1880s, when George shared his ideas. He was not the first Church authority to display an exuberance for Anglo-Saxons. He cited Brigham Young, who in 1863 declared:

The sons of Ephraim are wild and uncultivated, unruly, ungovernable. The spirit in them is turbulent and resolute; they are the Anglo-Saxon race, and they are upon the face of the whole earth, bearing the spirit of rule and dictation, to go forth from conquering to conquer. They search wide creation and scan every nook and corner of this earth to find out what is upon and within it. I see a congregation of them before me to-day. [^21]

In the late 1890s, twenty years after researching the house of Israel, George wrote another series of articles entitled "The Gospel in Ancient Britain." He cited a conversation between Joseph Smith and Heber C. Kimball in which the Prophet stated that biblical prophets had traveled in ancient Britain. Reynolds discussed new evidence of European and Asian migrations to Britain over a span of two thousand years. "With them [the migrants]," he asserted, "doubtless came many Israelites, either associates in their ventures or captives taken in war." Reynolds held to his earlier Are We of Israel? conclusion that "an admixture of Israelitish blood was infused into the population of Britain," but he was openly cautious about accepting the "Anglo-Israel" theories of all the "Old Testament worthies" who might have traveled to Britain. [^22]

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints never officially endorsed Anglo-Israelism ideas. Church authorities stated that Israelites were to be gathered from the entire world, not from Britain alone. [^23] Nevertheless, connections between Anglo-Israelism and Mormonism reappeared in the twentieth century. James H. Anderson, who as a young man assisted Reynolds with the publication of Are We of Israel? produced in 1937 God's Covenant Race. This work hailed the "inspired" teachings of Anglo-Israelism and praised the Anglo-Israel Federation of America and its periodical Destiny. Anderson cited his colleague from the Utah Genealogical Society and counselor in the First Presidency, Anthony W. Ivins, who reported in the April 1926 general conference that the British-Israel movement in England had "great scholars and statesmen" who as "British seers" were proclaiming the earth's end. He charged Church members to heed their counsel. [^24] In 1939 Elder John A. Widtsoe of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles discredited Anderson's ideas and the British-Israel movement. [^25] Two other Latter-day Saint writers, Ernest L. Whitehead and Francis M. Darter, [^26] supported Anglo-Israelism tenets, but their writings never gained popularity. Darter was excommunicated for fanaticism.

The Anglo-Israel bias continues in Mormon theological discussions and beliefs, but present-day Church teachings emphasize the existence of the blood of Israel and of Ephraim throughout the world. [^27] Elder Bruce R. McConkie of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles directed a volley against the Anglo-Israel philosophy:

This illusion postulates that the British people are identical with the Ten Tribes of Israel . . . [that] all of the ancient prophecies relative to the restoration of Israel have been or will be fulfilled in and through Great Britain as a nation. There is not one chance in a million, or in ten thousand million, that any of the historical assumptions are true; and if they were, it would not make one particle of difference—the doctrinal view would still be false. . . . Providentially, this British Israel concept, once so prevalent in the British Isles and elsewhere, has gone pretty much out of vogue and is not taken as seriously as it once was. [^28]

George Reynolds also directed attention in his writings to the Jews. "He had a very keen sympathy for the Jews," wrote Alice Louise Reynolds. "From my early recollections I recall we had among other informative magazines in the home the Jewish Chronicle." [^29] Reynolds, like most Mormons, felt a kinship for two reasons—Jews are relatives of Mormons as fellow members of the house of Israel, and both Mormons and Jews have suffered affliction from intolerant national governments.

Following the passage of the Edmunds Act in 1882, which outlawed polygamy and provided easier means to enforce the law than had the Morrill Act of 1862, George wrote a piece for the Church's Contributor. He compared the "same barbarous treatment" then being inflicted upon the Jews in Russia with what was, at the same time, being advocated against Mormons. "There is a marked similarity also in the action of the governments in both countries," he wrote:

It is openly charged that in Russia the government officials are at the bottom of these troubles, that where they do not secretly egg the populace on, they at any rate fail to protect the Jews or adequately punish their barbarous persecutors. In this country it is well understood that the destruction of the Mormon Church is recognized in political circles as an "administration measure," and all the power of the party lash has been applied to those Republicans who ventured to express their disapprobation of the violent measures sought to be used against the members of that church.

George Reynolds linked Jews and Mormons as Israelite cosufferers. He attributed the simultaneous assaults "on the two representative branches of the house of Israel—Judah and Ephraim" to Satan's latter-day plan preventing "the rapid growth of these two branches of Jacob's favored race." [^30] In other contexts Reynolds lauded Jewish accomplishments, ascribing successes "to the mental strength and activity of the Jewish race, which, when given opportunity, soon outstrips its fellows." [^31]

Simultaneously with this research and these writings, George also researched Abraham's background. The Church had just published a revised Pearl of Great Price. The Pearl of Great Price contained the book of Abraham, which was derived from ancient Egyptian papyri. And "as but very little has ever been said by the Elders of the Church in advocacy of its [the Book of Abraham's] claims as an inspired record," wrote Reynolds, "we think that a few chapters written to prove its genuineness and divine origin, will not be without value to the Latter-day Saints, and to the world at large." [^32] Thus began The Book of Abraham: Its Authenticity Established As a Divine and Ancient Record, the first Church commentary on the Book of Abraham.

In telling the story of Joseph Smith's acquisition of the Egyptian mummies and papyri, George simply recounted what was thought to be their origin—that they were discovered by a Mr. "Sebolo" (actually Lebolo) who, before he died in the 1830s, deeded them to his "nephew," M. H. Chandler. [^33] George also presented evidence from apocryphal and mythological sources of Abraham's faithful works, including his visits to Egypt and teachings there. In his analysis, George was a forerunner of Hugh Nibley, who attempted to justify the Book of Abraham using the same methods, although with more sophistication. [^34]

George's most unusual argument in his discussion of the book of Abraham was his carefully organized claim that Cheops, the builder of the Great Pyramid at Giza, was actually the Egyptian pharaoh whom Abraham visited. He cited several Anglo-Israelist authorities on the pyramids, calling them "modern scientists." He asserted that Abraham taught Cheops principles of astronomy and then "superintended the erection of the building of the pyramid." The pyramid was designed to be an astronomical observatory "built upon mathematical principles, and designed to perpetuate, through all succeeding time, a correct knowledge of heavens and the earth" and to contain "a prophetic history of the world." [^35] Modern readers would consider such pyramidology and the linking of Abraham to Cheops as superstitious, pseudoscientific, and fabricated history, yet it reflected a method many fundamentalists used to justify theology with pseudo-historical evidence. [^36] That George's work on the book of Abraham during the 1880s had the aura of official sanction is clear from his acknowledgment of President John Taylor, Franklin D. Richards, Joseph L. Barfoot, John R. Howard, and David McKenzie for their suggestions and valuable information in compiling the commentary. [^37]

By 1884 George Reynolds was a highly respected person in the Church's capital, Salt Lake City. Well-read Saints studied his continuous stream of writings. The First Presidency relied on him heavily for staff support. These were troubled times for the First Presidency and the Church as a whole as the United States federal government marshalled its forces for another crushing blow against Utah in its increasingly fierce antipolygamy crusade. How would George Reynolds be affected by these new events?

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Federal antipolygamy efforts are chronicled well in Gustive O. Larson, "The Crusade and the Manifesto," in Utah's History, ed. Richard D. Poll, et al. (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1978), pp. 257-74.
[^2] Ibid., 1885. The best sources on the Underground era are Gustive O. Larson, The "Americanization" of Utah for Statehood (San Marino, Calif.: Huntington Library, 1971), pp. 115-206; Kimberly Jensen James, "'Between Two Fires': Women on the 'Underground,' " Journal of Mormon History 8 (1981): 49-62; and Martha Sonntag Bradley, " 'Hide and Seek': Children on the Underground," Utah Historical Quarterly 51 (Spring 1983): 133-53.
[^3] George Reynolds Journal, vol. 6, 1885.
[^4] Ibid.
[^5] Ibid.; interview with Mark Curtis, an authority on the history of the Gardo House, 31 January 1986, Salt Lake City, Utah; Ann Jardine Bardsley, "Tracing the Lore of the Gardo House," Deseret News, 25 July 1985, p. c-1.
[^6] George Reynolds Journal, vol. 6, 1885; George Reynolds to Amelia Reynolds, 2 July 1885, 20 July 1885; 25 July 1885; 21 August 1885, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library.
[^7] George Reynolds Journal, vol. 6, 1887; interview with Emily Jensen, 29 November 1985, Provo, Utah; interview with Haroldeane Rasmussen, 29 November 1985, Provo, Utah.
[^8] George Reynolds Journal, vol. 6, 1885.
[^9] Ibid. According to an interview with Maude Ogden (daughter of Millie), 7 January 1986, Salt Lake City, Utah, Polly indicated in this discussion with her husband that she had no more intention of living around that other woman (Amelia), who had caused her so much grief. According to Grant Reynolds Hardy, one of the most informed descendants of the Reynolds family, this story is commonly rumored among the first and third family descendants.
[^10] Ibid.
[^11] "Autobiography of Alice Louise Reynolds," p. 3.
[^12] Amy Brown Lyman, A Lighter of Lamps: The Life Story of Alice Louise Reynolds (Provo, Utah: Alice Louise Reynolds Club, 1947), p. 4.
[^13] Ibid., p. 14.
[^14] Haroldeane Rasmussen, "History of Mary Ann Tuddenham Reynolds, My Grandmother," an unpublished three-page typescript in the possession of Haroldeane Rasmussen.
[^15] George Reynolds Journal, vol. 6, 1886. For a thorough discussion of the Lorenzo Snow case, see Edwin Brown Firmage and R. Collin Mangrum, Zion and the Courts: A Legal History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1830-1900 (Urbana, Ill.: University of Illinois Press, 1988), pp. 178-83.
[^16] Alice Louise Reynolds, "Biography of George Reynolds," p. 24.
[^17] Journal of George Reynolds, vol. 6, 1888.
[^18] George M. Ottinger's role as a pioneer artist in Utah is told in Madeleine B. Stern, "A Rocky Mountain Book Store: Savage and Ottinger of Utah," BYU Studies 9 (Winter 1969): 144-54.
[^19] Cited on a broadside advertisement on The Story of the Book of Mormon, in the LDS Church Historical Archives.
[^20] Ibid.
[^21] "Memo regarding Books written by George Reynolds," typescript, located in a collection of George Reynolds papers owned by Jane Reynolds Collection; Circular of the Story of the Book of Mormon, printed advertisement, n.d., Jane Reynolds Collection; J. H. Parry notes and assignment, Jane Reynolds Collection.
[^22] George Reynolds, The Story of the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City: Jos. Hyrum Parry, 1888), p. iii.
[^23] Ibid., p. 17.
[^24] Ibid., pp. 313-14.
[^25] Ibid., pp. 377-78. Certainly Reynolds would have been well read to have come up with such information as displayed in this quotation and in many other examples throughout The Story of the Book of Mormon. It appears from his correspondence that many of his linguistic conclusions were drawn after consultation with his scientific friend and curator of the Deseret Museum, Joseph Barfoot.
[^26] Ibid., pp. 382-416. Noted Latter-day Saint anthropologists John L. Sorenson and Joseph L. Allen have produced the most scholarly and up-to-date evaluations of geography and the Book of Mormon in An Ancient American Setting for the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1985) and Exploring the Lands of the Book of Mormon (Orem, Utah: S.A. Publishers, 1989). Their conclusions differ dramatically from those of Reynolds. Nevertheless these experts and others are indebted to Reynolds for his path-breaking studies on the subject.
[^27] "Editorial Thoughts," Juvenile Instructor 25 (1 January 1890): 18-19.
[^28] George Reynolds, The Story of the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City: Jos. Hyrum Parry, 1888), pp. 472-87.
[^29] Lyman, Lighter of Lamps, pp. 14-15.
[^30] Information for these two paragraphs was drawn from numerous interviews and numerous entries in George Reynolds Journal, vol. 6.
[^31] "Autobiography of Alice Louise Reynolds," pp. 25-26.
[^32] John Taylor to George Reynolds, 1 November 1886, Jane Reynolds Collection; Hartley, "The Seventies in the 1880s," pp. 76-77.
[^33] Diary of L. John Nuttall, vol. 2, pp. 123, 132, 134, 152, 155; George Reynolds Journal, vol. 6, 1888; Arthur M. Richardson and Nicholas G. Morgan, Sr., The Life and Ministry of John Morgan (Salt Lake City: n.p., 1965), p. 449.
[^34] Hugh Nibley, Abraham in Egypt (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981).
[^35] George Reynolds, Book of Abraham, pp. 27-44.
[^36] See George M. Marsden, Fundamentalism and American Culture: The Shaping of Twentieth-Century Evangelicalism 1870-1925 (New York: Oxford University Press, 1980), pp. 55-62.
[^37] 37. George Reynolds, Book of Abraham, p. 49.
