Bruce A. Van Orden, Prisoner for Conscience' Sake: The Life of George Reynolds ( 1992)

CHAPTER 15

On the Underground

The Reynolds Supreme Court defeat did not stop the Latter- day Saints from practicing plural marriage. To the contrary, numbers of plural marriages actually increased. It became obvious to Eastern antipolygamy crusaders that they would need to take tougher actions against the Mormons. [^1]

United States President Rutherford B. Hayes visited Utah in September 1880. The Liberal Party, a party created by gentiles in Utah to counter Mormon political domination, monopolized Hayes's time in the territory and convinced him that stricter federal antipolygamy measures must be enacted. He urged the Congress in December of that year to pass new legislation. President Hayes's successor in office, fellow Republican James A. Garfield, urged similar action before his assassination in 1881. President Chester A. Arthur continued to exert pressure on Congress.

Citizens flooded the 1881-82 congressional session with petitions on the Mormon question, and a score of bills and amendments was introduced. The only proposal to become law was the Edmunds Act of 1882, which in reality was a series of amendments to the Morrill Act of 1862. The law declared polygamy a felony with a penalty of up to five years' imprisonment. It also tacitly acknowledged that polygamy would be hard to prove, so "unlawful cohabitation" was declared a misdemeanor punishable by six months' imprisonment. The law disfranchised polygamists and declared them ineligible for office and jury duty. The president was authorized to appoint a five-member Utah Commission to administer all further elections in the territory. Finally there were real teeth in the law that easily allowed Latter-day Saint men to be prosecuted for polygamy and the Saints in general to suffer for their beliefs.

The federal court system in Utah readied itself for action. District attorneys and federal marshals rallied behind newly appointed and strong-minded judges to seek out "co-habs": men who could easily be convicted of polygamous living. The first case to come to trial was that of Rudger Clawson, a recently returned missionary to the southern states, in October 1884. Presidents John Taylor and George Q. Cannon were required to testify in the trial. After Clawson's second wife was discovered by marshals and forced to testify of her marriage, the all-gentile jury found Clawson guilty of the felony polygamy and sentenced him to three and a half years' imprisonment, a sentence the United States Supreme Court subsequently upheld. By the end of 1884 three more Latter-day Saint men had been convicted.

The First Presidency began taking steps to protect themselves and other men involved in plural marriage. Early in January 1885, President John Taylor and many other Church officials, including secretary George Reynolds, went to Arizona, New Mexico, and northern Mexico to find new places to settle the harried polygamists. Soon the prophet authorized Arizona members to settle in the Mexican state of Chihuahua to avoid arrest. In March, after the Supreme Court first upheld the Edmunds Act provisions, President Taylor set the pattern of passive resistance by going on the Mormon "underground." He disappeared from public view to live among loyal friends, first in the Salt Lake City vicinity and later northward in Davis County. To elude arrest, most polygamists followed suit and devised ingenious hideouts for their own "underground." The Underground, as it came to be known in the local culture, also developed highly successful communications systems that took advantage of locally controlled telegraph, railroad, and police systems. [^2]

George Reynolds, the first polygamous prisoner for conscience' sake, had been convicted under the provisions of the Morrill Antibigamy Act of 1862 and was liable for a second arrest under the provisions of the Edmunds Act of 1882. In April 1885 papers were served for his arrest, and he and his pregnant second wife, Amelia, had to go into hiding. He noted in his journal that Church authorities did not want him arrested, "as my second imprisonment could be used as a precedent for the same course to be taken towards other brethren." [^3]

To further complicate his life, but in response to what he referred to as "direct revelation," George secretly married a third wife, Mary Gulliford Goold, in the Endowment House on 26 April 1885. With the general authorities in hiding, George turned to his stake president, Angus M. Cannon, to seal the marriage. Mary Goold, an English immigrant, was twenty-six-years old at the time of this union. She had been hired by John Taylor as a maid in his official residence, the Gardo House, where George and she became acquainted. President Taylor heartily encouraged the marriage between his trusted assistant, George Reynolds, and Mary. [^4] The marriage was probably kept secret from most of George's family for some time, for to this day most of his descendants believe that she was married to him after the death of Polly in December 1885.

For his part, George hid first in the Gardo House, next in the Social Hall, and then in the Deseret Museum. Many other polygamists also hid out in the Gardo House in 1885. Whenever deputy marshals came to the front door, signals were quickly sent to each man to hide. The men would hide behind false wooden panels, in hollowed-out spaces under the bed mattresses, and in the tower of the Gardo House above a false ceiling. Amelia went into hiding first at the University of Deseret but went back home in the summer to deliver her baby, Willard (Bish), on 26 June. In July her home was raided by government officials. With the help of George's oldest daughter, Millie, Amelia was secreted in the cellar of the family shanty and was not found. Polly by this time was living in East Millcreek. "Finding neither myself nor wives the Deputies did not subpoena any of the children," George recorded in his journal. [^5]

Amelia and her children then moved to rented quarters in the Nineteenth Ward and in September moved again to the Seventeenth Ward. Later they moved yet again to the George Q. Cannon complex in west Salt Lake City. "This hiding up is a very irksome irritating, and withall expensive arrangement," George noted wryly in his journal. Only rarely was George able to visit with his family. [^6]

Polly became very ill again with another pregnancy during this year of much moving around. Much of the children's care fell to her oldest daughter, Millie, now seventeen years old. When the youngest child, Harold, received serious injuries, Millie knelt in prayer with the other children and then proceeded to care for his wounds. Maggie C. Shipp, one of Utah's leading doctors, saw the child and noted how successfully Millie had nursed Harold's wounds. That inspired Millie to pursue a career in nursing and midwifery, and she later took training from Shipp at Cook's College of Nursing in Salt Lake City. [^7]

Polly suffered from her typical dropsy and pleurisy during her pregnancy, and her condition worsened as she drew nearer to delivery. George was hardly able to see her to comfort her. On 11 December, when she was eight months pregnant, in great suffering she delivered a little boy, Herbert, who died twenty-four hours later. According to George, "the dropsical waters in my wife appear to have overflowed her chest, producing or causing the premature confinement, and afterwards pneumonia." [^8] It appeared that she might die, and George was called to her bedside. He encouraged her to exercise faith and a positive attitude, so that she might recover. She responded that she had no more intention to live. The body of baby Herbert was kept outside the window in the chill winter air to await burial with his mother. [^9]

One of Polly's nurses during her last days was George's third wife, Mary. Few, if any, knew she was married to George, or she would have had to hide as well. On the evening before her passing, Polly called her mother, brother, and each child in turn to her side and gave each her parting advice. "She was fully satisfied she was dying and prayed to go, apparently being anxious to depart," related George. She gave her children to the care of her daughter Millie and to the third wife, Mary, who solemnly promised to care for them. Polly died on 17 December 1885. George could not openly attend her funeral, because deputies were conspicuously in attendance at the Twentieth Ward meetinghouse. He disguised himself as a woman and hid his beard with a shawl when he visited her casket before the funeral. Elders Franklin D. Richards and Orson F. Whitney spoke at the services. Little Herbert was buried with Polly in the Salt Lake City cemetery in the family plot. [^10]

At the loss of her mother, Alice Louise (who was twelve at the time) recounted, "This was the most serious trouble that came to me in early life, and to this day is one of the keenest losses that I have ever felt. . . . I felt her loss as keenly on account of the other children, particularly the younger ones, as on my own account." [^11] Polly's children remember her as "an ideal homemaker and devoted mother" and as one who "never became cross no matter how hard her trials were." By others she was considered "an English gentlewoman of high principles and rare refinement" and noted "for her gentle, unselfish, and affectionate nature." [^12] Much later in life, Alice Louise recalled George Q. Cannon telling the children that their mother "would have a watch-care over us, and I think we all feel she has." [^13] According to her obituary in the Deseret News, Polly possessed "naturally a nervous temperament." The anxiety she felt for her husband during all his legal battles "preyed upon her health." She expired, the account continued, more from "the troubled condition of her mind" rather than from her dropsical condition. [^14]

The marshals sought George until May 1886, when he learned it would be safe to come out in the open again. The Supreme Court was studying the case of Lorenzo Snow and whether it was legal to arrest a man more than once for a polygamous offense. In June George received a blessing from William J. Smith. He was promised that his posterity would become as "numerous as the sands of the sea" and that they would bring his name "in honorable remembrance from generation to generation." He was further promised that his testimony would cause the hearts of thousands to rejoice. [^15]

Now that he was free to go back to work, George Reynolds went each day to the Office of the President to help care for Church business. The entire First Presidency and most of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles were in hiding. By this time John Taylor was secreted in a Kaysville, Utah, home. Secretary and son-in-law L. John Nuttall was constantly beside President Taylor, whose health was failing. From short entries in Nuttall's journal, we learn that George Reynolds helped run Church business and prepare dispatches that were regularly delivered at night by couriers to Presidents Taylor and Cannon. (President Smith was in hiding in Hawaii.)

During this time of relatively little administrative work, George proceeded vigorously on his Book of Mormon concordance project at home and occasionally during working hours. "After [the prison stay] until the completion of the work [on the concordance in 1899] he was at his desk each morning from 5 to 7 or 7:30," reported George's daughter Alice Louise. "In the evening he frequently checked passages. We were checking and double checking all the time. He was always examining into my spare time and was always delighted if I had an hour or two either in the afternoon or evening that I could give him." The other Reynolds children also assisted their father. [^16]

Because of his previous voluminous writings, in 1886 George Reynolds was recognized as the leading living Church authority on the Book of Mormon, Orson Pratt having died in 1881. His friends urged him about this time to compile his writings to be used as a Sunday School and religion class textbook. [^17] Liberally drawing on articles already composed for Church periodicals but including some original material, George produced The Story of the Book of Mormon, which was eventually published in 1888 by his next-door neighbor, Joseph Hyrum Parry.

The first half of The Story of the Book of Mormon gives a running narrative; the second half contains sociological and ethnological essays, many taken from his prison writings for the Juvenile Instructor. The Story of the Book of Mormon was the Church's first complete commentary of the Book of Mormon text. It also contained the first forty-two illustrations of Book of Mormon subjects, drawn by Utah's most prominent artists, George M. Ottinger, William T. Armitage, John Held, and W. C. Morris. [^18]

The book was widely advertised and highly recommended. "I recommend this work to all academies, church schools, teachers and friends of the Book of Mormon," wrote Karl G. Maeser, president of Brigham Young Academy. [^19] Elder Moses Thatcher of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles added, "It is written in forcible yet simple and unambitious style, and is well calculated to inspire faith in the hearts of the young. To the student of inspired history the work cannot fail to prove of great value." [^20]

The Story of the Book of Mormon met with immediate success, largely because the Church's educational arm adopted it for textbook use. Eventually more editions were published, some in special bindings. George was grateful for royalties and in time purchased the copyright from Joseph Parry. [^21] This volume provided a generation of the Church's youth with their initial training in the Book of Mormon.

"For many years we have taken great pleasure in perusing its sacred pages and studying its truths," George wrote of the Book of Mormon in the preface. "The more we read it the more we found it contained. . . . From reading it we turned to writing of it; and much that this volume contains has been penned at various intervals, from the days we were in prison for conscience sake, where portions were written, to the present." [^22]

The opening passage of the book reveals undeviating faith and reverence before God:

The story that we are about to relate is a true one. It is the history of the races who lived on this broad land of ours long, long ago. From it we shall learn many lessons of God's great love for man. We shall also learn how often his love has been spurned, how apt his favored children have been to walk in ways of sin, and how prone to disobey his holy law. It is a story full of light and shade, one which it will be well for all of us to take to heart, for by so doing our faith in God will increase, and we shall be prompted to strive the more earnestly to avoid the evils that others by their misdeeds have brought upon themselves and their posterity. [^23]

George's work is remarkably detailed and clear, as evidenced by this passage on domestic life among the Nephites:

In the midst of a people guided or reproved through their entire national life by an almost continuous succession of inspired teachers, it is but reasonable to conclude that the domestic virtues were assiduously cultivated, and all departures therefrom severely rebuked. Industry, economy, thrift, prudence, and moderation in dress were evidently as much the subject of the prophet's commendation then as in these latter days. Zeniff and others directly refer to the labors and toils of the Nephite women in spinning and making the material with which they clothed themselves and their households. . . .

The materials of which the clothing of this race were made are frequently mentioned in the inspired record. Fine silk, fine twined or twisted linen, and cloth of every kind are often spoken of. In one place good homely cloth is mentioned. By the word homely we must not understand the writer to mean ugly; the word is there evidently applied in its original significance, as it is used to-day in England, for homelike or fit for home—such material as was suited to the everyday life of an industrious, hard-working people. [^24]

George Reynolds was the first to seriously analyze Book of Mormon proper names. Many of his pioneering efforts were not considered valid by later scholars, but he set the stage for subsequent work. In a chapter entitled "Nephite Proper Names," he dealt with the critics' objections to so many biblical names in the text. He wrote at length about the nonbiblical names, asserting Old World derivation:

Nephi is another very remarkable name. Its roots are Egyptian; its meaning, good, excellent, benevolent. From very ancient times the Egyptians believed that all who died had to have their acts upon earth scrutinized by a council of inquisitors, before they could be proclaimed fit to enter the eternal abodes of bliss and stand in the presence of the god Osiris, the chief lord of the land of the departed. One of the names given to this god, expressive of his attributes, was Nephi or Dnephi (the D being silent, as in Dniestre, Dniepher, etc.), or the good, and the chief city dedicated to him was called N-ph, translated into the Hebrew as Noph, in which form it appears in Hosea, Isaiah, and Jeremiah. . . . From these facts we conclude that Nephi was a common name in the Egyptian tongue; and, as far as the founder of the Nephite nation was concerned, most applicable to his character, which was pre-eminently good and benevolent. [^25]

The Story of the Book of Mormon gives the first major attention to Book of Mormon geography. Although his study included personal speculation, much of which is questioned today, George attempted a detailed description of every city, valley, hill, land, and river mentioned in the Book of Mormon. He argued that to the ancient Nephites, the entire North American continent was known as the land of Mulek and the South American continent was known as the land of Lehi; South America had two grand divisions, the land of Zarahemla and the land of Nephi; except in times of war, the Lamanites occupied the land of Nephi and the Nephites the land of Zarahemla; the narrow neck of land was the Isthmus of Panama; the river Sidon was the Magdalena River in Columbia; Lehi landed at thirty degrees south latitude in Chile; the descendants of Lehi spread over both continents of the western hemisphere; the Hill Cumorah (also Ramah to the Jaredites) is located in New York State; the Jaredites crossed the central Asian plateau, thence to the Pacific seaboard, probably the coast of China; the barges of the Jaredites landed in Central America. [^26]

George's geographical theories motivated study of the Book of Mormon throughout the Church in subsequent years. President George Q. Cannon reported in January 1890: "We have heard of numerous lectures, illustrated by suggestive maps, being delivered on this subject [the geography of the Book of Mormon] during the present winter, generally under the auspices of the Improvement Societies and Sunday Schools. We are greatly pleased to notice the increasing interest taken by the Saints in this holy book." Cannon noted that those lecturing on geography did not offer united conclusions, which led to contention and confusion. He explained that although the First Presidency had been asked to prepare a map of Nephite geography, they refused on account of the scarcity of information in the Book of Mormon text. [^27]

George's final contribution in The Story of the Book of Mormon was his detailed "Book of Mormon Chronology." This useful piece lists in short paragraphs major Book of Mormon events, with corresponding dates b.c. or a.d. in one column and in another the year in the Book of Mormon story (for example, 621 meant 621 years since Lehi left Jerusalem). [^28] Elder James E. Talmage used this chart when he added chronological dates in the 1921 edition of the Book of Mormon.

On the home front during this period, George's life as a polygamous husband and father went through several phases. His older children were preparing to leave home. One by one they went away to school, on missions, or married. Amelia continued to live in the "north house." She gave birth to her eighth child (the seventh living), Nephi, on 13 August 1887. George's third wife, Mary, cared for the children of the first family in the "south house" and began a large family of her own.

Mary was by all accounts a remarkable woman. "She has been very much the heart of the family," wrote Alice Louise. [^29] Mary was meticulous with her grooming, and George referred to her as "my girl with the golden hair." Unselfishly she cared for Polly's younger children, treating them as her own. The eldest child, Millie, assisted with this care until she was married in 1888. Throughout the rest of their lives, the relationship between Mary and Millie was sisterly and extremely close. Polly's children revered "Aunt Mary," and their children always referred to her as "grandmother." Amelia, too, respected Mary, although she was somewhat jealous of the attention George gave her, and Amelia's children were also fond of "Aunt Mary."

Mary was a bundle of energy. Early in her marriage to George, she had three miscarriages. Finally she gave birth to Georgia on 10 July 1886. Later she suffered two more miscarriages.

Mary's younger sister, Amelia Ann, planned to marry George also when she became old enough. But Amelia Ann contracted typhoid fever and died at age fifteen. She was sealed to George in 1888 in the Logan Temple with Mary standing in for her as proxy. [^30]

George enjoyed the increasing maturity of his older children and was proud of their many accomplishments. He was happy that his emphasis on their education and religious training was paying dividends. "My Father and I were companions," remembered Alice Louise. "We talked of many things together. He was always alive to what was going on in the world, and his conversation was of never failing interest, but the finest thing about him was his character. . . . He had just that combination of qualities that inspire high regard and deep respect and to that, in my case, was added the loyalty and love of a daughter who enjoyed his scintillating mind and congenial companionship." [^31]

George remained active as the senior president of his seventies quorum. A letter from President John Taylor on the Underground indicates some of George's activities at this time: "You ask if an offending member of a quorum of Seventies who has been deprived of his Priesthood by the action of his quorum, has the right of appeal, and if so, to whom." Apparently the twenty-fourth quorum had had occasion to deprive of their place in the quorum recalcitrant members who were not abiding the Word of Wisdom. This purifying of the seventies quorums was going on throughout the Church. President Taylor answered George: "He [the offender] has the right of appeal to the Seven Presidents [of the First Council of Seventy], who preside over the whole body of Seventies." [^32]

Meanwhile President John Taylor's health continued to decline, and he passed away in Kaysville on 25 July 1887, still on the Underground. George immediately took on significant assignments for the new ruling Church body, the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. He served on the committee consisting of Wilford Woodruff, George Q. Cannon, Joseph F. Smith, and L. John Nuttall to plan the funeral services of President Taylor. Next he served as confidential secretary to the Twelve during the transition period and in one of their private meetings read the epistle of the Twelve that was to be delivered in October 1887 general conference. At a preliminary meeting of all the general authorities before the dedication of the Manti Temple, George was asked by the president of the Twelve, Wilford Woodruff, to read the dedicatory prayer that Woodruff had dictated to him. In 1888 George became secretary to the new General Church Board of Education. [^33] Clearly George Reynolds was one of the Church's most trusted and honored men.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Gustive O. Larson, "The Crusade and the Manifesto," in
[^2] Scott G. Kenney, ed., Wilford Woodruff's Journal, 9 vols. (Midvale, Utah: Signature Books, 1983-85), vol. 8, clearly demonstrates the tension existing in the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles (see especially 8:489-91). It started in the first meeting of the quorum following President Taylor's death (see 8:450-51) and continued over the next several months. George Reynolds took minutes during these meetings (see 8:482).
[^3] Notes in the William G. Hartley file at Brigham Young University of the First Council of Seventy Minutes obtained from LDS Church Historical Archives (these minutes are no longer open to scholars, according to interview with Elder Jack H. Goaslind, member of the presidency of the First Quorum of the Seventy, Salt Lake City, Utah, 6 November 1985); Abraham H. Cannon Journal, 3 October 1888, typescript in Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University; interview with Adrian W. Cannon, grandson of George Q. Cannon, who has studied the Cannon diaries, Salt Lake City, Utah, 17 July 1985; Truman G. Madsen, Defender of the Faith: The B. H. Roberts Story (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1980), p. 180.
[^4] Joseph Christensen Journals, August 1889 to December 1889, in LDS Church Historical Archives. Christensen was a young, temporary secretarial aide to Reynolds.
[^5] Ibid. James R. Clark, ed., Messages of the First Presidency, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-75), 3:176-79; George Reynolds Journal, vol. 6, 1889; David John Journal, vol. 3, 23 December 1889, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University; Arthur M. Richardson and Nicholas G. Morgan, Jr., The Life and Ministry of John Morgan (Salt Lake City: n. p., 1965), pp. 478-79.
[^6] George Reynolds Journal, vol. 6, 1890.
[^7] Before the Committee on Privileges and Elections of the United States Senate, Reed Smoot Case, 2 vols. (Washington: Government Printing Office, n.d.), 2:51-53. Frank J. Cannon, who was prominent in the negotiations leading up to the Manifesto, also acknowledged the possibility that Reynolds helped edit the document. See Frank J. Cannon and Harvey J. O'Higgins, Under the Prophet in Utah (Boston: C. M. Clark Publishing Co., 1911), p. 100. D. Michael Quinn in "LDS Church Authority and New Plural Marriages, 1900-1904," Dialogue 18 (Spring 1985): 44-45 submits further evidence of George Reynolds's assisting with the writing of the Manifesto. Richard S. Van Wagoner provides an excellent summary of the question of the authorship of the Manifesto in Mormon Polygamy: A History (Salt Lake City: Signature Books, 1986), pp. 261-62.
[^8] I have discussed the roles of all the secretaries in the Office of the President, including the private secretary, in more detail in "Close to the Seat of Authority: Secretaries and Clerks in the Office of the President of the LDS Church, 1870-1900," a paper delivered at the annual meetings of the Mormon History Association, Provo, Utah, May 1984.
[^9] Journal of George Reynolds, vol. 6, 1889.
[^10] Ibid., 1890.
[^11] "Book of Mormon chronological Chart, by George Reynolds," p. 188; "Editorial Thoughts," Juvenile Instructor 35 (1 May 1900): 281-82; Guide to Reynolds's chronological chart of Nephite and Lamanite History, broadside advertisement, located in Jane Reynolds Collection. A copy of this large chart was displayed at the George Reynolds Reunion, Salt Lake City, 31 August 1985.
[^12] "Are We of Israel?" Improvement Era 34 (October 1931): 744.
[^13] Journal of George Reynolds, vol. 6, 1891; "Sunday Schools to which I have given dictionaries of the Book of Mormon," memo book, Jane Reynolds Collection.
[^14] "Memo regarding Books written by Geo. Reynolds," Jane Reynolds Collection.
[^15] Millennial Star 54 (22 February 1892): 121- 22.
[^16] George Reynolds, A Dictionary of the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City: Jos. Hyrum Parry, 1891), p. 47.
[^17] Ibid., p. 352.
[^18] George M. Ottinger's role as a pioneer artist in Utah is told in Madeleine B. Stern, "A Rocky Mountain Book Store: Savage and Ottinger of Utah," BYU Studies 9 (Winter 1969): 144-54.
[^19] Cited on a broadside advertisement on The Story of the Book of Mormon, in the LDS Church Historical Archives.
[^20] Ibid.
[^21] "Memo regarding Books written by George Reynolds," typescript, located in a collection of George Reynolds papers owned by Jane Reynolds Collection; Circular of the Story of the Book of Mormon, printed advertisement, n.d., Jane Reynolds Collection; J. H. Parry notes and assignment, Jane Reynolds Collection.
[^22] George Reynolds, The Story of the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City: Jos. Hyrum Parry, 1888), p. iii.
[^23] Ibid., p. 17.
[^24] Ibid., pp. 313-14.
[^25] Ibid., pp. 377-78. Certainly Reynolds would have been well read to have come up with such information as displayed in this quotation and in many other examples throughout The Story of the Book of Mormon. It appears from his correspondence that many of his linguistic conclusions were drawn after consultation with his scientific friend and curator of the Deseret Museum, Joseph Barfoot.
[^26] Ibid., pp. 382-416. Noted Latter-day Saint anthropologists John L. Sorenson and Joseph L. Allen have produced the most scholarly and up-to-date evaluations of geography and the Book of Mormon in An Ancient American Setting for the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1985) and Exploring the Lands of the Book of Mormon (Orem, Utah: S.A. Publishers, 1989). Their conclusions differ dramatically from those of Reynolds. Nevertheless these experts and others are indebted to Reynolds for his path-breaking studies on the subject.
[^27] "Editorial Thoughts," Juvenile Instructor 25 (1 January 1890): 18-19.
[^28] George Reynolds, The Story of the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City: Jos. Hyrum Parry, 1888), pp. 472-87.
[^29] Lyman, Lighter of Lamps, pp. 14-15.
[^30] Information for these two paragraphs was drawn from numerous interviews and numerous entries in George Reynolds Journal, vol. 6.
[^31] "Autobiography of Alice Louise Reynolds," pp. 25-26.
[^32] John Taylor to George Reynolds, 1 November 1886, Jane Reynolds Collection; Hartley, "The Seventies in the 1880s," pp. 76-77.
[^33] Diary of L. John Nuttall, vol. 2, pp. 123, 132, 134, 152, 155; George Reynolds Journal, vol. 6, 1888; Arthur M. Richardson and Nicholas G. Morgan, Sr., The Life and Ministry of John Morgan (Salt Lake City: n.p., 1965), p. 449.
