Bruce A. Van Orden, Prisoner for Conscience' Sake: The Life of George Reynolds ( 1992)

CHAPTER 16

Secretary to President Wilford Woodruff

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was going through one of its worst crises in late 1887 and throughout 1888. Most of its leaders, including its presiding officer, Wilford Woodruff, president of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, were forced to remain in hiding to avoid arrest. The Edmunds-Tucker Act, passed in March 1887, had strengthened the federal government's power to squeeze the Saints' resolve to continue practicing their principle of polygamy. The law took away the Church's influence over the territorial militia, the educational system, and organized immigration. It even declared the Church itself disincorporated and authorized all Church property valued above fifty thousand dollars to be turned over to the government to benefit Utah's public schools. The law also further restricted the civil and voting rights of all Latter-day Saints. Immediately after President John Taylor's funeral in July 1887, the federal government implemented the escheatment provisions of the Edmunds-Tucker Act by filing suits against the Church and the Perpetual Emigrating Fund Company. Complex legal maneuvering followed. [^1]

The Church's crisis was heightened by the leaders' inability to communicate well among themselves because of conditions on the Underground. Wilford Woodruff ardently desired to reconstitute the First Presidency and call as his counselors George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith, the same counselors who had served under President John Taylor, but was stifled by disagreement among the Twelve Apostles over President Cannon's role as surrogate leader in 1886-87 during President Taylor's illness and incapacity. [^2]

George Reynolds, who now was free from potential arrest, assisted the presiding authorities of the Twelve in preparing documents, taking minutes of infrequent quorum meetings, and conducting correspondence. From time to time he met with President Wilford Woodruff and Elders George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith at their hiding places. These brethren were grateful for his accessibility, loyalty, dependability, and productivity. They never forgot his service during the Church's time of dire need.

A vacancy in the First Council of the Seventy occurred in September 1888 with the death of Horace S. Eldredge. President Woodruff, who could not attend the soon-to-be-convened October general conference, wrote to the remaining six presidents of the First Council, requesting them to present their recommendations of ordained seventies for consideration to fill the vacancy. George Reynolds's name topped the list, followed by that of Job Pingree, B. H. Roberts, and Joseph W. Summerhays. George Q. Cannon vetoed the choice of Reynolds at this time, on the grounds that his service as a secretary was still too valuable for him to be called to the First Council. Thirty-one-year-old B. H. Roberts, who had recently received public adulation for his bold work as mission president in the southern states, received the call instead. [^3]

So George Reynolds continued his vital role as secretary to the leading apostles. By summer 1889, political events and decisions made it possible for most Church authorities to come out from the Underground, and the Quorum of the Twelve resolved its internal divisions. Finally the apostles were prepared to sustain Wilford Woodruff, George Q. Cannon, and Joseph F. Smith as the new First Presidency. This action took place publicly in the 1889 October general conference.

After Wilford Woodruff became the fourth president of the Church in 1889, both L. John Nuttall and George Reynolds served as his private secretaries. To help Nuttall restore his failing health by freeing him from a sedentary life-style, President Woodruff sent him twice to Washington, D.C., to serve as secretary to Utah's territorial delegate to the Congress, John T. Caine, and other Mormon lobbyists, including President Joseph F. Smith. In such a capacity Nuttall could obtain more exercise and enjoy more frequently the open air. During the first of these lobbying efforts in Washington in the winter of 1889-90, Reynolds directed the office staff in Salt Lake City in researching material in the Millennial Star and the Journal of Discourses that would demonstrate the loyalty of the Church to the United States. [^4] The Church at this time was in an unprecedented conflict with the federal government. A special churchwide fast was called for 23 December 1889, the anniversary of Joseph Smith's birth. The Saints were enjoined to pray that the plots and schemes of those who sought to destroy the Saint's civil rights and liberties would be confounded. George Reynolds took part in fasting and praying with Church leaders in the Office of the President. [^5] All their efforts came to nothing. The gentile Liberal Party in February 1890 swept into political power in Salt Lake City, and as the year proceeded, it appeared that all Latter-day Saints would soon lose their right to vote unless polygamy was denounced.

Gradually Wilford Woodruff became convinced by events and through discussions with his closest advisers that he should consider halting the practice of plural marriage. After much solemn prayer, he finally decided in September 1890 to draft a manifesto stating that no more plural marriages would be performed and that the Church would abide the laws of the land. During the months leading up to the now famous "Woodruff Manifesto," Nuttall was still in Washington and George Reynolds shouldered the burden of work in Salt Lake City. Furthermore, he had been called in April of that year to be a general authority—a member of the First Council of the Seventy. This latter calling required additional traveling and meetings. He confided in his journal that he was "much overworked" and that he had extreme difficulty in tending to all his duties. But he was not alone. All Church leaders were feeling considerable stress. [^6]

Unquestionably, as President Woodruff's private secretary, Reynolds participated in the confidential discussions leading up to the publication of the Manifesto. During the celebrated Reed Smoot hearings in the United States Senate fourteen years later, George testified that he, together with Charles W. Penrose and John R. Winder, assisted with the writing and editing of the Manifesto after President Woodruff had drafted it and before it was made public. The First Presidency charged George Reynolds to send the Manifesto over the telegraph as an official announcement. [^7]

After the Manifesto, the Church's conflict with the federal government gradually diminished. The Church thus entered a new era of accommodation with the larger American society. George Reynolds's roles also changed. By 1890 George was forty-eight years old and was considered more a Church senior statesman than an up-and-coming leader. As one of the First Seven Presidents of Seventy and as a senior member of the Deseret Sunday School Union Board, he traveled frequently to the stakes of Zion and promoted the cause of both the seventies quorums and the Sunday Schools. He was no longer constantly available to the president of the Church as private secretary. L. John Nuttall's health also gradually limited his effectiveness as private secretary. In 1892 George F. Gibbs, a son-in-law of Lorenzo Snow and a long-time employee in the Office, became the Church president's private secretary and closest aide. He served in that post until 1923. [^8]

During this period, George Reynolds also found opportunity to continue his beloved Book of Mormon scholarly projects. He pressed forward, almost daily, in adding new passages to his Book of Mormon concordance. He was anxious to finish it but was even more anxious that the work be absolutely accurate. By February 1889, George had finished tabulating all the passages, a total of 154,000, in the Book of Mormon. Then the second, but shorter, stage of the project began: checking the entries for accuracy. With the aid of two young assistants in the Office of the President, George enthusiastically undertook the task, finishing more than half of the checking by year's end. [^9] When new duties came to him in 1890 as private secretary to President Wilford Woodruff and as a general authority, he shelved this project again. [^10] When opportunity arose, however, he doggedly pressed on, checking and rechecking his work.

George took the "Book of Mormon Chronological Chart" that was in his book Story of the Book of Mormon and with his publisher prepared a six-foot-long chart that came out in 1890. The Deseret Sunday School Union general board promoted the chart as a tool for the classroom and the home at a price of twenty-five cents on paper and one dollar if mounted on rollers. Fully extended, the chart was more than six feet long and had lines crossing at every inch. The mounted version was wound on two sticks, replicating Hebrew scriptures. As described in the Young Woman's Journal, "The events and dates of the world's history are printed on one side, while the corresponding dates and events of Nephite history are given on the opposite side. The colored streams representing the various peoples, flow down the center of the chart and give a most comprehensive view of the respective strength or numbers of each." The chart also included the name of each Nephite historian, the time he wrote, and the names and the length of the rule of the various chief judges. [^11]

In 1931, when another edition of George's "Book of Mormon Chronological Chart" was published by his son Harold, leading Mormon educator John Henry Evans noted: "George Reynolds was the most thorough-going student of the Nephite record we have had in a hundred years. And the Chart embodies, in a form that appeals to the eye, not only the chronological details of the Book of Mormon itself, but also such contemporary data as help one to understand the narrative. I consider the Chart of the greatest value in the study of the Nephite record. There is nothing that compares with it in its grasp of events, in its accuracy, or in its illuminating details." [^12] Although the chart has not been reprinted recently, other Book of Mormon chronology charts published by the Church have followed George's basic pattern.

Another book on the Book of Mormon was in the works as well: George's Dictionary of the Book of Mormon appeared in 1891. This volume was immediately implemented in Church schools as a textbook, and George gave gift copies to 354 Church Sunday Schools. [^13] When the books were advertised, George wrote, "If you find a customer undecided between the Story and the Dictionary, push the Dictionary." [^14] The Millennial Star urged readers to purchase the Dictionary: "It comprises all the biographical and geographical, as well as all other proper names, in the history to which it refers; and accompanying each is much valuable information in a comprehensive form." [^15]

This dictionary, printed in several editions, emphasizes detail. For example, an entry on the Amalekites reads:

A sect of Nephite apostates whose origin is not given. Many of them were after the order of Nehor. Very early in the days of the republic they had affiliated with the Lamanites and with them built a large city, not far from the waters of Mormon, which they called Jerusalem. They were exceedingly crafty and hard-hearted, and in all the ministrations of the sons of Mosiah among them only one was converted. They led in the massacres of the Christian Lamanites or people of Anti-Nephi-Lehi; and in later years the Lamanite generals were in the habit of placing them in high command in their armies, because of their greater force of character, their intense hatred to their former brethren, and their more wicked and murderous disposition. In the sacred record they are generally associated with the Zoramites and Amulonites. [^16]

Every Book of Mormon person, city, valley, hill, land, and river mentioned received thorough treatment. This is George Reynolds's most enduring book. Today its most dated portions are the geographical identifications with known map locations. Modern Book of Mormon geography students might take issue with those identifications, such as George's assertion that the land Bountiful "extended southward from the Isthmus of Panama." [^17] According to Reynolds, the Isthmus of Panama was the "narrow neck of land" in the Book of Mormon, a point disputed by many Book of Mormon scholars today.

George Reynolds continued maintaining his two separate polygamous households during this stressful time. He diligently saw to it that his growing families received the best possible opportunities for education, and he constantly checked on their progress. His oldest child at home, Alice Louise, was intellectually gifted, so George negotiated with his friend, Brigham Young Academy Principal Karl G. Maeser, for Alice to attend the Provo academy and receive the best available personal tutoring. The same opportunity soon followed for Florry.

At home Amelia gave birth to Nephi on 13 August 1887 and Ethel Georgina on 23 August 1889. Mary delivered her second child, Polly, named after George's first wife, on 11 May 1888 and Philip (Phil) on Pioneer Day, 24 July 1890. After the Manifesto of October 1890, George Reynolds followed the general practice of living with his plural wives and having children by them. Both Amelia and Mary bore several children in the post-Manifesto period.

Footnotes

Utah's History, ed. Richard D. Poll, et al. (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1978), pp. 266-68.

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith, Jr., History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 7 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book Co., 1957), 2:202.
[^2] Doctrine and Covenants 107:25-26, 34, 38, 93-98.
[^3] S. Dilworth Young, "The Seventies: A Historical Perspective," Ensign 6 (July 1976): 14-18; Hartley, "The Seventies in the 1880s," pp. 62-63; James N. Baumgarten, "The Role and Function of the Seventies in L.D.S. Church History," master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1960.
[^4] George Reynolds Journal, vol. 6, 1890; Abraham H. Cannon Journal, 1 April 1890; Deseret Semi-Weekly News, 8 April 1890, p. 3; Arthur M. Richardson and Nicholas G. Morgan, Jr., The Life and Ministry of John Morgan (Salt Lake City: n.p., 1965), p. 485.
[^5] Seymour Bicknell Young Papers; Alice Louise Reynolds, "Biography of George Reynolds," p. 30.
[^6] George Reynolds to B. H. Roberts, 27 November 1899, Jane Reynolds Collection. See also B. H. Roberts to George Reynolds, 8 December 1899 and J. Golden Kimball to George Reynolds, 13 September 1892, Jane Reynolds Collection. For other evidence of Reynolds's closeness to Roberts, see Truman G. Madsen, Defender of the Faith: The B. H. Roberts Story (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1980), pp. 226, 229, 233.
[^7] Juvenile Instructor 36 (1 August 1901): 464; 27 (1 August 1892): 465-68.
[^8] Edna Romano, ed., "Teancum Pratt, Founder of Helper," Utah Historical Quarterly 48 (Fall 1980): 351.
[^9] Deseret Semi-Weekly News, 2 February 1894, p. 4; Richardson and Morgan, The Life and Ministry of John Morgan, pp. 565-66.
[^10] Seymour Bicknell Young Papers; "Lives of Our Leaders.—The First Council of the Seventy. President Seymour B. Young," Juvenile Instructor 36 (15 April 1901): 224-27; Madsen, Defender of the Faith, pp. 182-83; Richardson and Morgan, The Life and Ministry of John Morgan, pp. 567-68; Reed Smoot Hearings, 2:51-53.
[^11] A. L. Reynolds, "Biography of George Reynolds," pp. 33-34.
[^12] George Reynolds Journal, vol. 6, 1893-1894.
[^13] George Reynolds to E. D. Woolley, 1893, Edwin Dilworth Woolley Papers, LDS Church Historical Archives.
[^14] George Reynolds to J. D. Call, 24 December 1897, Jane Reynolds Collection. Other letters that I have seen from the Office of the First Presidency written by Reynolds on doctrinal questions are G. R. to W. B. Torrey, 27 November 1900 (on who the "Lamanites" are today and the success of missionary work among them); G. R. to John F. Sharp, 26 August 1898 (on observing the Sabbath day on Sunday); G. R. to J. C. Ferrin, 7 March 1899 (on whether the Old Testament prophets possessed the Melchizedek Priesthood); G. R. to Hugh J. Cannon, 5 May 1902 (on a proposed wording change in the Book of Mormon text); and G. R. to R. Ballantyne, 28 September 1897 (on how the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible helps one understand the Old Testament passages on the Lord hardening the Pharaoh's heart), all in the Jane Reynolds Collection.
[^15] Conference Report, October 1897, p. 49. Reynolds discussed this same theme in his next recorded address, according to Conference Report, October 1898, pp. 18-21.
[^16] Journal of George Reynolds, vol. 6, 1896. This series, entitled "Evidences of the Book of Mormon: Some External Proofs of Its Divinity," is found in Contributor 17 (January 1896): 164-68; 17 (February 1896): 231-38; 17 (March 1896): 271-78; 17 (April 1896): 361-68; 17 (May 1896): 417-24.
[^17] Accounts of the Cluff expedition are found in Ernest L. Wilkinson, Brigham Young University: The First Hundred Years, 4 vols. (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1975), 1:289-329; Gary James Bergera and Ronald Priddis, Brigham Young University: A House of Faith (Salt Lake City: Signature Books, 1985), pp. 10-13.
