Bruce A. Van Orden, Prisoner for Conscience' Sake: The Life of George Reynolds ( 1992)

CHAPTER 17

Called as a General Authority

One of the greatest honors that can come to a Latter-day Saint male during his lifetime is a call to be one of the Church's general authorities. George Reynolds received such an honor in the April 1890 general conference when he was called and sustained as a member of the First Council of Seventy (or First Seven Presidents of Seventy, which was a more frequently used title at that time). Other general authorities were the three members of the First Presidency, the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, the patriarch to the Church, and the three members of the presiding bishopric. The presidents of the Seventy were experts on missionary work, acting under the direction of the First Presidency and the apostles, and they directed the affairs of the numerous seventies quorums throughout the Church in 1890.

Members of the Church have always been fascinated by their general authorities, often looking upon them with awe. Faithful Saints are expected to follow their counsel as coming from God. One reason these men are known as "general" authorities is that their assignments extend to all the world, not just to local wards and stakes as subordinate positions do. Since the period when George Reynolds served as a general authority, the number of such authorities has expanded. Not only are there seven presiding presidents (now referred to as the Presidency of the Seventy), but there are numerous members of both the first and the second quorums of the Seventy. Since October 1986 no lay members of the Church have served as seventies, only general authorities. Most seventies today function as members of area presidencies for the Church in various locations throughout the world. They also serve in executive positions supervising departments at Church headquarters. Today's critical and expanding work of the quorums of the Seventy has some roots in the period when George Reynolds was first an active seventy and later one of the First Seven Presidents of Seventy.

The first reference to seventies in the Church's history was in February 1835, when Joseph Smith announced an unrecorded revelation establishing the seventy as a new Melchizedek priesthood office (along with elder, high priest, and apostle—the latter having just been added itself) and created a distinctly structured quorum of seventy men. The Prophet taught that the seventies were "to constitute traveling quorums, to go into all the earth, withersoever the Twelve Apostles shall call them." [^1] A month later a "revelation on priesthood" (Doctrine and Covenants 107) provided further details of the responsibilities of all priesthood offices in both the Melchizedek (higher) and the Aaronic (lower) priesthoods, including the seventies. Clearly the calling of the seventy was similar to that of the apostles in preaching the gospel and in being "especial witnesses" (Doctrine and Covenants 107:25) and traveling ministers to all the world. But always the seventies were to act under the direction of the Twelve, never independently. [^2]

During Joseph Smith's adminstration, three seventies quorums were established. After his death, the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, under the direction of Brigham Young, envisioning as they did a vast expansion of proselyting the nations of the earth, gave even more emphasis to the seventies and formed a total of thirty-five quorums. Through the Church's exodus to the Rocky Mountains and subsequent colonization of many different valleys, seventies retained membership in their originally numbered Nauvoo quorums. This situation created record-keeping problems as well as difficulty for quorum members to hold meetings. Practically speaking, seventies existed from 1850 to 1880 primarily as a resource pool for potential missionaries who could be called into the Church's various missions. Approximately two-thirds of all missionaries called to foreign missions came from the seventies quorums. [^3] George Reynolds was ordained a seventy in 1866 and retained that priesthood office throughout his call as one of the First Seven Presidents of Seventy in 1890. Unlike today's practice, George as a presiding seventy was not ordained to the office of high priest.

George Reynolds's call as a general authority came in April 1890 after Abraham H. Cannon was called to be an apostle. Some of the pressure from federal authorities had abated, and none of the general authorities was in hiding. Again the First Council submitted recommendations. Again the Council made George Reynolds their first choice. This time he was called, although he still was serving as private secretary to President Wilford Woodruff and would continue in that capacity for two more years. After general conference sessions, in which George's name was presented for a sustaining vote, Lorenzo Snow, president of the quorum of the Twelve Apostles, set apart the forty-eight-year-old George Reynolds as one of the First Seven Presidents of Seventy. [^4]

His six colleagues were Henry Harriman, eighty-five; Jacob Gates, seventy-nine; Seymour B. Young, fifty-two; Christian D. Fjelsted, sixty-one; John Morgan, forty-seven; and B. H. Roberts, thirty-three. Harriman and Gates died within two years of George's call; Seymour B. Young became the senior president and remained as such throughout the rest of George's life. Others who became members of the First Council during George's tenure were J. Golden Kimball, Rulon S. Wells, Edward Stevenson, Joseph W. McMurrin, and Charles H. Hart. This group met each Wednesday in the Templeton Building on South Temple Street across from Temple Square. As would be expected, these men grew close. During the last two decades of his life, George considered his best friends to be Seymour Young, B. H. Roberts, J. Golden Kimball, and Rulon Wells of the First Council as well as his other close associates on the Deseret Sunday School Union Board, of which he also was a member. [^5]

George's fondness for his colleagues is revealed in a letter to B. H. Roberts, written while Roberts was struggling to hold onto his seat in the United States House of Representatives in 1899. Roberts was under attack for being a polygamist. George wrote his friend, "Last week the Council wrote you a letter, but, so far as I was concerned, at least, it was not entirely satisfactory. It did not fully convey our feelings, which are much warmer." Comfortingly he added, "I know that one man with God on his side is in the majority; and God has not deserted you, neither have many of your brethren. . . . You are standing in the gap where in a somewhat different manner, I once stood. The crowd are not fighting you or I; it is God's law they are warring on." [^6]

During George's service on the First Council, it was common for the seven presidents to have "general" callings in addition to their work as seventies. This general calling enabled them when they toured or visited the various stakes to meet not only with seventies quorums but with other appropriate Church workers. John Morgan was second assistant general superintendent of the Sunday Schools, and Seymour Young and George Reynolds were members of the Sunday School general board. George eventually served in the general superintendency as well. Beginning with J. Golden Kimball, each new member of the seven presidents was also called to serve on the general board of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association.

On average George visited some twenty stakes per year from 1890 to 1906. Many of these were in such distant locations as Canada, Oregon, Wyoming, Arizona, and Mexico and required several weeks away from home at a time. Almost always he met with both seventies and Sunday School conferences, or faculty meetings, to instruct them in their duties. On his visits he often called and set apart new seventies quorum presidents and ordained new seventies. With his interests in history, geography, and geology, George took advantage of the opportunity to learn new things on his trips. For example, in a report to the Juvenile Instructor of his visit to Church branches in the Tintic mining district in Juab County, Utah, George related, "True to his perceptive instincts, the next morning, Elder Reynolds was climbing the hills of Mammoth, viewing the landscape o'er and taking in the general topography of the country for present and future information and use." [^7]

Nothing was more important to the seven presidents during these years than educating prospective missionaries throughout the Church. Most of the First Council were educated men themselves and valued education as a most significant part of the gospel. As George and some of his colleagues traveled to the stakes, educating the youth became a prime topic of discussion. For example, Teancum Pratt of rural Carbon County recorded the visit of Elders Reynolds and Wells of the First Council to a conference: "We were met by Brother Reynolds and Wells, who talked mostly upon the subject of saving and educating the rising generation, and this subject is very much talked of now." [^8]

The First Council planned a general seventies conference in Salt Lake City to be held for two days in January 1894. The theme for the gathering was " 'the necessity of the Elders of Israel to acquire knowledge in all branches of learning whereby they may be made efficient as ministers of the Gospel and witnesses of the work of the Almighty of this age.' During the meetings Elder B. H. Roberts' new book Outlines of Ecclesiastical History was launched with a 'practical illustration of how to conduct a class.' " The Deseret News failed to identify the main speaker at the conference, but perhaps it was George Reynolds, for the sentiments expressed certainly reflected his attitudes. The speaker stated, "All truth emanated from the same source, from God." He added, "A mind well sorted with facts and filled with the Holy Spirit is a mind that exercises influence on the world for good." [^9]

In those years, serving as a member of the seven presidents was not a full-time calling and no salary was drawn for performing this priesthood work. Each member of the First Council was required to earn a living and support his family. Seymour Young, the senior member of the group during all but two years of George's tenure, was a physician who still maintained his practice and made a comfortable living. Young was so compassionate that he often performed medical work for others without charge, particularly while on the road in his ministry. Others of the First Council were not so well off financially. The most colorful among them, B. H. Roberts, was perpetually poor, supporting his plural families as best he could with royalties from lecturing and writing. John Morgan was an administrator of both a local hotel and a business college, both of which suffered terribly in the Panic of 1893. George Reynolds, of course, was employed by the Church, and his daily work was in harmony with his priesthood calling. But in 1904 he made it clear before the United States Senate that there was a distinction between his "business" in the Office and his "calling" in the priesthood. Because he labored at Church headquarters, George often assisted Seymour Young in blessing and setting apart missionaries as they prepared to depart on their assignments. [^10]

From the time of his release as private secretary to President Woodruff in 1892, George Reynolds served in a number of vital secretarial capacities in the Office. None of these, however, required hourly or daily attention. Hence he could travel, write, and carry out his responsibilities as needed on a more flexible schedule.

One of his duties was to process requests for divorce and cancellation of temple sealings. On occasion he summoned individuals who applied for divorce to sign papers. Alice Louise Reynolds recounts one story: "One day a man came in where the evidence was especially bad so far as he was concerned. Had that man known my Father he would have signed that paper and walked out but he stammered something about having his wife in eternity. At this Father became infuriated and said: Don't you ever think it. I should like to help kick you to hell myself." [^11]

In 1893 the construction of the Salt Lake Temple was completed, and the holy edifice was dedicated in multiple ceremonies over a month's period. George attended most of these dedicatory sessions and participated in some, either speaking or praying. President Wilford Woodruff had been the Church's greatest advocate of ordinance work for the dead, and in 1894 he organized the Utah Genealogical Society to promote genealogical research among Church members. George Reynolds, who had researched his family tree and had arranged for the ordinance work to be done, became the Genealogical Society secretary. [^12] He continued in that position until 1902.

By the 1890s the First Presidency (not just the Church president alone, as was generally the case with Joseph Smith and Brigham Young) had become the composite ruling entity of the LDS Church. The president was the prophet and had the final say on most matters, yet counselors increasingly exerted more influence. During the Underground era, when John Taylor was in hiding and in ill health, first counselor George Q. Cannon directed Church affairs by default. Under the aged Wilford Woodruff, formidable counselors George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith played nearly an equal role with Woodruff in Church administration. Important edicts came from the First Presidency as a body after this group discussed matters and came to a joint conclusion. During the last two decades of his life, George Reynolds handled a great deal of First Presidency correspondence. For example, in 1893 George wrote in behalf of the First Presidency to E. D. Woolley, the stake president of Kanab, on a matter about which the First Presidency had heard complaints:

I am directed by the First Presidency to say that a letter has been received at this office complaining of the habit to which some in Kanab, (and among them local authorities in the priesthood) are giving way to, of training race horses on the Sabbath day, in disregard of the commandments to keep the day holy, and to the injury of the morals of the youth of the settlement. This not being the first complaint that has been received on this matter, the Presidency would be pleased to learn from you how much there is to it, and what steps you are taking to remedy the evil, supposing it to exist. [^13]

Many times local Church leaders wrote to the First Presidency at the then-famous "Box B" in Salt Lake City asking difficult doctrinal questions. Apparently Reynolds, well versed as he was in theology and the history of the Church, was often charged to answer the questions. Sometimes he stated clearly what the First Presidency had authorized him to say and then added his own opinion. At other times he wrote reasoned, concise responses that seem to have been on his own authority. One such example follows:

There are various opinions held with regard to the Apostleship of Paul; but I know of nothing in the Scriptures to warrant the idea that he was one of the Twelve. Some imagine that he was a Seventy. My opinion is that he was an apostle, as in this dispensation, Oliver Cowdery and others have been ordained apostles yet never belonged to the Quorum of the Twelve. The same may be said of Bros. Daniel H. Wells and John W. Young. They were counselors to the Twelve they never belonged to the Quorum of the Twelve, yet they were both Apostles, for they belonged, at one time, to the First Presidency of the Church. In the eyes of many the fact that Paul was especially called by Jesus from heaven made him an Apostle; but until he was ordained to the Priesthood by one holding proper authority his administrations in the ordinances of the church would not have been legal. Paul himself, if we may judge by some of his utterances, esteemed himself equal in authority to those Apostles who belonged to the Twelve. [^14]

Another assignment that came to George and his colleagues was to speak in the Church's general conferences. George was not an orator, and he knew it. He preferred not to be called upon in the conference and much preferred to offer a prayer than to speak. Elders Seymour B. Young, B. H. Roberts, and J. Golden Kimball of the First Seven Presidents were well-liked public speakers and addressed conference sessions more frequently than did Elder Reynolds. Perhaps, with his close association with the First Presidency, he was able to persuade them not to call on him to speak as often.

In his first recorded address in general conference, in October 1897, seven and a half years after he was called as a general authority, George made public his lifelong, ardent desire for the arrival of the peaceful, millennial reign of Jesus Christ. "And these things I know will be brought about," he testified, "under the direction of those who hold the keys of power in the midst of His people, to whom He reveals His mind and will." He added, "And I am doubly thankful to know that there is not one key of the Holy Priesthood, not one power belonging to God's kingdom, not one key of authority, not one principle pertaining to the building up of righteousness upon the earth, that God has withheld from His people, in these the latter days." [^15]

Beginning in 1890, with the First Presidency's permission, George gave weekly lectures at both LDS College, Salt Lake City, and Brigham Young Academy, Provo, until 1902, when his increased responsibilities with the Deseret Sunday School Union made the weekly lectures impossible. Most of his college lectures dealt with Book of Mormon topics. Related to these lectures were eleven articles on "Lessons from the Life of Nephi" and twelve articles on "The Jaredites" published in the Juvenile Instructor in 1891 and 1892, respectively.

In 1896 George wrote in his journal, "I delivered my usual series of lectures at the B.Y. Academy, Provo, and Latter-day Saints College, Salt Lake City. This series was a new one treating on the Evidences of the Divinity of the Book of Mormon. Articles on the same subject (being the main argument of the lectures) appeared in the Contributor, commencing with January. This new course cost me a great amount of study." [^16]

These five articles had indeed demanded considerable research. Drawing from recently published studies, George argued that "external evidences" increased the veracity of the Book of Mormon. He examined ancient American codices containing similar Book of Mormon traditions; rings binding ancient records; the discovery of Hebrew writings and metal plates in the Americas; the ties to the Book of Mormon of ancient Mexican and Peruvian traditions as independently recorded by the chroniclers Lord Kingsborough, Sahagun, Las Casas, Torquemeda, and Montesinos; and geological evidences of cataclysmic events in the Americas. The Millennial Star reprinted these articles a year later. The study of external evidences pointing to the historicity of the Book of Mormon increased considerably in the Church after George's research was published.

The latter part of the nineteenth century has been identified by historians as the Age of Science. George's attempts to justify the Book of Mormon in light of the flood of scientific discoveries are commendable. A plethora of others in the Church, notably B. H. Roberts, soon followed his lead. George's professorship at Brigham Young Academy also prompted an enthusiastic determination by faculty and students to obtain firsthand scientific evidence to substantiate the Book of Mormon. The academy's president, Benjamin F. Cluff, Jr., organized an expedition to Central and South America in 1900. One of Cluff's ambitions was to discover Zarahemla in Colombia, which George Reynolds taught was on the River Magdalena. [^17]

George Reynolds continued a devoted father and husband during the 1890s. One of his most impressive habits was never to leave his family in suspense about where he was, what he was doing, or when he would be home in the evening. "All his life he turned to his wife or wives as he was leaving in the morning," Alice Louise wrote, "and said, 'I shall be home at my regular time, if anything interferes I shall let you know.' And if anything interfered, he did let them know. Before the time of telephones he used a messenger." He never failed to remember wedding anniversaries and birthdays, quite a feat for a man with three wives and more than thirty children. [^18]

Although George was an exemplary family man, he suffered from the weakness that many with his temperament and talents have also had. "If his reputation was particularly good [in relation to his love for his family]," Alice Louise recorded, "it was not so good when it came to putting up stoves, hanging doors, and pulling down carpets. Any wife he had could beat him at such jobs." [^19]

After Alice Louise began teaching at Brigham Young Academy, she once returned home for Christmas and, as usual, went straight from the railroad depot to her father's desk in the Office of the President. "There he sat with a picture book and a doll on his desk," she recounted.

As I came in he said, "Alice, there is a little girl in the L.D.S. hospital who is afraid Santa Claus won't know where she is. Sidney has bought the book. I have bought the doll" and I finished his sentence by saying, "and I will buy the dishes." The mere incident of this man who had 32 children of his own and staggering responsibility every day of his life taking it upon himself to see that the child at the hospital was not forgotten is not the important thing, but rather that there could be no Christmas for him unless the little girl at the hospital was provided for. [^20]

In 1894, George Reynolds moved his combined first and third families to a house on Wall Street near the present state capitol building. His two families were separated by more than a mile. George was very busy with being a secretary in the Office of the President, a ranking member of the Deseret Sunday School Union Board and general treasurer, and a member of the First Council of Seventy (which meant being away from Salt Lake City almost every weekend). He was in the last years of his project of collecting the data for his monumental Book of Mormon concordance. Furthermore he was more than fifty years old and had lost the energy of his earlier years. So he chose to spend most of his evenings at the home of his third wife, Mary, where he had an office upstairs. He got in the habit of going to Amelia's house only every Thursday night. Otherwise he was generally at his home on Wall Street in the Nineteenth Ward. [^21]

Most evenings he went home and spent an hour with the family, which included family prayer and time for the children to talk with their father. After dinner he retired to his office to work on his concordance, prepare his lectures, write other articles, or simply relax. Mary assiduously kept the little children and their noise away from him. Then in the mornings all the children were expected to arise early and eat breakfast with their father. The younger children did not become as acquainted with George, particularly with his happy and tender personality, as did his older children. Their memories of him are not as pleasant as those of the first children.

Amelia generally did not mind that George did not stay often in her home. She was tired of bearing children (her last one, her twelfth, was born in 1898) and did not want to have any more. But she insisted on having equal amounts of things provided her children, and George attempted to do that. Amelia's younger children suffered from lack of positive exposure to their father, although in 1902, when Amelia had a bad spell with rheumatism, he spent several months living at her house. He was also anxious to help Amelia whenever he could with her family's genealogy and temple work.

The children of the second family knew the children in the first and third families well. They often visited each other and went on outings together. The children in the first and third families were just like brothers and sisters to each other. They responded to the children from the second family not as cousins but still not quite as close as brothers and sisters.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] George Reynolds Journal, vol. 6, 1883, 1884.
[^2] "Historical Review of the Deseret Sunday School Union," Juvenile Instructor 19 (15 November 1884): 9346-47.
[^3] A History of Latter-day Saint Sunday Schools 1849-1899 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Sunday School Union, 1900), p. 51; George Reynolds Journal, vol. 6, 1889.
[^4] A History of Latter-day Saint Sunday Schools, p. 41; George Reynolds Journal, vol. 6, 1889; Deseret Sunday School Union Leaflets (Salt Lake City: Deseret Sunday School Union, 1901).
[^5] George Reynolds Journal, vol. 6, 1894; Jubilee History of Latter-day Saint Sunday Schools, p. 32; Deseret Semi-Weekly News, 13 April 1894, p. 2.
[^6] A History of Latter-day Saint Sunday Schools, p. 33.
[^7] George Reynolds Journal, vol. 6, 1898.
[^8] Ibid., Jubilee History of Latter-day Saint Sunday Schools, pp. 35-40.
[^9] A History of Latter-day Saint Sunday Schools, pp. 520-34; George D. Pyper to George Reynolds and Levi W. Richards, 19 July 1899, in Jane Reynolds Collection.
[^10] Juvenile Instructor 35 (15 August 1900): 545-49.
[^11] Ibid., 35 (1 August 1900): 511; 35 (1 September 1900): 586-87; 35 (15 October 1900): 702-3; 35 (1 November 1900): 735-36.
[^12] Ibid., 35 (15 October 1900): 699-701; 35 (15 December 1900): 822.
[^13] Ibid., 35 (1 December 1900): 788; 36 (1 January 1901): 917-18; 36 (15 February 1901): 105-6; 36 (15 March 1901): 141; Knighton, "A Comparative Study of the Teaching Methods of the L.D.S. and Non-L.D.S. Sunday School Movements in the United States Prior to 1900," pp. 90-99.
[^14] Ibid., 36 (15 February 1901): 111; George Reynolds Journal, vol. 6, 1900.
[^15] George Reynolds Journal, vol. 6, 1901.
[^16] None of these editorials contains any by-line, but Reynolds's style is nearly unmistakable. Certain other editorials in 1901, usually not dealing with Sunday School procedure but rather centering on events in the Near East where Joseph Tanner had traveled, bear the marks of Tanner.
[^17] Juvenile Instructor 36 (1 May 1901): 274.
[^18] Ibid., 36 (1 November 1901): 656-57.
[^19] Information for this paragraph was drawn from numerous entries in volumes 36-40 (1901-1905) in the Juvenile Instructor and George Reynolds Journal, vol. 6, 1901-1906.
[^20] These questions were drawn from volumes 36-38 (1901-1903) of the Juvenile Instructor.
[^21] George Reynolds, to J. B. Merrill, 23 March 1899; see also Joel Ricks to George Reynolds, 28 December 1903; J. C. Ferrin to George Reynolds, 6 March 1899; A. Booth to George Reynolds, 9 September 1901; all located in Jane Reynolds Collection.
