Bruce A. Van Orden, Prisoner for Conscience' Sake: The Life of George Reynolds ( 1992)

CHAPTER 18

Sunday School Administrator

In addition to all his other duties, George Reynolds continued to labor through the years with his beloved Sunday School program. Under George Q. Cannon, Reynolds had been a pioneer Sunday School worker as a contributor to the Juvenile Instructor, treasurer of the Deseret Sunday School Union, chairman of the publications committee, and a writer and promoter of the Union's Faith Promoting Series booklets. In the Twentieth Ward, George served three lengthy terms as Sunday School superintendent, during which many innovations in recruitment, activities, music, and curriculum were implemented. After 1885 he no longer served on the local level.

In 1883 George aided the Union in preparing the Church's first Sunday School hymnal, Deseret Sunday School Union Music Book. A year later he and Union co-worker Levi W. Richards compiled a serial article, "Historical Review of the Deseret Sunday School Union," for the Juvenile Instructor. [^1] This effort presaged a much larger project, Jubilee History of Latter-day Saint Sunday Schools, which George Reynolds and Levi Richards co-authored in 1899. The latter publication drew heavily, even in exact language, from the 1884 article. The 1884 sketch concluded with the following glowing assessment:

To say that [the Deseret Sunday School Union] has been a potent instrument of religious culture, of social refinement, and moral worth, a factor in the development of God's purposes, a bond of union among His people, a source of strength to the Church, and an aid to the Priesthood would, we submit, not be claiming too much; and this position is all the more gratifying when we consider how vast has been the labor performed and how slight has been the cost in dollars and cents, to the community. [^2]

In April 1889, the executive board of the Deseret Sunday School Union was formed. Before that time executive power rested with the general superintendency alone, but with the growth of the Union throughout the expanding Church and with General Superintendent Cannon's frequent absence on account of his other duties, six men were added to the executive board. George Reynolds was named the senior member of that additional six. In August that year George began serving in his new calling by going on a three-week "Sunday School mission" to small settlements in northern Utah and southern Idaho. [^3]

Also in 1889 the publications committee promoted a new teaching methodology by issuing thirty-one "Sunday School Leaflets" on the life of Christ. They were written by George Reynolds and two emerging young and brilliant educators in the Church, James E. Talmage and Willard Done. Throughout the 1890s this committee, which was expanded to include Karl G. Maeser and Bertha Irving, continued to produce more leaflets until there were 212 in all. For many years the leaflets provided the basic curriculum in the Deseret Sunday School Union. They contained seventy-four lessons on the Old Testament, twenty on the life of the Prophet Joseph Smith, fifty-one on the Book of Mormon, and forty on the Articles of Faith. Each of the leaflets contained texts from the scriptures and helps for the teachers in preparing their lessons. The sections were entitled "Lesson Statement," "Questions on the Lesson," and "What We May Learn from This Lesson." [^4]

After George's call to be a general authority in 1890 at age forty-eight, his work with the Sunday Schools took a new turn. Henceforth he traveled many times each year in his dual role as an executive member of the Deseret Sunday School general board and as a member of the First Council of Seventy. More often than not he conducted both Sunday School and seventies' business in the stakes and missions he visited.

In 1893 a proposal of the Deseret Sunday School Union that each stake hold annual Sunday School conferences received approval from the First Presidency. Hence, in 1894 George went in company with George Goddard of the general superintendency on an extended four and one-half month "mission" to stake and mission Sunday School conferences and meetings in California, Arizona, Mexico, Idaho, and Utah. "During my travels on S.S. Conference business [in 1894] I traveled about 11,700 miles, nearly 2,000 of which was by [horse] team," he recorded. "While visiting the stakes we not only attended the public conference meetings, but held meetings with the teachers and with the Stake Presidency & Superintendency." [^5] In these settings, the general board members exhibited methods of conducting class exercises, answered questions about Sunday School matters, and gave encouragement. [^6] George attended a number of such conferences in subsequent years, although he was not again absent from home for such an extended period of time.

In September 1898, George visited Rock Springs, Wyoming, and then traveled eastward to Omaha, Nebraska, where he attended meetings of the Trans-Mississippi Sunday School Congress as one of several delegates from the Deseret Sunday School Union. Obviously Latter-day Saint Sunday School leaders felt they could learn new ideas from the Protestant Sunday Schools. On the train home, George suggested to his colleagues that they propose to George Q. Cannon that a huge general Sunday School convention be held in Salt Lake City. Cannon readily accepted the idea and appointed George Reynolds, Joseph Summerhays, and George Pyper to a committee to plan and conduct the conference. [^7]

The conference was held in the Assembly Hall on Temple Square, 28 and 29 November. Three sessions were held each day for the delegates, who came from each stake throughout the Church. Elder Reynolds outlined the objectives of the convention at the beginning of the conference and gave other instruction throughout. "The proceedings of the convention were considered of such practical value and importance to Sunday School workers that they were published in full by the Union." [^8]

Nearly a year later, in October 1899, after the regular general conference sessions, the Deseret Sunday School Union hosted a spectacular fiftieth-year anniversary jubilee. Surviving members of the original class taught by Richard Ballantyne fifty years earlier were honored. Sunday School children from various ancestries recited the Church's Articles of Faith in different languages to symbolize the growth of the Church internationally. To commemorate the activities, Elder Reynolds and Levi W. Richards compiled the Jubilee History of the Latter-day Saint Sunday Schools. [^9]

In company with Thomas C. Griggs of the general board, George went on a typical visit in the summer of 1900 to outlying stakes on Sunday School business. The Juvenile Instructor published the details of the visit as "specimenic" of experiences of general board members "when visiting distant stakes of Zion in their official capacity." The two men traveled by rail to the terminus at Belknap in southern Utah and then were conveyed first by stage and then by team to Panguitch, where they conducted sessions of a stake Sunday School conference. En route they witnessed the death of a little boy on the rails. The pair related the difficulties of reaching the isolated settlements of Tropic, Escalante, Cannonville, Hillsdale, Long Valley, and Orderville—having to be their own teamsters for forty miles—but also the hearty welcome they received everywhere. At each spot Reynolds and Griggs conducted Sunday School business, and Reynolds also met with the seventies of the area wherever possible. [^10]

Also in 1900 George was called with Joseph W. Summerhays and George D. Pyper to prepare a second general convention of Sunday School workers to be held in Salt Lake City 12 and 13 November. Among other things George was to prepare answers to questions on Sunday School procedures that were to be sent to headquarters in advance by superintendents. [^11] At an important preparatory meeting of the general board on 5 October, a discussion arose about dealing with the Juvenile Instructor, now that the George Q. Cannon & Sons publishing company had been disbanded. George Reynolds spoke in favor of the Deseret Sunday School Union purchasing the Juvenile Instructor and using it as the official publication of the Union. The idea was accepted, and board members Reynolds, Summerhays, and Griggs were appointed to negotiate terms of purchase with Cannon. By year's end the deal was concluded, and Cannon, who remained as editor of the publication, named George Reynolds, "the devoted Sunday School worker and warm personal friend," as the assistant editor. [^12]

The second Deseret Sunday School Convention, held in November, was largely prepared under the supervision of George Reynolds and went superbly. There were 2,025 delegates representing 125,000 pupils and teachers from throughout the Church, who were trained in all aspects of their work. George took a leading role in answering the delegates' questions. The most important announcement of the convention was that henceforth the standard works of the Church—the Holy Bible, the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and Pearl of Great Price—should serve as the basic curriculum in Sunday Schools. Other resources would be allowed, but none of a sectarian or secular nature. George Reynolds took a major role in formulating this policy, which has remained basically intact in the LDS Church to the present time.

George Q. Cannon observed about the Sunday School convention:

[The Lord's] spirit was poured out abundantly, and if there is such a thing as being intoxicated with happiness, certainly those sensations were felt by very many. The assemblage was such as to call forth the blessings of the Lord. Outside of our Church, no gathering of men and women could be found more self-sacrificing and more thoroughly filled with the spirit to do good to others, than those who were present at this convention. [^13]

This second general Sunday School convention also marked the beginning of the last chapter in the career of George Reynolds, for he was called as the second assistant general superintendent of the Deseret Sunday School Union. George Goddard, the original first assistant to George Q. Cannon beginning in 1872 and also a good friend to George Reynolds, had died in January 1899. Cannon had not made any changes for nearly two years, retaining only Karl G. Maeser in the superintendency. Between sessions of the convention, the general board met, and Cannon named George Reynolds as second assistant, announcing that he was moved upon by the Spirit. George's name was then presented to the convention for a sustaining vote. Cannon told the delegates, "He has been intimately identified with the Sunday School movement from the beginning and has been one of our best and most active workers, and is as well acquainted with the workings of the organization as any man in it." [^14]

This arrangement in the superintendency was of short duration. Three months later, in February 1901, seventy-two-year-old Karl G. Maeser died, followed two months later by seventy-four-year-old George Q. Cannon. The venerable Lorenzo Snow and his counselors of the First Presidency then decided that the president of the Church should serve as the Union's general superintendent. George Reynolds and Joseph M. Tanner were named as first and second assistants, respectively. Tanner was formerly president of Brigham Young College and of Utah State Agricultural College in Logan and soon was named superintendent of the Church schools. Reynolds's and Tanner's calling included being assistant editors of the Juvenile Instructor.

President Snow was then eighty-seven and in the last year of his life. His temperament and his health prohibited him from playing a major role in the Sunday School administration. Therefore, as the longest continuously serving member of the general board, George Reynolds became the de facto chief of the Union and editor of the organization's periodical. He confided in his journal, "During the whole of the Year [1901] did the greater portion of the literary work of getting out the paper [Juvenile Instructor]." [^15]

Most of the publication's editorials in 1901 reflect George's touch. A stickler for efficient modes of procedure and the Union's most experienced and knowledgeable advocate, he wrote such editorials as "The Word of God in Our Sunday Schools," "The New Sunday School Visiting Book," "Record Day—Minutes" on the necessity of keeping full and accurate records of the schools, "The Social Aspect of the Sunday School," "Stake Officers' Meetings," "Our [Stake] Sunday School Conferences," "Statistics and Secretaries," and "The Teaching of Chastity [in Sunday School]." [^16]

George also wrote editorials eulogizing two of his most admired tutors and leaders, George Q. Cannon and Lorenzo Snow. Of the former George wrote:

President Cannon in intellectual gifts was richly endowed beyond the great majority of his fellows. In faith, few were his equals. As a servant of the Most High, he was among that favored few who saw the face of the Lord while in the flesh and heard the Divine voice, and yet remained in mortality. [^17]

This last revelation may have been confided by Cannon to his close friend Reynolds.

Reynolds likewise admired President Snow, as seen in this editorial observation:

Lorenzo Snow was naturally a man among men, a man of high order, a man of strong convictions a man of fine intellectuality, and keen perceptions. Those who observed him walk, and have noticed the manner in which he placed his heel upon the earth, knew, if they knew aught of human nature, that he walked with the same firmness that he talked and conducted himself among his fellow-men. There have been in our Church few men possessed of a more delicate and sensitive nature than that with which President Snow was endowed. There was in his spirit an artistic, exquisite refinement rarely found. [^18]

The period of George's greatest direct influence in the Sunday Schools came to an end on 7 November 1901, when new Church president, Joseph F. Smith, became the general superintendent of the Deseret Sunday School Union. President Smith took much firmer control of the Union and the Juvenile Instructor than had President Snow. For the rest of George Reynolds's life, Joseph F. Smith wrote and signed nearly all of the editorials in the Juvenile.

This is not to say that George's effect on the Union was not profound. He persisted in his normal, unassuming way to keep order and harmony in the work of the Union. But from 1902 until his debilitating illness in 1907, George was somewhat overshadowed by Joseph F. Smith, by second assistant Joseph M. Tanner, who because of his oratorical skills did more speaking to Sunday School workers in conferences until his release from the Union in 1906, and finally by youthful and dynamic David O. McKay, who became the best known of all Latter-day Saint Sunday School leaders.

As first assistant general superintendent of the Deseret Sunday School Union, George traveled to stake Sunday School conferences and other meetings throughout the Church; answered questions about Sunday School procedure, the history of the Church, and doctrine in a column in the Juvenile Instructor; helped conduct the semiannual general Sunday School conferences; helped write and promote the curriculum aids known collectively as the "Outlines"; and cared for the finances of the Union, particularly through the program "Nickel Sunday."

George dutifully recorded in his journal every ward Sunday School and stake or mission Sunday School conference he attended. He was away on Church business of some kind almost every Sabbath day. Sometimes he visited Sunday Schools in Salt Lake City or nearby stakes. Other times he took extended trips to southern and northern Utah, Wyoming, Colorado, Arizona, Idaho, Oregon, and Alberta, Canada. In 1902 he attended the nondenominational International Sunday School Conference in Denver. General board visits to the stakes were generally reported in the Juvenile Instructor, and George's name often appears along with the results of his visits. As the years went by, George, then in his sixties, felt increased weariness from traveling and so noted in his journal. By 1906 he was exhausted and doing very little traveling. [^19]

A column that appeared frequently in the Juvenile Instructor was "Answers to Questions." Although these columns never bore the name of George Reynolds, it is obvious that he wrote most if not all of them: they bear his distinctive style; they reflect information that it is known he researched and had previously written or spoken about; they deal often with Sunday School procedures, of which he was a master; and drafts of this column and letters to him containing questions from Latter-day Saints exist in his surviving papers. The questions that he answered in these numerous columns included the following: "Were any ordinances for the dead performed from the days of Moses to the time of the advent of the Savior?"; "Which comes first in the Gospel, faith or knowledge?"; "Did Abel the martyr hold the Priesthood?"; "What is the destiny of children that are born before their parents are married?"; "Did any of the general authorities of the Church enlist in the Mormon Battalion?"; "Did David Whitmer and Martin Harris hold the Apostleship at the time that they ordained the Twelve Apostles; if so, when did they receive it?"; "Where did the Nephites, the Mulekites and Jaredites respectively land on this continent?"; "Can the Indians rightfully be called the Jews?"; "What are the ten kingdoms or peoples representing the ten toes of the great image seen by Nebuchadnezzar in his dream and interpreted by the prophet Daniel?"; "How many Urim and Thummim are there?"; "When a Sunday School officers' and teachers' prayer meeting is held prior to the commencement of the regular school exercises, what is the proper mode of procedure?"; "What authorities or officers should be presented and sustained at the annual ward Sunday School conferences?"; "Should teachers prepare lessons during devotional exercises in the Sunday School?" [^20]

George's answers were always to the point, lucid, and not condescending in their manner. For his time, George Reynolds was considered one of the most learned men in Utah about gospel doctrine, history of the Church, and appropriate Church procedure.

Elder Reynolds also aided his fellow Saints in understanding the Book of Mormon by answering questions directed to him from Sunday School classes, seventies quorums, and private individuals. He received questions on Book of Mormon geography, the translation process of the Isaiah portions, whether the Nephites held the Melchizedek Priesthood, and Martin Harris's 1828 interview with Professor Charles Anthon. Regarding Harris, George wrote:

Personally I do not believe that Prof. Anthon said all that has been attributed to him. I believe that Bro. Martin Harris, who was a nervous man, got slightly confused in his memory. I can readily understand that the Professor said they were true or genuine characters, but when it came to saying anything of the translation, cannot conceive how, as a scientific man, he possibly could do so. For independent of the statement of Moroni that no other people could read the reformed Egyptian of the Nephites, Egyptology itself was at that time in its infancy, and I doubt much if Prof. Anthon could have translated the characters even if no change had been made in them from the time Lehi left Jerusalem. This is my theory and you can have it for what it is worth. [^21]

One who later followed in his footsteps in such scholarship and in writing answers to gospel questions in Church periodicals was Elder Joseph Fielding Smith, who married one of George's daughters, Ethel Georgina, shortly after George's death.

After George entered the general superintendency of the Deseret Sunday School Union, it was decided that general Sunday School conventions would no longer be held but that at April and October general conference time a separate Sunday School session could be held for officers and teachers in the organization. George often conducted these sessions, but the record of these conferences shows that he usually deferred to others in giving speeches. He did not feel that he had a strong pulpit posture, and he was pleased to see others who were more dynamic, such as Joseph F. Smith, Joseph M. Tanner, Horace Ensign, and David O. McKay, do the speaking. [^22]

In the latter half of 1902, George Reynolds and select members of the general board met every Sunday to write for publication short curriculum guides for all age groups, which they designated the "Outlines." [^23] This was yet another step in clarifying for the teachers what and how they should be teaching unitedly throughout the Church. Columns from the Juvenile Instructor show that many teachers needed some persuading and instructing to implement the outlines effectively.

Every October a Sunday was designated throughout the LDS Sunday Schools as "Nickel Sunday." George had begun this program a quarter century earlier as the Union treasurer. Even as a member of the general superintendency, he continued as treasurer. Beginning each fall in the pages of the Juvenile Instructor, George cajoled officers of the ward and stake Sunday Schools to coordinate effectively the Nickel Sunday, collect the monies, and remit them promptly to Sunday School headquarters. Through this system, George and the general board were able to cover all costs of the Union and avoid drawing upon the general funds of the Church. Surely one of George Reynolds's greatest contributions to the Sunday School program was his unsung and lengthy service as treasurer, in which position he kept the Union perpetually solvent.

Between sessions of the April general conference in 1906, President Joseph F. Smith asked Elder Reynolds if he did not think the Sabbath schools were in a better condition then than they had ever been. In his conference address Elder Reynolds reported that he had never known a time when the schools were doing a better work than at the present:

Our schools are increasing in number; and that in regard to punctuality, the good order maintained, the methods adopted for instructing the children I believe we are growing and growing in the right direction, each year. Above all, I believe that the children in the schools are obtaining a better knowledge of the Gospel, and that they are not losing in the spirit and faith of the principles of eternal life. I have always regarded, and do today, that the first thing most important in connection with our Sunday schools, and indeed with all the other auxiliary organizations of the Church, is to make Latter-day Saints of our children, to develop within them a faith that shall grow with increasing years, an understanding faith, a faith that, while it appeals to the heart, will also appeal to the head, and be able to give a reason for the hope that is within; not a blind obedience, as it is sometimes called, but a comprehensive understanding of the revelations of God and the work that He is performing in this generation. [^24]

Not long after this conference, Elder George Reynolds fell seriously ill and did not function again as Sunday School administrator.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Alice Louise Reynolds, "Biography of George Reynolds," p. 41; David John Papers, vol. 4, p. 145, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library; George Reynolds to Charles A. Callis, 13 December 1905, 23 December 1905, and 26 March 1906, Papers of Charles A. Callis, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library; Charles Bartlett to George Reynolds, Jane Reynolds Collection; James R. Clark, ed., Messages of the First Presidency, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-75), 4:48; Horace S. Ensign to George Reynolds in Juvenile Instructor 38 (1 December 1903): 727-28.
[^2] Journal History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 12 August 1909, p. 1, LDS Church Historical Archives.
[^3] Hartley notes of First Council of Seventy Minutes; George Reynolds Journal, vol. 6, 1899.
[^4] Information for this paragraph was drawn from Hardy, "George Reynolds: The Early Years," master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1972, p. 104; from several entries in George Reynolds Journal, vol. 6, and from several letters in the Jane Reynolds Collection.
[^5] Joseph F. Smith, "The Last Days of President Snow," Juvenile Instructor 36 (15 November 1901): 688-91.
[^6] Conference Report, October 1901, pp. 60-62.
[^7] Conference Report, April 1902, p. 7.
[^8] George Reynolds Journal, vol. 6, 1901, 1903.
[^9] George Reynolds to Sidney Reynolds, 13 April 1907, letter in possession of Sydney Skidmore, Potomac, Maryland.
[^10] Conference Report, April 1906, p. 23.
[^11] Thomas G. Alexander, "The Word of Wisdom: From Principle to Requirement," Dialogue 14 (Autumn 1981): 79-80.
[^12] Joseph A. Anderson, address to the faculty of Religious Education, Brigham Young University, 19 November 1982.
[^13] A. L. Reynolds, "Biography of George Reynolds," p. 29.
[^14] Adam Bennion, "George Reynolds," Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 1 (October 1910): 148.
[^15] Interview with Emily Jensen, Provo, Utah, 29 November 1985; interview with Haroldeane Rasmussen, Provo, Utah, 29 November 1985.
[^16] "President George Reynolds," Juvenile Instructor 44 (September 1909): 386.
[^17] Interview with Emily Jensen.
[^18] A. L. Reynolds, "Biography of George Reynolds," pp. 34-36.
[^19] Conference Report, October 1906, pp. 116-17.
[^20] A. L. Reynolds, "Biography of George Reynolds," p. 24.
[^21] Ibid., pp. 24-25.
[^22] George Reynolds, A Complete Concordance to the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City: George Reynolds, 1900), preface; "Biography of George Reynolds," pp. 27-29; Journal of George Reynolds, vol. 6, 1899, 1904. I cannot find the number of copies of the concordance published in the first edition. If Reynolds's cost per copy were five dollars, for example, there would have been six hundred copies produced. If the price were four dollars, there would have been seven hundred fifty copies.
[^23] Improvement Era (December 1904): 151.
[^24] Millennial Star 67 (30 March 1905): 202.
