Bruce A. Van Orden, Prisoner for Conscience' Sake: The Life of George Reynolds ( 1992)

CHAPTER 19

Secretary to the Missionary Committee

Sometime during the 1890s, after George Reynolds was called as one of the First Seven Presidents of the Seventy, the First Presidency organized the Missionary Committee of the Apostles and called George as secretary. This committee decided where missionaries were needed and to which missions all prospective missionaries would be called, including mission presidents. George sent out all the formal calls from "Box B" and arranged for the missionaries' railroad transportation, visas, and steamship passages. He also coordinated all correspondence regarding missionary work. He answered mission presidents' questions, usually on behalf of the missionary committee. [^1] On one occasion, President Joseph F. Smith indicated that Elder Reynolds had helped the First Presidency in "selecting missionaries for the various fields and his judgment had been invaluable." [^2]

An excellent source illuminating some of George's work on the missionary committee is Ben E. Rich, president of the Southern States Mission from 1898 to 1901, who recorded all correspondence between him and Church headquarters. Rich often asked for clarification of matters administrative and doctrinal. George answered his questions dealing with financial aid to impoverished missionaries, elders accused of immorality, elders receiving temple endowments before entering the field, the length of missionary service, the washing of feet against the wicked, the purchase of clothing by missionaries, the disposition of tithing in kind, and elders falling into apostasy.

Supervising missionary work was one of the duties of the First Council of Seventy. On some of his trips, such as to Omaha for an interdenominational Sunday School congress, George visited and spoke to missionaries serving in the field. The duties of the First Council also extended to supplying missionaries needed closer to home. During a mining boom in the late nineteenth century, the town of Mercur was established in the Oquirrh Mountains in Tooele County. Most of the young miners were not members of the LDS Church. At the weekly meeting of the First Council on 9 August 1899, George Reynolds told his brethren that the First Presidency had asked him to submit to them the condition of affairs at Mercur and recommended that the First Council send two strong missionaries there. The seven presidents accordingly sent to Mercur three young missionaries who had recently returned from other fields of labor. Elder Reynolds set each apart to the assignment. One was his oldest son, Sidney, who had only recently returned from a mission in the southern states. The work of these three missionaries in Mercur was dramatically successful, and more missionaries were soon selected. [^3]

George and his wives were naturally eager that their sons enter the mission field. George's oldest son, Sidney, went to the Southern States Mission in the late 1890s and then, as described, served a short-term mission to Mercur upon his return. Six of George's other eleven sons also served missions for the Church: George Bruford, John, Harold, Bish, Phil and Cliff. The last three served missions after their father died. While George was still alive, his daughter Nel began serving a "mission" as a hostess in the Church's new visitors center. Another daughter, Polly, also served a mission after the death of her father. Harold earned a strong reputation for himself as a missionary in Germany and, upon his return in 1906, was called by the First Presidency to assist his father as a secretary to the Missionary Committee. When his father became incapacitated, Harold became the chief secretary of the committee and served in that capacity until his own death in 1940. George also kept in close contact with his son-in-law John Russell, who had married his daughter Bertie and then immediately accepted a mission call to Scotland. Russell wrote missionary letters to George, addressing him as "Father." [^4]

In the October 1901 general conference, Church president Lorenzo Snow, then in his eighty-eighth year, rose from his sickbed and enthusiastically delivered a message that pertained to the work of George Reynolds on the First Council and as secretary to the Missionary Committee of the Apostles. For some weeks President Snow had been agitated about the neglect of the Twelve and the seventies under them to further pursue the spread of missionary work to more nations of the earth. He was disturbed that the general authorities were spending too much of their precious time dealing with the problems in the stakes, when their main duty "is to warn the nations of the earth and prepare the world for the coming of the Savior." [^5] So in conference the venerable President Snow solemnly charged the stake presidents and their subordinates to begin tackling their local problems with more vigor, thus freeing the apostles and seventies to be "special witnesses unto the nations of the earth." He promised that the apostles and seventies would be redirected to other fields of labor. [^6]

President Snow died only four days after his stirring address. His successor, Joseph F. Smith, endorsed the new policy and began immediately to implement it. Valiant attempts were made to spread the gospel message to Japan, the Austrian Empire, and Russia, but with negligible success. As it turned out, no member of the First Council of Seventy, including George Reynolds, was asked in the next few years to establish new foreign missions. The idea of sending leading seventies abroad was not abandoned, however, and today such is the expected role of members of the Quorums of the Seventy.

New enthusiasm was nevertheless injected into the spread of missionary work in the early 1900s. In the next general conference (April 1902) Elder Reynolds remarked, "I also know that there is a dearth of experienced men in the foreign ministry of the Church. I know it because of the requisitions that so often pass through my hands [as secretary] from the presidents of missions, asking for more experienced men to be sent to them." He testified that he knew that he would live to see greater growth in the foreign missions with a greater influx of elders to the field. [^7] George also played a major role in the promotion of educating prospective missionaries in Church academies.

As a general authority, George was also empowered to perform marriages in the Church's temples. These marriages are considered by the Latter-day Saints to be not only valid for this life but also for the eternities. Elder Reynolds performed his first temple marriage in 1901 for his son Sidney and his bride Mary Maude Davis. [^8]

George's schedule was a rigorous one and began to take its toll on his physical health, particularly after 1902, when he was in his sixties. George's typical schedule, even in his advanced age, was to work six days in the Office of the President, and then late on Saturday to travel, usually by rail, to a stake conference. If the stake were distant, he would travel all Saturday night and all Sunday night to save time. On Sunday he would attend "five or six conference meetings." After his breakdown in 1907, George wrote his son Sidney that he had been converted to the biblical injunction of working only six days a week and resting on the seventh. [^9]

In 1906, the last year he was healthy enough to work, Elder Reynolds spoke in general conference about mission calls that he helped process. He exclaimed that "in all my lengthy experience I have never known the call for missionaries to be answered so willingly and so readily as is the present one" and that "the brethren whose names have been suggested show better preparation for that labor than I have ever known." But he was also disheartened about "the number of young men called who admit that they have not been keeping the Word of Wisdom." He added, "We often express a willingness to lay our all upon the altar of sacrifice, and at the same time these matters which in the minds of some appear to be of minor importance are forgotten or slighted." [^10] This counsel came at a time when the First Presidency was launching a concerted effort to have faithful Church members conform to the Word of Wisdom, that is, to refrain from indulging in any form of tobacco, alcoholic beverages, tea, or coffee. [^11]

In summing up George Reynolds's secretarial career, one must include many noteworthy qualities that he brought to assignments. Obviously these qualities attracted the Brethren and kept him close to high-level decision making for many years. Perhaps the most important quality was his ability to keep confidences. His family members reported that he rarely ever mentioned his work while at home and never divulged any secrets. A more recent secretary to the First Presidency, Joseph A. Anderson, remarked that one of the things President Heber J. Grant liked about him was Anderson's ability to keep his mouth shut. [^12] George Reynolds was much like Joseph Anderson. He did not discuss private matters, nor did he write anything of a confidential nature in his journals. Alice Louise Reynolds recorded that her father was "trustworthy to the nth degree." [^13]

Furthermore, George was noted for his promptness and punctuality. Adam Bennion wrote that he "was prompt always and was never more annoyed than at the failure of someone to meet an appointment. Whenever he promised a piece of work, it could be depended upon that it would be completed. He has set up many a night in order to finish tasks promised at certain hours. He was always 'there' and could be counted on." [^14] George's family also confirmed his penchant for punctuality. [^15]

One of his colleagues noted that "George Reynolds was a worker. He knew but little of rest, and nothing at all of idleness. If he had a fault, it was that he accepted too much work. He wore himself out too soon." [^16]

George was ambidextrous. When he became tired of writing with one hand, he would use the other. [^17] Existing samples show that the handwriting done in his secretarial capacities was more meticulous than that in his personal journal.

George sought constantly to be well-informed. He deplored the idea of being an "ignoramus." His associates often referred to his knowledge as encyclopedic, and his store of knowledge was often used by Church leaders. His knowledge included not only Church history and doctrine but also procedures, statistical data, finances, politics, secular history, human nature, and information about important people. [^18]

Loyalty to the Church hierarchy, to each other, and to the work of the building the Kingdom of God was the watchword of all the secretaries in the Office of the President. That is what made George Reynolds and his associates valuable to the First Presidency. George's devotion to his chiefs is evident in his last public address:

I want to bear my testimony that I have been acquainted with the Presidents of this Church intimately for many years—with Presidents Brigham Young, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, Lorenzo Snow and Joseph F. Smith; and though in minor particulars and characteristics they differed very materially, yet they were all the men of God's choice, the men for the hour, the men whom God selected as the leaders of His people, and they all did the work that God required at their hands. They were his mouthpieces, and they accomplished that which He placed them in the position to fulfill, every one of them. They were all prepared of God to do the work assigned them, and they all did it, and did it well. Notwithstanding the differences and peculiarities of their minor characteristics, there were some certain things in which they were all alike, namely, their love for the truth, their faith in God, their willingness to listen to His word, their uncompromising devotion and integrity to God and His work, their full belief in the divine calling of the Prophet Joseph. These characterized them all, and God was with them. [^19]

During this last period of George's service as one of the Church's elder statesman his masterful research work, his Book of Mormon concordance, was finally published. He considered this work his greatest contribution to the work of the kingdom. [^20] Hardly a week passed from the time of its inception in 1880 until 1899, when he took the finished manuscript to Chicago for printing on electro plates, that George was not writing and rewriting passages that composed the monumental work. "I have never ceased being astonished at the rapidity with which he checked passages; but the amazing accuracy of the book is due to this very process," reported his daughter Alice Louise. George's wives aided him in the project "by seeing that his room was comfortable at so early an hour and keeping things as quiet as possible around him so that he could work uninterrupted." [^21]

A final typewritten manuscript was ready to take to Chicago in 1899. No publisher in Utah was equipped to handle either the intricate detail or the financial commitment for publication. The cost of electro plates preparation amounted to three thousand dollars, which George paid himself. He also paid for the printing and binding costs. "I have but little hope while I live of receiving this amount [for the electro plates] back through sales of the book, to say nothing of the other expenses such as printing and binding," he wrote upon finishing the publication in 1904. "The circulation will necessarily at first be small. As the Church grows the demand will doubtless increase. But such a book was needed, and I felt that it was very improbable that anyone else would attempt to prepare one." [^22]

Reviewed and promoted in Church publications, the concordance met with positive response. For example, the new magazine for the Mutual Improvement Associations, the Improvement Era, stated, "The book should be appreciated and purchased by every person, and should have a place in every M.I.A., Sunday School, public and private library in the Church. Many students have waited long for it." The Era noted, "There is only one man in the Church having the patience, perseverance, and unselfish devotion for the work, necessary to accomplish such a prodigious undertaking, and that man is the author, Elder George Reynolds." [^23] The Millennial Star identified the book as "the most stupendous task heretofore attempted and completed by any writer of the Church." [^24]

George's unselfishness with regard to his "gift to the Church" is also demonstrated by his gifts of the concordance to the Church academies and to friends. James Dunn, a leading citizen of Tooele, wrote to George:

Not for a long time have my feelings been so drawn out as your valuable present had done; the more so as your goodly gift was so unexpected by me. I will confess that I was so overcome by your remembrance of me that I did drop a few tears that are not dry as I write this note to you. Why, I cannot yet understand; but for a great man in Israel to remember your humble servant strikes me in a very tender spot. I do not flatter you when I say to you that you have won for yourself a name that will never die in the production of such a noble and useful book. Only the Spirit of God abounding in you could you have performed such a great task, and in such a short time. [^25]

George's inclusion of lengthy entries to assist the reader's understanding increased the value of the concordance. His entries are more thorough than comparable entries in biblical concordances. Furthermore, he subdivided references to some important words to aid the reader in finding a sought-after passage. For example, the entry "People" is subdivided into categories of "A People," "Among the People," "Among this People," "All his People," "For his People," "Of his People," "Over his People," "Redeem his People," "That his People," "To his People," and forty-two others. [^26]

Translators and later editors of the Book of Mormon relied heavily upon the concordance. For example, Alma Taylor, first translator of this book of scripture into Japanese, told Alice Louise Reynolds that he would never have completed his task without her father's concordance. Members of the committee that produced the 1921 edition of the Book of Mormon also indicated how much they used the concordance. That committee discovered only one error. [^27]

One who built on the writings of George Reynolds and became even more well-known for his Book of Mormon scholarship was George's colleague on the First Council of Seventy, B. H. Roberts. Elder Roberts warmly acknowledged his debt to Reynolds: It is a pleasure to note the work of this my brother, and fellow President in the First Council of the Seventies in this field of Book of Mormon labor. I feel myself much indebted to him because of his great achievements in this field of research.

First, for his excellent Book of Mormon Chronological Table, published now for many years in connection with the late Elder F. D. Richards' "Compendium."

Second, for his "Myth of the Manuscript Found."

Third, for his "dictionary of the Book of Mormon."

Fourth, for a series of articles in the "Contributor," (Vol. 5) on the History of the Book of Mormon.

Fifth, for a second series of articles in the "Contributor" (Vol. 17) under the title "Evidences of the Book of Mormon; Some External Proofs of its Divinity."

Sixth, and last, and greatest achievement of all, I thank him for his "Complete Concordance of the Book of Mormon." The amount of patient, pains-taking labor required for the production of this magnificent work will never be known to the general reader. Only the close student of the Nephite Scriptures will ever really appreciate it. What Cruden and Young have done for Bible students, Elder Reynolds has more abundantly done for Book of Mormon students. The Elders of the Church through all generations to come will, I am sure, feel deeply grateful to Elder Reynolds for his great work which will stand as a monument to his pains-taking habits of thorough application to a task; but what is better still, the work will stand as a monument of his love for the Book of Mormon. [^28]

The unique contributions of George Reynolds to Book of Mormon scholarship, particularly for Church members in his era, include a succinct summary of the arguments discrediting the theory of the Soloman Spaulding origin of the Book of Mormon; the first thorough biographical discussion of the role, personalities, and contributions of the three witnesses—Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris; the first commentary on the Book of Mormon narrative (The Story of the Book of Mormon); the first analysis of ethnological and cultural considerations pertaining to the book's peoples; the first chronological dating system (widely used by students today, though rarely acknowledged, was devised by George Reynolds); A Diction-ary of the Book of Mormon, an alphabetically listed and detailed key to every person, valley, hill, river, city, and animal mentioned in the Book of Mormon; the first serious articles linking contemporary archaeological, anthropological, and lingual studies to the veracity of the Book of Mormon; his service as the first Book of Mormon teacher in the Church's educational system; and most importantly, the massive Book of Mormon concordance. The concordance and dictionary are enduring works that are still valuable aids to students, researchers, and translators.

George Reynolds rightly ranks among the five leading Book of Mormon scholars in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. His peers include Orson Pratt, B. H. Roberts, Sidney B. Sperry, and Hugh Nibley. Orson Pratt's contributions directly influenced George Reynolds, and George's work in turn influenced the other four. While many of George's ideas have been superseded today by additional discoveries and new thinking, all dedicated Book of Mormon students are indebted to him for his pioneering efforts in geography, history, people and places, understanding the story line, ethnology, chronology, external evidences, concordance, and how the Book of Mormon was translated and published in several editions. [^29]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Samuel Edwin Woolley Journal, 11 January to 1 May 1907.
[^2] George Reynolds to Sidney Reynolds, 13 April 1907, copy in possession of Sydney Skidmore, Potomac, Maryland.
[^3] Samuel Edwin Woolley Journal, 21 April 1907.
[^4] "Elder George Reynolds," Juvenile Instructor 44 (1 September 1909): 355.
[^5] "Gone to His Rest," Millennial Star 71 (26 August 1909): 539.
[^6] Hardy, "George Reynolds: The Early Years," master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1972, p. 84.
[^7] "Funeral of George Reynolds," Deseret News, 12 August 1909.
[^8] Ibid.
[^9] Ibid.
[^10] Ibid.
[^11] Ibid.
[^12] Amy Brown Lyman, A Lighter of Lamps: The Life Story of Alice Louise Reynolds (Provo, Utah: Alice Louise Reynolds Club, 1947), p. 2.
[^13] Ibid.
[^14] Vicky Burgess-Olson, "Family Structure and Dynamics in Early Utah Mormon Families—1847-1885," Ph.D. dissertation, Northwestern University, 1975.
[^15] Ibid., pp. 123-37.
[^16] Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (Liverpool: Latter-day Saints Book Depot, 1855-56), 26:160.
[^17] A typescript of this speech is in the Jane Reynolds Collection.
[^18] Nettie W. Puzey to George Reynolds, 23 May 1905, in Jane Reynolds Collection.
[^19] George Teasdale to George Reynolds, 26 August 1904, in Jane Reynolds Collection.
[^20] Conference Report, October 1906, p. 116.
[^21] James R. Clark, ed., Messages of the First Presidency, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-75), 4:211.
[^22] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Feasting upon the Scriptures," Ensign 15 (December 1985): 42.
[^23] Improvement Era (December 1904): 151.
[^24] Millennial Star 67 (30 March 1905): 202.
[^25] James Dunn to George Reynolds, 6 December 1904; see also J. Summerhays to George Reynolds, 4 November 1904; Charles B. Bartlett (president of the New Zealand Mission) to George Reynolds, 1 June 1905; and Ezra Christianson (principal of Ricks Academy) to George Reynolds, 5 January 1904; all located in Jane Reynolds Collection.
[^26] George Reynolds, Complete Concordance to the Book of Mormon, pp. 536-47.
[^27] A. L. Reynolds, "Biography of George Reynolds," pp. 27-28. "Autobiography of Alice Louise Reynolds," typescript, p. 25.
[^28] B. H. Roberts, New Witnesses for God, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1951), 3:560.
[^29] In my review of the writings of the Book of Mormon by Orson Pratt and B. H. Roberts, two scholars whom Reynolds knew intimately, I have concluded that (1) Reynolds did not write upon the same themes concerning the Book of Mormon as did Orson Pratt; (2) virtually all of Reynolds's contributions were either original to him or at least he arrived at them through discussion with others and that he, not others, published them; (3) the writings of B. H. Roberts on the Book of Mormon began during the decade of 1900 to 1910 at a time when Reynolds had completed his published contributions on the Book of Mormon; and (4) therefore, Roberts, in his considerations about evidences of the Book of Mormon, was indebted to Reynolds for his work rather than Reynolds being indebted to Roberts. See "Divine Authenticity of the Book of Mormon" in Parker Pratt Robison, ed., Orson Pratt's Works (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1945), pp. 107-289; N. B. Lundwall, comp., Masterful Discourses and Writings of Orson Pratt (Salt Lake City: by the compiler, 1946), pp. 387-424B; Breck England, The Life and Thought of Orson Pratt (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1985), pp. 161-63; David J. Whittaker, "Orson Pratt: Early Advocate of the Book of Mormon," Ensign 14 (April 1984): 54-57; Truman G. Madsen, "B. H. Roberts and the Book of Mormon," BYU Studies 19 (Summer 1979): 427-45.
