Bruce A. Van Orden, Prisoner for Conscience' Sake: The Life of George Reynolds ( 1992)

CHAPTER 20

In Honorable Remembrance

In the last decade of his life, George Reynolds felt the ef- fects of his advancing age. But it was not until 1906 that he decided to lighten his schedule in any way. By then he had probably done too much damage to the vital organs of his body.

On his sixty-fifth birthday, on 1 January 1907, George met with all of his family for a special celebration. He was proud to sit for a photograph with his twelve surviving sons, ranging from Sidney, thirty-one years old, to little Cliff, three years old. He compared that experience to that of Jacob and his twelve sons. Later that same afternoon, he began working on a Sunday School assignment, writing one of the "Outlines," when he suffered a stroke. For several days he was not able to recover movement in all of his limbs or return to work as a general authority or secretary. As it turned out, he did not work again during the last two and one-half years of his life.

Two weeks after his stroke he was sent by Church officials to Hawaii in the hope that he would recover. He was accompanied only by his wife Mary. Samuel E. Woolley, who had been serving as mission president of the Hawaii Mission and manager of the Church's plantation in Laie since 1895, was in Salt Lake City on business. The First Presidency assigned Woolley to look after the Reynoldses on their trip to Hawaii. Woolley treated George with utmost deference, and George and Mary were accorded every courtesy and privilege, including first-class rail and steamship passage. Upon arriving in the islands, Woolley introduced George Reynolds to the Church members and told them of his many writings about the Book of Mormon. George spoke infrequently to the Sunday School children. Once he bore to them his testimony that he knew "that all the Presidents of the Church were men of God, especially fitted for the labors in the day and time in which each has lived." [^1]

Under the pleasant surroundings and with many hours availed him for rest, George gradually recovered physically to the point where he could walk several miles each day, but his nervous tension remained. In a letter to his son Sidney, he confided some of his frustrations:

Resting the body is one thing, resting the mind another. With me the first is a success, and I guess the other cannot be counted among the failures, but there comes a time when the body being sufficiently rested seeks new activities, and to compel its continued inertia, begets unrest of mind; the mind finds in change, not in monotony the rest it needs. So with me, at present, I think Honolulu & Laie have done me all the good they can. What I now need is movement to give me new thoughts, new ideas, new feelings—and not compel my mind to be occupied only the tho'ts of the past, or wonderings regarding the future.

He yearned for the chance to see his other loved ones again. He also recognized that in returning to Utah he could not expect to work such an exhausting schedule again. But he felt that he had to get back or he would have another breakdown. [^2]

During their last Sunday on the islands, Mary Reynolds was asked to address the congregation of Saints in Laie. President Woolley had introduced the subject of plural marriage and defended it as a righteous principle. Sister Reynolds added her confirmation, telling of her feelings of accommodating her life-style to that of a polygamous wife: "I know [plural marriage] is true, it has brought to me a loving husband whose salvation I feel is sure, and it brought to me two loveable women that I love and that love me, and it has brought to me nine beautiful children and the care of seven more that are as my own. I know it is true. I can feel it in every fibre of my being. Don't any of you dare to speak evil against it, for it is true." [^3]

When they returned from Hawaii, George's tensions returned and he suffered a relapse. The authorities sent him to Portland for rest, but when he returned, he was no better; indeed, he seemed worse. He was sent to the state mental hospital in Provo for treatment, but through the auspices of Elder Seymour Young, who was a physician, he was soon taken back home. Young felt that being in the state hospital was an affront for one of George's station.

During this period George's children and grandchildren often came to visit him. The grandchildren had memories of his fondly touching their faces and saying such things as "My sweet little girl," and of their sitting on his lap and combing his long beard. The grandchildren tended to mix in with Mary's younger children, George's third family.

Mary cared for George in his deteriorating mental and physical condition as best she could. The children were kept away from him as much as possible. The little ones remember that he acted strangely. Young Gordon, who was difficult to handle, was sent away to Nephi for an extended separation. In the meantime, George's second wife, Amelia, was suffering considerably herself; she died in 1908 from Bright's disease (kidney failure). George had so far lost his mental faculties that he did not realize what was happening to her. His daughter May, from the second family, took care of the younger ones in that family.

Elder Seymour B. Young visited his seriously ill colleague most days each week. The end finally came on 9 August 1909.

The announcement of George Reynolds's death brought "sorrow to thousands who have been honored in personal acquaintance with Brother Reynolds, and to many thousands more who have known him through his work alone." [^4] Charles W. Penrose, then serving a mission in Great Britain, undoubtedly echoed the feelings of many who had associated with George Reynolds when he wrote, "We bid him farewell with sadness that we shall see him in this life no more, but we have full confidence and faith that, if we are privileged to mingle with the just made perfect in the mansions on high, where the glory of the Father surrounds the mighty who have fought the good fight and have overcome, we shall behold the face of our dear departed brother George Reynolds among the foremost of the heavenly throng." [^5]

The funeral for Elder Reynolds would normally have been held either in the Assembly Hall or in the Tabernacle on Temple Square. But coincidental with his death was the convening of the annual gathering of the Grand Army of the Republic, the organization for the Union veterans of the United States Civil War, in Salt Lake City. The Church had offered its large assembly facilities to the veterans. The Tabernacle was draped with flags and bunting and gleamed with electric lights. It was an awe-inspiring sight. A spendid parade with many bands was held in the city. George Reynolds had often teased his children that flags would wave and bands would play when he died. [^6] Little did he know that his light-hearted prophecy would be fulfilled so literally.

Barratt Hall, part of the campus of LDS College and located on the block where the Church Office Building now stands, served as the substitute location for George Reynolds's funeral. The interior of the building was draped in white, and the platform and pulpit were wreathed in flowers. Church president Joseph F. Smith conducted the services. A number of Church officials were present, particularly George's associates in the Deseret Sunday School Union and the Seventy. On the stand also were Governor William Spry and James E. Talmage, president of the University of Utah. The services opened with prayer by Joseph W. Summerhays, George's close associate both in seventies work and in the Deseret Sunday School Union. A special choir for the occasion provided several musical numbers for the services.

The funeral speakers were fellow general authorities, each of whom had had a different association with George Reynolds. Each reflected on the various ways in which George had impressed and influenced him. The first speaker was Elder Seymour B. Young, senior president of the First Council of Seventy. He had known George Reynolds since the 1860s, when George had begun his labors in the Office of the President. Of George he said, "While he was a most talented and intelligent and cultured man, he was one of the most modest and retiring, never officious in his superiority but humble and quiet." George had reminded Young of the statement: "Oh, why should the spirit of mortals be proud." Young spoke at length of George's many literary attainments and how they had aided the members of the Church. He considered the concordance to the Book of Mormon to be the most important. Young indicated that in the sessions of the First Council of Seventy, George's "judgment was nearly always the crowning one in the sessions." Young was also a member of the general board of the Sunday Schools and praised George's work in the Union for more than a quarter of a century. Young testified that Reynolds's "private life was an open book," that he had "fought the good fight," and that he "has made his calling and election sure." [^7]

Elder B. H. Roberts, another of the First Seven Presidents of Seventy, added his tribute. "I loved George Reynolds for his noble qualities and respected him for his fine intellect and judgment," Roberts began. He indicated that in the First Council there was always absolute freedom of speech, and although he and George had differed widely in temperament, there had never been any disharmony between them. "He was an absolutely fearless man, a zealous and brave adherent to the truth." Roberts also commended his literary work, speaking especially of his fondness for George's treatise on the Book of Abraham and commending it to the youth of Zion. [^8]

Elder Rulon S. Wells, also of the First Council of the Seventy, said that he could not conceive how anyone could do more than had George Reynolds to be worthy of eternal life. "He was sent to earth for a mission and fulfilled it in every way." Elder Joseph W. McMurrin of the same quorum said that George had lived and performed his work under the literal inspiration of God. No more noble legacy could have been left his family than the record and memory of his good life. [^9]

President John R. Winder of the First Presidency next spoke and heartily endorsed the previous tributes. In the mission field he had likewise noted George's humility and devotion, spoken of so fondly by the others. Elder Heber J. Grant, a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, referred especially to George's great learning. He said he could go at any time to George with a problem and never come away disappointed. He urged members of the Reynolds family to follow in the footsteps of their father. [^10]

President Joseph F. Smith was the concluding speaker. He explained that he had known George Reynolds for nearly fifty years, having first met him when George was working in the London Conference as a young missionary. He knew George best, he said, at his work in the Office of the President and indicated that he could not see how more could be done by anyone in a public vocation than George had done in his. "He was faithful to every trust and no more can be said of any man." President Smith stated that Reynolds had received every gift, every key, and every authority bestowed on the holy priesthood in any dispensation known in time. This included, he said, power to receive "dominion and power and eternal life worlds without end." He urged the Reynolds family members to live by the principles of the gospel and thus share in his glory. The services concluded with a benediction by Levi S. Richards, another long-time colleague on the Deseret Sunday School Union Board. Interment was in the Salt Lake City cemetery beside his wife Polly. [^11]

George Reynolds was first and foremost a disciple with unceasing faith and the energy to commit to the building of the kingdom of God. Ever loyal to his superiors, he unflinchingly did whatever he was asked to do, including serving as the polygamy test case, and he gloried in the privilege of aiding the kingdom through his sacrifices. He never criticized nor complained about the leaders of the Church. Because he was loyal, trustworthy, and knowledgable as well as unusually competent in a number of organizational and bookkeeping skills, he was repeatedly named to positions of authority and influence in the Church—in secretarial capacities, in significant managerial posts in Church-owned businesses, in the Deseret Sunday School Union, and as one of the First Seven Presidents of Seventy. His memory "was so unusual that his friends declared that he never forgot anything he ever read, saw, or learned." [^12] All along he was a disciple with a mind of his own. Time and again he contributed original commentary and study aids to members of the Church to help them understand their scriptural storehouse. His writings also sought to defend the faith against contemporary opponents of the Church. He considered it a fault not to be increasing one's knowledge and shuddered at the thought of being an "ignoramus" about anything. "He was an inveterate reader, and so great was his store of ready knowledge on all sorts of subjects that he was not only constantly consulted by his friends and associates, but also by many others who were seeking information." [^13] A fellow disciple and close colleague who has been widely hailed as one of the most free-spirited intellectuals in Mormonism's history, B. H. Roberts, expressed genuine respect for George Reynolds's writings.

George's lasting legacy to his family was his good name, his unimpeachable character, and, for many of his children, a first-rate upbringing. Life was not easy for the two Reynolds families after George's death. In those years, the Church recommended against its employees' buying insurance, so there was no available cash for Mary and the children after George's death. Ten dollars a month was given her for a few years. Later the amount was increased somewhat. The younger children were required to take jobs to help bring in cash to the family. Gordon remembered having to sell newspapers at a young age and thus launched his career in the newspaper business.

Six of George Reynolds's children achieved fame in their chosen fields. Millie became a noted midwife in the Springfield, Utah, community. She delivered hundreds of babies, including those of "Aunt Mary" and those of her own daughters. Alice Louise became a respected professor of English and literature at Brigham Young University and a member of the general board of the Church's Relief Society. John was a wealthy entrepreneur who helped develop the city of Magna and its industries. Harold was a bishop for more than a decade and was the mission secretary of the Church for more than thirty-five years. Philip was an engineer who brought many of his father's writings back into publication and who compiled commentaries on the Book of Mormon and the Pearl of Great Price in the names of his father and his father-in-law Janne M. Sjodahl. Ethel worked in the Church historical archives and married Elder Joseph Fielding Smith of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles.

George Reynolds had 104 grandchildren: thirty-seven from Polly's family, forty-nine from Amelia's family, and eighteen from Mary's family.

George Reynolds's plural marriage relationships can be evaluated by the norms outlined by Vicky Burgess-Olson in her 1975 doctoral dissertation. [^14] She learned that the average polygamous husband married plurally for the first time 11.2 years after his first marriage. George married his second wife, Amelia, eight years after his marriage to Polly. The average age of first wives was twenty-one. Polly was nineteen when she married George. The average age of second wives was twenty-five; Amelia was twenty-two at her marriage. The average age of third wives was twenty-two; Mary was twenty-six. The study showed that first wives averaged 9.1 children. Polly had nine. Second wives averaged 7.5 children. Amelia had twelve. Third wives averaged 7.6 children. Mary bore nine. Most polygamous men had only one or two additional wives, as did George. His experiences in the Church conformed to the pattern discovered by Burgess-Olson that polygamous men held much higher positions in the Church hierarchy and spent more time serving on missions away from their families than did monogamous men. She noted that polygamous families of the same husband usually lived in the same town but in separate households; some 57 percent lived at least part of the time in the same household. The Reynolds situation corresponds to this last norm exactly. It can thus be concluded that George Reynolds's experiences as a polygamous husband and father were not drastically different from those of most other polygamous men in Utah during the nineteenth century. [^15]

George Reynolds's role in the Reynolds v. United States polygamy case is probably the main reason he is remembered in Mormon, Utah, and United States history. When the First Presidency asked Reynolds to stand in as a test case in behalf of the Church and its leaders, George did not hesitate. He was a model of decorum in the court room, although he was publicly scolded by the bench and ridiculed by members of the "gentile ring." He did not complain when the case was lost and he was required to serve a prison sentence. Instead of fretting about his unfortunate circumstances in either the Nebraska State Penitentiary or the Utah Territorial Penitentiary, he made the best of his situation and gained the respect of the government officials who watched over him. His fellow prisoners honored him as a man of God. No evidence exists that he ever murmured about his humiliating plight. His chief concerns were not for himself but for the well-being of his family and the growth of the kingdom. Concerning the latter, his faith was that all would be well in time.

In the Tabernacle, on 29 March 1885, just a few weeks after President John Taylor went into hiding from federal marshals, George Reynolds spoke comforting words to the Saints, who were frightened about current happenings: "It is by perfect confidence in the word of the Lord, and by willing humble obedience to all His requirements, accepting all His providences as for our best good, that we shall be delivered," he testified. "Judging by the experience of the Saints in the past, and judging by our own experience in this dispensation—as far as I know it—has all gone to prove that the closer we cleave to the Lord, the nearer He will draw unto us, the greater will be the manifestations of His power in our behalf, and the sooner will be our triumph over those who seek to injure us." He assured his listeners that the Latter-day Saints have no conflict with mankind. "We are sent forth to preach life and salvation to every soul who will hearken and obey. Our mission is one of good will to all men the wide world over. We seek the hurt or injury of no people upon the face of the earth." [^16]

His greatest contributions to the Church he loved are his path-breaking writings on the Book of Mormon, including his massive concordance. For each contribution he deserves to be held "in honorable remembrance," as he was promised in his patriarchal blessing.

In 1893 Elder Reynolds was asked to speak briefly at a meeting of the general authorities in conjunction with the dedication of the Salt Lake Temple, an event considered pentecostal in its significance for the Church. His geniune feelings of love toward God and gratitude for His miraculous hand in blessing the Church flowed from this noble disciple:

My brethren, I feel exceedingly happy in being with you this morning, and in standing for a few moments before you. I can say with all sincerity that I have rejoiced in the teachings that I have heard at the dedication of this Temple, and more so in the spirit that has been there; for I have rejoiced in the knowledge that God has accepted this house, and also that He has accepted His people; and furthermore, I have had a testimony from God for myself that He has forgiven my individual sins. All these things cause my heart to rejoice before Him, and to increase within me a desire that to my life's end I may serve Him with faithfulness, devotion and humility. There is another thing, too, that has greatly caused my heart to swell with gratitude before God in these meetings, and it is this—that God has magnified His servants of the First Presidency in the eyes of all Israel; that all the people who have congregated at these various meetings have seen that God is with them, that He is leading them, that His Spirit is with them, and that He accepts them. I know that some of the brethren, owing to circumstances that have occurred, have misunderstood some things that have been done. I am thankful beyond measure that that has been removed, and that we now are a united people—united in God, united in keeping His commandments. I have been one of those of whom mention has been made in the meeting, who wondered and feared and had trouble how ever, as things were going, we could be united again. I could not see how it could be done, unless God should work a miracle in our midst. That work He has performed; He has made us one, and I feel that this is a great and glorious day for God's Church here upon the earth. With regard to myself, my brethren, if I have offended any of you I humbly seek your forgiveness. As far as I am concerned myself, I have not an ill feeling toward any soul who dwells on this earth. I wish them all well. I desire to see them, as the children of our Great Father, all blessed, guided, and preserved by Him. These are my feelings. I am one with my brethren in the quorum. I have the fullest confidence in our leaders as the servants of God; and pray that His Holy Spirit may continue to guide us in the offices that we hold, that we may live to His honor and glory and the salvation of our fellow men, in the positions we are called to occupy; through Jesus I ask it. Amen. [^17]

In all important areas of his life, in his writings, in his work with the Deseret Sunday School Union, in the general calling in the First Council of Seventy, and with his family, George exercised much energy to spread the good news of the gospel and build the kingdom. Even in private acts, George personified the principles he taught. In 1905 the widow of a personal friend wrote George the following letter of appreciation:

Permit me to sincerely thank you for your kindness and substantial aid in the hour of our distress.

The mortage on our little home has been fully paid and a deed made direct to me. Words cannot express my feelings of appreciation.

Our little home is a gift from you and others of our friends, and I hope to be able to keep it always, and your kindness in helping to make this possible I can never forget. [^18]

During the last years of his life, George received a tender letter of commendation from one of his first acquaintances in the Church and the man who confirmed him a member of the Church, Elder George Teasdale of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. Teasdale wrote:

Ever since I knew you, you have been a champion for Truth and righteousness, a patient laborer, a successful author, a wonderful worker. God bless you. You need not think that your labors are not appreciated, or your integrity. You have made a glorious record and will surely reap the recompense of reward. How wonderful have been the dealings of the Lord with us from the first time we met in the Somerstown branch unto the present time. [^19]

Elder George Reynolds declared his life's motto in what turned out to be his last public sermon in general conference in October 1906: "I hope that all through my life I shall ever consider the Kingdom of God and His righteousness first, last, and all the time," he declared. Echoing what he had heard John Taylor say previously, George continued, "To me, this is the 'Kingdom of God or nothing' and the nothing is an impossibility to my mind." [^20]

The annual First Presidency Christmas message in the year 1909, the year of George's death, included the following tribute:

The past year has witnessed the calling to the other side of a number of the veterans who have done much for the cause of Zion at home and abroad. Among these stalwart and faithful elders from whom we have been called to part during the past year, the names of Lorin Farr, George Reynolds, John Nicholson, Charles R. Savage, Andrew W. Winberg, Amos Milton Musser, Samuel W. Richards and others stand out prominently. The services of these men were devoted to the welfare of humanity and were engaged in the ministry almost since the organization of the Church. They have been faithful and true through all vicissitudes, obstacles, persecutions and hardships, through which they were called to pass. [^21]

Nor is George Reynolds forgotten today. In a special satellite broadcast about the scriptures in 1985, President Gordon B. Hinckley of the First Presidency addressed the members of the Church worldwide. He emphasized individual scholarship in studying the scriptures and spoke favorably about using concordances, mentioning that he valued his copy of Cruden's concordance of the Bible. "I also treasure my first edition of the Concordance of the Book of Mormon, which was printed in 1900," he declared, holding his copy close to his chest. "It represents twenty years of devoted labor on the part of George Reynolds. The volume which I have is now eighty-five years old. It was my father's. He used it much, as have I. I love the feel of its old leather cover. As I use it I can sense the pride of its compiler, who paid so heavy a price for his testimony of the gospel." [^22]

In 1984 the Reynolds Family Organization was reestablished, and a reunion was held on 9 August, the seventy-fifth anniversary of George Reynolds's death. Plans were made for future gatherings and an even larger convocation of his descendants occurred in August 1985, during which historical sites relating to George were visited, speeches were given in his honor, and a slide-sound presentation was made of key events in his history. Members of all three families labored hand in hand for this enterprise. Truly this noble man is held "in honorable remembrance."

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The Book of Abraham: Its Authenticity Established As a Divine and Ancient Record. Salt Lake City: Deseret News Printing and Publishing Co., 1879. Reynolds, George. Are We of Israel? and The Book of Abraham. Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1952. "The Good Samaritan." 1 (1 February 1866): 9-10. "The Real and the Imaginary." 25 (3 January 1863): 4-6. "The Nephites Under the Judges." 2 (February 1881): 139-42. "Miracles." 5 (6 July 1907): 76-77. (Reprinted from Millennial Star.) "The Bible and the Book of Mormon." 9 (November 1898): 490-92. "The Thief on the Cross." 1 (February 1898): 225-30.
[^2] Are We of Israel? Salt Lake City: Deseret News Printing and Publishing Co., 1883. Reynolds, George. A Dictionary of the Book of Mormon. Salt Lake City: Phillip C. Reynolds, 1954. "Be Satisfied." 1 (15 February 1866): 14. "How Shall We Be Better?" 25 (4 April 1863): 213-15. "The Nephites Under the Judges." 2 (March 1881): 171-74. "The Repentant Lawyer." 5 (27 July 1907): 154-56. (Reprinted from Millennial Star.) "Not Too Young." 15 (September 1904): 399-400. "He Shall Perish." 2 (September 1899): 801-06.
[^3] The "Mormon" Metropolis: An Illustrated Guide to Salt Lake City and Its Environs. Salt Lake City: Jos. Hyrum Parry, 1883. Reynolds, George, and Sjodahl, Janne M. Commentary on the Book of Mormon. Edited by Philip C. Reynolds. 7 vols. Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1955-61. "The Story of Atlas." 1 (1 March 1866): 17-18. "First Impressions Indelible—Importance of Early Training." 26 (16 January 1864): 36-38. "The Nephites Under the Judges." 2 (April 1881): 205-08. "Objections to the Book of Mormon." 6 (2 November 1907): 534-36. (Reprinted from Millennial Star.) "Shiz—The Headless." 3 (June 1900): 588-89.
[^4] The Myth of "Manuscript Found," or The Absurdities of the "Spaulding Story." Salt Lake City: Juvenile Instructor Office, 1883. Reynolds, George. The Story of the Book of Mormon. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1957. "Esther, Queen of Persia." 1 (15 July 1866): 56. "The Supernatural." 26 (16 July 1864): 449-51. "The Nephites Under the Judges." 2 (May 1881): 235-38. "Infant Baptism and the Sacrament." 4 (February 1901): 247-52.
[^5] The Story of the Book of Mormon. Salt Lake City: Jos. Hyrum Parry, 1888. Reynolds, George, and Sjodahl, Janne M. Book of Mormon Geography. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1957. "A Life in the Trees." 1 (1 August 1866): 60. "It Must Be True, For It Was in the Papers." 26 (20 August 1864): 533-34. "Crime and Education." 2 (July 1881): 292-95.
[^6] A Dictionary of the Book of Mormon. Salt Lake City: Jos. Hyrum Parry, 1891. Reynolds, George. A Complete Concordance of the Book of Mormon. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1957. "The Gods of the Heathens." 1 (15 August 1866): 63. "The Harmony of the Gospel." 26 (17 September 1864): 593-95. "Influence of Outside Literature." 2 (September 1881): 357-59.
[^7] Jubilee History of Latter-day Saints Sunday Schools. Salt Lake City: Deseret Sunday School Union, 1900 (co-authored with Levi W. Richards). Reynolds, George, and Sjodahl, Janne M. Commentary on the Pearl of Great Price. Edited by Philip C. Reynolds. Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1965. "Who's Afraid?" 1 (1 September 1866): 68. "Extremes of Character." 26 (15 October 1864): 657-60. "Thoughts on Genesis." 3 (October 1881): 16-17.
[^8] A Complete Concordance of the Book of Mormon. Salt Lake City: by the author, 1900. "The Two Voices." 1 (15 September 1866): 70. "The Influence We Wield." 26 (26 November 1864): 756-60. "Miracles." 3 (November 1881): 44-45.
[^9] "Strange Fashions." 1 (1 October 1866): 75. "Post Prophesying." 26 (24 December 1864): 819-21. "Objections to the Book of Mormon." 3 (December 1881): 81-83.
[^10] "Jezebel." 1 (15 October 1866): 79. "I'll Ask Counsel." 27 (25 February 1865): 117-18. "Objections to the Book of Mormon." 3 (January 1882): 105-08.
[^11] "When the Teacher Comes." 1 (15 October 1866): 81. "The Religion of Every Day Life." 27 (15 April 1865): 227-29. "Objections to the Book of Mormon." 3 (February 1882): 134-37.
[^12] "The Little Captive Maiden." 1 (1 December 1866): 90. "Wisdom and Knowledge." 27 (29 April 1865): 260-61. "The Edmunds Bill." 3 (April 1882): 204-05.
[^13] "Gehazi and Naaman." 1 (15 December 1866): 95. "Prophets and Petrels." 33 (27 June 1871): 407. "Mormon and Jew—A Modern Parallel." 3 (May 1882): 247-49.
[^14] "Ruth and Naomi." 1 (15 January 1867): 9-10. "The Decline of Mormonism." 33 (27 June 1871): 408-10. "Objections to the Book of Mormon." 4 (October 1882): 4-6.
[^15] "Roman Conquest of Jerusalem." 2 (1 February 1867): 17-18. "The Gospel Before the Savior's Advent." 33 (25 July 1871): 472-74. "Utah Statistics—Census of 1880." 4 (April 1883): 276-78.
[^16] "Oracles." 2 (15 February 1867): 26. "Hints to Emigrants." 33 (1 August 1871): 488-89. "Utah Statistics—Census of 1880." 4 (June 1883): 352-53.
[^17] "The Kangaroo." 2 (15 February 1867): 29. "The Power of the Priesthood." 33 (22 August 1871): 536-37. "History of the Book of Mormon." 5 (November 1883): 41-47.
[^18] "The Finding of Moses." 2 (1 March 1867): 33-34. "Signs in the Heavens." 33 (29 August 1871): 552-53. "History of the Book of Mormon: Contents of the Records." 5 (December 1883): 81-85.
[^19] "What's Worth Doing is Worth Doing Well." 2 (1 March 1867): 37-38. "The Patience of the Saints." 33 (10 October 1871): 648-49. "History of the Book of Mormon: Contents of the Records." 5 (January 1884): 121-25.
[^20] "The Passage of the Red Sea." 2 (15 March 18670:41-42. "Be Not Discouraged." 33 (17 October 1871): 664. "History of the Book of Mormon: Contents of the Records." 5 (February 1884): 161-68.
[^21] "The Worship of the Golden Calf." 2 (1 April 1867): 49-50. "Open to Conviction." 33(7 November 1871): 714-16. "History of the Book of Mormon: Contents of the Records." 5 (March 1884): 201-06.
[^22] "David and Goliath." 2 (15 April 1867): 57-58. "Train Up a Child in the Way He Should Go." 33 (5 December 1871): 776-77. "History of the Book of Mormon: Contents of the Records." 5 (April 1884): 241-46.
