Victor L. Ludlow, Isaiah: Prophet, Seer, and Poet ( 1982)

INTRODUCTION

Students and scholars of the scriptures all acknowledge the importance of Isaiah's words, but many of them have difficulty understanding them. His insights are prophetic and fascinating, but since he uses poetry and symbols, readers often become discouraged and confused.

The man purpose of Isaiah: Prophet, Seer, and Poet is to help readers of Isaiah to understand his writings. Readers sometimes come across ambiguous passages in Isaiah, and they wonder, "What is he saying?" The ambiguity often results from confusing or unfamiliar vocabulary, phraseology, or sentence structure. In order to clarify Isaiah's words, this book explains Isaiah's obscure terminology, poetic style, symbolism, and teachings. Charts, maps, outlines, illustrations, and alternate English translations are included to further elucidate his writings.

Helpful background chapters are given in the first section of this book to provide information about Isaiah and his prophetic role and to give suggestions on why and how one should study Isaiah. They also help answer a more challenging question: "What does Isaiah mean?" In order to answer this question, Isaiah's writings are discussed in terms of historical context, literary style, scriptural context, and doctrinal application. This "four-dimensional" approach is used in this book to build up progressive layers of knowledge about Isaiah's message. Through the historical dimension, the reader learns about the cultural setting and history of the ancient Middle East. The literary dimension enables the reader to analyze the poetic and prophetic style in which Isaiah wrote. The third dimension reveals Isaiah through the eyes of other prophets, some contemporary, others his successors. Each borrows from Isaiah according to his needs and prophetic perspective. The insights of these prophets help the reader appreciate key words, symbolism, and figurative and spiritual meaning in Isaiah. The last and most important dimension is doctrinal; it highlights Isaiah's prophecies and allows the reader to apply his teachings.

My approach in this book has been to provide information and ideas from which readers can make their own value judgments. Probably the most important question any reader should ask about Isaiah's writings is, "What is the value of his words to me today?" Although I will give some suggestions as to how Isaiah's message can be applied to contemporary situations, the readers should not feel restricted to these applications. Because Isaiah's prophecies are powerful and prophetic, any limited or single interpretation may restrict their meaning and application. Instead of following one line of thought, I prefer to share a variety of insights I have gained through years of study of Isaiah, the Old Testament, the Hebrew language, and the Near East. My perceptions and suggestions should simplify Isaiah's writings and help readers to study and ponder the prophet's message. However, readers should consider my ideas only as possible suggestions and then build upon them, going beyond them to seek an individual relationship with Isaiah's work. In other words, follow the admonition of Nephi and "liken" Isaiah unto yourself! (1 Ne. 19:23-24.)

I hope that the ideas and materials in Isaiah—Prophet, Seer, and Poet will motivate Latter-day Saints toward a greater appreciation and comprehension of the great words of a great prophet. I also hope that a better understanding of Isaiah's writings will strengthen the readers' testimonies and that his messages will motivate them toward becoming true sons and daughters of our Heavenly Father.
