Victor L. Ludlow, Isaiah: Prophet, Seer, and Poet ( 1982)

WHY AND HOW TO STUDY ISAIAH

Numerous prophets and leaders have served the Lord. Of all the prophets who prepare us for the future through messianic and millennial prophecies, Isaiah is by far the most significant. Although Christ has endorsed the words of all his servants, the prophets (D&C 1:38; 68:3-4), he singled out Isaiah's words in particular and commanded his followers to study Isaiah's message:

Yea, a commandment I give unto you that ye search these things diligently; for great are the words of Isaiah. For surely he spake . . . concerning my people which are of the house of Israel; therefore . . . he must speak also to the Gentiles. And all things that he spake have been and shall be, even according to the words which he spake. (3 Ne. 23:1-3.)

Why? All Isaiah's words will be fulfilled. Isaiah spoke to Israel and the whole world, delivering many prophecies concerning the Lord's work. In speaking to the Nephites, Jesus promised that all Isaiah's prophecies will be fulfilled, just as Isaiah gave them.

How? Read Isaiah. Isaiah's words help only those who read them. And because of the complexity of his message and style, it is usually not until the second or third reading that his ideas become clear and his wisdom appears bright.

It is also very helpful to read more than one translation of Isaiah. Obviously, reading his book in the original Hebrew would be of greatest value, but any foreign language version or alternate English translation helps the reader view Isaiah from a different perspective. An additional English translation is also helpful because it often provides alternate meanings for troublesome words, idiomatic expressions, and language patterns. The main value of a second translation is that it stimulates a closer evaluation of the text itself. As one reads the material in a different language, new meanings appear. This is important, since all scripture must be read, pondered, and prayed about before it can be fully understood. (See Moro. 10:3-5.) A second or third reading of Isaiah, especially if one reads an alternate translation, stimulates meditation and enhances understanding.

Since a great number and variety of new English translations have appeared recently, this book includes a second English translation for each Isaiah chapter to complement the standard King James Version. The second version will appear within the text of the commentary on each chapter.

As you set aside time for daily scripture study and read and reread Isaiah, you will come to understand and feel more comfortable with his writings.

And it came to pass that I, Nephi, did teach my brethren . . . And I read many things unto them . . .: but that I might more fully persuade them to believe in the Lord their Redeemer I did read unto them that which was written by the prophet Isaiah; . . . that it might be for our profit and learning. (1 Ne. 19:22-23.)

Why? Isaiah inspires and teaches. Many of the great prophets and teachers took material for their messages from Isaiah: when Nephi tried to persuade his brothers to believe in Christ, he read from Isaiah; as Abinadi taught about the Messiah, Resurrection, and Atonement, he preached from Isaiah (Mosiah 14-15); while the resurrected Lord ministered to the Nephites, he incorporated and elucidated much of Isaiah within his teachings (3 Ne. 16, 20-23); and as Moroni concluded his records, he exhorted his readers to search the prophecies of Isaiah (Morm. 8:23). The Lord and these Book of Mormon prophets recognized the universal application of the inspired teachings and prophecies of Isaiah. Just as they used his words to teach their audiences, we too can reap insights from Isaiah to inspire ourselves and others.

How? Search and study Isaiah's gospel teachings. It is not enough simply to read the scriptures, or to read Isaiah; Christ said that one must search the scriptures (John 5:39) and search Isaiah (3 Ne. 20:11; 23:1). It is only after careful and deep examination, comparison, and synthesis that the words of Isaiah burn brightly and his images reveal themselves.

As most of us read Isaiah, trying to ponder his words and understand their meaning, we are like the Ethiopian who was reading an Isaiah scroll while riding home in his chariot from Jerusalem. Philip met him and asked, "Do you understand what you are reading?" The man replied, "How can I, unless some man guides me?" (Acts 8:30-31.) Since Isaiah's inspired writings reflect both his time and culture and also reveal the Lord's work throughout later generations, the question, "What does Isaiah say?" is not as important as the more insistent query, "What does Isaiah mean?" This second question should motivate everyone's search into the words of Isaiah.

One aid to understanding is to study Isaiah within the context of the gospel dispensation of Moses. Many Israelites of Isaiah's time knew the elements of the plan of salvation (premortal existence, purpose of earth life, resurrection, etc.), the basic principles and ordinances of the gospel, and the prophetic promises about the Messiah, who would free them from spiritual and physical bondage. Isaiah builds upon this gospel foundation and teaches it in greater depth. For example, his ideas in chapter 14 elaborate on the account of Lucifer and his hosts being cast down to spirit prison. And in chapter 1, he teaches in his unique vocabulary the basic gospel principles of knowing one's master (faith), changing scarlet sins to white (repentance), washing oneself (baptism), and hearing the word of the Lord (the gift of the Holy Ghost). His servant songs and insights about a prophet's burdens culminate in chapter 53 with his great discourse on the atoning servant, Jesus Christ.

Before we can understand Isaiah's teachings and share the inspiration he received, we must study his words, ponder how they fit within the gospel, and pray about them. A careful study requires us to look at Isaiah theme by theme, chapter by chapter, concept by concept, verse by verse. As we come to share his insights, we will come to a greater understanding of the gospel.

I [Nephi] did . . . read unto them that which was written by the prophet Isaiah; for I did liken all scriptures unto us, that it might be for our profit and learning. Wherefore I spake unto them, saying: Hear ye the words of the prophet . . . and liken them unto yourselves, that ye may have hope. And now I, Nephi, write more of the words of Isaiah, . . . For I will liken his words unto my people, . . . for he verily saw my Redeemer. (1 Ne. 19:23-24; 2 Ne. 11:2.)

Why? We can learn from Isaiah today. Nephi includes many historical passages in his Isaiah extracts and gives them not as history lessons so much as lessons from history, showing the past types and patterns that can influence later generations. The fate of ancient unrighteous nations (and individuals) was all too familiar to Nephi. Having seen the destruction of Jerusalem and the future destruction of his own people in vision, and knowing the awful destiny of most latter-day Gentiles, he strove to motivate those who would repent, both among his own people and later readers. (Compare 1 Ne. 12 with 2 Ne. 28:32.) He recognized that scripture will help only those readers who can personally relate to its message. A modern prophet, Bruce R. McConkie, has expressed similar feelings:

Scriptural understanding and great insight relative to the doctrines of salvation are valuable only insofar as they change and perfect the lives of men, only insofar as they live in the hearts of those who know them. (Ensign, Oct. 1973, p. 83.)

How? Liken Isaiah to yourself. You might take the words of Isaiah and place them in a modern context by:

But whatever method you choose, take the ideas, feelings and teachings of Isaiah and see how they apply in your own life and how you can use them in teaching and inspiring others.

Isaiah spake many things which were hard for many . . . to understand; for they know not concerning the manner of prophesying among the Jews. . . . And my soul delighteth in the words of Isaiah, . . . and I know that the Jews do understand . . . the prophets, and there is none other people that understand . . . save it be that they are taught after the manner of the things of the Jews. (2 Ne. 25:1, 5.)

Why? Isaiah is profoundly prophetic. Just as many Nephites did not understand Isaiah because they did not know "the manner of prophesying among the Jews," most people today continue to lack understanding for the same reason. While Nephi's writings are simple and plain, Isaiah's compositions are complicated and eloquent. Isaiah's messages contain many levels of meaning and are thus comparable to the Savior's parables, which were addressed to different audiences of varied spiritual backgrounds. Isaiah's audience included the people of his own time and place, Israelites in exile, Jews returning from Babylon, Jews at the time of Jesus, early Christians, and the Nephites. Now it includes modern Christians, Jews, Moslems, and Latter-day Saints. He has something to say to all of us, and in order to teach and inspire us, his poetry is superb, his prophecy sublime, and his style of teaching unique.

Isaiah's mechanical techniques (his "manner of prophesying") were probably understood by the Nephites. That is, they understood Isaiah's types, figures, symbols, and poetic structure. Their ignorance was not so much in the mechanics of prophecy as in spiritual comprehension, as suggested by Nephi's brother Jacob:

The Jews were a stiffnecked people; and they despised the words of plainness . . . and sought for things that they could not understand. Wherefore, because of their blindness, which blindness came by looking beyond the mark . . . God hath taken away his plainness from them, and delivered unto them many things which they cannot understand, because they desired it. And because they desired it God hath done it. (Jacob 4:14.)

Nephi and Jacob are saying, in other words, "Isaiah is hard for many people to understand because they do not know the way the Lord commanded Isaiah to prophesy. Since they have desired complicated messages, God has given them prophetic utterances which they do not comprehend."

Isaiah's prophesying is usually cryptic, for he often veils his message from his audience. (See the commentary on Isaiah 6 in this book.) Elder McConkie illustrates this technique as follows:

The virgin birth prophecy is dropped into the midst of a recitation of local historical occurrences so that to the spiritually untutored it could be interpreted as some ancient and unknown happening that had no relationship to the birth of the Lord Jehovah into mortality some 700 years later. Similarly, many chapters dealing with latter-day apostasy and the second coming of Christ are written relative to ancient nations whose destruction was but a symbol, a type, and a shadow, of that which would fall upon all nations when the great and dreadful day of the Lord finally came. . . . Once we learn this system and use the interpretive keys found in the Book of Mormon and through latter-day revelation, we soon find the Isaiah passages unfolding themselves to our view. (Ensign, Oct. 1973, pp. 82-83.)

How? Study Isaiah's manner of prophesying. Four major stylistic elements must be understood before Isaiah's "manner of prophesying" can be unraveled. First, his mode of communication should be studied, since most of his writings are poetry. A careful look at his poetic style, called "parallelism," is necessary to understand the form of his writing.

The second element in Isaiah's "manner of prophesying" is his use of symbolism. Symbolic names (such as Immanuel, and those of Isaiah's two sons—Shear-jashub and Maher-shalal-hash-baz, Shiloh, etc.), titles (servant, the blind, Holy One, etc.), places (altar, temple, mountain of the Lord, Edom, Babylon, etc.), and acts (washing, sacrifice, shedding blood, etc.) are scattered throughout Isaiah. By studying the history and context of Isaiah's ministry, one can see how he uses contemporary symbols both to teach his immediate audience and to provide images and lessons for later generations.

The third element in understanding Isaiah's prophesying is more difficult since it requires a careful look at his prophetic role and philosophy of teaching. Because of the spiritual limitations of his audience, he could not always be exact and straightforward in his teaching. His insights are often well hidden within a poetic discourse. He thereby not only challenges our understanding through his writing expertise, but also deliberately obscures his ideas in imagery and symbolism.

The last element necessary to understand Isaiah's prophesying is the use of inspired interpretation. Revealed insights and interpretive keys are found in the New Testament, the Book of Mormon, and latter-day revelation, though much remains to be revealed as the prophecies of Isaiah continue to unfold. (See Article of Faith 9.)

In summary, Isaiah's "manner of prophesying" follows certain patterns that require sensitive interpretive skills before one can understand his teachings. The four major elements of his prophesying must be studied on two levels: (1) the mechanics or technique of his writings, and (2) the meaning or interpretation of his teachings. The basic keys are diagrammed in the following chart:

Ancient Israelites (such as Nephi's brothers) understood the prophetic technique but, since they were often not spiritually sensitive, looked "beyond the mark" and missed the correct interpretation. Today we should be able to interpret Isaiah because of the many scriptures and inspired interpretations available to us. However, we often hesitate to study Isaiah because we do not or cannot appreciate the mechanics of his prophesying, and therefore we stumble over his style and symbols. As we both study his technique and learn how to interpret his writings, we will master his "manner of prophesying" and come to understand his message.

I [Christ] say unto you, that when they [the words of Isaiah] shall be fulfilled then is the fulfilling of the covenant which the Father hath made unto his people, O house of Israel. (3 Ne. 20:12; see also 23:2.)

I [Nephi] speak unto all the house of Israel, . . . he [the Lord] surely did show unto the prophets of old all things concerning them; . . . that they might know concerning the doings of the Lord. . . . Hear ye the words of the prophet [Isaiah], which were written unto all the house of Israel. (1 Ne. 19:19, 21, 22, 24.)

I [Jacob] have read these things [from Isaiah] that ye might know concerning the covenants of the Lord that he has covenanted with all the house of Israel. (2 Ne. 9:1.)

Why? Isaiah taught Israel concerning her covenants with the Lord. Isaiah was the last great prophet who spoke to all of Israel while they were still one people in the Holy Land. He taught the Israelites how the Lord had worked with their ancestors and why they were his covenant people. He reminded them of how they were breaking their covenants and why the Lord's punishment would come upon them. In short, he was the greatest teacher of Israel since Moses, and the last prophetic witness before the scattering.

How? Review the Lord's covenants in the ancient scriptures. Read and reread the Old Testament to appreciate how God dealt with his children anciently. In particular, study chapters 12-50 of Genesis to review how the Lord established covenants with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob (Israel). Then review the book of Deuteronomy to see what Moses taught assembled Israel concerning their laws and covenants. Finally, read the book of Psalms to capture some of the love and emotion expressed by many authors (poets, kings, priests, and prophets) as they told about God's relationship with his chosen people.

The Book of Mormon is also a key to understanding ancient covenants. Review especially 1 Nephi 10 (Lehi's teachings on Israel), 2 Nephi 25-33 (Nephi's teachings), and Jacob 5 (Zenos's allegory) to see how the Lord's covenants developed within that branch of Israel. Also note how the law of Moses was fulfilled as recorded in 3 Nephi 1:24-25 and 9:16-22.

The fulfillment of the Mosaic dispensation, the preparation of the Jews for Christ's dispensation, and many other Isaianic prophecies are also recorded in the New Testament. All these ancient scriptures show how the Lord worked through the prophets (particularly Isaiah) and other servants (psalmists, poets, etc.) to teach Israel her proper relationship with God.

And I [Nephi] did rehearse unto them the words of Isaiah, who spake concerning the restoration of the Jews, or of the house of Israel; and after they were restored they should no more be confounded, neither should they be scattered again. (1 Ne. 15:20.)

Why? Isaiah promises the return of Israel. Isaiah not only taught Israel about her ancient history and covenants, but he also prophesied that the Jews and other remnants of Israel will return to the Lord and their promised lands in the last days. His ideas stimulated the Book of Mormon prophets to seek for further insights into these future events. Isaiah also gives signs and promises concerning the other remnants of Israel, the Ten Tribes and Lamanites; some of these prophecies were used by Christ as he taught the Lamanites about their latter-day destiny. When the Ten Tribes return and their scriptural record is revealed, Isaiah's words will probably be frequently quoted in them as a major teaching source and witness. (See 2 Ne. 29:13.) In short, Isaiah's words have inspired all the dispersed groups of Israel, and his promises concerning their return will certainly be fulfilled.

How? Study Jewish and Lamanite history. A study of Jewish and Lamanite history over the past hundred and fifty years will demonstrate the fulfillment of many Isaianic prophecies pertaining to the return of Israel in the last days. Many Jewish history books evaluate modern Jewish history (since 1800), the development of Zionism, and the modern state of Israel. Not as many sources are available for American Indian or Lamanite history, but articles in the Church News, Ensign, and other Latter-day Saint publications often highlight the current social and religious development of the Lamanites as they join the Church in large numbers in Central and South America. Of course, many prophecies of these two remnants of Israel remain to be fulfilled, but a review of their movements and growth indicates the tremendous progress they have made from their ancient apostate traditions since the keys for the gathering of Israel were restored by Moses to Joseph Smith in 1836.

But behold, I [Nephi] proceed with mine own prophecy. . . . In the days that the prophecies of Isaiah shall be fulfilled men shall know of a surety, at the times when they shall come to pass. Wherefore, they are of worth unto the children of men, . . . for I know that they shall be of great worth unto them in the last days; for in that day shall they understand them; wherefore, for their good have I written them. (2 Ne. 25:7-8.)

Why? People in the last days will witness the fulfillment of Isaiah's prophecies. Although some of us may wish that we had lived in the days of Isaiah, when his visions and revelations might have been explained to us personally, most of us would still be confused, since we could not then have comprehended the scientific achievements and religious developments to come in the last days. From an ancient perspective, our modern age would have appeared astonishing with its labor-saving machines, communication systems, transportation devices, and other advances; yet it would also have baffled us that so much poverty, inequality, and wickedness could still be a part of the "advanced" society of the last days. We would also have a difficult time appreciating how the plain, simple, restored truths of the gospel could come forth and grow in such a sophisticated and wicked world. Since Isaiah used imagery and symbols to describe the latter days and did not completely and literally describe all that he saw, his audience would have been even more confused about modern events and how they would fulfill Isaiah's prophecies.

In the Book of Mormon reference quoted above, Nephi promises that those who live in the last days will witness the fulfillment of Isaiah's prophecies and understand them! We can build upon our hindsight of history with knowledge of contemporary events and Isaiah's visions of our day to see how his words are being fulfilled.

How? Review the restored gospel and the signs of the times. In modern revelation, the Lord has interpreted, clarified, and expanded the meaning of many of Isaiah's words. Many quotations from Isaiah are found in the latter-day scriptures, and explanations of his meaning are contained in the teachings of the prophets and apostles of this dispensation.

Moroni quoted Isaiah to Joseph Smith at the opening of this dispensation (JS-H 1:40), and the Doctrine and Covenants is especially rich in phraseology from Isaiah. For example, section 113 interprets parts of Isaiah 11 and 52; section 133 repeats many phrases and ideas from Isaiah 35, 51, 63, and 64; and section 101 presents some keys to understanding Isaiah 65. Also, numerous Isaianic terms and phrases are found in sections 1, 45, 88, 109, 124, and 128.

Later prophets and apostles of this dispensation also have taught from Isaiah and explained difficult points of his message. Elder Bruce R. McConkie points out the value of these modern, inspired commentaries:

There are also, of course, numerous allusions to and explanations of the great seer's words in the sermons of Joseph Smith and the other inspired teachers of righteousness of this dispensation. So often it takes only a prophetically uttered statement, revealing the age or place or subject involved in a particular passage in the writings of any prophet, to cause the whole passage and all related ones to shine forth with their true meaning and import.

It truly takes revelation to understand revelation, and what is more natural than to find the Lord Jehovah, who revealed his truths anciently, revealing the same eternal verities today and so tying his ancient and modern words together, that we may be blessed by our knowledge of what he has said in all ages. (Ensign, Oct. 1973, p. 81.)

In seeking to understand more of Isaiah by reviewing the restored gospel and studying the signs of these last days, we should study the Doctrine and Covenants carefully, especially the sections noted above. We should know the important events and movements of Latter-day Saint and world history. We should study the general conference addresses and review the scriptures that prophesy of the last days. All these things will not only help us to understand how Isaiah's prophecies are being fulfilled, but also prepare us to become better servants in fulfilling the prophesied events of this dispensation.

Wherefore, hearken, . . . and give ear unto my words; for because the words of Isaiah are not plain unto you, nevertheless they are plain unto all those that are filled with the spirit of prophecy. (2 Ne. 25:4.)

Why? Isaiah's words are plain to those with the spirit of prophecy. An angel told John the Revelator that "the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy." (Rev. 19:10.) Peter likewise recorded that no man can know the things of God without enlightenment by the Spirit. (2 Pet. 1:20-21.) Since the spirit of prophecy makes plain the words of Isaiah, a living knowledge and testimony of the gospel truths, especially the divine mission of the Lord Jesus Christ, is imperative for understanding Isaiah's writings.

With this spiritual gift, we can understand Isaiah through the same spirit of prophecy that inspired Isaiah. Isaiah's inspired writings and all other scriptures come from God through the power of the Holy Ghost. As any man studies scripture, that same Holy Ghost enlightens him as to the meaning and value of revealed truths. (See Hel. 9:20; 1 Cor. 2:11; 1 Ne. 10:17-19; D&C 75:10.)

How? Gain the spirit of prophecy. The value of all spiritual gifts depends upon our worthiness to receive them and our diligence in developing them. God's Spirit does not come to the unworthy and, as demonstrated in the parable of the talents, gifts from God profit neither him nor us if they are not used and magnified. (See Hel. 4:12-14; Matt. 25:15-30; Ether 12:35.) Thus, in order to receive the spirit of prophecy, we must strive to keep all the commandments and retain the Holy Spirit at all times. The development of this spiritual gift through constant study, pondering, and prayer can eventually lead us to receive the same spirit of instruction that inspired Isaiah originally.

And now I, Nephi, write more of the words of Isaiah, for my soul delighteth in his words . . . for he verily saw my Redeemer, even as I have seen him. (2 Ne. 11:2.)

Why? Isaiah has seen the Lord. Nephi loved to quote Isaiah because he shared Isaiah's spiritual manifestations and insights. Both Nephi and Isaiah had seen the Lord, and they foresaw how his work would unfold among the children of men.

Of all the prophetic writings on the brass plates, Nephi specifically chose the writings of Isaiah to use in persuading his brothers and the whole house of Israel to believe in the Lord their Redeemer, Jesus Christ. (1 Ne. 19:18-23.) Isaiah received and recorded messianic insights that continue to inspire God's children. As Elder McConkie writes,

Isaiah is everywhere known as the messianic prophet because of the abundance, beauty, and perfection of his prophetic utterances foretelling the first coming of our Lord. And truly such he is. No old world prophet, whose inspired sayings have come down to us, can compare with him in this respect. Moreover, the first coming of the Messiah is past, and so even those among us who are not overly endowed with spiritual insight can look back and see in the birth, ministry, and death of our Lord the fulfillment of Isaiah's forecasts. (Ensign, Oct. 1973, p. 81.)

How? Develop yourself spiritually. During our mortality, most of us may not be privileged to see Christ in vision as did Isaiah and Nephi, or in the flesh as did others, but all of us can draw nearer to the Lord through following his teachings and example. As we attain greater spiritual heights and develop an intimate relationship with him through mighty prayer, we will naturally come to a greater love and appreciation of him. And as we give Christian service and increase our love toward others, we will become more like him. Then we will understand more of the words and feelings of Isaiah and the other prophets who loved the Lord and served him with all their power. As our spiritual life becomes more like Isaiah's, his writings will communicate to us on a higher spiritual level and teach us great truths about ourselves, others, the Lord, and the divine plan for this earth and its inhabitants.

We can derive many values from studying Isaiah's book, for as we follow the necessary steps in understanding his writings, they will help us come closer to the Lord's goal for the children of men—immortality and eternal life. (Moses 1:39.)
