Victor L. Ludlow, Isaiah: Prophet, Seer, and Poet ( 1982)

PARALLELISM IN OLD TESTAMENT POETRY AND PROPHECY

Hebrew poetry comprises about one-third of the Old Testament. It extends beyond the so-called poetic books (Job, Psalms, Proverbs, etc.) throughout the scriptures, and it is especially prominent in the prophetic books (Isaiah, Jeremiah, Hosea, Amos, etc.). For example, approximately ninety percent of Isaiah is written in poetry.

The ancient poets and prophets recognized that their works were usually received and transmitted orally. Although written copies of their works (usually in the form of parchment scrolls) would have been available from generation to generation, most Israelites would not have had copies in their own homes because of the expense and effort required to make the scrolls. Temple or synagogue scrolls were usually not readily available, and in times of war or religious persecution they would have been easily suppressed or destroyed. Rather than relying upon written records, the ancient Semites were trained to remember long passages. The development of their oral retention allowed them to pass on religious records, poetry, psalms, family histories, and other important information.

The ancient poets, prophets, writers, and scribes would assist their followers by organizing their material into an easily remembered form. Old Testament authors often used key phrases or words as verbal flags to alert the listener to important passages that would be coming up shortly in their presentation. They also used memory devices or patterns that made the poems easy to remember and still allowed the composer spontaneity of expression.

The most common pattern in Hebrew poetry was parallelism. Two thousand years after Hebrew had ceased to be a common spoken language, Bishop Robert Lowth of the Anglican Church rediscovered this memory aid and poetic style in 1753. Later studies have expanded his ideas and have made major strides in understanding Old Testament poetry and why words and ideas are repeated in many verses.

Parallelism is the most distinctive quality of Hebrew poetry, and it is found in most of the famous biblical passages. In parallelism, a thought, idea, grammar pattern, or key word of the first line is repeated or continued in the second line. There are two basic types of parallelism, grammatical and semantic. Grammatical or "form" parallelism is often difficult to identify, especially in non-Hebrew translations, because the rhyme schemes, grammar forms, conjugation patterns, prefix or suffix parallelisms, and so on may not carry over into the new translation. However, semantic parallelism is more easily recognized in English and other non-Semitic language translations since it is a "theme rhyme" or "idea pattern" in which the thought or meaning in one line is related to an idea of another line in a variety of parallel patterns. Among the types of semantic parallelism are the following:

(a) A fool's mouth is his ruin, and

(b) His lips are the snare of his soul. (Prov. 18:7.)

(a) An ox knows his owner, and

(b) An ass his master's crib. (Isa. 1:3.)

This most common form of parallelism might be compared to the two rails of a railroad track, because although close together, the parallel rails seem to join into a single point on the horizon. The repeated ideas of synonymous parallelism reinforce each other and provide a more complete perspective of a single, major concept.

Many ideas are repeated throughout the scriptures. Repetition is a necessary educational process, whether in learning a new vocabulary word or in understanding complex religious doctrines. By using synonymous parallelism, the ancient authors could repeat their messages and reinforce the learning of their listeners.

(a) When pride comes, then comes disgrace.

(b) But with the humble is wisdom. (Prov. 11:2.)

(a) If you are willing and obedient, you will eat the good things of the earth:

(b) But if you refuse and disobey, you will be devoured by the sword. (Isa. 1:19-20.)

This form is very common in Proverbs, and the use of opposites clarifies both extremes. It might be compared to a black silhouette, which brings the exact outline of a figure into sharp focus as it is placed on a white background.

Through antithetic parallelism, the poet mirrors the opposition of all things. (See Eccl. 3:1-8.) As in life, where sensitivity to ugliness and suffering can lead one to better appreciate beauty and goodness, so also in poetry the sharp contrast of opposites brings the desired message into sharper focus.

(a) Like clouds and wind without rain

(b) Is the man who boasts of a gift he does not give. (Prov. 25:14.)

(a) Though your sins be [red] as scarlet,

(b) They shall be white as snow.

(a') Though they be red as dyed wool,

(b') They shall be [white] as fleece. (Isa. 1:18.)

These comparisons can usually be recognized by the prepositions "like" or "as." Often symbolic, emblematic parallelism is like a shadow, which can be distinct or hazy.

Symbolic representations allow the listener's past experiences to enrich his understanding. Like parables, they allow the listener to comprehend the parallelism according to his own background and insights. Thus, every listener can immediately relate to the material and yet still be challenged to discover additional meanings.

These first three types of parallelism are all used in the second example above:

(a) Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil:

(b) For thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff they comfort me. (Ps. 23:4.)

(a) I [the Lord] have nourished and brought up children,

(b) And they have rebelled against me. (Isa. 1:2.)

The two lines of the synthetic couplet are often loosely connected as the second line continues or completes the thought of the first. Like a belt and buckle, this parallelism joins or blends two ideas in any of several possible relations.

Sometimes difficult to identify, synthetic parallelism encompasses good educational psychology as it generates and then answers questions, completes statements, and amplifies ideas. If the first line of a verse seems incomplete or if it causes you to want to know how or why that statement is true (for example, Why should I not be afraid in the shadow of death? or, What happened to the children?), then this line probably begins a synthetic parallelism.

Blessed is the man

(a) Who walks not in the counsel of the ungodly,

(b) Nor stands in the way of sinners,

(c) Nor sits in the seat of the scornful. (Ps. 1:1.)

(a) Ah nation of sin!

(b) A people laden with iniquity!

(c) A brood of evildoers!

(d) Children that are corrupters:

They have forsaken the Lord. (Isa. 1:4.)

By presenting a variety of ideas that radiate about a central theme, this parallelism is often an advanced combination of synonymous and synthetic parallelisms and is like the spokes of a wheel, combining ideas to provide a complete message. Sometimes the central idea (or hub) of these ideas is expressly stated, as in the first example above (qualities of a blessed man). Other times no central theme is mentioned; or a general theme or summary (hub) might be stated, as with the second example, and the listener must still organize the component parts within a general framework (or rim) and complete the model (the wickedness of the society).

Notice in both examples above how the poets provided additional memory aids. In the first, the verb sequence is natural and easy to picture and remember: "walks," "stands," "sits." In the second, the size of the group decreases in each line: "nation," "people," "brood (extended family)," "children (immediate family)."

Through composite parallelism, the poet extends an idea beyond its simple meaning into its varied component parts. Complex issues are presented in as many facets as the poet wants to develop. He provides the definitions and interpretations that give the listeners a more complete understanding of the whole theme.

(a) Ascribe to the Lord heavenly beings

(b) Ascribe to the Lord glory and strength

(c) Ascribe to the Lord the glory of his name

Worship the Lord in holy array. (Ps. 29:1-2.)

(a) Your country is desolate

(b) Your cities are burnt down

(c) Your land is devoured by strangers before your eyes

It is desolate; as overthrown by strangers. (Isa. 1:7.)

Sometimes the theme statement is given first and then followed by the repeated term (a phrase or word) with its attached phrases:

The daughter of Zion is left

(a) Like a booth in a vineyard

(b) Like a hut in a cucumber field

(c) Like a city beleaguered. (Isa. 1:8.)

The main point and the ideas (or steps) leading toward it can be joined in various combinations. In the first example above, the climax presents a new idea in contrast to the introductory lines. The first three lines stress the majesty of God to the listener, and in the fourth he is exhorted to worship God. In this psalm, David develops the idea of respect for the Lord by stressing varied manifestations of divine glory. However, he wants the listeners to do more than just fear the Lord, so he shifts emphasis in the last line and challenges the listeners to worship God in reverence. This poetic style is much more effective than simply saying, "Worship God because he is almighty."

In the second example, the major ideas and key words ("desolate," "strangers") are contained within both the steps and the climax. Thus, the climax is not a surprise but a summary.

The third example is also an elaborate model of emblematic parallelism, in which the climactic idea, the "daughter of Zion," is defined through the three following examples, each of which is an emblematic parallelism.

This progressive model of parallelism is like a set of steps that lead to or descend from a main point. To help distinguish this from composite parallelism, look for a word or phrase repeated in each line leading to (or from) the climax.

This complicated form of parallelism is often made by combining a composite form of semantic parallelism with a more obvious example of grammatical parallelism. Grammatical parallelism deals with the structure or form of the original Hebrew, while semantic parallelism consists of the message or idea of the poetry. For example, the syntactical patterns (the way in which words are joined to form phrases and sentences) or metrical similarities (the measured rhythm or patterns of accented and unaccented syllables) would be types of grammatical parallelism, while repeated patterns using similar symbols and comparable vocabulary words would be types of semantic parallelism. Grammatical parallelism is usually present in most semantic parallelism, but it is often disguised by the English translation.

In climactic parallelism, watch for a word, phrase, grammar unit, or other form to repeat itself in each line. By using a number of close, successive steps, the poet channels the listener's attention toward a culminating point. This climax could be a summary of the earlier-mentioned ideas, or it could be a new idea derived from the context of the earlier ones. In any case, the poet uses climactic parallelism to lead the listener toward a major theme or idea.

(a) We have escaped as a bird

(b) From the snare of the fowlers

(b') The snare is broken,

(a') And we have escaped! (Ps. 124:7.)

(a) Ephraim shall not envy

(b) Judah

(b') And Judah

(a') shall not harass Ephraim. (Isa. 11:13.)

The poet can develop and then introvert as many ideas as he desires:

(a) Make the heart of this people fat,

(b) And make their ears heavy,

(c) And shut their eyes,

(c') Lest they see with their eyes,

(b') And hear with their ears,

(a') And understand with their heart,

And convert [return], and be healed [heal themselves]. (Isa. 6:10.)

(abc) Come to the house of the God of Jacob, . . . and we will walk in his paths

(d) And he shall judge among the nations, . . .

(ef) And they shall beat their swords into plowshares,

(e'f') And their spears into pruninghooks:

(d') Nation shall not lift up sword against nation, . . .

(a'b'c') O house of Jacob, . . . let us walk in the light of the Lord (Isa. 2:3-5.)

Chiastic patterns can be expanded to include many verses, whole chapters, and even (according to some authorities) groups of chapters. With the more elaborate patterns, a main theme or message is usually stressed in the center of the chiasmus; thus it might be compared to an hourglass, with the focal point being in the middle. The separate halves of the chiasmus can also be in parallel patterns to each other (synonymous, antithetic, synthetic, etc.), so this becomes a very sophisticated style of Hebrew poetry.

Chiastic parallelism is a common literary and public communications style used by Israelite poets and prophets. Just as contemporary students in public speaking classes are taught to organize their talks with an introduction, major ideas or illustrations, and a conclusion, ancient Israelite poets would use chiasmus along with other forms of parallelism to present their messages.

Introverted parallelism is found in much of the inspired prophetic literature, [^1] suggesting the possibility that revelation was received by the prophets in this structured form. Chiasmus transmits sublime, divine teachings, and as the Bible reader understands this style, he can better appreciate God's messages for today.

Why Parallelisms Are Sometimes Difficult to Recognize

Hebrew poetic parallelisms, as they are found in the English translations of the Bible, are often hard to identify and understand. There are several reasons for this difficulty:

In summary, for the people of Old Testament times, parallelism served not only as an oral memory device, but it also enriched the messages of the prophets. Today, an awareness of parallelism aids the reader in his comprehension of vague and repetitive biblical passages. Although one should not attempt to rigidly identify each Bible verse as an example of parallelism, an understanding of this poetic style can increase one's appreciation of the literary qualities and religious messages to be found in the scriptures.

Footnotes

*—pivot point of these patterns.

---
Notas:
[^1] Chapters 1-2: Prophecies of the destruction of Israel and surrounding nations through a cataloging of their sins and the modes of their judgments. Hosea's covenant relationship with his wife is broken. (Hosea 1.) Israel breaks her covenants with God. (Hosea 4-6.) Read the chapter quickly for an overall impression of its style and message. The name Joshua is also derived from the same Hebrew root (Num. 13:16), while the name Jesus is an Aramaic derivation of the same word (Matt. 1:21).
