Victor L. Ludlow, Isaiah: Prophet, Seer, and Poet ( 1982)

PROPHETS CONTEMPORARY WITH ISAIAH

The Old Testament is primarily the inspired journal of ancient Hebrew prophets. Starting with the record of Moses and ending a thousand years later with the prophecies of Malachi, this work of scripture contains the names, activities, and teachings of dozens of prophets. During long periods within that millennium, however, no prophetic activities were recorded, such as during the period of the judges, before the time of Elijah, and after the ministry of Elisha. At other times, two or more prophets were contemporary with each other. At no other Old Testament time period were as many prophetic works and significant writings recorded as during the lifetime of Isaiah. The exact time spans of these contemporary prophetic ministries is not known, but the following chart lists the prophets of Isaiah's time and provides an overview of how their ministries may have overlapped.

Zechariah

Prior to Isaiah's counseling of the Judean kings, Ahaz and Hezekiah, an earlier prophet, Zechariah, served as an advisor to King Uzziah. His prophetic ministry is recorded in a single Bible verse which states that he "had understanding in the visions of God." (2 Chr. 26:5.) Over two centuries later, a prophet with the same name encouraged the Jews to rebuild the temple after their return from Babylon, and he left many important prophecies which are found in the Old Testament book, Zechariah.

Jonah

Jonah lived during the reign of King Jeroboam II, who ruled Israel from 787 to 746 B.C. (2 Kgs. 14:23-25.) The story of Jonah as now found in the Bible, however, was written some centuries later. Since Isaiah grew up during Jeroboam's reign over Israel, it is probable that he heard of Jonah and his calling to the Assyrians at Ninevah. Indeed, Isaiah later gave his own prophecies concerning the Assyrians, although it is doubtful that he ever traveled there personally to deliver his warnings. (See BD "Jonah.")

Amos

Amos was probably acquainted with both Zechariah and Jonah, since he lived in Judah when Zechariah advised King Uzziah (Amos 1:1) and he traveled to Israel, where he had a confrontation with King Jeroboam's chief priest (Amos 7:10-13).

Although Amos died before Isaiah received his prophetic calling, scrolls containing Amos's warnings and prophecies were probably available for Isaiah to read and study. Indeed, so many similarities exist between the writings of Amos and Isaiah that Isaiah was undoubtedly inspired by Amos. Both prophets recorded a vision of the Lord near his altar and both shared similar teachings and style. For example, they both received visions of the Lord (Amos 9:1; Isa. 6:1-6); delivered prophecies to the same foreign nations (Amos 1-2; Isa. 14-23); denounced the lack of Israelite charity (Amos 2:6-8; Isa. 1:17; 58:7); rebuked the people's rejection of the prophets (Amos 2:12; Isa. 30:9-10); used biting wit to belittle secular leaders (Amos 4:1, 11; Isa. 1:10); prophesied that only a tenth of the Israelites would be left in the land after its destruction (Amos 5:3; Isa. 6:13); criticized the religious festivals and sacrifices of hypocritical Israelites (Amos 5:21-23;Isa. 1:11-14); warned of heavenly manifestations of judgment ( Amos 8:9; Isa. 13:10); told of baldness as a sign for mourning or destruction (Amos 8:10; Isa. 3:24); foretold an apostasy or period of spiritual darkness (Amos 8:11-12; Isa. 60:2); and concluded their writings with promises of peace, productivity, and righteousness in the last days (Amos 9:11-15; Isa. 65-66). In addition, similar words and phrases demonstrate an affinity between Amos and Isaiah. In order to appreciate the life and teachings of Amos and to understand how they may have influenced Isaiah, a careful study of Amos is important.

In spite of many similarities between their writings, these two prophets came from very different backgrounds. Isaiah led a highly educated and social life in Jerusalem; Amos raised flocks and tended orchards in the small village of Tekoa, about ten miles south of Jerusalem. As a shepherd and wool producer, Amos traveled throughout Judah and Israel. Before he was called as a prophet, he had probably made several trips into the northern towns of Israel, where he had seen the religious and social corruptions he would later denounce. Amos did not receive any formal training for his calling; instead, he listened to the Lord's promptings while tending his flocks. Although he lived in Judah, his call was to go and preach to the inhabitants of Israel. (Amos 7:14-15.)

Because of their lineage through Abraham and "the covenant," the Israelites considered themselves above reproach and protected by adherence to the Mosaic law. Amos tried to instruct the people as to what the covenant and law really required in terms of obedience. First, he warned that lineage and nationality give no impunity from punishment, but that greater punishment follows in the wake of greater knowledge. Second, he tried to lift the people above the empty rituals of the law which, by themselves, lack power to save. Rejecting the sacrifice and ritual of the Israelites, Amos preached justice and righteousness.

As revealed through this straightforward, unsophisticated message, Amos was a common man, untrained in all the technicalities of religious law and unacquainted with the intellectual and theological "prophetic" schools of his day. His message was, therefore, not written as a polished, eloquent masterpiece like Isaiah's, but developed out of his experience as a rural dweller, shepherd, and dresser of fig trees. (Amos 7:14.) The imagery in his visions came naturally from the scenes around him and present a harsh and unrelenting picture of the desert in which he dwelt.

Most scholars divide the writings of Amos into three sections:

Through repetition of parallel syntactical structures in chapters one and two, Amos lists judgments to come upon the neighboring nations, building to a climactic pronouncement upon Judah and Israel. These two countries, ruled as they are by the descendants of Jacob, are in a particularly precarious position, since they alone know the law of Jehovah. Two specific and major sins are associated with the country of Israel, Amos's distinct charge, and his complaint against her centers around them—social injustice and idolatry.

Indeed, although Amos's background and style were in sharp contrast to Isaiah's, both prophets delivered similar messages and held great hope for the future. The two men may not have had direct contact with each other, but Amos's simple feelings, concerns, prophecies, and promises later inspired Isaiah and were repeated and amplified by him in his characteristic majestic style.

Hosea

Fewer similarities exist between Hosea and Isaiah than between Amos and Isaiah, in that while Isaiah and Amos lived in the southern kingdom, Hosea lived and preached many miles north of Jerusalem in the kingdom of Israel. Like Amos, his vocational and social background differed greatly from Isaiah's. Though Hosea recorded very little about his lifestyle and background, the agricultural images that he uses leads some readers to believe that he was a farmer (see Hosea 2:5, 8, 22; 4:16; 6:4; 10:12 for some examples), while others derive from the references in chapter seven that he was a baker. Infrequently, if ever, would this rural prophet from the north have associated with Jerusalem's urban prophet, Isaiah.

As the only northern prophet whose writings have survived, Hosea's love for his nation, Israel, is apparent. Unlike Amos and Isaiah, who prophesied concerning surrounding countries, he focused strictly upon Israel's relationship with the Lord and rarely referred to foreign nations except in terms of how the Lord uses them in relation to Israel. Also unlike Amos, Isaiah, and Micah, his prophetic warnings encompass little beyond the immediate future (the impending Assyrian captivity) and the continued love of God for his people. Therefore, of Isaiah's contemporaries, Hosea's writings are at once the most immediate and personal. Because of his sensitivity, he has been described as "the prophet of love," the prophet with a "broken" or "tender" heart, and, along with Jeremiah, "the weeping prophet."

The biographical sketch at the beginning of his work provides insights into his soul through his feelings toward his wayward wife. his experiences with her helped him to identify with the Lord's love toward an apostate, immoral Israel. Therefore, it is not surprising that woven throughout his teachings is a most personal and familiar metaphor—marriage.

Previous to Hosea, sexual symbolism had been avoided as a way of expressing the relationship between Yahweh and his people, because sex was central to the mythology of the fertility cults of the nations that surrounded Israel. But since Israel's increased participation in the rituals and religion of the idolatrous Canaanites had become the nation's greatest sin, Hosea's symbol of the adulterous wife was perfectly fitting. He was able to grasp the peoples' attention by incorporating Canaanite images and themes into the context of the Israelite covenant. The cultic marriage of Baal and nature needed to be replaced with a remarriage between Yahweh and his estranged people.

The book of Hosea, then, develops the metaphor of marriage and the unfaithful wife on two levels, personal and national. The first three chapters deal primarily with Hosea's personal marital problems, while chapters four through fourteen expand the metaphor to place Yahweh and Israel in a marital or covenant relationship.

In short, four major phases in Hosea's relationship with his wife are presented in the first three chapters:

These same four phases are then developed in national terms by Hosea in chapters 4-14 as he teaches the Israelites concerning their relationship with God:

By comparing these eleven later chapters with the earlier biographical chapters, the reader can appreciate Hosea's personal experiences, which gave him great insight into the Lord's feelings and actions toward Israel.

Isaiah undoubtedly shared these feelings and borrowed from Hosea's insights and teachings. He also identified with Hosea because of the similarity of their names. The name Hosea (hoshea) is derived from the same Hebrew root as Isaiah (yeshayahu). While Hosea's name means simply "salvation," Isaiah's means "salvation of Jehovah" or "Jehovah is salvation." [^1] True to these appellations, both prophets, in different styles, explain why Israel forfeited the Lord's salvation at that time. Both condemn the social evils and spiritual ignorance of the people. They denounce the fertility cults and ridicule idolatry while testifying that Jehovah lives and beside him there is no Savior. (Compare Hosea 13:2-4; 6:2 with Isaiah 43-45.) Finally, both prophets promise that the Lord's salvation will finally come to Israel.

Perhaps the primary difference between the messages of Hosea and Isaiah is that Isaiah develops his themes more extensively. Hosea may give a verse or two on a topic, while Isaiah employs an entire chapter or more to present the same concept. Of course Isaiah also expounds some themes Hosea does not address, such as his pronouncements to various nations, messianic prophecies, and promises of the last days.

In summary, Hosea was a prophet who typified a love for humanity. Separated from his wife and isolated from the wicked society of his age, he remained hopeful that the judgment and punishment of Jehovah would prompt both his wife and the people to repent and renew their covenants. His life and personality present a noble, sensitive father image to Israel. Isaiah, who followed Hosea, is not seen in an intimate fatherly role. His personality is more stern and his words more harsh as he builds upon Hosea's ideas and serves more as a teacher to Israel.

Micah

If Isaiah was Israel's teacher, then Micah was Isaiah's outstanding student and disciple. Micah began his ministry shortly after Isaiah received his first vision (Micah 1:1), and their prophetic callings paralleled each other for over three decades. Micah was Isaiah's younger, rural contemporary. He was raised in a village twenty-five miles southwest of Jerusalem. Neither a statesman nor an advisor to kings, as Isaiah was, he observed Israel and Judah from a common man's viewpoint. But, like Isaiah and the other contemporary prophets, Amos and Hosea, he mourned the greed, immorality, and idolatry of his age. He denounced these evils, and sounded a warning to both Israel and Judah. Like Isaiah, he also saw beyond his age and prophesied concerning the meridian of time and the last days.

Like Isaiah, Micah was a poet. Except for the first introductory verse, his whole short book has a poetic form, full of parallelism, word play, and imagery. His style is simple and forthright, and although his symbolism and phraseology are not as elaborate or eloquent as Isaiah's, he follows a similar pattern of grouping many smaller messages into larger, loose collections of writings. The smaller poems and segments of Micah are grouped into three collections now comprising chapters 1-2, 3-5, and 6-7. Each collection begins with an exhortation to his audience to "hear" the Lord's words. (Micah 1:2; 3:1; 6:1.) In each set, too, Micah gives a series of judgments or warnings before concluding with a promise of eventual blessings. (Micah 2:12-13; 4:1-5, 13; 7:14-20.) Isaiah uses a similar pattern of following a warning with a promise throughout his works, but his literary structure extends beyond individual poems, chapters, and collections of messages to encompass his entire book. The first thirty-five chapters of Isaiah are primarily warnings, while his great promises are found in the last twenty-seven chapters. It is possible that Micah used Isaiah's form as a model, but in any case, he develops a similar style and pattern in his three collections, as he first warns that God will send judgments for Judah's sins and then promises an eventual pardon and blessings.

In terms of the cyclical writing pattern (hear-warnings-blessings), the book of Micah is divided into three major sections:

Time Framework Warning Promise Chapters

Contemporary Judgment on Samaria Salvation of a 1-2

and Jerusalem remnant

Last days and Imminent destruction Triumph of a 3-5

messianic upon the wicked remnant of Jacob

Universal (judicial Jehovah and Israel Future 6-7

contest) in controversy restoration and glory

In summary, Micah was a representative prophet of the eighth century, for he shared Amos's passion for justice, Hosea's heart for compassion, and Isaiah's style for poetry. He denounced contemporary evils and promised a time of eventual restoration; he recognized the justice and mercy of Jehovah in present problems and future blessings; and he used moving poetry to depict the absolute holiness and majesty of the Lord. As a faithful disciple of Isaiah, he served as a noble servant and forceful prophet of the Lord becoming, as his name implies, "like unto the Lord."

Conclusion

Isaiah was not a solitary prophet. Other great prophets served before and during his ministry, influencing each other's ideas and messages. Together, these prophets warned Israel of her impending destruction and testified that the Lord would fulfill his plan with his children. Sharing contemporary problems and future hopes, each developed his own style to express the message he wanted the people to remember. By studying Isaiah in the context of these contemporary prophets, we can see that the Israelites received broad and varied messages that should have warned, taught, and comforted them. These eighth century B.C. prophets addressed the needs of their society as a body just as a group of any three or four apostles of this dispensation will speak out on a variety of themes, each in his own style; yet, together, they provide a comprehensive communication from the Lord to his children. Each of the ancient prophets (or modern apostles) usually stresses two or three main themes; by studying all of their writings, we can appreciate how God reveals many ideas through two or more witnesses.

The three prophets contemporary to Isaiah, Amos, Hosea, and Micah, not only addressed the same general themes, but they also borrowed ideas, words, and phrases from each other. Being led by the same source, they were able to share ideas and reinforce each other's message in the witnesses they provided the people.

In studying the writings of these prophets, it is important to remember that their messages were originally received and transmitted orally. They, therefore, preferred to give many short messages, which were often in allegorical and poetic form, so that people could more easily remember them. These messages were recorded on scrolls (or in books), and centuries later these writings were divided into the chapters and verses we have now. In the King James Version and many other translations, the verses are grouped by paragraphs (see markings) into units containing similar ideas and teachings. These paragraph and chapter divisions were established by medieval scribes who usually were able to distinguish and separate the individual messages and poems of the original prophetic writings. Thus, what had originally been three or four short discourses or poems of a prophet may now be found in a single chapter. The separate messages and literary units may still be distinguished if the reader carefully observes the paragraph markings and other features in the chapter.

The following suggestions will help you understand the many brief literary units found in most chapters:

After such an exercise as this, you will be able to glean new insights and meaning from the passages each time you return to them. You will also increase your appreciation of prophetic and poetic writing styles and enrich your understanding of the various levels of spiritual meaning. Then the scriptures will always be a fresh, rich source of literary beauty and spiritual inspiration for you.

The words of Amos, Hosea, and Micah provide a strong theological foundation for Isaiah's teachings. Through Amos we learn that the Lord always gives adequate warnings through many prophets, thus enabling his followers to avoid impending destruction. The book of Hosea on the other hand, reflects the Lord's love for his children even when they break their covenants, and it promises a restoration if they will return to their Master. Micah condemns social abuse, hypocrisy, and false prophesying, while extolling the Lord's majesty and promising divine forgiveness to those who truly repent. Taken together, these prophetic writings complement Isaiah's words and provide inspired commentary about his time. Understanding them will help us understand the great culminating work of Isaiah.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Basic principles and ordinances of the gospel (ch. 1). Preparation: A prophet is prepared in the premortal existence and during his mortal existence for his calling. (Isa. 46:1-5, 9-10; 40:3; TG "Foreordination.") Review the synopsis of Isaiah's chapters in this book to see which chapters contain messianic references. (Pp. 57-69.) Some fifty-three of the sixty-six chapters of the book of Isaiah, if they do not deal exclusively with the latter days, contain verses pointing to our time. (Those that do not are 7-9, 15-16, 20-21, 23, 36-39, and 46.) It would seem that the prophet spent more time envisioning our day than he did teaching in his own! Prophecies about the northern kingdom of Israel [^1] (in different chapters, especially 1-10). See Bible Dictionary
