Victor L. Ludlow, Isaiah: Prophet, Seer, and Poet ( 1982)

ISAIAH'S INVITATION TO THE GOSPEL ISAIAH 1

Isaiah's introductory message reaches out to all Israel, inviting all of God's children to obey the Lord. It warns the Israelites that they will be scattered if they disobey, but still promises them an opportunity for divine cleansing and blessing if they repent. In this first chapter, Isaiah teaches the basic principles and ordinances of the gospel and prophesies concerning apostasy, restoration, and judgment. Chapter 1 of Isaiah is, therefore, a fitting introduction to his book, because it provides a broad preview of his gospel insights and essential teachings. Chapter 1 is also typical of Isaiah's writing style and poetry.

Most scholars agree that this chapter is not the first prophecy received by Isaiah, but that it heads his writings because of its profound, clear message. A renowned Isaiah scholar describes it in this way:

The first chapter of the Book of Isaiah owes its position not to its date . . . but to its character. . . The prophecy . . . has been . . . placed in the front of the book, either by Isaiah himself or by an editor, as a general introduction to his collected pieces. . . . It is a clear, complete statement of the points which were at issue between the Lord and His own all the time Isaiah was the Lord's prophet. It is the most representative of Isaiah's prophecies, a summary, perhaps better than any other single chapter of the Old Testament, of the substance of prophetic doctrine, and a very vivid illustration of the prophetic spirit and method. (BOI 1:3-4.)

Latter-day Saint writers also compare Isaiah 1 with the first section of the Doctrines and Covenants, since this preface to modern scripture was received later in Joseph Smith's ministry, but was placed by him at the head of his revelations. Latter-day Saint scholar Sidney B. Sperry says of the first chapter of Isaiah, "It is one of the finest specimens of prophetic oratory in the Old Testament." (VIP, p. 20.)

The Great Arraignment

The first chapter of Isaiah is often called the "Great Arraignment," because it takes the form of a court scene with Jehovah as the plaintiff and judge, Israel as the defendant, Isaiah as an observer and occasional interlocutor, and heaven and earth as the witnesses. After a prologue (Isa. 1:1) comes the court scene, which can be outlined as follows:

Accusation: The Lord's charge of sin and sickness throughout Israel is given (vs. 2-6).

Immediate judgments: Physical and spiritual consequences are coming upon Israel because the people have not obeyed the Lord (7-15).

Promise of pardon: Conditions of cleansing, repentance, and blessing are presented (16-20).

Final sentencing: The Lord will purge the wicked and redeem the righteous through apostasy, restoration, and judgment (21-31).

Prologue (v. 1)

1 The prophecies of Isaiah son of Amoz, who prophesied concerning Judah and Jerusalem in the reigns of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah. (NJV)

The first verse serves as a simple prose introduction to the entire book of Isaiah. Since most ancient Hebrew scripture was written on parchment scrolls, an introduction like this was valuable so that a reader would not have to unroll the entire scroll in order to identify its author and subject matter. This short verse contains all the essential identifying information: the type of writing ("vision," KJV, or "prophecies," NJV), the author or source of the material (Isaiah), the primary subject matter (Judah and Jerusalem), and the period of composition (c. 750-690 B.C., during the reigns of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah).

Accusation (vs. 2-6)

Beginning with verse 2, the rest of chapter 1 is written in poetic form rather than prose. The first few verses contain the Lord's charge against Israel as he decries her wickedness and sickness:

For the Lord has spoken:

"I reared children and brought them up—

And they have rebelled against Me!

An ass its master's crib:

Israel does not know,

My people takes no thought."

People laden with iniquity!

Brood of evildoers!

Depraved children!

They have foresaken the Lord,

Spurned the Holy One of Israel,

Turned their backs (on Him).

That you continue to offend?

Every head is ailing,

And every heart is sick.

No spot is sound:

All bruises, and welts,

And festering sores—

Not pressed out, not bound up,

Not softened with oil. (NJV)

The beginning half of verse 2 contains two strong exhortations to Isaiah's audience. It begins with the command to "hear!" The Hebrew word (shim'u) is in the imperative form, meaning that the Lord insists that Isaiah's listeners or readers pay attention. The word also has the connotation of "obeying" or "following," in the sense of keeping the commandments. An alternate translation of this word is "give heed" or "hearken to act." Thus, Isaiah is not just politely asking for attention but is rather commanding adherence to his words.

The beginning phrase of verse 2 echoes the words of Moses as he begins the great psalm that was his last mortal discourse: "Give ear, O ye heavens, and I will speak; and hear, O earth, the words of my mouth." (Deut. 32:1; compare Deut. 31:28.) Moses' last sermon deals with God's greatness, his choice of Israel as his covenant people, Israel's rebellion, and God's final sovereignty over Israel and all nations. Isaiah expresses those same ideas and begins this chapter with a similar exhortation, indicating his familiarity with Moses' sermon. These words also serve as a reminder to Israel of the solemn covenants their ancestors made with the Lord before they entered the Promised Land. As in the past, willful disobedience to this covenant is sure to result in utter destruction. (See Deut. 4:25-26.)

Isaiah appropriately builds upon the Israelite covenant and the words of Deuteronomy, for he was the most profound prophet and teacher of Israel since Moses. Living halfway between the time of Moses and that of Christ, Isaiah forms a bridge between these two servants of Israel as he both testifies of the continued validity of Moses' dispensation and prophesies the promised redemption of Christ's. Isaiah's use of Mosaic phraseology and themes places him in the mainstream of Israel's prophetic tradition with the mantle of Moses resting firmly on his shoulders.

The second phrase of verse 2, "For the Lord has spoken," also confirms Isaiah's prophetic calling. Isaiah wants his listeners to know that he is not giving his own ideas or philosophy, but the words of the Lord. This phrase also catches his listeners' attention and alerts them to an important message to follow. In Isaiah (or any of the scriptures), phrases like "the Lord has spoken," and "hear the word of the Lord," "the mouth of the Lord has spoken," and "thus saith the Lord" are used as flags to attract our attention and to testify concerning the Lord's message. After using such a phrase in his opening exhortation, Isaiah is now ready to deliver the Lord's word to Israel.

The remainder of verse 2 and all of verse 3 testify that God's children have rebelled against their Lord and are worthy of death, the penalty allowed under Mosaic law for the deliberate disobedience by children. (Ex. 21:15, 17.) The Israelites have become less obedient than animals, who at least recognize their masters.

Verse 4 seems to warn of the dangers of disobedience, for it begins with the Hebrew exclamation hoy, which can be rendered simply as "ah!" although a more complete derivative would be "shame" or "alas." The Lord then elaborates upon Israel's corruption in a fourfold denouncement that describes four types of wickedness (sin, iniquity, evildoing, and depravity or corruption) among four groups (nation, people, brood or seed, and children). The description of the last group (depraved or corrupt children) demonstrates the seriousness of Israel's wickedness, for even her children are being taught to do evil.

In verses 5 and 6, the people contract sickness and open sores, which might be physical but are probably spiritual, because they result from the people's continued rebellion against the Lord. The sickness of the "head" and "heart" is most serious, because these organs are necessary both for physical health and for spiritual sensitivity. Intellectual and emotional faith, both necessary for true religious devotion, stem from the head and heart, respectively.

Sometimes a disease lies dormant within the body for a time, later manifesting itself through external symptoms like the open sores of verse 6. These festering wounds could be literal or figurative, representing either the nation's inability to care for her wounds in a time of chaos (or apathy), or her refusal to acknowledge her sins and heal herself spiritually. The verse might easily refer to both.

Immediate Judgments (vs. 7-15)

After presenting the Lord's accusation and opening remarks, Isaiah is ready to detail the imminent catastrophes coming upon Israel. These include desolation in the land, the loss of many people, and rejection by the Lord, as described in the following verses:

Your cities burnt down;

Before your eyes, the yield of your soil

Is consumed by strangers—

A wasteland as overthrown by strangers!

Like a booth in a vineyard

Like a hut in a cucumber field,

Like a city beleaguered.

Left us some survivors,

We should be like Sodom,

Another Gomorrah.

You chieftains of Sodom;

Give ear to our God's instruction,

You folk, of Gomorrah!

Says the Lord,

"I am sated with burnt offerings of rams,

And suet of fatlings,

And blood of bulls;

And I have no delight

In lambs and he-goats.

Who asked that of you?

Trample My courts

No more

Incense is offensive to Me.

New moon and sabbath,

Proclaiming of solemnities,

Assemblies with iniquity,

I cannot abide.

Fill Me with loathing;

They are become a burden to Me,

I cannot endure them.

I will turn My eyes away from you;

Though you pray at length,

I will not listen.

Your hands are stained with crime. (NJV)

Verses 7-9 detail the destruction throughout the land and among the people. As a punishment for wickedness, strangers (foreigners or Gentiles) will occupy the land, and the fruits of the labor of Israelite hands will be consumed by strangers. The centuries Israel has spent developing the promised land will yield her nothing. This devastation came upon Israel and Judah during Isaiah's lifetime when the Assyrians destroyed Israel, took many captives, and repeatedly plundered Judah.

The imagery in verse 8 graphically portrays the extent of Israel's desolation. Isaiah emphasizes her condition through parallel phrases as he declares that fair Zion is left like a booth in a vineyard or a hut in the fields. During Isaiah's time, booths and huts were a common part of the agricultural landscape. Most Israelites lived in towns, villages, and fortified cities, while their fields and orchards lay among the valleys and surrounding hillsides. Usually the people would walk to and from the fields each day, but during the hectic harvest season, such traveling wasted precious daylight working hours. In addition, since the entire family was needed for a full day's work to gather, sort, dry, and store the harvested fruits and grains, they spent the season living in a hut, shack, or simple cottage in their fields. Huts were also available for other workers and for the watchmen who protected the harvest from straying livestock and thieves in the night.

When Isaiah prophesies that Zion will be left as a hut or lodge in the field, then, he is warning of a loss of people and productivity. This loss will be so great that only the empty huts and booths will remain, desolate reminders of former prosperity. They will serve as memorials of how the Lord once blessed Israel in the land but now curses her.

Verse 9 illustrates how close Israel comes to complete annihilation; if it were not for the Lord's intervention, she would be completely obliterated, like Sodom and Gomorrah. To compare Jerusalem with Sodom and Gomorrah was a dreadful indictment against Judah, and indicates the extremely depraved condition into which many Israelites had fallen.

Verses 10-15 demonstrate the complete division between Israel and the Lord. He rejects her external religious acts (sacrifices, festivals, and prayers) because she has rejected his counsel and stained her hands with sin. Actually, the Israelites were in many ways worse than the people of Sodom and Gomorrah, who were openly and blatantly wicked, while the Israelites hid their sins behind superficial symbols of religious devotion.

The most important theme of the Lord's pronouncement in chapter 1 is in verses 10-12. Note the verbal flags that direct attention toward this important section: "hear the word of the Lord," "give ear unto the law of our God," and, "saith the Lord." The passage between these declarations is a question to Israel from the Lord: "To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me?" (KJV), or "What need have I of all your sacrifices?" (NJV). While a superficial reading of this passage may suggest the possibility that God is revoking his law of animal sacrifice, a more careful study reveals that God is not doing away with sacrifices but is rather rejecting the many perfunctory offerings of the wicked Israelites. He is weary of external signs—the smoke, fat, and blood of their sacrifices—that are not accompanied by true internal religious devotion.

Israelites, hearing these words of Isaiah, might have reflected upon two other occasions in their history when the Lord rejected burnt offerings. At the beginning of human history, God rejected Cain's sacrifices because Cain performed them only after Satan commanded him to. (Moses 5:18, 21.) Later in Israelite history, God rejected King Saul's offerings because he disobeyed the Lord by returning with large flocks captured from the Amalikites. (1 Sam. 15:21.) In each case, the Lord did not object to the law of sacrifice per se, but rather to the violation of the law of obedience, which must always precede an acceptable sacrifice. (1 Sam. 15:22.)

Latter-day Saints are also taught the relationship between these two laws, obedience and sacrifice.

In summary, verses 10-12 teach that though people may keep the letter of the law, thinking that pious acts alone will bring salvation, the Lord requires much more than mere outward performance. He wants internal commitment and integrity to precede the external ordinances. (See Moro. 7:5-11.) And knowing that the Israelites themselves recognize their hypocrisy, he asks them why they have assembled unrighteously before him in his temple courts. Don't they know better?

In reviewing the physical and spiritual judgments to come upon Israel, Isaiah is not just trying to scare the people into submission to the Lord. He is reminding them of their sacred covenants with God and their promises to obey him. If the people will listen to the promptings of the Spirit, they will remember the righteous attitudes that are expected of them before they can worthily appear at the Lord's temple courtyards with their sacrifices.

Promise of Pardon (vs. 16-20)

In the next five verses, God demonstrates his love for his children in a promise of cleansing, forgiveness, and blessing extended to Israel:

Put your evil doings

Away from My sight.

Cease to do evil;

Devote yourselves to justice;

Aid the wronged.

Uphold the rights of the orphans;

Defend the cause of the widow.

"Be your sins like crimson,

They can turn snow-white;

Be they red as dyed wool,

They can become like fleece."

You will eat the good things of the earth;

You will be devoured (by) the sword.—

For it was the Lord who spoke. (NJV)

Verse 16 is Isaiah's admonition to repent and be baptized. His terminology seems somewhat unfamiliar to us because some modern religious terms did not exist in the ancient Hebrew vocabulary. For example, baptism is derived from a Greek word, but the Greek civilization did not influence the Hebrew until centuries after Isaiah's time. Therefore, when Isaiah says "wash yourself," he could mean either a figurative cleansing or a literal washing, such as baptism. His references to repentance in verse 16, on the other hand, are more straightforward, suggesting that the washing he advocates is more spiritual than physical. His admonition continues in verse 17, as the people are told to use their heads (learning) and hearts (justice) for noble purposes. This is a direct contrast to the diseased heads and hearts of verse 5.

The Lord's beautiful and oft-quoted promise of forgiveness is found in verse 18. Although Israel may be stained red with sin, she can become pure white. Isaiah's use of these particular contrasting colors enriches the imagery. Where we might use black and white, he uses red and white to symbolize the purification process brought about by the cleansing blood of Christ's atonement. Blood plays an intrinsic part in the Mosaic law, which was instituted to prepare the Israelites for their Redeemer. (See Lev. 8:30; Isa. 63:3; Morm. 9:6.) Note how in Isaiah 1:16-18 acts of repentance and washing (or baptism) precede forgiveness. (See Moses 5:6-8; 2 Ne. 31:13, 17-18.)

Isaiah concludes this section with a twofold promise: the people will be either blessed in the land if they give heed to the Lord's word or destroyed if they rebel against him. The Doctrine and Covenants contains similar promises. (See D&C 59:1-3, 16-19; 64:34-38.)

Although the Lord warns the Israelites of some immediate consequences of their wickedness, he still offers a promise of cleansing, forgiveness, and blessing if the people will recognize and obey him as the Lord of this earth (compare v. 19 with v. 3). This promised pardon is conditional upon their attitude and actions, however. But as the next verses indicate, Israel does not change her behavior, becoming instead even further entrenched in apostasy and wickedness.

Final Sentencing (vs. 21-31)

Structurally, the last section of chapter 1 can stand alone as an independent pronouncement. The Lord first addresses a very wicked Jerusalem, threatening vengeance upon those who become his enemies. He then foretells a purging and a restoration of Zion, and concludes by prophesying the destruction of the wicked. This pronouncement is divided into three segments in the King James Version (note the markings) which follow a chiastic pattern of negative-positive-negative, that is: warning first of wickedness and vengeance (vs. 21-24), then promising cleansing and redemption (vs. 25-27), and finally burning the wicked and the worldly (vs. 28-31). The primary themes of these three segments also follow the common and easily remembered pattern of apostasy-restoration-judgment. These three segments of the pronouncement will be discussed in turn.

Apostasy (vs. 21-24)

The faithful city

That was filled with justice,

Where righteousness dwelt—

But now murderers.

Your wine is cut with water.

And cronies of thieves,

Every one avid for presents

and greedy for gifts;

They do not judge the case of the orphan,

And the widow's cause never reaches them.

Of the Sovereign, the Lord of Hosts,

The Mighty One of Israel:

"Ah, I will get satisfaction from My foes;

I will wreak vengeance on My enemies!" (NJV)

The Israelite society has become so wicked that Jerusalem is compared to a harlot, quite a contrast from the "daughter of Zion" in verse 8. From verses 21-24, it is obvious that the people of Jerusalem do not heed Isaiah's admonition to repent. Consequently, they find themselves out of favor with God and subject to his wrath. Their sins include adultery, murder, graft (adulterating the silver with alloys), deception (watering the wine), [^1] rebellion, thievery, corruption (accepting bribes), and injustice (oppressing the needy). Small wonder, then, that they should be counted as the Lord's enemies and worthy of his vengeance (v. 24).

One immediate fulfillment of this prophecy upon Israel was the invasion by Assyria and the forced resettlement of many Israelites in the far reaches of the Assyrian Empire. Also, according to Oliver Cowdery, the angel Moroni quoted these verses to Joseph Smith and told him that they referred to the Ten Tribes, who were scattered because of their apostasy. Moroni indicated that the next verses predict a future restoration of Israel. (Messenger and Advocate, Apr. 1835, p. 110.)

Restoration (vs. 25-27)

And smelt out your dross as with lye,

And remove all your slag:

And your counselors as of yore.

After that you shall be called

City of Righteousness, Faithful City."

Her repentant ones, in the retribution. (NJV)

After purging the imperfections of her inhabitants, the Lord will restore Jerusalem as a righteous city with trustworthy leaders. And as promised in verse 27, he will save Zion with justice and the repentant converts with retribution (or righteousness, KJV). It will be a marvelous time when the Lord and his people (Zion, or the pure in heart) will be established in judgment and righteousness upon the earth. It will be a time of peace and joy for many, though some will instead suffer the consequences described by Isaiah in the last verses of chapter 1.

Judgment (vs. 28-31)

And those who forsake the Lord shall perish.

Because of the terebinths you desired,

And you shall be confounded

Because of the gardens you coveted.

Wilted of leaf,

And like a garden

That has no water,

And he who amassed it a spark;

And the two shall burn together,

With none to quench. (NJV)

In verse 28 Isaiah describes an event before the second coming of Christ when the wicked must be separated from the righteous, the tares from the wheat, and be consumed. (See Matt. 13:30.)

As verse 29 indicates, the sinners will be ashamed of the trees and gardens they coveted. The oaks (or terebinths) and gardens might represent either the worldly acquisition of property or idolatrous nature worship—sinners in groves of trees. The Canaanites usually worshipped their pagan idols in the groves and on the high places, and they even considered some trees sacred. [^2] Isaiah foretells that the wicked will be like trees and gardens that wither away (v. 30).

Isaiah concludes his pronouncement in verses 28-31 by warning of consuming fire. The original Hebrew does not clearly define exactly who will be burned by this fire, but the King James Version implies that the powerful idol worshippers ("the strong") along with the makers of idols ("the maker of it") will be like tow (or kindling), and a spark will ignite one and it will consume the other with fire. The New Jerusalem Version (quoted above) suggests another interpretation. "Stored wealth" (worldly possessions or idols) and its owners (materialistic individuals or idol worshippers) will destroy each other. In either case, idolatrous practices and selfishness will bring the downfall of those who seek after idols and worldly treasures. The fire could be a literal burning on earth or a figurative fire in the spirit, representing either the consuming fire of the Lord's glory (D&C 29:12, 21; 63:34) or the sufferings of the wicked in the fires of hell (D&C 29:29; 63:54).

As illustrated above, numerous possibilities of meaning can make comprehension of this important first chapter a challenge. In order to improve the reader's understanding of how Isaiah's words and ideas are organized, a detailed outline of chapter 1 is given below. Both major segments of the chapter, the introductory discourse (vs. 2-20) and the pronouncement upon Israel (vs. 21-31), are presented in a chiastic pattern of introverted parallelism.

A. Introductory discourse (vs. 2-20)

a. The Lord speaks—Israel has rebelled (2)

b. Animals know their master's crib (food supply) (3)

c. Sinful people! (4)

d. People stricken—every head and heart sick (5)

e. Open sores everywhere are not cared for (6)

f. Strangers consume the land (labor of hands yields nothing) (7)

g. Zion is desolate after the harvest (8)

h. People are like Sodom and Gomorrah (blatant wickedness) (9)

i. Hear the word of the Lord (10)

Pivot point: For what purpose are your sacrifices?

Obedience is better than sacrifice! (See 1 Sam. 15:22.) (11)

i'. Who asked you to come to the Lord? (Haven't you heard?) (12)

h'. The Lord rejects sabbaths, religious assemblies (hiding wickedness) (13)

g'. No more harvest feasts accepted by the Lord (14)

f'. Sinful hands raised in prayer bring no results (15)

e'. People wash themselves clean (16)

d'. Noble learning (head) and justice (heart)—oppression ended (17)

c'. Promise of forgiveness to people (18)

b'. If people follow God, they will eat food of the earth (19)

a'. Rebellious Israel will be devoured—the Lord has spoken (20)

B. Pronouncement upon Israel (21-31)

u. Jerusalem and wickedness together (21)

v. Watered wine (22)

w. Greed for wealth (23)

x. The Lord will send vengeance on his enemies (24)

y. Wickedness will be purged out (25)

Pivot point: The LORD will restore proper leaders

God will restore to righteousness! (See Jer. 33:7-9.)

z. Jerusalem will be the faithful city again (26)

y'. Repentant ones will be redeemed (27)

x'. The Lord will destroy sinners (28)

w'. Coveting for property (29)

v'. Gardens without water (30)

u'. Selfish ones and their wealth burn together (31)

Though there are many productive ways to study the individual verses and smaller segments of prophetic writings, one helpful technique is to compare parallel verses on opposite sides of a chiasmus, that is, to match a (v. 2) with a' (v. 20), (v. 3) with b' (v. 19), c (v. 4) with c' (v. 18), and so on.

Remember that two parallel verses usually contain similar ideas or concepts, and that sometimes words are even repeated. For example, in verses 2 and 20 of the King James Version (a and a' in the outline above) three words are repeated: "spoken," "Lord," and "rebel." You will not find any two of these words, let alone all three of them, together in any other verse of chapter 1. Another example: the word "water" appears only twice in the chapter, in parallel verses 22 and 30 (v and v' in the outline).

Some parallelisms can be translated only subtly and indirectly. For example, in verses 6 and 17 (e and e'), the first verse in the parallelism mentions open sores on the body, and its corollary commands the people to clean themselves, which is an obvious parallelism. However, verse 17 then goes on to admonish the people to repent and cease to do evil, to clean themselves spiritually as well as physically. Looking back at verse 6, one might conjecture that the open sores are not just physical, but might also be outward manifestations of spiritual ailments. Thus, parallel structures expand and clarify one another.

Verses 7 and 15 (f and f') comprise another indirect parallelism. Verse 7 mentions strangers bringing physical destruction upon the land, while verse 15, seemingly unrelated, describes the Lord turning away from the people. By carefully comparing the verses in their contexts and with each other, though, we realize that the fruits of sin result ultimately in both physical and spiritual desolation. Although the invasion of verse 7 endangers lives and brings destruction, the spiritual death described in verse 15 is even more serious. Also, in comparing the two verses, we see in verse 7 that centuries of residence and manual labor in the land will not profit the Israelites, for strangers will enjoy the fruits of their labors (or work of their hands). Likewise, their hands raised in prayer (v. 15) bring no relief, for the Lord will not answer them because of their wickedness. Although the parallelism of these two verses is neither simple nor straightforward, a little study and reflection can produce helpful comparative insights.

Three major gospel themes are intertwined within chapter 1 of Isaiah.

First, Isaiah teaches the basic principles and ordinances of the gospel. Granted, he uses distinctive terminology that often differs from ours today, but he teaches the same concepts. For example, he uses words like "trust," "know," and "obey" to teach faith in the Lord (vs. 2, 10, 19-20). Concerning repentance, he talks about "returning" or "turning back to the Lord" and "ceasing to do evil" (vs. 16, 18, and 27). "Washing" is his word for baptism (v. 16). And the gift of the Holy Ghost is literally "listening to the Lord" or "hearing the word" (vs. 2 and 10). He also admonishes Israel to follow some basic gospel teachings, such as obedience and sacrifice (v. 11), charity (v. 17), morality (vs. 4, 18), and commitment (v. 19). Other fundamental gospel concepts can also be identified in the first chapter of Isaiah through careful reading and study.

Isaiah develops a second theme throughout chapter 1, which encompasses the opposing verities of good and evil, obedience and rebellion, and blessing and punishment. He likes to stress the opposites incorporated within the laws of justice and mercy. For example, he says that if we agree with the Lord and obey, we will be blessed, but if we disagree, we will be destroyed (see vs. 19-20). This theme will be amplified in Isaiah's later chapters.

The third theme taught by Isaiah in chapter 1 concerns the changing relationship between the children of men and their Lord. The Israelites go through different phases as they fulfill the Lord's plan for them—covenant-making, apostasy, restoration, and final judgment. All of these concepts are presented in chapter 1 and elaborated upon in following chapters.

In short, while the first chapter of Isaiah may appear initially to be just a simple introduction, it contains many profound gospel themes, which are expressed in a structured, elaborate, poetic style. This single chapter deserves hours of study so that its message can be fully comprehended; it will edify and inspire those who read, study, ponder, and pray about it.

SCRIPTURAL NOTES AND COMMENTARY

Isaiah 1:29: "Oak" or "Terebinth" trees

The "oaks" mentioned in verses 29 and 30 of the King James Version are usually identified as "terebinth" trees in modern translations. (See footnote 29a.)

The terebinth is common in the eastern Mediterranean area and is used in landscaping either as a decorative windbreak or sunshield. It also yields a resinous sap from which turpentine is derived. Groves of terebinths were also used in pagan idol worship because, among other reasons, the pagans considered these evergreen trees to represent perpetual renewal and fertility. Thus, in Isaiah, groves of trees were often synonymous with idolatry.

Therefore, when Isaiah says that the Israelites covet the terebinths, he is referring to either their coveting and yearning to have their yards and estates landscaped with groves of terebinths, or their desiring to use terebinths for places of idol worship. In either case, their longing for materialism or idolatry will result in drought and death, as seen in verse 30.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The Jews are scattered and a Messiah is promised. (See 1 Ne. 11.) See DWW, p. 337, where, in the dedicatory prayer of the Salt Lake Temple, President Woodruff mentions fulfillment of Isaiah's prophecy. A similar identification was made during the dedication of the Idaho Falls Temple. (Improvement Era, Oct. 1945, p. 564.)
[^2] Now it will come about that A remnant is destroyed, but its records will speak from the dust. (See 1 Ne. 12-13.) Some examples: John Taylor (JD 6:167; 11:345; 21:32; 23:333), Joseph Fielding Smith (CHMR 4:129-30), Harold B. Lee (CR Oct. 1945, p. 47; Apr. 1966, p. 68; Oct. 1972, p. 63; Apr. 1973, p. 5), Orson Pratt (JD 14:350; Ensign, Nov. 1971, p. 14), LeGrand Richards (CR Oct. 1962, p. 109; Apr. 1967, p. 22; Oct. 1970, pp. 61-62; Apr. 1971, p. 143; Oct. 1975, p. 77), and Bruce R. McConkie (CR Oct. 1967, p. 43; MD pp. 518, 690, 691, 781, 855).
