Victor L. Ludlow, Isaiah: Prophet, Seer, and Poet ( 1982)

THE MOUNTAIN OF THE LORD'S HOUSE IN ZION ISAIAH 2

The second chapter of Isaiah is significant for a number of reasons: it contains many prophecies of the last days and the Second Coming; it is quoted in the Book of Mormon with important changes in the text; and it introduces a great prophetic discourse, which continues into chapters 3 and 4.

Chapter 2 contains a vision of the future (vs. 2-4) and a rebuke with a promise of judgment (vs. 5-22). It promises an attainable ideal while chastising the present wickedness of the people. Using directional imagery, it contains a call to Israel to "come down" from the false and worldly heights of men and to "come up" to Zion, the mountain of the Lord. Indeed, the contrast between the "top of the mountains" (v. 2), where the Lord's house will be established as a center of worship and learning, and the "tops of the jagged rocks" (v. 21), where the idolators will flee for safety, reveals the seeming similarity and yet ultimate distinction between God's eternal glory and the world's vain and transitory pomp.

The chapter begins with a brief introduction:

2 The word which Isaiah the son of Amoz saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem. (NAS)

One interesting point in this verse is that Isaiah "saw" the word he delivered. It is difficult to know how he "saw the word," whether he saw it written out on an actual scroll or in a vision of a heavenly book (as Lehi did; 1 Ne. 1:11-14).

A Vision of "the Mountain of the Lord's House" (vs. 2-4)

Interestingly, the first words Isaiah records in verses 2-4 of chapter 2 are also found with only slight variations in Micah 4:1-4. It may be that Isaiah "saw" the words of Micah or that he "saw" his own vision and Micah borrowed his words. Or, both prophets may have read the prophecy of some earlier prophet. Scholars differ in their opinions on which of these possibilities best explains the textual similarities. There is yet a fourth possibility, however, that seems plausible, particularly to Latter-day Saints: Isaiah and Micah, by virtue of their prophetic callings, each "saw" the same heavenly vision and were inspired to record it in essentially the same words. Since Isaiah and Micah were contemporaries dealing with the same people and problems, it seems likely that they would share similar spiritual manifestations. Precedents for this explanation exist elsewhere in the scriptures, because several prophets far distant from each other have recorded the same inspired messages: compare the "charity" sermon in 1 Corinthians 13 with Moroni 7, and the discourse on gifts of the Spirit in 1 Corinthians 12 with Moroni 10 and Doctrines and Covenants section 46. Certainly it is possible for two prophets to use the same vocabulary in recording revelations if, as the Lord said, "these words are not of men, nor of man, but of me." (D&C 18:34.)

The important point here is that these verses have authority, regardless of their authorship. They are authentic and prophetic, and carry a beautiful message concerning the Lord's kingdom in the last days:

In the last days,

The mountain of the house of the LORD

Will be established as the chief of the mountains,

And will be raised above the hills;

And all the nations will stream to it.

"Come, let us go up to the mountain of the LORD,

That He may teach us concerning His ways,

And that we may walk in His paths."

For the law will go forth from Zion,

And the word of the LORD from Jerusalem.

And will render decisions for many peoples;

And they will hammer their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning hooks.

Nation will not lift up sword against nation,

And never again will they learn war. (NAS)

The varieties of interpretation of these verses usually depend upon the location and identification given to the "mountain of the Lord's house" (KJV) described in verse 2. Though the fulfillment of the prophecy is clearly set in "the last days," the implication is that a mountain of the Lord has been established before on this earth. (For example, see Ex. 3:1; Moses 7:2-3.)

A mountain is, both literally and symbolically, the highest reach of the earth toward heaven. As Latter-day Saints draw closer to heaven during their worship services, especially those conducted in the temples of the Lord, they are reaching new "mountains" or heights of spiritual growth. Modern temples have been erected, to which many people from all nations flow to learn the ways of the Lord; temples serve in many ways as "mountains of the Lord." The Salt Lake Temple, constructed of granite from the surrounding mountains, could very properly be termed "the mountain of the Lord's house" or, in other words, the Lord's house made of mountain. [^1]

The Kirtland Temple serves as a type, as does the Salt Lake Temple, of the last great temple to be built in Jackson County, Missouri (D&C 84:2-4; 110:9) when, in the last days, the Jews flee to the "mountain of the Lord's house" while the Gentiles flee to Zion. This promise suggests that the temples to be built in the last days in both Old and New Jerusalem will serve as the Lord's "holy mountains." (See D&C 133:12-13.) In short, all temples stand as a type of the paradise lost in this world, of the place of contact between heaven and earth, and of the final temple that this earth will become—the abode of the Father and the Son and their sanctified ones.

Numerous prophets and apostles of this dispensation have quoted verses 2-4 of Isaiah and related how the prophecy has been fulfilled by the Latter-day Saints going to the Rocky Mountains, building temples, sending out missionaries, gathering converts, conducting general conference sessions, and presiding over the Lord's kingdom. [^2]

Jewish readers of these verses will, of course, find ready application of the ideas to themselves as a people. In fact, the possibility of a double application is even suggested in the Doctrine and Covenants, where the Lord commands, "Let them who be of Judah flee into Jerusalem unto the mountain of the Lord's house." (D&C 133:13, italics added.)

Another more liberal application would even identify the "mountain of the Lord's house" with the entire earth. The blessings described would then portray the gospel going to all the Lord's children in their individual nations. It seems that the symbolism of these verses can take on a broader meaning than one might initially think.

In verse 3, Isaiah promises that the law will go out of Zion and that the Lord's word will go out of Jerusalem. Realizing that most of Isaiah's writings, including this verse, are written in poetic parallelism, we readily see some parallels in the structure of Isaiah's promise:

Object Place

The law Zion

The Lord's word Jerusalem

Before one applies these parallels to his own people, especially if he is inclined to believe that they apply only to his group, he should first go beyond recognizing parallelism to ask: "What type of parallelism is this?"

If the two phrases are synonymous, and if the reader assigns narrow definitions to the terms, he might assume that Isaiah's words are applicable only to him and his people. For example, a Latter-day Saint might consider both "Zion" and "Jerusalem" to mean "America," while a Jew would believe both terms to mean "Israel." However, if the reader accepts a wider range of possibilities, he can apply this prophecy to other situations as well. He would probably consider the phrases to be composite and consider that "Zion" and "Jerusalem" could have a broad range of possible applications.

In summary, there is nothing wrong in taking the words of a prophet and seeing how they can be applied to oneself and one's people. Indeed, one of the most extensive prophetic commentators on Isaiah, Nephi, specifically states that one of his primary techniques for teaching Isaiah included "likening" or applying Isaiah's message to his own people. (2 Ne. 11:2, 8.) One of the apostles from this dispensation, LeGrand Richards, is also noted for his lively and creative applications of Isaiah's words to contemporary Latter-day Saint events.

On the other hand, one should not maintain an extremely narrow view of the meaning of Isaiah's words. Until the Lord or his prophets say that "this way and this way only is how Isaiah is to be understood," readers of Isaiah should seek application of his words both to their own lives and to other people and situations as well.

A Rebuke of the Proud, Worldly Idolators (vs. 5-22)

Beginning in verse 5, Isaiah's attention shifts from the future back to his own people. He rebukes them for their pride and idolatry and warns of the sure judgment of the Lord. (Since there are a number of significant changes in these verses as quoted in the Book of Mormon, the 2 Nephi 12 changes and additions will be included in this text within parentheses as the New American Standard translation is quoted.) While reading Isaiah's rebuke, notice that some words such as "gold," "silver," "idols," "proud," "humbled," "rocks," and "holes" are often repeated. Also recognize that three major themes are repeatedly stressed: the people's worldliness, the Lord's vengeance, and the wicked's humility and fear. The first theme is stressed in these verses:

(yea, come, for ye have all gone astray, every one to his wicked ways.)

Because they are filled with influences from the east,

And they (hearken unto) soothsayers like the Philistines,

And they strike bargains with the children of foreigners.

And there is no end to their treasures;

Their land has also been filled with horses,

And there is no end to their chariots.

They worship the work of their hands,

That which their fingers have made. (NAS)

These verses provide quite a contrast from the first verses of the chapter: instead of the word of the Lord going from Jerusalem to the entire earth (v. 3), worldly paganism comes to the house of Jacob (v. 6); instead of Israel being the light of the world, she is darkened with idolatry and worldliness (vs. 5-8). (See TG "Light," "Israel, Mission of.")

Beginning in verse 9, Isaiah introduces the two other major themes in this pronouncement—the Lord's impending judgment and the people's humility and fear. Note particularly in verse 9 how the Book of Mormon clarifies what would otherwise be a very confusing verse. The Old Testament seems to suggest that one should not forgive those who repent and humble themselves. The account in 2 Nephi, on the other hand, explains that the people did not humble themselves, and therefore were not forgiven. These wicked people are destined to experience the following:

And the man of importance has (not) been abased,

(therefore) do not forgive them.

(O ye wicked ones,) the terror of the LORD and His majesty (shall smite thee.)

And the loftiness of man will be humbled,

And the LORD alone will be exalted in that day. (NAS)

Isaiah next gives a list of those with high, proud, and worldly aspirations whom the Lord will bring down:

Against everyone who is proud and lofty,

And against everyone who is lifted up,

That he may be abased.

Against all the oaks of Bashan.

Against all the hills (and upon all the nations) that are lifted up,

Against every fortified wall,

And against all the beautiful craft. (NAS)

The Book of Mormon adds five phrases in these few verses, four of which stress the universality of the judgment that will come upon "all nations" and "every people," even the high and lofty ones (the proud) as represented by tall trees, mountains, and towers (vs. 12-15). The fifth addition in verse 16 is also found in the early Greek version of the Old Testament, the Septuagint or LXX. (See BD "Septuagint.") The sixteenth verse in 2 Nephi 12 consists of three phrases, two of which are found in both the Septuagint and the Hebrew Masoretic text (which the KJV followed; see BD "Masoretic text"). However, the same two phrases are not in both the Greek and Hebrew texts. The structure of the three versions can be shown as follows:

Three phrases of in KJV in Septuagint in B of M

verse 16

And upon all the - + +

ships of the sea

And upon all the ships + - +

of Tarshish

And upon all pleasant + + +

ships

Thus, it appears that the Book of Mormon contains the most complete retention of the original structure of this verse. Since the prophet Joseph Smith did not know Greek, and since there is no evidence that he had access to a copy of the Septuagint when he completed his Book of Mormon translation in 1829, this addition supports the fact that Joseph Smith translated the Isaiah portion in the Book of Mormon from a more authentic ancient text. [^3]

Verses 12-16 emphasize the status symbols of ancient times. The "cedars of Lebanon"—symbols of strength, splendor, and glory (v. 13)—provided beautiful, fragrant wood for major Israelite buildings such as Solomon's Temple. (IDB 1:545.) The "oaks of Bashan" (v. 13) came from the wooded areas east of the Sea of Galilee and were an important local source of hardwood, often a rare commodity in Palestine. The high mountains with their surrounding hills (v. 14) and the high towers with their surrounding walls (v. 15) represent man's false trust in natural and man-made defenses. The "ships of the sea" (v. 16) represent the people's commercial enterprises, especially the "ships of Tarshish," which were noted for their ability to travel long distances, their strength as war vessels, and their large storage capacity as commercial carriers. (IB 5:186; IDB 4:333, 517-18.) The "beautiful craft" (NAS) or "pleasant pictures" (KJV, v. 16) were apparently the pleasure crafts or ships in which the wealthy traveled throughout the Mediterranean. Isaiah prophesies that the Lord will abase all these superficial symbols of wealth and power.

In verses 17-18, Isaiah directs his attention to the people who have relied upon these worldly symbols. Echoing verses 9-11, he foretells that the proud will be humbled and that their idols will vanish in the presence of the Lord:

And the loftiness of men will be abased,

And the LORD alone will be exalted in that day.

And into holes of the ground

(For) the terror of the LORD (shall come upon them),

And the splendor of His majesty (shall smite them),

When He arises to make the earth tremble. (NAS)

Isaiah concludes his pronouncement with another description of the final fate of the wicked and their idols when the Lord comes:

Their idols of silver and their idols of gold,

Which they made for themselves to worship,

(For) the terror of the Lord (shall come upon them), and the splendor of His majesty (shall smite them),

When he arises to make the earth tremble.

For why should he be esteemed? (NAS)

The imagery of verse 20 is striking: the people will throw their gold and silver idols to moles and bats, animals who are blind from living so long in darkness. The irony of this is that people who understood the material value of the precious metals, and should also have seen the spiritual impotence of the idols, will throw these precious items to animals who will not be able to see them at all.

The endpoint of Isaiah's pronouncement is verse 22, in which he reminds the people of man's insignificance when compared with God's glory. (See Moses 1:10.) The prophet exhorts Israel to cease placing confidence in man and his status symbols and idols. Instead of foolishly trusting in himself, man should exhibit wisdom, since he knows that someday he will stand accountable before the Lord.

ISAIAH IN THE BOOK OF MORMON

A strong scriptural foundation was a valuable element of the Book of Mormon society. Lehi sent his sons back to Jerusalem to acquire the brass plates of Laban, which contained the Old Testament records that were then extant. (1 Ne. 3-5.) These records were used to teach the people in the New World, and the Book of Mormon prophets often quoted from them, especially from the writings of Isaiah.

From his dream of the tree of life, Lehi records how important the rod of iron was in helping the people reach the tree, or salvation. (1 Ne. 8.) Yet Lehi did not define what the iron rod was. Nephi later saw the same vision, and was told that the rod of iron represented the word of God. (1 Ne. 15:23-24.) Since Isaiah's words were used by Nephi and others to teach the word of God, it appears from the context of Lehi's dream that the writings of Isaiah were a primary scriptural "iron rod" that the people could grasp.

The ancient American prophets quoted Isaiah so extensively that one-third of Isaiah is quoted directly, and at least another five percent is paraphrased, in the Book of Mormon. As Latter-day Saints read and compare the Isaiah portions in the Book of Mormon with those in the Old Testament, they should also study how they are used and why they are important for a better understanding of both Isaiah and the Book of Mormon. The following five ideas suggest some reasons how Isaiah was used and why it is important in the Book of Mormon:

Accuracy

Since the brass plates contain the earliest known version of Isaiah, it is likely that they are more correct than the version recorded in the Old Testament or Dead Sea Scrolls. Accordingly, there are over 70 verses with major changes (almost four changes per quoted chapter) in the Book of Mormon quotations of 433 verses of Isaiah. That there are not more implies the overall accuracy of the transmission of the book of Isaiah in the King James Version. The nature of the changes, however, makes clear the fact that, indeed, "many plain and precious things" have been lost. (See 1 Ne. 13:20-42.)

On the other hand, many Isaiah verses as quoted in the Book of Mormon have no changes at all when compared to the King James Version. Latter-day Saint scholar Daniel Ludlow discusses this socalled "Isaiah problem" of the Book of Mormon:

Translation is frequently concerned with general ideas rather than specific words; even the best translators do not translate the same material from one language into another word-for-word the same. There appears to be only one answer to explain the word-for-word similarities between the verses of Isaiah in the Bible and the same verses in the Book of Mormon. When Joseph Smith translated the Isaiah references from the small plates of Nephi, he evidently opened his King James Version of the Bible and compared the impression he had received in translating with the words of the King James scholars. If his translation was essentially the same as that of the King James Version, he apparently quoted the verse from the Bible; then his scribe, Oliver Cowdery, copied it down. However, if Joseph Smith's translation did not agree precisely with that of the King James scholars, he would dictate his own translation to the scribe. This procedure in translation would account both for the 234 verses of Isaiah which were changed or modified by the Prophet Joseph as well as the 199 verses which were translated word-for-word the same. Although some critics might question this procedure of translation, scholars today frequently use this same procedure in translating the Biblical manuscripts among the Dead Sea Scrolls. (CSBM, pp. 141-42.)

Contextual Meaning

Another dimension of meaning derives from the various contexts in which the Isaiah passages were quoted by Book of Mormon prophets:

Book of Mormon Reference Use of Isaiah

1 Ne. 20-21 Nephi quotes Isaiah 48 and 49 to

Laman and Lemuel as a plea for them

to recognize God and the prophets and

to repent of their rebelliousness. He

seeks to "more fully persuade them to

believe in the Lord their Redeemer." (1

Ne. 19:23; see also 1 Ne. 2:12-13;

7:8-15.)

2 Ne. 7-8 Jacob quotes Isaiah 50 and 51 so

that his people "might know concerning

the covenants of the Lord that he

has covenanted with all the house of

Israel." He uses the citations as a

springboard for his discussion in 2

Nephi 9 on the atonement.

2 Ne. 12-24 Nephi records chapters 2-14 of

Isaiah prior to his own prophecy

"according to . . . plainness" (2 Ne.

25:7), which deals almost exclusively

with the last days and speaks

considerably of a certain "sealed

book." (2 Ne. 27:6-22.)

Mosiah 12-15 In addressing King Noah's wicked

priests who claimed to understand the

law of Moses, the prophet Abinadi

quoted most of Isaiah 52 and 53,

echoing the teachings of king Benjamin,

who said that "the law of Moses avail-

eth nothing except it were through the

atonement of [Christ's] blood." (Mosiah

3:15.) Like the Jews, Noah's priests

claimed to be keeping the law of Moses, though they didn't

understand this "law of

performances and ordinances" and that

"all these things were types of things

to come." (Mosiah 13:30-31.) In short,

the wicked priests did not understand

that the law of Moses foreshadowed the

atonement. Abinadi's prophetic

commentary makes the messianic

interpretation of Isaiah 53

perfectly clear. (Mosiah 15.)

3 Ne. 16, 20-22 While among the Nephites, the

resurrected Savior quoted at length

from chapters 52 and 54 to prophesy of

the final triumph of Israel and the

foundation of Zion on this continent

and commanded his disciple Nephi to

include his addresses and accounts

of other events in the sacred

records. (3 Ne. 23:1-4.)

Prophetic Commentary

Because "the Book of Mormon prophets interpreted the passages they used," explains Elder Bruce R. McConkie, "the Book of Mormon is the world's greatest commentary of the book of Isaiah." He continues, "No one, absolutely no one, in this age and dispensation has or does or can understand the writings of Isaiah until he first learns and believes what God has revealed by the mouths of his Nephite witnesses as these truths are found" in the Book of Mormon. (Ensign, Oct. 1973, p. 81; italics added.)

The following chapters contain specific commentaries on Isaiah's messages by the Nephite prophets and the Lord Jesus Christ: 1 Nephi 22 (Isa. 48-49); 2 Nephi 6, 9-11 (Isa. 50-51), 25-30 (Isa. 2-14, 29); Mosiah 15 (Isa. 52-53); 3 Nephi 16, 20-21, 23, 26 (Isa. 52, 54).

For example, as the capstone on his lengthy Isaiah citations, Nephi presents a case study of how to study Isaiah in his own chapters of inspired commentary. (2 Ne. 25-30.) Introducing his "plain prophecy" and saying that the words of Isaiah he has quoted are plain "to all those with the spirit of prophecy," Nephi draws together two broad themes found in the writings of Isaiah before closing his own testimony with his beautiful "Doctrine of Christ" discourse. These two themes become the dominant themes of the Book of Mormon as a whole and include an affirmation of belief in the Messiah and predictions of events to transpire in relation to the Restoration, the last days, and the Millennium. The following is a brief outline of five major topics introduced by Nephi and later developed in his six commentary chapters, followed by references showing the Isaiah passages Nephi may have drawn upon for his commentary.

2 Nephi Isaiah

25:7-15 Scattering of the Jews after rejection 8:14

of the Messiah

25:16-21 Convincing of the Jews 11:11

25:22-30 All judged in Christ 9:7

2 Nephi Isaiah

26:1-7 Destruction of the Nephites by 5:24-30; 29:6

internal contention

words—law (26:1) 5:24

stubble (26:4, 6) 5:24

consume (26:6) 5:24

cast out (26:3) 5:24

blood cries/anger (26:3) 5:25

earthquakes (26:6) 5:25

streets torn (26:5) 5:25

whirlwinds (26:5) 5:28

anger kindled (26:6) 5:25

pain and sorrow (26:7) 5:30

26:8-15 Seed smitten by Gentiles

camped against (26:15) 29:3

destruction (26:11) 5:25

26:16-19 Speak from the dust 29:4

26:20-22 Problems of the Gentiles 3:15

Leaders err (26:20) 3:15; 9:16; 8:14

26:23-33 Gospel is free (26:25) 55:1

No need to stumble (26:20) 8:14

27:6-27 Sealed book 29:1-18

sealed book (27:7) 29:11

words from sealed books (27:15) 29:11

27:1-2 Abominations 10:23-27; 11:4

signs (27:2-4) 29:6-9

last days (27:25-34) 29:13-24

2 Nephi Isaiah

28:12-32 Wickedness in the last days

pride of leaders (28:12-13) 3:15; 2:12

destruction (28:16) 10:25

repentance (28:17) 2:9

abominable branch (28:18) 14:19

fall of devil (28:19) 14:9

brought down to hell (28:21) 14:15

woes (28:24-32) 5:8-23

2 Nephi Isaiah

29:1-14 God speaks to all nations 11:10

ensign (29:2) 11:10

second time (29:1) 11:11

remember isles of the sea (29:7) 11:11

all in all (29:13) 11:13

God's people (29:14) 14:32

2 Nephi Isaiah

30:1-18 Millennial joy 11:5-9

great division (30:10) 5:24

covenant/repent (30:2) 8:14-16

gospel declared (30:5) 2:1-5

rejoicing (30:6) 12:1-6

gathering (30:7) 10:21

commence work (30:8) 11:11

judge poor (30:9) 11:4

destroy by fire (30:10) 5:24

blessedness and peace (30:11-15) 11:5-9

"One Isaiah" Affirmed

Because some disputed chapters of Isaiah (those after chapter 39) that belong to the "second Isaiah" are quoted in the Book of Mormon, the sectarian "deutero-Isaiah" theory and other theories of multiple authorship are disproved. Because the version from which most of the Isaiah passages were cited and recorded was itself produced no later than 600 B.C., and because the resurrected Lord quoted from the later chapters of Isaiah (52, 54) and attributed them to Isaiah, it seems reasonable to assume that the book of Isaiah as we have it is close to its original form and is the work of a single prophet-writer.

Editing and Compiling

The brass plates were had among the people. Copies of at least some of the writings (including Isaiah) were made and dispersed among the people. (See Jacob 7:23; Alma 13:20; 14:2, 8; 3 Ne. 20:11.) Why, then, did Nephi, for example, go to the trouble of copying so much of the book of Isaiah in his own records?

After Nephi had secured the brass plates of Laban and made his own plates, he recorded that "he received a commandment that . . . the prophecies, the more plain and precious parts of them, should be written upon these plates . . . and . . . kept for the instruction of my people, who should possess the land, and also for other wise purposes, which purposes are known unto the Lord." (1 Ne. 19:3, italics added.) Nephi's shortened account of his father's prophecies, the eight-year journey in the wilderness, the subsequent sea voyage, and the initial colonization of the promised land comprise only seventeen of the fifty-five chapters in Nephi's two books! (1 Ne. 1-8, 10, 16-18; 2 Ne. 1-5.) The remaining chapters deal with his reasons for writing his own record (2 Ne. 6, 9, 19); his own prophecies, visions, and interpretations of Lehi's dream (1 Ne. 11-15; 2 Ne. 25-33); his commentaries on the Isaiah passages he quotes (2 Ne. 25-30); and the eighteen chapters of Isaiah he or his brother Jacob quote in their entirety. (2 Ne. 12-24, 26-27; 1 Ne. 20-21.)

The Lord prompted the extensive quotation of the writings of Isaiah in the book that is a compilation of prophetic writings preserved specifically for our day and edited by prophets who have seen our day (several of whom said they could not write "the hundredth part" of what could have been written—see Jacob 3:13; W of M 1:5; Hel. 3:14; 3 Ne. 5:8; 26:6; Ether 15:33). Nephi, the most prolific commentator on Isaiah, wrote, "I know that they shall be of great worth unto them in the last days . . . wherefore, for their good have I written them." (2 Ne. 25:8.) Apparently, above all the ancient prophet-writers, Isaiah will be the best guide through the perilous last days of the dispensation of the fulness of times.

In conclusion, Latter-day Saints who accept the Book of Mormon as the word of God have a scriptural perspective unmatched in all the world. The writings of Isaiah contained in the Book of Mormon, when studied together with the Old Testament version, give a deep understanding of the words of the ancient prophet.

SCRIPTURAL NOTES AND COMMENTARY

Isaiah 2:2: Why is the "top of the mountains" significant?

A mountaintop is an exalted, high place, both literally and spiritually. Since the "top of the mountains" might apply to the site of the ancient temples in Jerusalem, a study of that site on Mount Moriah reveals that it is in fact lower than the surrounding hills. (See Map 17.) The only immediate area near Mount Moriah without a dominant ridge higher than the mount is to the south in the area of the ancient village of Salem and the early city of the Jebusites and David. During most of the Old Testament period, the major populace of Jerusalem lived south of the temple mount, and thus they would always "go up" to the temple. However, Mount Moriah still maintains a position of relative height, since valleys immediately surround it on three sides (east, south, and west) and since it is located in the middle of Jerusalem. It also retains importance because it is a sacred site revered by Christians, Jews, and Moslems alike.

Since the phrase "top of the mountains" can also apply to the Latter-day Saint temple sites in the Rocky Mountains, it is interesting that although the various Utah temples are built in valleys, their elevation still exceeds that of Mount Moriah in Jerusalem. That is, Jerusalem, on the top of the Judean Mountains, is more than one thousand feet lower than the cities in the valleys along the Wasatch Front of the Rockies. Therefore, the Latter-day Saint temples in Utah are even above "the top of the mountains" when compared to the site of the ancient Jerusalem temple.

And, of course, the Latter-day Saint temples in Utah and throughout the world represent the tops of the spiritual mountains, where God's children can rise closer to him than anywhere else on earth. They are the place where heaven and earth meet, and thus are extremely important for the full spiritual advancement of the children of God.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The Jews are scattered and a Messiah is promised. (See 1 Ne. 11.) See DWW, p. 337, where, in the dedicatory prayer of the Salt Lake Temple, President Woodruff mentions fulfillment of Isaiah's prophecy. A similar identification was made during the dedication of the Idaho Falls Temple. (Improvement Era, Oct. 1945, p. 564.)
[^2] Now it will come about that A remnant is destroyed, but its records will speak from the dust. (See 1 Ne. 12-13.) Some examples: John Taylor (JD 6:167; 11:345; 21:32; 23:333), Joseph Fielding Smith (CHMR 4:129-30), Harold B. Lee (CR Oct. 1945, p. 47; Apr. 1966, p. 68; Oct. 1972, p. 63; Apr. 1973, p. 5), Orson Pratt (JD 14:350; Ensign, Nov. 1971, p. 14), LeGrand Richards (CR Oct. 1962, p. 109; Apr. 1967, p. 22; Oct. 1970, pp. 61-62; Apr. 1971, p. 143; Oct. 1975, p. 77), and Bruce R. McConkie (CR Oct. 1967, p. 43; MD pp. 518, 690, 691, 781, 855).
[^3] And many peoples will come and say, The ways of the devil; his destruction foretold. (See 1 Ne. 14.) 3. In studying the available texts, it is often noticeable that the Book of Mormon quotations from Isaiah conflict with the King James Version in the same verses in which the Septuagint and Masoretic texts conflict. This does not mean, however, that the Septuagint and Book of Mormon renditions agree, for they usually do not. It does seem to mean that neither the compilers of the Septuagint or the Masoretic texts had a clear text to work with. The text of the early scribes was apparently already corrupt, and the disagreements in the later texts do not show what the original said, but they do show that there is something wrong in their texts. The Book of Mormon thus proves to be a valuable resource in restoring a more correct version of the original material. Until older biblical documents that have not been corrupted come forth, the Book of Mormon will have to stand as its own witness to an inspired version of the Isaiah passages.
