Victor L. Ludlow, Isaiah: Prophet, Seer, and Poet ( 1982)

A DELIBERATELY DIFFICULT PROPHET ISAIAH 6

Perilous times faced Isaiah and his people as he began his prophetic ministry. Politically, the situation was unstable following the death of King Uzziah, who had ruled Judah for over fifty years, and Assyrian expansion threatened the peace in the area. Socially, poverty and oppression fell upon many Israelites as the wealthy increased their power. Spiritually, many Israelites continued to observe traditional religious practices but with their hearts turned away from the Lord. A prophet's role is challenging in the best of circumstances, but Isaiah's was particularly difficult because of the problems he faced.

In what is now chapter 6 of his writings, Isaiah records the foundation of his prophetic calling. He describes his vision of the Lord and the purpose of his mission to Israel. He testifies to the people concerning the holiness and glory of God and also explains why his prophetic role of speaking for the Lord to the people is so difficult.

There are many possible explanations as to why this sixth chapter of Isaiah is not placed at the head of his writings. Perhaps Isaiah wanted to introduce his message before he introduced himself; after delivering the important pronouncements found in the first five chapters, he wanted to provide a seal for his words by testifying concerning his prophetic authority. Or, it may even be that the vision and calling recorded in chapter 6 came to Isaiah after the visions of the first few chapters.

Or, chapter 6 may be where it is to bridge the two major segments of his opening chapters. The first section of Isaiah, chapters 1-12, contains two major themes: the unrighteousness of the Israelites, and the promise of a new Zion in the last days. The first five chapters emphasize Israel's separation from the "master of the vineyard," while chapters 7-12 promise deliverance and the millennial day. Both themes are epitomized by Isaiah himself in chapter 6; he fears the Lord's judgment because of his own sins and yet is willing to serve the Lord because he knows that a latter-day remnant of Israel will believe and understand his prophecies.

Since Isaiah did not date most of his prophecies and pronouncements, we do not know the proper chronological placement of chapter 6 in relation to the other Isaiah chapters. Some scholars believe this was not Isaiah's original call into the prophetic ministry, but a calling to higher responsibilities. The examples of Elisha in the Old Testament (1 Kgs. 19:19; 2 Kgs. 2), Peter in the New Testament (Matt. 4:18; 16:13-20; 28:19; Acts 2:1-3), and Spencer W. Kimball in this dispensation (SWK, pp. 188, 237) illustrate how some of the Lord's servants have received new responsibilities or divine manifestations months and even years after they were first called.

Other scholars argue that chapter 6 records Isaiah's original call to his prophetic ministry. To the, Isaiah's feelings of unworthiness in verse 5 seem more appropriate to an inaugural call than to an additional, higher calling. For a modern example, compare Spencer W. Kimball's feelings when he was first called to the apostleship with his later feelings when he was given additional responsibility for the Lamanites. (SWK, pp. 189-95, 236-38.)

Whether the vision and calling recorded in Isaiah 6 highlight Isaiah's initial call or represent newer and higher responsibilities in his prophetic role, they attest to his importance as a servant of the Lord. If the events of this chapter did not begin Isaiah's ministry, they probably occurred early in his career. In any case, the full authority of a prophet did not accrue to Isaiah because of this vision. His actual power and authority as a prophet came through proper priesthood channels as he was ordained and set apart for his prophetic role. (See Deut. 34:9; Jer. 1:5; Acts 16:4; Heb. 5:4; Ex. 40:13.) Although Isaiah's actual ordination is not recorded in his own work, chapter 6 describes why he was worthy and willing and also foreshadows how the people would respond to his warnings.

Chapter 6 divides easily into two parts: Isaiah's vision of the Lord, and his prophetic commission. It can be outlined as follows:

I. The vision (vs. 1-7)

A. The Lord's court (1-4)

B. Isaiah's cleansing (5-7)

II. The call (8-13)

A. Isaiah volunteers: "Here am I; send me" (8)

B. Isaiah's prophetic commission (9-13)

According to verse 1, Isaiah received his vision of the Lord in the year of King Uzziah's death, around 740 B.C. Political conditions were unstable in both Israel and Judah at this time. For example, three men—Uzziah, Jotham (Uzziah's son), and Ahaz (Uzziah's grandson)—were all ruling Judah immediately prior to Uzziah's death.

But chapter 6 makes only brief mention of the political events of the time, concentrating instead upon Isaiah's experience with the Lord. In reading the account of Isaiah's vision, one should carefully note what he first sees and how his attention shifts to other beings and objects:

6 In the year that King Uzziah died, I beheld my LORD seated on a high and lofty throne; and the skirts of His robe filled the Temple. 2Seraphs stood in attendance on Him. Each of them had six wings: with two he covered his face, with two he covered his legs, and with two he would fly.

3And one would call to the other,

"Holy, holy, holy!

The LORD of Hosts!

His presence fills all the earth!"

4The doorposts would shake at the sound of the one who called, and the House kept filling with smoke. (NJV)

The first thing to attract Isaiah's attention is the Lord himself. Only later does Isaiah notice the interesting furniture, clothing, and seraphs.

Some commentators wonder whether Isaiah actually saw the Lord or just some evidence of Jehovah's presence, since Isaiah does not actually describe the Lord's person but talks about the hem of his garment, the seraphim, his voice, and so on. However, Isaiah himself simply declares, "I saw the Lord," and other ancient and modern prophets testify that Jehovah has appeared to many prophets. (See 2 Ne. 11:2; DS 1:27.)

Many similarities exist between the images of Isaiah's vision and the symbols of the temple service. The Lord's robe or train compares to the temple veil which separates us from God's direct glory. The seraphim are like temple attendants, calling to one another in a threefold petition (v. 2). The moving door posts (v. 4) suggest a stirring at the veil. Isaiah receiving a live coal from the temple altar (v. 6) reminds us of the eternal life promised to those who keep the covenants made at the temple altars. (See D&C 130:6-11.) If not during this vision of the Lord, at some time during his life Isaiah received the fullness of the priesthood and the temple blessings, including the assurance of eternal life, for he has become an "heir of the celestial kingdom" and enjoys eternity in the Lord's house. (D&C 137:7; 138:42, 51.)

After depicting the Lord in his glory, Isaiah describes special beings who attend the Lord. These seraphim (or seraphs [^1]) are such unusual creatures that Isaiah carefully describes their three sets of wings and their manner of praising the Lord. The wings could be symbols of the ability of God's spirit children to move freely throughout his kingdom (see D&C 77:4; MD, pp. 702-3), though they are probably literal wings upon real animal-like entities that reside in God's presence. (See BD "Seraphim.") Many animals and plants live in God's kingdom, and some creatures communicate with God and man. John the Revelator saw and heard such animals in God's presence (Rev. 5:13), and Joseph Smith recorded how these animals praised and glorified God. (TPJS, pp. 291-92.)

Joseph Smith also describes seraphs in God's presence in the dedicatory prayer of the Kirtland Temple, and his record of them in Doctrine and Covenants 109:79 has some similarity to Isaiah's account:

And help us by the power of thy spirit, that we may mingle our voices with those bright, shining seraphs around thy throne, with acclamations of praise, singing Hosanna to God and the Lamb! (Italics added.)

Both Isaiah and Joseph Smith envision the seraphs near God's throne, and both record that the seraphs give praise to God.

There are some differences between the two accounts as well. Isaiah says that the seraphs have wings and hands and that they move about. (Isa. 6:6.) Joseph records that they are bright, shining beings. This description fits very well with the Hebrew root of seraph, which means "burning." Thus seraphim would be the "burning ones," those who appear to be on fire; or, as Joseph describes them, "bright, shining seraphs."

Joseph Smith also taught that God dwells in everlasting burnings and that righteous beings (animal and human) dwell with him in a place of continual burning or glory. (TPJS, pp. 372-73, 347, 361.) Other apostles of this dispensation have also taught that all celestial beings need to be able to endure eternal burnings. (See COR, p. 275; MD, pp. 116, 695-97.) The seraphs, celestial beings in God's presence, are therefore necessarily bright, shining, and burning beings. (See D&C 38:1.) In Isaiah's account, they are associated with an altar, burning coals, and a cleansing process. (Isa. 6:5-7.) Other than the descriptions mentioned above, however, very little is known about them.

Following his brief explanation of the seraphim, Isaiah describes a door whose posts (or foundations) moved as one seraph spoke. These could be the posts of the doorway leading into the Holy of Holies of the Jerusalem temple, or the heavenly doorway that leads into God's presence. In either case, that there is a door or gateway into the divine presence is a concept that is also suggested in other scriptures. (John 10; 2 Ne. 9:41; Isa. 22:22.)

Recognizing that he is in the presence of the Lord, the reality of his own mortal weaknesses strikes Isaiah, and he records:

5I cried,

"Woe is me; I am lost!

For I am a man of unclean lips

And I live among a people

Of unclean lips;

Yet my own eyes have beheld

the King LORD of Hosts."

6Then one of the seraphs flew over to me with a live coal, which he had taken from the altar with a pair of tongs. 7He touched it to my lips and declared,

"Now that this has touched your lips,

Your guilt shall depart

And your sin be purged away." (NJV)

Isaiah's first response is fear: "Woe is me!" It is doubtful that Isaiah's earlier life was grossly sinful or corrupt. More likely, his confession of sin came from his deep humility resulting from suddenly finding himself in the divine presence. (See JS-H 1:28-29.) It is not unusual for people to experience such feelings of unworthiness, impending judgment, and possible destruction when they are visited by an angel, hear the Lord's voice, or see God in a vision. Often, the first message given them is either "Fear not" or "Peace be with you." After this, they usually feel free from guilt and soon realize that the visitation or vision is to be a blessing, not a condemnation. (See Ex. 3:6; Judg. 6:22-23; Moses 6:31-32; Hel. 5:43-48; JS-H 1:17.) Similarly, Isaiah's fear of unworthiness in the Lord's presence is quickly dispelled by a symbolic act of forgiveness.

The live coal (v. 6) that touches Isaiah's lips symbolizes the purging of his sins, just as our ordinances of baptism and the sacrament physically represent acts of spiritual power. (See Isa. 6, footnote 6a.) The coal could have come from the altar of burnt offerings outside the temple, but it could also have been the stone on the altar of incense inside the temple. The latter is more likely, since the Hebrew word for "live coal" is ritzpah, which is often translated as "stone," particularly as "glowing (incandescent) stone." In the ancient temple service, the incense was placed on a stone to be burned. (See Young, The Book of Isaiah 1:250.) Regardless of whether the coal (or stone) came from an altar outside or inside the temple, or whether the temple was in Jerusalem or in God's presence, the important fact is that the coal represents divine fire and the cleansing power of the Atonement. By touching Isaiah's lips, the cleansing object not only purges him from being "a man of unclean lips," but it also consecrates him to speak in righteousness as a mouthpiece of the Lord. (See Jer. 1:9.)

Now worthy to be with God, Isaiah hears God's own voice addressing an unmentioned audience, probably a celestial council:

8Then I heard the voice of my Lord saying, "Whom shall I send? Who will go for us?" And I said, "Here am I; send me." (NJV)

Isaiah volunteers for the calling even before it is directly offered to him; his acceptance echoes Jehovah's own response to a similar invitation in the heavenly councils of the premortal existence. (See Abr. 3:27.) Isaiah's answer to God's call is as simple as the call itself. The Lord asks, "Whom shall I send, and who will go for us?" Isaiah replies, "Here am I; send me." Although some great prophets, like Enoch, Moses, and Jeremiah, were initially reluctant to accept their prophetic calling, Isaiah responds without hesitation. (See Moses 6, Ex. 4, Jer. 1.) His willing attitude testifies to his greatness.

After Isaiah commits himself, God gives him further instruction about his calling (vs. 9-10). In contrast to the simplicity of the initial call, the Lord's directive raises many questions as to how Isaiah should preach to the people:

9And He said, "Go, say to that people:

'Hear, indeed, but do not understand;

See, indeed, but do not grasp.'

10Dull that people's mind,

Stop its ears,

And seal its eyes—

Lest, seeing with its eyes

And hearing with its ears,

It also grasp with its mind,

And repent and save [heal] itself." (NJV)

The ambiguity of verse 9 is easily clarified if the additional pronouns in the Book of Mormon translation (2 Ne. 16:9) of this verse are combined with the modern punctuation and verb structure of the New Jewish Version:

Quotation Details

And he [the Lord] said [to Isaiah], introduction

"Go and tell this people: charge to Isaiah

'Hear ye indeed,' Isaiah's admonition

but they will not understand; and people's response

'See ye indeed,' Isaiah's admonition

but they will not perceive." people's response

In other words, the Lord tells Isaiah that although he (Isaiah) will speak forthrightly to the people, they will not understand his message.

The complex charge given to Isaiah in verse 10 is more difficult to understand. In casual reading, it appears that Isaiah is told to deliberately confuse the people because the Lord does not want them to repent and be healed. Actually, Isaiah's words were to be incomprehensible not because the Lord desired the people to be ignorant, but because they, themselves, did not want to know the truth or to be converted and healed. The early Hebrew versions of this verse, and Christ's use of it in the New Testament, suggest this interpretation.

Lest That People Should Heal Itself

The earliest Hebrew versions of this verse, as found in the Dead Sea Scrolls and Masoretic texts, are translated quite correctly in the New Jewish Version quoted above. The New Jewish Version corresponds closely to the King James Version, although a slightly different vocabulary is used. An important difference between these two English versions, however, is that the New Jewish Version includes the word "itself" at the end of the verse ("lest that people . . . repent and save itself") while the King James Version simply states, "lest [this people] . . . convert, and be healed." The act of repenting (or converting) and being healed is the same in both versions, but the source of the healing differs. In the Hebrew and the New Jewish Version, the verse states that the people might try to heal themselves, which is impossible, especially in a spiritual context, since healing and forgiveness come only through Christ's atonement, after anything we can do for ourselves. With our free agency, we seek to avail ourselves of the saving power and healing power of the Atonement, but we do not have within us the capacity to completely cleanse ourselves. (See 2 Ne. 2:27; 25:23; D&C 58:28; Hel. 14:29-30; Alma 12:9-11; 1 Cor. 2:9-10, 12, 14; D&C 76:10.)

Speaking in Parables

Another explanation of why Isaiah's words are deliberately difficult is found in the New Testament. Both Jesus and the Apostle Paul used the language of Isaiah 6:10 to describe the Jews in their day who refused to hear and give heed to the gospel truths. (See Matt. 13:15; Acts 28:25-28.) Jesus' application of this verse is especially valuable, because with it he describes his own methods of teaching Israel.

Jesus used the parable as his primary teaching medium. On one occasion, when his disciples asked him why he taught in parables (Matt. 13:10), he responded that parables would enable his disciples to learn as much as they were prepared to understand, even the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven. But those who rejected the truth would not understand the true meaning of the parables and would thus avoid condemnation. (See Matt. 13:11-13; Matt. 13, footnote 12a.) Jesus then quoted from Isaiah, saying that Isaiah's words were fulfilled in the people of his day. The Jews did not understand the Lord's words because they closed themselves off from his message, "lest . . . they . . . should be converted and I [Jesus] should heal them." (Matt. 13:14-15; compare Mark 4:9-13; Luke 8:10; John 12:37-41.)

Isaiah and Jesus as Teachers

In many ways, Isaiah and Jesus faced comparable and extremely difficult teaching situations. Isaiah was the last great prophet to address assembled Israel. During his ministry, the Ten Tribes were taken captive; they later fled to the north and became lost. His words went with these Israelites, and later with Lehi and his people. Of course, Isaiah's messages also remained with the Jews in Jerusalem. Furthermore, since so many of Isaiah's prophecies deal with the last days, his words are of particular value to those of covenant Israel who now read his book. Given this wide time period and recognizing the wide range of spiritual attitudes that the readers of his work would have, Isaiah was challenged to find the means to teach such a diversified audience.

Jesus faced a similar challenge during his earthly ministry. He needed to impart special knowledge to his "elect" apostles and disciples, while at the same time teaching the multitudes. Among the crowds were people of varying degrees of spirituality, some seeking the truth, others trying to entrap Jesus, and many simply satisfying their curiosity. Also, Jesus knew that his words would inspire countless generations of readers in varying cultures, languages, and spiritual conditions. Therefore, he spoke in parables so that the listener or reader would understand according to his individual level of spiritual sensitivity.

There are, however, at least two disadvantages in using parables. First, a listener or reader may miss the most important message of any parable if he lacks the background or keys necessary for understanding the story. Second, it is often too easy for a person to simply read a parable and quickly go through a mental checklist, saying, "Here is the simple meaning of the story, here is its moral application, and this is the spiritual meaning; now I understand this parable and am ready to read on." Someone who fails to seriously ponder the full variety of meanings in a parable may miss its most important application to him or his day.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie states that Jesus, the Master Teacher, chose to present many truths through parables in order to obscure his doctrine from those not prepared to receive it. (DNTC 1:283-84.) This is one of many reasons why Jesus used parables to teach his widely diversified audience.

Isaiah, when facing a difficult teaching situation, did not use the parable as a tool; instead, he veiled his message in clouds of symbolism, poetry, and complex terminology. In other words, instead of speaking at a simple level and letting his listeners build upon that foundation, Isaiah spoke at a high intellectual and spiritual level, thus challenging or even forcing his listeners to attain that level before they could begin to understand his words. Isaiah was not only difficult, he was deliberately difficult. We must study his words, wrestle with them, and ponder them at great length before his powerful, sublime teachings begin to emerge and inspire us. Because of this, it is easy to become discouraged and give up before we begin to understand his message. However, through serious and prayerful study, when we finally grasp the language and ideas of a particular chapter until they not only make sense, but enlighten and inspire as well, we realize that we have arrived at a profound level of understanding.

Why Is Isaiah Deliberately Difficult?

The following list suggests at least seven reasons, including those mentioned above, why the book of Isaiah is so difficult to understand. Some scriptures about other groups of people who experienced difficulty understanding Isaiah's words are included.

Isaiah's natural response to the conditions surrounding his call was to ask the Lord how long he would prophesy before his words would be understood. (Isa. 6:11.) He may have assumed that for at most a few months or maybe a few years his message would remain obscure, and thus he was probably surprised when the Lord answered that the prophecies would not be understood until after Judah was destroyed, her inhabitants scattered, and a remnant gathered (vs. 11-13). The answer itself includes a prophecy of the scattering and gathering, as well as a promise that Isaiah's words will finally be comprehended by a righteous remnant of Israel:

11I asked, "How long, my Lord?"

And He replied:

"Till towns lie waste without inhabitants

And houses without people,

And the ground lies waste and desolate—

12"For the LORD will banish the population—

And deserted sites are many

In the midst of the land.

13"But while a tenth party yet remains in it, it shall repent. It shall be ravaged like the terebinth and the oak, of which stumps are left even when they are felled: its stump shall be a holy seed." (NJV)

The righteous remnant that later returns to Jerusalem and sees the fulfillment of Isaiah's prophecies could be members of Judah who returned from the Babylonian captivity and witnessed the ministry of Jesus Christ. It could also refer to the righteous in Israel today who repent, return to the Lord, and receive the spiritual gifts necessary to understand Isaiah. In verse 13, this remnant is compared to the shoots of a tree stump. The symbol of the tree is found elsewhere in Isaiah (ch. 5) and other scriptures (especially Jacob 5), and is most appropriate to Israel; though the leaves are scattered, the limbs cut off or grafted into other trees, and the trunk burned up, the stump still has the potential for growth. Eventually, new buds and sprouts come forth which, though ravaged or afflicted by storm and pestilence, still carry on the life of the mother tree. The remnant or tenth (tithe) that returns and is called holy is one branch that will survive. Just as only one of ten cleansed lepers returned to thank the Lord (Luke 17:15-17) and as we still return a tithe to the Lord, so also in the last days a tenth of scattered Israel will return to him. Although the trials of men and the judgments of God may come upon this remnant of his chosen people, they will return to him in righteousness and become the seed (or vehicle) for carrying the Lord's message to the whole world.

Conclusion

The sixth chapter of Isaiah is short, yet it contains a number of profound teachings:

The challenge facing the readers of Isaiah is to understand and appreciate his message. As outlined by the Lord, his words are difficult, even deliberately difficult, to comprehend. Indeed, reading Isaiah may be especially frustrating for most Latter-day Saints; although they know many of his prophecies deal with these last days, they cannot understand them.

Although Isaiah is difficult, there are times when the Lord desires that we understand the timing and fulfillment of his prophecies concerning our dispensation. In keeping with the principle of "line upon line, precept upon precept" (Isa. 28:10; 2 Ne. 28:30), the Lord makes it possible for us to understand more and more Isaianic prophecies as we are spiritually prepared to receive them. Nephi, speaking of Isaiah's prophecies, said that "men shall know of a surety, at the times when they shall come to pass." (2 Ne. 25:7.) We now live during the time of the fulfillment of many Isaianic prophecies. We are therefore challenged to study his messages so as to be better prepared for the problems of our age.

Since many of Isaiah's prophecies are being fulfilled in these last days, we have a better opportunity to understand his writings than any other generation of Israelites. Also, we have the other scriptures and living prophets to enlighten us about Isaiah's words. Isaiah is not impossible to understand. If we study the scriptures, review contemporary events, listen to the living prophets, and, above all, heed our own spiritual promptings through the gift of prophecy, Isaiah's words will become clear to us as we open our eyes, ears, and hearts to the truths he proclaims.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Behold, the (that) young woman (virgin) will conceive (v. 14). As mentioned earlier, Ahaz and the people of Judah needed to develop faith in the Lord to deliver them from the confederacy of Rezin and Pekah. A son was to be born and named Immanuel as a sign of the Lord's power of deliverance in the subsequent withdrawal and humiliation of the threatening alliance. His name is the longest word in the Bible.
