Victor L. Ludlow, Isaiah: Prophet, Seer, and Poet ( 1982)

IMMANUEL PROMISED TO KING AHAZ AND THE HOUSE OF DAVID ISAIAH 7-8

A new and distinct section of narrative begins in these chapters. Isaiah changes his writing from a personal memoir of his vision to a third-person, historical, prophetic account. He records both events in which he participates and records prophecies that he sees partially fulfilled during his lifetime. Most of his prophecies concern the Syro-Israelite War against Judah and the Assyrian encroachment into the area. However, the most significant of his prophecies in these chapters promises the presence of God with Israel through a child named Immanuel.

At the time the Immanuel prophecy was given (about 734 B.C.) the country of Judah was under threat of attack by Rezin, king of Syria, and Pekah, king of Israel. These kings had formed an alliance during the final part of the reign of Jotham, the predecessor of Ahaz, and had made war against Jerusalem but had not been able to prevail against it. (See 2 Kgs. 15:37; 16:5.) When Ahaz came to the throne in 735 B.C., the Syro-Ephraimite coalition made a renewed effort to take Jerusalem. The alliance had as its primary goal the unification of all the countries in the area into a solid anti-Assyrian block. When Ahaz refused to join, Rezin and Pekah decided to subjugate Judah and replace Ahaz with a leader more sympathetic to their anti-Assyrian policies. Syria and Israel made preparations for war and sent an invading army into Judah from the north. In a pitched battle, Pekah's army slew a hundred and twenty thousand men of Judah and took two hundred thousand captives in one day. (See 2 Chr. 28:6-15.) Although the alliance eventually released the Judean captives, it appeared that Judah would soon fall. Reports of further enemy success in the north caused Ahaz to fear greatly for the safety of Jerusalem (v.2). He was apparently inspecting the city's water supply in the Kidron Valley when Isaiah came to him with a message of comfort:

7 When Ahaz son of Jothan, the son of Uzziah, was king of Judah, King Rezin of Aram and Pekah son of Remaliah king of Israel marched up to fight against Jerusalem, but they could not overpower it. 2Now the house of David was told, "Aram has allied itself with Ephraim"; so the hearts of Ahaz and his people were shaken, as the trees of the forest are shaken by the wind.

3Then the LORD said to Isaiah, "Go out, you and your son Shear-Jashub, to meet Ahaz at the end of the aqueduct of the Upper Pool, on the road to the Washerman's Field.

4Say to him, 'Be careful, keep calm and don't be afraid. Do not lose heart because of these two smoldering stubs of firewood—because of the fierce anger of Rezin and Aram and of the son of Remaliah.

5Aram, Ephraim and Remaliah's son have plotted your ruin, saying,

6"Let us invade Judah; let us tear it apart and divide it among ourselves, and make the son of Tabeel king over it."

7Yet this is what the Sovereign

LORD says:

"'It will not take place, it will not happen,

8for the head of Aram is Damascus, and the head of Damascus is only Rezin.

Within sixty-five years Ephraim will be too shattered to be a people.

9The head of Ephraim is Samaria, and the head of Samaria is only Remaliah's son.

If you do not stand firm in your faith, you will not stand at all.'" (NIV)

In order to properly associate all the various names of places and persons, remember that the same country often carried different names. Just as the United States of America and its government might be identified in the press by a number of terms (the administration; the president; Washington, D.C.; the Capitol; Congress; America; etc.), the ancient powers also had a variety of names. The names of the three countries involved in this incident are:

Country: Judah Syria Israel

Capital city: Jerusalem Damascus Samaria

Territory or tribe: Judah Aram Ephraim

Leader: Ahaz, of the Rezin Pekah, son of

House of David Remaliah

Refer to Map 9 to identify the general geographical location of these nations, and note how the several names for the countries listed are variously repeated in verses 1-9.

In verse 3, one of Isaiah's two sons in introduced. His name is Shear-jashub, which means "a remnant shall return." His symbolic name refers to the literal return of a remnant of Israel to their land or a spiritual return of those who repent and return to the Lord. Actually, as will be seen in later chapters of Isaiah, both meanings apply simultaneously, since the physical return depends partially upon a spiritual return.

As Isaiah and his son meet with Ahaz, the prophet tells the king not to worry about Rezin and the "son of Remaliah" (v. 4). Isaiah does not hesitate to use scorn when he speaks of Pekah. Rather than mentioning him by name, the prophet expresses his disdain by continually referring to him only as "Remaliah's son" (vs. 5, 9).

As stated in verse 6, the goal of the Syro-Israelite alliance was to divide Judah and replace her king. In poetic prophecy, the Lord speaks through Isaiah to sooth the fears of Judah and promise a fate upon Israel that Israel sought to impose upon Judah—destruction and scattering. The divine pronouncement contains five segments alternating between prophecy and history.

Prophecy (or warning) Verses Historical statements

The alliance's goals will not 7

come to pass 8a For the head of Syria is

Within sixty-five years Ephraim 8b Damascus and Rezin

(Israel) will be scattered 9a For the head of Ephraim is

If you [Ahaz of Judah] do not 9b Samaria and Remaliah's son

believe, you will not be protected

The three prophetic segments in the lefthand column can be read without the historical segments to form one continuous prophecy. The combination of history and prophecy is characteristic of Isaiah's writings.

In this prophecy, Isaiah promises that the Syro-Israelite alliance will fail and that Israel will be scattered within sixty-five years. The fulfillment came about in successive stages. First, Tiglath-Pileser III (Pul) attacked Syria and Israel in 732 B.C. and took many Israelites captive to Assyria, especially those from the northern tribes. Secondly, in 730-727, Pul annexed the Transjordan area and deported large numbers of the Israelite tribes from that area to the far reaches of the Assyrian Empire. Third, in 726, Hoshea refused to pay Assyrian tribute, and Pul's successor, Shalmaneser, retaliated by attacking Israel and besieging Samaria, which fell in 722 B.C. Thus, within a dozen years of Isaiah's prophecy, the alliance had completely failed, and three major groups of Israelites had been deported. Finally, large groups of the Israelites fled from Assyria to the remote areas northward and became the lost Ten Tribes of Israel. Apparently, within about fifty years of their leaving Assyria, they were scattered so widely that many of them no longer existed as a cohesive group. Thereby Isaiah's prophecy to Ephraim was completely realized.

In the last part of the prophecy, Isaiah warns Judah that she must remain firm in her trust of the Lord or she will not be able to stand. Unfortunately, Ahaz did not heed this warning and relied instead upon the Assyrians for deliverance. The Assyrians did hinder the Syro-Israelite attack by destroying Syria and large parts of Israel, but since the Assyrians desired more territory and wealth, Judah found herself paying tribute to avoid war. Knowing that the greatest danger to Judah came from Assyria and not Syria and Ephraim, the Lord would have helped Judah stand against both the Syro-Israelite attack and the Assyrians if her people had remained faithful.

Unfortunately for Judah, she had a difficult time in developing trust in the Lord at least in part because her king, Ahaz, lacked faith and trust. Even after Isaiah gave him an opportunity for a miraculous manifestation to strengthen whatever faith he may have had, Ahaz refused the sign and rejected the Lord's counsel. Isaiah gave him a sign and a promise anyway:

10Again the LORD spoke to Ahaz,

11"Ask the LORD your God for a sign, whether in the deepest depths or in the highest heights."

12But Ahaz said, "I will not ask; I will not put the LORD to the test."

13Then Isaiah said, "Hear now, you house of David! Is it not enough to try the patience of men? Will you try the patience of my God also? 14Therefore the LORD himself will give you a sign: The virgin will be with child and will give birth to a son, and will call him Immanuel.

15He will eat curds and honey when he knows enough to reject the wrong and choose the right. 16But before the boy knows enough to reject the wrong and choose the right, the land of the two kings you dread will be laid waste. 17The LORD will bring on you and your people and on the house of your father a time unlike any since Ephraim broke away from Judah—he will bring the king of Assyria." (NIV)

In order to prove the authenticity of his words, Isaiah commands Ahaz in the name of the Lord to ask for a sign. This request is obviously different from the type of sign described in the Savior's statement that "an evil and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign" (Matt. 12:39; see also Isa. 5:18-19), for Ahaz had not sought a sign. Indeed, he refused to ask for a sign even when the prophet of the Lord gave him the opportunity. (See Deut. 6:16.) It is probable that Ahaz refused to ask for a sign because he had no confidence in the Lord—he was secretly depending on the aid of the king of Assyria. Ahaz's hypocritical unbelief, however, so wearied God that Ahaz was no longer free to request any particular sign but had to receive whatever sign God chose to give. In this instance, therefore, what happens is in accordance with what the Lord has said in modern revelation: "Yea, signs come . . . not by the will of men, nor as they please, but by the will of God. (D&C 63:10; italics added.)

The Lord seems weary of the people's lack of faith (v. 13). It seems that he chose this situation to give a prophecy with various layers of meaning. The context of the pronouncement of the sign is almost as important, therefore, as the sign itself. The situation serves to emphasize man's complete, though often unwilling, dependence on God. The crux of the message is a call to faith; it is a type of the Lord's power to save one from a seemingly inescapable situation. In barest terms, though laden with meaning, the sign the Lord gives to signal the end of the threatening conspiracy is the birth of a male child.

The Immanuel Prophecy

There are several theories as to how this prophecy was fulfilled in the days of Ahaz. One theory proposes that the child to be born is Isaiah's own. This is based upon information in Isaiah 8:1-4, in which Isaiah names his new son. Although Isaiah already had a son, Shearjashub (Isa. 7:3), it is still possible that the mother of the new son could be a virgin if Shear-jashub's mother was deceased and Isaiah was about to be remarried. (See Albert Barne, Barne's Notes on Isaiah [New York: Leavitt and Allen, 1847] 1:177.) One question asked about this theory is, "How could Isaiah have two new sons with different names in such a short period unless he had two wives?" However, it is possible that two names were given to the same child, specifically that Maher-shalal-hash-baz (Isa. 8:3) was also named Immanuel (Isa. 7:14). The practice of having two or more names is not unusual in the Bible, as shown in the cases of Joshua (see BD "Joshua"), Gideon (Judg. 6:11, 32), and Jesus (see BD "Christ, Names of"). This argument is disclaimed by many scholars, however. Some of them, such as Otto Kaiser, suggest a second possible fulfillment and state that Isaiah is promising such a rapid dissipation of the Syro-Israelite threat that any "women who are now with child will name their sons, in thankfulness for being saved, 'Immanuel,' 'God is with us.'" Kaiser goes on to say that the immediate fulfillment of the prophecy was necessary to show Ahaz that Isaiah's sign was given with God's authority and that to reject it is nothing other than apostasy from the living God. (Kaiser, Isaiah 1-12, p. 103.)

A third possible explanation is a variation of the one just mentioned: instead of the son of any woman fulfilling the promise, the son of one particular woman was designated. In the Hebrew, a definite article precedes the term translated as "virgin" or "young woman," indicating that she is the virgin and not just a virgin or any young woman. Isaiah identifies her as the first element of a fivefold prophecy:

Regardless of the precise identity of the woman and her child, it appears obvious that the circumstances of the child's birth and the conditions surrounding his early life were so much an evidence of divine protection as to make proper his name, Immanuel, for God was truly with the people of Judah.

Isaiah delivered the Immanuel prophecy when Jerusalem was threatened by the Syro-Ephraimite conspiracy from the north. As mentioned earlier, the sign given by the Lord of a son to be born signals the end of this threat. The naming of the son Immanuel shows that God was ultimately on the side of the people.

Given this brief background, it seems that this sign, or prophecy, can find fulfillment as a call to faith on three levels:

Whatever Isaiah's understanding about his famous Immanuel prophecy, he knew that it was to be delivered to Ahaz and the house of David (v. 13). Isaiah also had further warnings to deliver to the people of Judah that were more clearly fulfilled during Isaiah's lifetime. Continuing with some terminology from the Immanuel prophecy, he warns about the impending Assyrian attacks upon Judah:

18In that day the LORD will whistle for flies from the distant streams of Egypt and for bees from the land of Assyria. 19They will all come and settle in the steep ravines and in the crevices in the rocks, on all the thornbushes and at all the water holes. 20In that day the Lord will use a razor hired from beyond the River—the king of Assyria—to shave your head and the hair of your legs, and to take off your beards also. 21In that day, a man will keep alive a young cow and two goats. 22And because of the abundance of the milk they give, he will have curds to eat. All who remain in the land will eat curds and honey. 23In that day, in every place where there were a thousand vines worth a thousand silver shekels, there will be only briers and thorns. 24Men will go there with bow and arrow, for the land will be covered with briers and thorns. 25As for all the hills once cultivated by the hoe, you will no longer go there for fear of the briers and thorns; they will become places where cattle are turned loose and where sheep run. (NIV)

The humiliation and slavery that will befall the people is represented in verse 20 by the razor cutting off their hair. The Assyrians cut off all the hair from their captives for three reasons: humiliation, sanitation (especially while traveling under crude conditions to Assyria), and separation (if any slaves escaped while being moved from their homeland, they could not blend in with other peoples since their baldness would give them away; thus they usually were quickly recaptured, punished, and returned to their captors.)

The seriousness of the devastation in the land is expressed in verses 22-25. People will be able to retain only a fraction of their original herds and flocks (v. 22), yet the population will be so decimated that the limited livestock will provide plentiful milk and curds to the survivors. The relative losses of animals and people can be illustrated as follows:

The abundance of honey in these devastating circumstances comes from the large land areas that are left uncultivated and quickly turn to wild flowers, weeds, and other blossom-producing plants. Thus, ironically, the few who remain in the land will enjoy milk and honey because of the relatively large numbers of food-producing animals. They will still have problems and dangers, however, since they must fight off the weeds, thorny bushes, and wild animals. All in all, Isaiah describes serious conditions that will beset the people.

A few years after his Immanuel prophecy, Isaiah elaborated upon his earlier warnings with a new set of prophecies. This time he spoke not to the king or a small body; he wrote a message in large letters witnessed by the leaders of Jerusalem as a promise of the impending Assyrian attack upon Syria and Israel:

8 The LORD said to me, "Take a large scroll and write on it with an ordinary pen: Maher-Shalal-Hash-Baz. 2And I will call in Uriah the priest and Zechariah son of Jeberekiah as reliable witnesses for me."

3Then I went to the prophetess, and she conceived and gave birth to a son. And the LORD said to me, "Name him Maher-Shalal-Hash-Baz. 4Before the boy knows how to say 'My father' or "My mother,' the wealth of Damascus and the plunder of Samaria will be carried off by the king of Assyria." (NIV)

The message Isaiah carried to the people was "Maher-Shalal-Hash-Baz" or, "quick to the plunder, swift to the spoil." (See Isa. 8, footnote Id.) This message was written on a large tablet or parchment to warn the people that an Assyrian attack was imminent. The message was also embodied in Isaiah's son, who received the message as his given name. [^1] The nearness of fulfillment was also to be seen in the son because before he could "call out" or speak to his parents, the invasion would come upon Damascus and Samaria, and their wealth would go to Assyria.

Since Pul's invasion of Syria and Israel took place in 732 B.C., this prophecy was probably given two years earlier. Isaiah had the warning witnessed by leaders of Jerusalem, and thus after his wife conceived and they named their son, the people waited for him to learn to speak. It appears that before he did, the attack came, and the Judeans received a confirmation of Isaiah's prophetic powers.

With a witness of Isaiah's prophecy about the Assyrian attack upon the northern countries, the people of Jerusalem could study his prophecy given about them and know that it was also to be fulfilled:

5The LORD spoke to me again:

6"Because this people has rejected the gently flowing waters of Shiloah

and rejoices over Rezin and the son of Remaliah,

7therefore the Lord is about to bring against them the mighty flood waters of the River—the king of Assyria with all his pomp.

It will overflow all its channels, run over all its banks

8and sweep on into Judah, swirling over it, passing through it and reaching up to the neck.

Its outspread wings will cover the breadth of your land, O Immanuel!" (NIV)

The gentle waters of Shiloah (v.6) were the major water source for ancient Jerusalem. Located at the Gihon spring in the Kidron Valley east of the fortified city, they ebb and flow continually throughout the year. (See area D3 on Map 17.) During Isaiah's life, the waters were brought into a fortified area of the city when King Hezekiah, the son of Ahaz, built a tunnel through Mount Ophel, which still carries from eight to forty inches of running water. (See area C4 on Map 17.) This cool, flowing spring supplied more than enough water for the city of Jerusalem.

The "waters of Shiloah" also represent the continuous tender care that the Lord provided for his people as he sought to lead them with gentle promptings of the Spirit. The Judean leaders rejected the Lord's advice offered through Isaiah, who foretold how the raging floodwaters of the Euphrates River would replace the waters of Shiloah. Instead of gentle water around their knees, the raging torrent of the Assyrian army would gather around their necks (v. 8).

Having concluded his short warning to Judah with the expression "O Immanuel" or "Oh—God is with us!" Isaiah then addresses the nations rising against Judah and promises them, "God is with us":

9Raise the war cry, you nations, and be shattered!

Listen, all you distant lands.

Prepare for battle, and be shattered!

Prepare for battle, and be shattered!

10Devise your strategy, but it will be thwarted;

propose your plan, but it will not stand, for God is with us. (NIV)

The repetition of phrases at the end of verse 9 accentuates the message and provides a form of the comparative. The comparative degree in Hebrew was formed by simply repeating a word or phrase. To repeat the item three or more times made it superlative. Whereas in English one would say "good," "better," and "best" to indicate comparative degrees, in Hebrew one could say "good," "good, good," and "good, good, good." Thus, in the verse above, Isaiah is warning the nations that if they prepare for battle, they will be devastated.

In chapter 8, Isaiah speaks to a variety of audiences: the leaders of Jerusalem, the Israelites and Syrians, the judeans, and the enemy nations. Beginning in verse 11, he gives a rare personal discourse about his relationship with the people:

11The LORD spoke to me with his strong hand upon me, warning me not to follow the way of this people. He said:

12"Do not call conspiracy everything that these people call conspiracy;

do not fear what they fear,

and do not dread it.

13The LORD Almighty is the one you are to regard as holy, he is the one you are to fear, he is the one you are to dread,

14and he will be a sanctuary; but for both houses of Israel he will be a stone that causes men to stumble and a rock that makes them fall.

And for the people of Jerusalem he will be a trap and a snare.

15Many of them will stumble; they will fall and be broken, they will be snared and captured." (NIV)

The Lord counseled Isaiah not to fear the people or teach what they wanted to hear. Instead of seeking public acceptance, Isaiah was to seek the favor and sanctuary of the Lord. (Compare similar counsel to Jeremiah and Ezekiel in Jer. 7:25-28; Ezek. 3:7-9.)

The Lord then told the prophet that while he (and the righteous) sought the Lord's presence, the wicked would stumble over the Lord's advent and teachings. Jehovah and his laws caused many Israelites who refused to follow him to stumble. (See Jacob 4:15.) Later, when the Lord lived among the Jews, he was still a stumbling block to those who rejected his divine mission. (See 1 Pet. 2:8; Rom. 9:33; 1 Cor. 1:23.) Using five verbs that develop a "downward" pattern, Isaiah describes the results befalling those who reject the Lord (v. 15)—they stumble—they falter in their faith; they fall—they commit sins; they are broken—they suffer consequences for their transgressions; they are snared—they are enticed by Satan's temptations; they are captured—they are turned over to Satan's buffetings.

The Lord commands Isaiah to record his testimony or witness (v.16), and Isaiah responds with a promise to follow the Lord (v. 17):

16Bind up the testimony and seal up the law among my disciples

17I will wait for the LORD, who is hiding his face from the house of Jacob

I will put my trust in him. (NIV)

Other prophets have also been commanded to seal their witnesses and power to the people. (Jer. 32:44; Matt. 16:19; 18:18; D&C 1:8; 68:12; 88:84.) Eventually, the records and testimonies of the prophets will help judge the people. (D&C 133:71-73.)

Isaiah concludes chapter 8 by comparing his role as witness and symbol with the false messages the people receive from evil sources:

18Here am I, and the children the LORD has given me. We are signs and symbols in Israel from the LORD Almighty, who dwells on Mount Zion.

19When men tell you to consult mediums and spiritists, who whisper and mutter, should not a people inquire of their God? Why consult the dead on behalf of the living?

20To the law and to the testimony! If they do not speak according to this work, they have no light of dawn. 21Distressed and hungry, they will roam through the land; when they are famished, they will become enraged and, looking upward, they will curse their king and their God. 22Then they will look toward the earth and see only distress and darkness and fearful gloom, and they will be thrust into utter darkness. (NIV)

In these concluding verses, Isaiah first holds up himself and his sons, with their symbolic names and lives, as special signs to the people. (See Isa. 7:3, 10-16; 8:1-4.) He then rebukes the people's attempts to receive signs and counsel from diviners (v. 19). Important guidelines follow verse 20, in which Isaiah tells Israel that if one does not speak according to the law and testimony (the discourses of Moses and the witnesses of the prophets in the scriptures), he is not of God.

In summary, Isaiah's discourse in chapter 8 is a collection of warnings sealed with his own special witness. Coupled with chapter 7, these two chapters provide a number of warnings, signs, prophecies, and witnesses to Israel. To the wicked, these words will be as a snare to demonstrate their true relationship with God when they reject his word. To the righteous, Isaiah's words provide insight, perspective, and the important eternal witness that "God is with us!"

SCRIPTURAL NOTES AND COMMENTARY

Isaiah 7: Parallelism

Chapter 7 shifts from the Syro-Israelite invasion to God's signs and then to the Assyrian invasion. This develops a thematic pattern as follows:

A. Man vs. man (Judah vs. Syro-Israel) (vs. 1-10)

B. Man vs. God (Ahaz and a sign) (11-16)

A'. Man vs. God (Judah and prophecies) (17-20)

B'. Man vs. man (Judah vs. Assyria) (21-25)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The darkness represents Assyria; the light is the king who protects his people from Assyria. Since Hezekiah is victorious over the Assyrians, he is the natural candidate for this rescuing role. (Isa. 38-39.) This viewpoint is favored among Jewish scholars.
