Victor L. Ludlow, Isaiah: Prophet, Seer, and Poet ( 1982)

WARNINGS TO ISRAEL AND ASSYRIA ISAIAH 9-10

Chapters 9 and 10 of Isaiah are a natural continuation of chapters 7 and 8; the historical context still centers upon the Assyrian crisis of 734-701 B.C., although the situation worsens after Ahaz ignores Isaiah's counsel. In chapters 7 and 8, Isaiah told Ahaz that an Assyrian alliance would bring problems. Now, in chapters 9 and 10, with the alliance an accomplished fact, Isaiah prophesies more specifically about the Assyrian punishments coming upon Israel and Judah. He warns the ten tribes in the north of their impending captivity and foretells a later Assyrian attack upon the southern tribes.

The messianic prophecies of chapters 7 and 8 are also developed further in chapters 9 and 10. The Immanuel prophecy is amplified in chapter 9 as Isaiah promises a "new light" and a new leader for Israel. This promised child could be the young King Hezekiah, who would help deliver Judah from the Assyrians, but if Hezekiah is the object of Isaiah's prophecy, he is only a foreshadowing of Jesus Christ, the greater light and deliverer of all nations.

The material in chapters 9 and 10 divides easily into three major sections:

I. The Prince of Peace (9:1-7)

II. Four warnings to Israel (9:8-10:4)

A. Pride and arrogance (9:8-12)

B. Evil leaders (9:13-17)

C. Selfishness and destruction (9:18-21)

D. Unjust leaders (10:1-4)

III. God sends Assyria against Judah (10:5-34)

The Prince of Peace (9:1-7)

Because of Canaan's location between Asia and Africa, it served as the crossroads for caravans and armies. Unfortunately for the inhabitants, however, the armies usually did not pass through without plundering, destroying, and seeking to control the area. Egyptian and Mesopotamian powers often threatened the Israelites, but for over half a millennium no foreign power had established complete domination over them. With the encroachment of the Assyrians, however, it appeared that Israel's independence was finally ending and Judah's was likewise endangered. Isaiah's words seem to promise an immediate release from this threat:

9 But there will be no gloom for her that was in anguish. In the former time he brought into contempt the land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, but in the latter time he will make glorious the way of the sea, the land beyond the Jordan, Galilee of the nations. (RSV)

In this verse Isaiah immediately sets up a contrast before former and latter times. The former time refers to his own age when the Assyrians were punishing the Israelites in the lands of Zebulun and Naphtali, two tribes located near the Sea of Galilee; the latter time is a future period when God will "be heavy" (from the Hebrew root, kaved) with the land. Translators differ as to the meaning of this term, saying variously that God will "make glorious," "deal heavily" (NIV), or "grievously afflict" (KJV) the area. Besides the unsurety of what the Lord's actions will be, the precise time of this manifestation is not presented, and, for unknown reasons, the land area to be affected in the latter time is larger than that which was anciently attacked by the Assyrians. Also, the "way of the sea" is not identified, although the Book of Mormon includes a clarifying modifier, calling it the "way of the Red Sea." (2 Ne. 19:1.)

Verse 1 of chapter 9 bridges chapters 8 and 9, and its position might help clarify its meaning. In fact, it is included as the last verse of chapter 8 in the Hebrew versions of Isaiah but is made the beginning verse of chapter 9 in most English translations. Chapter 8 ends with a gloomy note of trouble and darkness, while, beginning in verse 2, chapter 9 speaks of light and joy. Therefore, it seems likely that chapter 9 verse 1 includes both a former time of darkness and a latter time when the Lord's "heaviness" will provide blessings.

A clearer promise is found in the second verse:

2The people who walked in darkness have seen a great light; those who dwelt in a land of deep darkness, on them has light shined. (RSV)

Isaiah continues the contrast theme in this verse, shifting from a former-latter time contrast to a darkness-light comparison. He does not establish, however, whether the "darkness" and "light" refer to physical, social, or spiritual conditions. At least three explanations are possible:

As Isaiah talks further about the conflict between the forces of darkness and light, notice how the three interpretations (Assyrians versus Hezekiah, a wicked versus a righteous people, and apostasy versus Christ) might apply:

3Thou has multiplied the nation, thou hast increased its joy;

they rejoice before thee as with joy at the harvest, as men rejoice when they divide the spoil.

4For the yoke of his burden, and the staff for his shoulder, the rod of his oppressor, thou hast broken as on the day of Midian.

5For every boot of the tramping warrior in battle tumult and every garment rolled in blood will be burned as fuel for the fire.

6For to us a child is born, to us a son is given;

and the government will be upon his shoulder, and his name will be called "Wonderful Counselor, Mighty God,

Everlasting Father, Prince of Peace."

7Of the increase of his government and of peace

there will be no end,

upon the throne of David, and over his kingdom,

to establish it, and to uphold it

with justice and with righteousness from this time forth and for evermore. The zeal of the LORD of hosts will do this. (RSV)

If Isaiah is prophesying about Hezekiah, then verse 3 describes the Israelites' joy at their deliverance; verse 4 portrays how the Assyrians were defeated in spite of their greater numbers, just as the many Midianites were by Gideon and his 300 men (Judg. 7); verse 5 describes the Assyrian casualties; and verses 6 and 7 tell about Hezekiah's titles and righteous, peaceful rule as king.

If the verses describe a righteous people fighting against wickedness, then verse 3 describes their joy at success, verses 4 and 5 portray the defeat of the enemy, and verses 6 and 7 describe a new age of millennial peace that may be assisted or ushered in by a messianic figure.

Finally, the identification of the ruler in verses 3-7 with Jesus Christ has a number of possibilities, as verse 3 talks about his many followers who rejoice at the spiritual blessings he has provided; verse 4 describes how he was able to overcome the temptations of Satan, break the yoke of sin, and maintain power over the legions of Satan's devils; verse 5 symbolizes his atonement and the cleansing powers of baptism and the Holy Ghost; verse 6 presents some of his titles and roles; and verse 7 describes his eternal position as the Lord and King of this earth. This last interpretation is amplified by a modern apostle, James E. Talmage, who said:

Isaiah, whose prophetic office was honored by the personal testimony of Christ and the apostles, manifested in numerous passages the burden of his conviction relating to the great event of the Savior's advent and ministry on earth. With the forcefulness of direct revelation he told of the Virgin's divine maternity, whereof Immanuel should be born, and his prediction was reiterated by the angel of the Lord, over seven centuries later. Looking down through the ages the prophet saw the accomplishment of the divine purposes as if already achieved, and sang in triumph: 'For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given: and the government shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace.'" (JTC, pp. 46-47.)

In verse 6, Isaiah prophesies that the promised deliverer will be born "unto us" (the house of Israel), and he gives four titles of the Redeemer: Wonderful Counselor, Mighty God, Everlasting Father, and Prince of Peace. Although the titles might apply to Hezekiah, they more naturally identify the Messiah, for each one describes an important role of Jesus Christ. Isaiah's use of symbolic titles is a very common technique of prophesying both in the Old Testament and the Book of Mormon. A brief study of this technique will help clarify Isaiah's literary and prophetic style.

A prophet contemporary with Isaiah records an important key to the prophetic technique: "I [the Lord] have also spoken by the prophets, and I have multiplied visions, and used similitudes, by the ministry of the prophets." (Hosea 12:10; italics added.)

This verse reveals that the Lord has spoken "by the prophets" through visions and used "similitudes" in the revelations in order to present his message to the people. (A similitude is an allegory or parable.) A natural question arising from the Hosea passage is, "What do the similitudes or parables represent?" The apostle Peter answers: "Yea, and all the prophets from Samuel and those that follow after, as many as have spoken, have likewise foretold of these days [of Jesus Christ]." (Acts 3:24; see also Acts 7:52; 10:43.)

A Book of Mormon prophet, Jacob, explains that all things are a "typifying" (an example or parable) of Christ. (2 Ne. 11:4.) This is what Hosea and Peter were saying: all the prophets have spoken and prophesied of Christ by using "all things" as a "typifying" of him. Ancient Israel understood this. The law of Moses with all its statues and rites existed expressly to prepare Israel for the coming of Christ. (See Deut. 18:15, 19; 2 Ne. 22:2; Acts 3:19-26.) Understanding the use of types as a technique of prophesying helps explain how Isaiah was able to use pious examples from his age as models for his messianic prophecies.

As stated earlier, some scholars believe that the leader promised by Isaiah in chapter 9 was Hezekiah. Hezekiah was indeed a righteous king, for he both helped bring Judah to a higher spiritual plane and brought a partial peace to the land. Hezekiah listened to the counsel of Isaiah and tried to follow it. He seems particularly righteous when contrasted with his father, Ahaz, and his son Mannaseh. Still, Isaiah was merely using Hezekiah as a type, a figure of the future Messiah. Isaiah's method was at least partially understood by the Jews, as evidenced in the above scriptures from New Testament times. When the Israelites heard of Isaiah's prophecy, they knew it applied to Hezekiah and that they would enjoy a period of peace, but some of them also knew that its full realization would come only in the birth and life of the Messiah, the perfect king.

Four Warnings to Israel (9:8-10:4)

Isaiah now turns his attention to the rebellious northern kingdom of Israel, whose ruling tribe is represented by Ephraim and whose capital is Samaria. The historical setting is the same as in verses 1-7: the northern tribes have already been placed under direct Assyrian control, and many leading citizens have been taken captive to Assyria. The campaign of Tiglath-Pileser III in 732 B.C. brought about the deportation of the major portions of the northernmost Israelite tribes, Zebulun and Naphtali. Still, the invasion and deportation did not bring the stubborn Israelites to the realization that the prophecies uttered against them would all surely come to pass unless they repented. They had had a taste of the Lord's judgment, but learned nothing from it, since Isaiah still levels four major accusations against them: pride, evil leaders, selfishness, and injustice.

This prophecy is written in four stanzas, each ending with the same refrain: "for all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still." As indicated earlier in the discussion of Isaiah 5:25, this same phrase implies both a warning of further punishment and an invitation to repent and yield to the Lord's mercy.

In the first stanza, Isaiah describes the people's arrogance in their response to the destruction around them. They respond with a boast, saying that they will build a civilization more glorious than the one destroyed:

8The Lord has sent a word against Jacob,

and it will light upon Israel;

9and all the people will know,

Ephraim and the inhabitants of Samaria,

who say in pride and in arrogance of heart:

10"The bricks have fallen,

but we will build with dressed stones;

the sycamores have been cut down,

but we will put cedars in their place."

11So the LORD raises adversaries against them,

and stirs up their enemies.

12The Syrians on the east and the Philistines on the west

devour Israel with open mouth.

For all this his anger is not turned away

and his hand is stretched out still. (RSV)

The second stanza or warning describes why the Lord has caused their leaders to be taken away and allowed universal suffering to occur:

13The people did not turn to him who smote them,

nor seek the LORD of hosts.

14So the LORD cut off from Israel head and tail,

palm branch and reed in one day—

15the elder and honored man is the head,

and the prophet who teaches lies is the tail;

16for those who lead this people lead them astray,

and those who are led by them are swallowed up.

17Therefore the LORD does not

rejoice over their young men,

and has no compassion on their fatherless and widows;

for every one is godless and an evildoer,

and every mouth speaks folly.

For all this his anger is not turned away

and his hand is stretched out still. (RSV)

The third warning promises the consuming wrath of the Lord, yet the people are so selfish that they continue to grasp whatever they can in the chaos:

18For wickedness burns like a fire,

it consumes briers and thorns;

it kindles the thickets of the forest,

and they roll upward in a column of smoke.

19Through the wrath of the LORD of hosts

the land is burned, and the people are like fuel for the fire;

no man spares his brother.

20They snatch on the right, but are still hungry,

and they devour on the left, but are not satisfied;

each devours his neighbor's flesh,

21Manasseh Ephraim, and Ephraim Manasseh,

and together they are against Judah.

For all this his anger is not turned away

and his hand is stretched out still. (RSV)

The final stanza summarizes the northern Israelites' wickedness and describes their injustice toward the weak and needy. The Lord promises that since the oppressed have no one to help them, the Israelites will likewise be without a protector:

10 Woe to those who decree iniquitous decrees,

and the writers who keep writing oppression,

2to turn aside the needy from justice

and to rob the poor of my people of their right,

that widows may be their spoil,

and that they may make the fatherless their prey!

3What will you do on the day of punishment,

in the storm which will come from afar?

To whom will you flee for help,

and where will you leave your wealth?

4Nothing remains but to crouch

among the prisoners or fall among the slain.

For all this his anger is not turned away

and his hand is stretched out still. (RSV)

The Old Testament provides a limited account of the political events that led up to the destruction promised by Isaiah. Fortunately, some Assyrian records have been discovered and translated within the past century that give us a more complete history. Together, these two sources help us understand how the Lord used Assyria in an attempt to humble Israel and bring her to repentence. Israel, however, became progressively more wicked until she merited the complete destruction of her country, the loss of her independence, and the captivity of many of her citizens.

As prophesied, the Assyrians came and attacked Syria from the north. Pekah and Rezin were forced to lift their siege of Jerusalem and rush off to defend their lands. Here are the accounts as recorded in the Bible and the cuneiform tablets of Tiglath-Pileser III:

2 Kings

The king of Assyria went up against Damascus and took it, and carried the people of it captive to Kir, and slew Rezin (16:9).

In the days of Pekah, King of Israel came Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria, and took . . . Hazor, and Gilead, and Galilee, all the land of Naphtali, and carried them captive to Assyria (15:29).

And Hosea . . . made a conspiracy against Pekah . . . and slew him and reigned in his stead (15:30).

Cuneiform Text of Pul

His noblemen I impaled alive and displayed this exhibition to his land. All his gardens and fruit orchards I destroyed. I besieged and captured the native city of Reson [Rezin] of Damascus. 800 people with their belongings I led away. Towns in 16 districts of Damascus I laid waste like mounds after the flood.

Bet-Omri [Israel] all of whose cities I had added to my territories on my former campaigns, and had left out only the city of Samaria. The whole of Nephtali I took for Assyria. I put my officials over them as governors. The land of Bet-Omri, all its people and their possessions I took away to Assyria.

They overthrew Pekah their king and I made Hosea to be king over them. (Keller, The Bible as History, p. 245.)

By 732 B.C., as a result of this rebellion against the Assyrians, Israel was smashed to the ground, decimated by deportation, and beaten back into the southern corner of her kingdom. With the exception of Samaria, all her major cities were annexed by Assyria, and the countryside was divided into provinces over which Assyrian governors and officials exercised strict control.

The Assyrians controlled the whole of the Fertile Crescent from the Persian mountains to Asia Minor, and from the Mesopotamian plain through Lebanon to Palestine. Only Judah and a few other states remained independent, although they had to pay tribute or risk conquest. Samaria retained only a few square miles of farmland, and even though she was reduced to barely a city with her surrounding mountains and valleys, Samaria still boasted that she would rebuild and come to power again. (Isa. 9:10.)

With the death of Tiglath-Pileser III in 727 B.C., Hosea stopped paying annual tribute, conspired with Egypt, and rebelled against Assyria. Shalmaneser V, the next Assyrian king, attacked what remained of Israel and besieged Samaria. However, he soon died, and his successor, Sargon II, conquered Samaria. Sargon records:

In the first year of my reign I besieged and conquered Samaria. . . . I led away into captivity 27,290 people who lived there. . . . People of the lands, prisoners my hand has captured, I settled there. My officials I placed over them as governors. I imposed tribute and tax upon them, as upon the Assyrians." (Keller, The Bible as History, pp. 246, 250; compare 2 Kgs. 17.)

The fall of Samaria in 722-721 B.C. was the beginning of exile for the lost ten tribes of Israel. The Assyrians deported the conquered nation's inhabitants to break their national spirit and assimilate them into Assyrian culture. Shortly thereafter, Samaria was inhabited by pagan people from other nations. These people mixed with the remaining Israelites, for not all of them had been taken into captivity. Through the mixing of these groups the Samaritans came about. As a result of this mixing, the Jews later felt that the Samaritans were no longer pure descendants of Abraham and therefore were not entitled to be remembered with the chosen people. The Samaritan Province, along with the other Assyrian provinces, is shown in the map on page 160.

The Assyrians could have been diverted from Israel if her people had only repented; instead, they persisted in boasting of their strength. Because they failed to heed the words of Isaiah and the other prophets, and ignored the earlier, minor judgments of the Lord, they were destroyed as a nation and taken captive to Assyria and Media. Later, they vanished from the stage of history, but the Lord has promised that a remnant will return again someday. (Jer. 16:14-15; D&C 133:23-28.) Isaiah gives a last warning to Israel along with a promise concerning her redeemed remnant in the pronouncement in chapter 10.

God Sends Assyria against Israel (10:5-34)

After his fourfold warning to Israel, Isaiah continues his discourse in the form of a poetic prophecy. He gives warning to both Assyria and Israel in a poem structured in introverted parallelism (chiasmus). The poem encompasses the entire chapter and can be outlined as follows:

A. The wicked will bow down (vs. 1-4)

B. Assyria raised by the Lord (5)

C. The Assyrian king speaks against Jerusalem (6-11)

D. The Lord will punish proud Assyria (12-14)

E. An ax is used as a tool (15)

F. The Lord is a burning fire in the land (16-17)

G. Out of all the scrubs—only a remnant remains (18-19)

H. A remnant of Israel shall return to the Lord (20-21)

G'. Out of the "sands of the sea"—only a remnant returns (22)

F'. A divine consumption is in the land (23)

E'. A rod is used as an instrument (24-26)

D'. Assyria's yoke will be lifted (27)

C'. Assyrian army approaches Jerusalem (28-32)

B'. Assyria humbled by the Lord (33)

A'. The haughty will be cut down (34)

Isaiah records that the Lord allowed Assyria to become a strong nation to enable it to be the medium through which he would mete out his judgments upon various nations, especially the wicked northern kingdom of Israel. However, the Assyrian king thinks that he has been able to gain control over the western Fertile Crescent because of his armies' great power. In this he is sadly mistaken, and his people will themselves experience the Lord's punishment and lose many of their own numbers:

5Ah, Assyria, the rod of my anger, the staff of my fury!

6Against a godless nation I send him,

and against the people of my wrath I command him,

to take spoil and seize plunder,

and to tread them down like the mire of the streets.

7But he does not so intend,

and his mind does not so think;

but it is in his mind to destroy,

and to cut off nations not a few;

8for he says:

"Are not my commanders all kings?

9Is not Calno like Carchemish?

Is not Hamath like Arpad?

Is not Samaria like Damascus?

10As my hand has reached to the kingdoms of the idols

whose graven images were greater than those of Jerusalem and Samaria,

11Shall I not do to Jerusalem and her idols

as I have done to Samaria and her images?"

12When the Lord has finished all his work on Mount Zion and on Jerusalem he will punish the arrogant boasting of the king of Assyria and his haughty pride.

13For he says:

"By the strength of my hand I have done it,

and by my wisdom, for I have understanding;

I have removed the boundaries of peoples,

and have plundered their treasures;

like a bull I have brought down those who sat on thrones.

14My hand has found like a nest the wealth of the peoples;

and as men gather eggs that have been forsaken

so I have gathered all the earth;

and there was none that moved a wing,

or opened the mouth, or chirped."

15Shall the axe vaunt itself over him who hews with it,

or the saw magnify itself

against him who wields it?

As if a rod should wield him who lifts it,

or as if a staff should lift him who is not wood!

16Therefore the Lord, the LORD of hosts,

will send wasting sickness among his stout warriors,

and under his glory a burning will be kindled,

like the burning of fire.

17The light of Israel will become a fire,

and his Holy One a flame;

and it will burn and devour

his thorns and briers in one day.

18The glory of his forest and of his fruitful land

the LORD will destroy, both soul and body,

and it will be as when a sick man wastes away.

19The remnant of the trees of his

forest will be so few

that a child can write them down.(RSV)

The extent of Assyrian power is described in verses 5-11, which include a list of the major Mesopotamian, Syrian, and Israelite cities that had already fallen (v. 9). Sargon records how he conquered and destroyed these cities:

The king's throne would be set up before the gates of the city and the prisoners would be paraded before him, led by the monarch of the captured town, who would undergo the most agonizing torture, such as having his eyes put out or confinement in a cage, until the king of Assyria set a term to his long-drawn agony. Sargon had the defeated king of Damascus burned alive before his eyes. The wives and daughters of the captured king were destined for the Assyrian harems and those who were not of noble blood were condemned to slavery. Meanwhile the soldiery had been massacring the population, and brought the heads of their victims in into the king's presence, where they were counted up by the scribes. Not all the male prisoners were put to death, for the boys and craftsmen were led into captivity, where they would be assigned to the hardest tasks on the royal building projects, where the swamps which cover so much of Mesopotamia must have caused an enormously high rate of mortality. The remainder of the population were uprooted and sent to the other end of the empire. (Quoted in A. Heschel, The Prophets [New York: Jewish Publ. Soc. of America, 1962], p. 163.)

The arrogant boasting of Assyria would eventually bring God's wrath upon her, but only after she had completed her task against Jerusalem.

In verse 12, Isaiah gives the first hint that Jerusalem will actually be attacked by Assyria as was Samaria. The Assyrian invasion no doubt fulfilled a purpose the Lord had in mind; he wanted to humble the Jews and awaken them to an awareness of him. The invasion referred to took place under Sennacherib in the year 701 B.C. During this invasion, many cities in Judah were destroyed, but Jerusalem miraculously held out against the Assyrian siege because the Lord sent a terrible sickness throughout the Assyrian camps, which caused many deaths. (2 Kgs. 19:35, 37; Isa. 36-37.)

The major point of these verses is that even though the Lord sent Assyria to carry out judgments on Israel and Judah, Assyria was sinful too, claiming victory because of her own strength and not rightfully giving the credit to God (vs. 12-14).

Starting with verse 15 and continuing through verse 19, the Lord pronounces the judgment coming upon Assyria for her undue pride. The ax, Assyria, is nothing without the one who wields it, the Lord; because Assyria has tried to take the credit, she will be smitten (v. 15). (As described earlier, sickness did break out among the Assyrian troops, causing them to lift their siege of Jerusalem.) Continuing the judgment upon Assyria, Isaiah says that they will be so completely destroyed that even a child could count the number of people left (v.19). Indeed, the Babylonians and Persians later destroyed the Assyrian empire so completely that the Assyrians ceased to be a people.

A Remnant of Israel to Be Saved

Even though the country of Israel was destroyed by the Assyrians, and her people were scattered through the Assyrian Empire, Isaiah promises that a remnant of Israel will return to the Lord and their promised land:

20In that day the remnant of Israel and the survivors of the house of Jacob will no more lean upon him that smote them, but will lean upon the LORD, the Holy One of Israel, in truth. 21A remnant will return, the remnant of Jacob, to the mighty God. 22For though your people Israel be as the sand of the sea, only a remnant of them will return. Destruction is decreed, overflowing with righteousness. 23For the Lord, the LORD of hosts, will make a full end, as decreed, in the midst of all the earth. (RSV)

The concept of a remnant returning is a key theme in Isaiah's writings. It goes back to his initial vision (Isa. 6:13) and remains a thread of hope weaving throughout his darkest pronouncements of doom.

Isaiah uses the term remnant to describe two distinct groups of Israelites: he talks about a remnant that remains in the land after the Assyrian destruction and promises the return of a future righteous remnant. The two groups are called the historical remnant and the eschatological remnant respectively. The historical remnant is the group present from a past event (such as the Assyrian invasions), while the eschatological remnant is the group that will emerge from a future action of God and have the qualifications of a latter-day, millennial society. Isaiah's urgent hope is that the historical remnant of the eighth century B.C. will return to the Lord and become the community from which the eschatological remnant will emerge.

Isaiah concludes his pronouncement in chapter 10 by again addressing Israel and promising that the Lord will relieve her of the Assyrian oppression:

24Therefore thus says the Lord, the LORD of hosts: "O my people, who dwell in Zion, be not afraid of the Assyrians when they smite with the rod and lift up their staff against you as the Egyptians did. 25For in a very little while my indignation will come to an end, and my anger will be directed to their destruction. 26And the LORD of hosts will wield against them a scourge as when he smote Midian at the rock of Oreb: and his rod will be over the sea, and he will lift it as he did in Egypt.

27And in that day his burden will depart from your shoulder, and his yoke will be destroyed from your neck."

He has gone up from Rimmon,

28he has come to Aiath;

he has passed through Migron, at Michmash he stores his baggage;

29they have crossed over the pass,

at Geba they lodge for the night,;

Ramah trembles,

Gibe-ah of Saul has fled.

30Cry aloud, O daughter of Gallim!

Hearken, O Laishah! Answer her, O Anathoth!

31Madmenah is in flight,

the inhabitants of Gebim flee for safety.

32This very day he will halt at Nob,

he will shake his fist

at the mount of the daughter of Zion,

the hill of Jerusalem.

33Behold, the Lord, the LORD of hosts

will lop the boughs with terrifying power;

the great in height will be hewn down, and the lofty will be brought low.

34He will cut down the thickets of the forest with an axe,

and Lebanon with its majestic trees will fall. (RSV)

Although the Assyrian army will come close to Jerusalem (vs. 28-32), the Lord promises that he will finally cut down the Assyrian leaders in order to preserve Jersualem. The cities conquered during the Assyrian invasion are shown in the map on page 166.

The Assyrians did later invade Judah and came almost into Jerusalem. (Isa. 36-37.) However, the invasion Isaiah foretells may also be eschatological and refer to the future attack upon Jerusalem by forces from the north. (See Zech. 14:2; Rev. 11:1-13; JST Matt. 24.) Another reason for looking at the end of chapter 10 from a latter-day context is that chapter 11 is definitely a prophecy to be fulfilled after 1823, for Moroni told Joseph Smith in September of that year "that it was about to be fulfilled." (JS-H 1:40.)

In conclusion, chapters 9 and 10 present a blend of historical warnings, messianic promises, and latter-day prophecies. The people of Isaiah's time could have learned from his words and been blessed, especially as they heeded his counsel. We today can heed the same warnings, since similar conditions of wickedness and war appear in our society.
