Victor L. Ludlow, Isaiah: Prophet, Seer, and Poet ( 1982)

LATTER-DAY SERVANTS OF POWER AND MILLENNIAL PEACE ISAIAH 11-12

In sweeping panoramic visions, the Lord taught Isaiah remarkable truths about our time. Like Moroni (see Morm. 8), he saw our day—the last days; he foresaw the events and personalities of this dispensation in fulfillment of the Lord's designs to elevate this planet and its inhabitants to a more glorious millennial existence.

When Moroni visited Joseph Smith on the night of September 21, 1823, he quoted the eleventh chapter of Isaiah and told Joseph that "it was about to be fulfilled." (JS-H 1:40.) This important chapter describes people and events associated with the Millennium. It contains some classic verses about the wolf and the lamb dwelling together and how Israel will be gathered a second time. However, some of the terms and symbols in this chapter are extremely difficult to understand. Later revelations clarify some of the terms and identify leaders who would assume important roles in this dispensation. In 1838, Joseph asked the Lord about the meaning of three key terms in this chapter. The revealed answers were recorded in section 113 of the Doctrine and Covenants. These three terms are identified as separate personalities who would play important roles in the last days.

11 But a shoot shall grow out of the stump of Jesse

A twig shall branch off from his stock. (NJV)

This verse develops further the metaphor introduced in the previous chapter in which the Lord warned Assyria of her pride and eventual fall. The time would come when the oppressed of Israel would escape the power of the Assyrian yoke. Chapter 10 ends with Isaiah's promise that the mighty trees (or leaders) of Assyria would be hewn down (or humbled). Isaiah then begins his prophecy in chapter 11 speaking of new trees (or leaders) that would come forth out of Israel to rule and bless the earth.

Verse 1 appears to be an example of synonymous parallelism, a poetic device used by Isaiah in nearly every chapter. Apparently the reference to two separate individuals (rod—branch; stem—roots) is his way of saying the same thing twice, but in slightly different words:

A. And there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse,

B. And a branch shall grow out of his roots. (KJV)

In section 113 of the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord identifies two key terms used in this verse: "rod" and "stem of Jesse." The "rod" is "a servant in the hands of Christ, who is partly a descendant of Jesse as well as of Ephraim . . . on whom there is laid much power." (D&C 113:3-4.) The "stem" is Christ himself. (See D&C 113:1-2.) [^1] Therefore, the first part of verse 1 could be translated:

And there shall come forth a descendant of Jesse and Ephraim who shall be a powerful servant in the hands of Christ . . .

Continuing the parallelism, the second part of the verse ("and a branch shall grow out of his roots") could read:

. . . yea, a helper from among his children shall come forth.

The humble beginnings of this servant might be indicated by the use of the terms "rod" (twig) and "branch" instead of the more prominent images of "limb," "trunk," or "tree." It might also emphasize the barrenness of Israelite leadership at the time. At any rate, it is clear that this "rod" or "branch" would grow into a mighty tree and assume an important role in the last days.

The term branch in the King James text comes from the Hebrew word natzar, which appears in only one other prophetic book of the Old Testament—Daniel 11:7. In Daniel's vision of the last days, he mentions a "branch" coming from "roots." (See Dan. 11:7-12:1.) Many other scriptures mention the "branch" or leader who will build a temple and fight against the wicked king and stand witness of the Lord's final victory in the last days. He is called by many names and titles, including: "my servant, the BRANCH" (Zech. 3:8-9); "my servant David," a "king" over the Jews (Ezek. 37:21-28); "a righteous Branch and a King" in whose days Judah would be saved (Jer. 23:3-8); "a Branch of righteousness" (Jer. 33:15); "a leader and commander to the people" (Isa. 55:3-4); and "David their king in the latter days" (Hosea 3:4-5).

Modern prophets have also discussed this Jewish leader of the last days. Joseph Smith said, "The throne and kingdom of David is to be taken from him and given to another by the name of David in the last days, raised up out of his lineage." (HC 6:253.) In his dedicatory prayer on the Mount of Olives, Orson Hyde prophesied: "Raise up Jerusalem . . . and constitute her people a distinct nation and government, with David Thy servant, even a descendant from the loins of ancient David to be their king." (HC 4:457.)

In summary, the servant ("rod" and "branch") of Isaiah 11:1 appears to describe the great Jewish leader of the last days who will be called David. He will be an instrument (in somewhat the same manner as was Cyrus anciently—see Isa. 44:28) used by the Lord to fulfill his divine plan of events before the Millennium.

2The spirit of the Lord shall alight upon him:

A spirit of wisdom and insight,

A spirit of counsel and valor,

A spirit of devotion and reverence for the Lord.

3He shall sense the truth by his reverence for the Lord:

He shall not judge by what his eyes behold,

Nor decide by what his ears perceive.

4Thus he shall judge the poor with equity

and decide with justice for the lowly of the land.

He shall strike down a land with the rod of his mouth

and slay the wicked with the breath of his lips.

5Justice shall be the girdle of his loins,

And faithfulness the girdle of his waist. (NJV)

These verses describe some important characteristics of this great leader. The Spirit of the Lord will rest upon him and other spiritual gifts will be his. He will be led to reverence the Lord. He might not be a Christian or a member of Christ's true church, but he will respect the Lord and have concern for others. He will judge righteously through the power of discernment. Like the prophets Joshua (Deut. 34:9), Samuel (1 Sam. 16:7), and Jesus (John 7:24), he will not depend upon the physical senses of man, but upon the Spirit of God, and will be able to judge in righteousness and equity. (See 1 Cor. 2:10-16.) Indeed, verse 5 could be rephrased as "righteousness shall be the girdle [strength] of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins [sinews]."

These spiritual powers and promises also belong to Christ (see D&C 113:2; 2 Ne. 30:9-11), as he is their giver. He, in turn, promises to share them with his endowed and faithful disciples as they live righteously and become more and more like him. (See Alma 20:4; D&C 113:8.) These verses therefore achieve a double fulfillment, as they describe both Christ and his servants. (Compare Ps. 22, 110.)

6The wolf shall dwell with the lamb,

The leopard lie down with the kid;

The calf, the beast of prey, and the fatling together,

With a little boy to herd them.

7The cow and the bear shall graze,

Their young shall lie down together;

And the lion, like the ox, shall eat straw.

8A babe shall play over a viper's hole

And an infant pass his hand over an adder's den.

9In all of My sacred mount nothing evil or vile shall be done;

For the land shall be filled with devotion to the Lord

As water covers the sea. (NJV)

These well-known verses describe the millennial period of peace between wild and domesticated animals (wolf and lamb, leopard and goat, lion and calf) and between helpless people and deadly animals (children and poisonous serpents). Enmity between animals will cease and Satan will be bound as man's righteousness and knowledge increase. (D&C 101:26-34; 2 Ne. 30:16-18.) The earth will begin to fill the measure of her creation as righteousness prevails and the knowledge of the glory of God fills the world even as the waters cover the sea. (See Hab. 2:14.) The gospel will be spread to all nations until "all the inhabitants of the earth shall embrace it." (DS 3:64-65; see also Spencer W. Kimball, "Lamanite Prophecies Fulfilled," BYU Speeches of the Year [Provo: BYU Press], 1964-65, p. 11.)

10In that day,

The stock of Jesse that has remained standing

Shall become a standard to nations—

Peoples shall seek his counsel,

And his abode shall be honored. (NJV)

Another major figure of the last days is introduced in this verse: a "root of Jesse," who shall stand as an ensign for the people to which the Gentiles shall seek. The Lord identifies this "root of Jesse" as a "descendant of Jesse, as well as of Joseph, unto whom rightly belongs the priesthood, and the keys of the kingdom, for an ensign, and for the gathering of my people in the last days." (D&C 113:5-6.)

This servant would hold the priesthood keys that would serve as an ensign for the Gentiles and result in the gathering of Israel in the last days. He is often identified as the Prophet Joseph Smith. (See VIP, pp. 34-38.) In comparing Joseph Smith with the "root of Jesse," each aspect of his calling will be analyzed:

Joseph Smith: Descendant of Jesse and Joseph

The Book of Mormon contains an important prophecy about a descendant of the ancient Joseph who would also be named Joseph and who would do a great work of salvation among the Israelites to bring them to the knowledge of God's covenants in the last days. (2 Ne. 3:6-11, 14-15.) Joseph Smith, Jr., is this Joseph. His patriarchal blessing identifies him as the heir to the promises of Ephraim (son of the ancient Joseph), and he is called a pure Ephraimite [^3] by Brigham Young. (DS 3:250-54; WTP, pp. 125-27.)

There is not the same recorded evidence of Joseph Smith being a descendant of Jesse through the tribe of Judah. However, there were occasions in earlier Church history when a number of the brethren, including Joseph Smith, claimed that they shared lineage with Jesus in the tribe of Judah. (See Life of Heber C. Kimball [1888], p. 185; JD 4:248; Journal of President Rudger Clawson, pp. 374-75; Ivins Journal, p. 21.)

In short, Joseph Smith fulfills the requirements as a descendant of Joseph through his son Ephraim. He was also a descendant of Judah through Jesse, and he may have descended through the same lineage as Jesus.

Joseph Smith: Rightful Heir to the Priesthood

The early priesthood holders of this dispensation were lawful heirs to their power through their lineage. (D&C 86:8-11.) Indeed, Isaiah prophesied that the strength of Zion in the last days would be the authority of the priesthood to which Zion "has a right by lineage." (Isa. 52:1; D&C 113:8; see also 107:40-41, 56-57.) Joseph Smith held the priesthood and through it organized the Church of Jesus Christ in this dispensation. (See D&C 13; 20; 23; 84; 107; 124:123.)

Joseph Smith: Holder of the Keys of the Kingdom

With the priesthood, the Prophet also received certain keys. First, he received the office of an apostle under the hands of Peter, James, and John, who held the keys of "the kingdom of heaven." (See Matt. 16:19; D&C 27:12-13.) Later, through Moses, Elias, [^4] and Elijah, he received the keys necessary for this dispensation and was told that thus the world would know that the "great and dreadful day of the Lord" was near at hand. (D&C 110:11-16.) With these keys for the gathering of Israel, missionary work, the sealing powers of the temple, and other powers, Joseph Smith had the authority to usher in the dispensation of the fullness of times. (D&C 65:2; 107:8; 115:18-19; 128:10-14, 20-21.)

Joseph Smith: His Work to Be an Ensign to the Nations

In 1844, the Prophet Joseph Smith stated:

The Savior said . . . the keys of knowledge, power and revelations should be revealed to a witness who should hold the testimony to the world. . . . The testimony is that the Lord in the last days would commit the keys of the priesthood to a witness over all people . . . a special messenger—ordained and prepared for that purpose in the last days. (HC 6:363-64.)

Joseph recorded that Moroni had told him "that God had a work for me to do; and that my name should be had for good and evil among all nations, kindreds, and tongues." (JS-H 1:33.)

After the Church was organized, the Prophet Joseph Smith became the rallying point and the source of God's knowledge and strength to the early Saints. (See D&C 5:10.) By the time of his martyrdom, the Church had grown so much that its leaders were ready to fulfill their purpose and continue the work Joseph began. The gospel (the everlasting covenant) has since spread worldwide, thereby becoming a light to the world, a standard (or ensign) for the Lord's people and for the Gentiles to seek and a messenger [^5] to prepare the way before Christ's second coming. (See D&C 45:9; DS 3:254-62; D&C 135:3.)

Joseph Smith: His Role in the Gathering of Israel in the Last Days

On April 3, 1836, Joseph Smith received from the resurrected Moses the keys for the "gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth, and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north." (D&C 110:11.) [^6] A few years later, in 1841, the Prophet sent Orson Hyde to Palestine to dedicate the land for the return of the Jews, and since 1881, the Jews have returned to Israel from over a hundred nations. Also, through missionary work, scattered remnants of Israel have joined the Lord's restored kingdom by the hundreds of thousands. The keys for this work have been passed down through succeeding presidents of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and the gathering that began with Joseph Smith is still in progress.

Joseph Smith's life and ministry easily demonstrate how he could be the "root of Jesse" spoken of in Isaiah 11:10. He was a priesthood leader and servant of the Lord who established a great work. The Church is an ensign to the world and now directs the gathering of Israel to spiritual Zion.

Still, Joseph Smith might not be the only "root of Jesse" in these last days. Many presidents of the Church have been related to him by blood, and all have held the priesthood and the keys of the kingdom that he held. For example, President Spencer W. Kimball is related to Joseph, and he has magnified the keys of missionary work, especially among the Lamanites and the Jews. The "root of Jesse" could also be that particular prophet who will hold the keys when Christ returns to preside personally over his kingdom. The term could even represent the office of the president of the Church. In any case, the "root of Jesse" designates a great leader in the Church of Jesus Christ in this dispensation.

11In that day, My Lord will apply His hand again to redeeming the other part of His people from Assyria—as also from Egypt, Pathros, Nubia, Elam, Shinar, Hamath, and the coastlands.

12He will hold up a signal to the nations

And assemble the banished of Israel,

And gather the dispersed of Judah

From the four corners of the earth. (NJV)

These verses elaborate on the gathering of Israel and the role of an ensign. The first gathering of Israel took place after the Babylonian captivity; during the second gathering, remnants will return from all directions (as symbolized by different countries) [^7] and from various continents (islands of the sea). The Lord will also set up a church (or ensign) for the nations and the scattered outcasts of Israel. (A more detailed discussion of the gathering of Judah and Israel is on pp. 301-4, 414-17.)

13Then Ephraim's envy shall cease

And Judah's harassment shall end;

Ephraim shall not envy Judah,

And Judah shall not harass Ephraim.

14They shall pounce on the back of Philistia to the west,

And together plunder the peoples of the east;

Edom and Moab shall be subject to them

And the children of Ammon shall obey them. (NJV)

After the dispersal of the Jews (Judah) and the remnants of Israel, including the Ten Tribes (Ephraim) return, they will work together and prevail over their earlier enemies to the east (Edom, Moab, Ammon—Modern Jordan) and west (Philistines—Gaza Strip). The ancient hostility between Israel (Ephraim) and Judah will cease as they unite their righteous efforts. Some scholars recognize a similar promise recorded in Ezekiel 37:16-17, where the stick of Judah (Bible) and the stick of Ephraim (Book of Mormon) will become one to testify to the world. (See Freehof, Book of Isaiah, p. 78.)

15The Lord will dry up the tongue of the Egyptian sea.—He will raise His hand over the Euphrates with the might of His wind and break it into seven wadis, so that it can be trodden dry-shod.

16Thus there shall be a highway for the other part of His people out of Assyria, such as there was for Israel when it left the land of Egypt. (NJV)

Various interpretations have been rendered for the term "tongue of the Egyptian sea" in verse 15. It might be the western arm of the Red Sea (or Gulf of Suez, for which the modern Suez Canal was named) and the narrow body of water that extended north from the Red Sea into the desert. Another possibility is the delta (or tongue) of the Nile, which protruded into the Mediterranean Sea along Egypt's north coast. The most likely explanation, however, is the large inland sea created late each spring as the Nile overflows its banks and floods a large part of the valley, like a tongue sticking far inland. Isaiah 19:5-10 describes the destruction of the Nile River in greater detail. If the Nile River is the "tongue of the Egyptian Sea," then this prophecy might have been fulfilled since the building of the Aswan Dam and the destruction of the traditional way of life along the Nile.

Verse 15 states also that the Lord will divert "the river" (usually understood to be the Euphrates River) into seven streams so that travelers can walk across without getting their feet wet. In addition, a highway will be prepared for the remnant of Israel coming from Assyria (the land on the other side of the Euphrates). Isaiah 19:23-25, too, prophesies of a highway all the way from Assyria (through Israel) to Egypt. Other prophecies describe a great highway for the righteous in the last days. (See Isa. 35:8-10; 51:9-11; D&C 133:27.)

Although this highway might be a literal, physical road, it could also be representative of any means of transportation, such as an airway or railroad. As indicated in verse 16, this will be a highway like there was for Israel when the Lord led them out of Egypt. The Lord did not create a literal road for ancient Israel, but he did prepare the way for them so they would reach their destination. (Compare Isa. 11, footnotes 15a, 15b; Rev. 16:12.) He will do the same for Israel in the last days and they will recognize his hand in their return. (Jer. 16:14-15; 30:1; 31:1.)

The eleventh chapter of Isaiah contains some marvelous prophecies of the last days. It enlightens modern Israelites about the roles of at least two great leaders who will prepare the way for the coming of Christ in power and glory. They may possibly be the two "saviors" or "messiahs" known in Jewish tradition as "Messiah ben David" (a redeemer descended from David) and "Messiah ben Joseph" (a redeemer descended from Joseph). [^8]

Two brief psalms comprise the whole of chapter 12, and they provide a suitable conclusion to the messianic images of chapter 11. This short chapter is also a positive, inspirational capstone for the first dozen chapters of Isaiah's writings; in the beginning chapters, Isaiah sharply denounces Israelite follies and encourages the Israelites to repent (Isa. 1-5); in chapter 6, he reviews his calling and role as a prophet; in the next group he gives inspired political advice and subtle messianic prophecies (Isa. 7-9); and in his final section, he concludes with pointed warnings to Assyria and millennial promises to Israel (Isa. 10-11), with chapter 12 ending this section.

In the two psalms of chapter 12, Isaiah speaks for all Israel as he gives thanks and praise to the Lord for providing salvation and millennial blessings.

12 In that day, you shall say:

"I give thanks to You, O LORD!

Although You were wroth with me,

Your wrath has turned back and You comfort me,

2Behold the God who gives me triumph!

I am confident, unafraid;

For Yah the LORD is my strength and might,

And He has been my deliverance."

3Joyfully shall you draw water

From the fountains of triumph. (NJV)

By comparing the punctuation, especially the quotation marks, with the King James Version, a major problem with this short psalm becomes apparent. Although the beginning of the psalm is clearly defined in verse 1, the conclusion of the psalm remains indefinite. Scholars agree that verse 3 is the most important verse in this set, but they disagree as to whether or not it should be included within the psalm. Unfortunately, the original Hebrew provides no help with this problem because it contains no punctuation at all. Indeed, most early Hebrew writings had no punctuation, since such symbols were not developed or even encouraged because space on writing materials (scrolls of parchment, clay tablets, metal plates, etc.) was at a premium, and most readers of the materials were familiar enough with it that they could supply the necessary breaks, pauses, and inflections. Therefore, context becomes the best clue for interpretation.

In analyzing the important role of verse 3 in this psalm, then, the first two verses need to be studied. In verse 1 Isaiah addresses the gathered remnants of Israel (see the end of chapter 11) and speaks as all Israel in giving thanks to the Lord for "turning away his wrath and comforting him," or forgiving his sins. Then, in verse 2, the Israelite turns to an unidentified audience and extolls the virtues of God. He could be speaking to the world at large or he might be bearing his testimony to fellow Israelites. If verse 3 is a continuation of this psalm, the speaker concludes by exhorting the listeners to come and join with him in these spiritual experiences. On the other hand, if the psalm ends with verse 2, then Isaiah himself would be the speaker in verse 3 as he encourages gathered Israel to enjoy these religious opportunities. In either case, those who have not yet enjoyed a close fellowship with the Lord are invited to receive that blessing. Other important concepts, including the basic gospel principles, are found in these three verses: justice and forgiveness, trust and faith, and an invitation to the waters of salvation (which are now symbolized by the waters of baptism and the sacrament) are the key themes of this psalm and exhortation. The speaker, be it Isaiah, an Israelite, or all those gathered to Zion, has much to be thankful for, and he beautifully expresses his gratitude in these few verses.

The second psalm is also one of thanksgiving. Technically, though, it is more of a "praise psalm" than a "thanks psalm," for in giving praise to the Lord one has a slightly different attitude than in giving thanks. In a praise psalm, attention is centered upon the person being extolled, but in a thanks psalm the viewpoint is focused on the person giving thanks and upon the blessing that he has received. The first psalm of chapter 12 is in the "thanks" category; the second is more of a "praise" type:

4And you shall say on that day:

"Praise the LORD, proclaim His name.

Make His deeds known among the peoples;

Declare that His name is exalted.

5Hymn the LORD,

For He has done gloriously

Let this be made known

In all the world!

6Oh, shout for joy,

You who dwell in Zion!

For great in your midst

Is the Holy One of Israel." (NJV)

A natural pattern of spiritual growth is shown by Isaiah in these two short psalms. First, the individual gains his own faith in the Lord and the atonement (vs. 1-2). Second, he wants others to share in the blessings of baptism and salvation (v. 3). Then, his testimony manifests itself so strongly that he publicly exhorts others to make the Lord's deeds known to all (v. 4). Finally, his deep convictions are evidenced by his singing of praises and bearing witness of the truth (vs. 5-6). A pattern similar to this is developed in another millennial psalm as recorded by Joseph Smith in Doctrine and Covenants 84:99-102. First, the Lord's redemption is extolled and the principles of faith and covenant-making are enjoined (vs. 99-100). Then the Lord's deeds are recounted (vs. 100-101), and the hymn concludes with glorious praises to God (v. 102).

Isaiah and Joseph Smith yearned for the Millennium, and both prophets used short, powerful hymns to give sincere thanks and profound praise to the Lord for the blessings he would give the earth. In a few verses, they each expressed the gratitude all of us should feel as the Lord's works become manifest among men.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] A descendant of Jesse and Joseph. See also Rev. 22:16, where the Savior calls himself the "root and offspring of David." Also, in John 15, the branches (disciples) of the true vine (Christ) are described.
[^3] A holder of the keys to the kingdom. This phrase could not mean that all of Joseph Smith's ancestors were descendants only of Ephraim, because Ephraim's immediate children could not marry each other but were probably married to other Israelites or at least to other Semites. Jesus is known as the rightful heir of Judah, yet even his ancestry contained non-Israelite blood (Ruth the Moabite). That Joseph Smith is a "pure Ephraimite" probably means that if he traced his genealogy back to the time of Jacob or Israel, his "pure" patriarchal line (that is, his father's-father's-father, etc.) would trace directly to Ephraim.
[^4] His work to be an ensign to the nations. 4. See D&C 77:9, 14; HC 1:176, and HC 6:249-54 for ideas about the role of "Elias," messengers who were to come in this dispensation. See also Isa. 40:3, Mal. 3:1, and Mark 1:3 for scriptures about a messenger who was to come before the Messiah.
[^5] His role in the gathering of Israel in the last days. [^2] 5. See end of footnote 4.
[^6] 6. See also D&C 133:25-35; Amos 9:9; Isa. 10:20-22; 35:8-10; HC 4:456; 5:336-37; TPJS, pp. 17, 83, 308.
[^7] 7. Assyria—Modern Iraq; Egypt and Pathros—Egypt; Cush (or Nubia)—Ethiopia; Elam—Iran; Shinar—Iraq; Hamath—Syria.
[^8] 8. Encyclopedia Judaica 11:1411 states: "A secondary messianic figure is the Messiah son of [of the tribe of] Joseph (or Ephraim), whose coming precedes that of the Messiah, son of David, and who will die in combat with the enemies of God and Israel." Joseph Smith and his martyrdom could already be a fulfillment of this role. More detailed Jewish commentaries are recorded by Odeberg in 3 Enoch or The Hebrew Book of Enoch, pp. 144-47.
