Victor L. Ludlow, Isaiah: Prophet, Seer, and Poet ( 1982)

BABYLON AND HER KING ISAIAH 13-14

Isaiah was first and foremost a prophet to the house of Israel, though he also spoke to others of God's children and gave inspired warning and promises to other nations. Most of these pronouncements to foreign nations are grouped together in Isaiah 13-23. Having laid the foundation of his teachings in the first dozen chapters of his writings, Isaiah turns to the nations who surrounded and often opposed Israel. Some of these nations had manifested themselves as enemies of God's people, while others had refused to aid their brothers and fellow Semites, the Israelites. In chapters 13-23 Isaiah prophesies concerning these nations in their contemporary settings, while often including promises of an eschatological nature. (See map, p. 181.)

In chapter 13, Isaiah first addresses Babylon, the ancient country that had ruled over the Middle East until displaced by the Assyrians. (See Map 2.) Although Babylon was subject to Assyrian rule during Isaiah's lifetime, she gradually regained power and independence until the New Babylonian Empire replaced Assyria as the major power in the Fertile Crescent at the end of the seventh century B.C. (Compare Maps 10 and 11.) But even during the so-called Assyrian period, Babylon still represented the best of culture, learning, literature, and religion (in the same way that Greek culture was sustained and imitated during the Roman period). Therefore, Isaiah often uses Babylon and her king as symbols of the world and its wickedness. (Isa. 13-14.)

Isaiah also speaks to Moab and Syria, both of which lie east of Israel. These peoples gloried in the downfall of Israel and the humiliation of Judah. Moab and Syria are warned of their impending destruction and promised a restoration in later times. (Isa. 15-17.)

Isaiah addresses some of the countries west of Israel. In chapter 18 he speaks of a strange land beyond Africa that thrives under the special protection of God. As Hyrum Smith indicated, this land represents America. (HC 6:322.) Chapters 19 and 20 contain special promises to Egypt.

Isaiah directs other pronouncements toward the Assyrians, Philistines, various nomadic desert people, Phoenicians, and even the inhabitants of Jerusalem. (Isa. 14:24-32; 21-23.) Isaiah 13-23 consists almost entirely of pronouncements upon the foreign nations, and as a section, it compares with Jeremiah 46-51 and Ezekiel 25-32, in which these prophets group their prophecies thematically rather than strictly chronologically.

This section of foreign pronouncements incorporates two major messages: first, that Jehovah's power and kingdom are worldwide, and second, that foreign oppression of Israel will end. The concept of the Lord's universal rule was somewhat peculiar to ancient Israel. Many ancient pagan religions taught that any given god could be worshipped properly in only one given place, and that he had no power outside certain boundaries.

Isaiah begins his prophecies against Babylon, since Babylon most clearly represents the hostility toward God's plan of salvation in the world. Although Babylon did not represent a military threat to Jerusalem during Isaiah's lifetime, Babylonian culture and its pagan ideologies spread throughout the Middle East. Babylon later became so great an enemy that in Revelation it represents the antichrist forces. (Rev. 17:1-5; 18.) This symbolism is sustained in modern scripture, in which Babylon is used as a name for Satan's kingdom, or "the world." (D&C 1:16; 133:14.)

Remembering that the term Babylon has both literal and spiritual meaning helps to clarify the awkward passages in chapters 13 and 14; as is the case with many of Isaiah's prophecies, there are dual fulfillments hidden in his words. This creates a "tension which results from the interviewing of prophecies of a local and a universal future event." (Kaiser, Isaiah 18-39, p. 9.)

In addition, Isaiah has some warnings to Assyria and Philistia in chapters 13 and 14, as shown by the outline below.

I. The fall of Babylon (13:1-22, 14:1-23)

A. Introduction (13:1)

B. The Lord gathers his forces (13:2-5)

C. The Lord brings his power against (spiritual) Babylon (13:6-13)

D. The Lord brings the Medes against (physical) Babylon (13:14-22)

B'. The Lord will be merciful to Israel (14:1-3)

C'. A taunt song against the king of (spiritual) Babylon (14:4-21)

D'. The destruction of (physical) Babylon (14:22-23)

II. The fall of Assyria (14:24-27)

III. The fall of Philistia (14:28-32)

Notice in the section "The Fall of Babylon" how Isaiah prophesies the nation's physical and spiritual downfall in a "double" pronouncement (BCD and B'C'D'). Though it appears that he warns "spiritual Babylon" first in each pronouncement, it is quite difficult to know whether Isaiah is talking about physical or spiritual Babylon. Thus, these verses should be studied in both a historical and eschatological setting. (See Isa. 13, footnote lc.)

The Fall of Babylon

Isaiah introduces his vision of Babylon with a short verse:

13 This is a message about Babylon, which Isaiah son of Amoz received from God. (TEV)

The "message" (or "burden" [KJV] that Isaiah delivers to Babylon is a prophetic oracle or divine declaration. The term comes from the Hebrew word massa, which becomes a superscription throughout Isaiah's prophecies to the foreign nations. (See Isa. 14:28; 15:1; 17:1; 19:1; 21:1, 11, 13; 22:1; 23:1.) Whereas some translators follow the King James Version and render this term as "burden," others follow the more literal meaning of the Hebrew ("raise up") and translate it as "oracle" or "message." The meanings complement each other, because when a prophet "raises his voice" for God, he delivers an "oracle," which can become a "burden" for the people, since additional knowledge and responsibility is placed upon them. (See Isa. 13, footnote lb.)

The means by which Isaiah received his message is clearly expressed in the Hebrew: he "saw" (chazah) the oracle of Babylon. Since chazah is the root for "seer," Isaiah did not just see (ro'eh) the vision physically, but he saw it as inspired in his calling as a prophet or seer.

Isaiah begins his pronouncement with the Lord's summoning of his forces from the ends of the earth in preparation for a "holy war":

2On the top of a barren hill raise the battle flag! Shout to the soldiers and raise your arm as the signal for them to attack the gates of the proud city. 3The LORD has called out his proud and confident soldiers to fight a holy war and punish those he is angry with.

4Listen to the noise on the mountains—the sound of a great crowd of people, the sound of nations and kingdoms gathering. The LORD of Armies is preparing his troops for battle. 5They are coming from far-off countries at the ends of the earth. In his anger the LORD is coming to devastate the whole country. (TEV)

The "battle flag" could be used to rally the forces of the world against Jerusalem (see Isa. 10), or it might serve as an "ensign" (KJV) around which the Lord's servants and saints gather against the evil forces of the world. (See Isa. 11:10; 62:10, where the same word is used.) In either case, it will assemble a mighty force that will fulfill some of the Lord's judgments against the wicked.

Isaiah next describes the destruction that the "day of the Lord" will bring upon the world:

6Howl in pain! The day of the LORD is near, the day when the Almighty brings destruction. 7Everyone's hands will hang limp, and everyone's courage will fail. 8They will all be terrified and overcome with pain, like the pain of a woman in labor. They will look at each other in fear, and their faces will burn with shame. 9The day of the LORD is coming—that cruel day of his fierce anger and fury. The earth will be made a wilderness, and every sinner will be destroyed. 10Every star and every constellation will stop shining, the sun will be dark when it rises, and the moon will give no light.

11The LORD says, "I will bring disaster on the earth and punish all wicked people for their sins. I will humble everyone who is proud and punish everyone who is arrogant and cruel. 12Those who survive will be scarcer than gold. 13I will make the heavens tremble, and the earth will be shaken out of its place on that day when I, the LORD Almighty, show my anger. (TEV)

The phrase "day of the Lord" first appears in the writings of the eighth-century prophets Amos and Isaiah (Amos 5:18-20; Isa. 2:6-22) to refer to a day of judgment that is so extremely severe that the people will howl with fear. Isaiah compares the trembling fear and shaking terror of the men to the anguish of a woman in labor: "But whereas a woman in labour cries, men will only stare at each other aghast in horror and begin to sweat from fear." (Kaiser, Isaiah 13-39, p. 16.) The fear of the people described in these verses compares with the fear portrayed earlier by Isaiah in chapter 2 (especially vs. 1-21; see Rev. 6:15-17, in which John writes of a fear that will come upon all the wicked).

Verses 9-13 describe the purpose and results of the Lord's day of vengeance. Verse 9 explains that the purpose of the day of the Lord is to purge the earth of all sinners. (See D&C 133:50-51; Joel 2:1-2; Mal. 4:1; 2 Thes. 1:7-9.) In his later writings, Isaiah elaborates upon the intensity and completeness with which the Lord will cleanse the earth. (Isa. 24:1-6; 34:2-8; 63:4; 64:1-2; 66:15-16.) The cleansing upon the earth parallels manifestations upon the earth and in the heavens (vs. 10, 13). The earth will shake and the heavens turn dark as signs of the day of the Lord. (See Rev. 6:12-14; D&C 133:21-24, 49.) The few who remain upon the earth will be humble and righteous people (vs. 11-12). As a remnant surviving the destruction, they will form the nucleus for a new generation living in a new millennial age. (See Isa. 6:13; 43:1-7, 14-21.)

Isaiah concludes his first pronouncement upon Babylon by graphically describing the physical consequences that will befall the land and its inhabitants:

14"The foreigners living in Babylon will run away to their homelands, scattering like deer escaping from hunters, like sheep without a shepherd. 15Anyone who is caught will be stabbed to death. 16While they look on helplessly, their babies will be battered to death, their homes will be looted, and their wives will be raped."

17The LORD says, "I am stirring up the Medes to attack Babylon. They care nothing for silver and are not tempted by god. 18With their bows and arrows they will kill the young men. They will show no mercy to babies and take no pity on children. 19Babylonia is the most beautiful kingdom of all; it is the pride of its people. But I, the LORD, will overthrow Babylon as I did Sodom and Gomorrah! 20No one will ever live there again. No wandering Arab will ever pitch his tent there, and no shepherd will ever pasture his flock there. 21It will be a place where desert animals live and where owls build their nests. Ostriches will live there, and wild goats will prance through the ruins. 22The towers and palaces will echo with the cries of hyenas and jackals. Babylon's time has come! Her days are almost over." (TEV)

The Medes (v. 17) came from Persia and easily conquered Babylon in 538 B.C.. The walls were destroyed twenty years later, after which the city never again became the capital of an independent, strong Mesopotamian power. Two centuries later, after the Greeks, under Alexander the Great, conquered the Persians, Babylon rapidly declined in commercial and cultural importance as Seleucia became the major city in the area. By the time of Christ, only a few astronomers and mathematicians continued to live in the ancient, sparsely populated city. After they left, Babylon remained a deserted tell (mound), which sand and brush gradually covered until it became a hill used only by wild animals and as grazing land for nomadic flocks. (IDB 1:335; compare vs. 20-22 above, and Isa. 13, footnote 19a.)

Isaiah begins his second Babylonian pronouncement with another gathering of the Lord's forces. Having proclaimed the destruction of Babylon, he anticipates a time when Israel will return from her exile (physical and spiritual) as other peoples assist her and even become subject to her. Israel will finally rest from her hard centuries of subjugation and service to foreigners:

14 The LORD will once again be merciful to his people Israel and choose them as his own. He will let them live in their own land again, and foreigners will come and live there with them. 2Many nations will help the people of Israel return to the land which the LORD gave them, and there the nations will serve Israel as slaves. Those who once captured Israel will now be captured by Israel, and the people of Israel will rule over those who once oppressed them.

3The LORD will give the people of Israel relief from their pain and suffering and from the hard work they were forced to do. (TEV)

Historically, these verses were fulfilled when Cyrus the Great of Persia issued an order allowing all captive peoples in Babylon to return to their place of origin. The first group of Jews returned in 538 B.C. and started to rebuild Jerusalem and Judea. Another great exodus of Jews began in 520 B.C., and the group eventually was able to rebuild the walls of Jerusalem, the city itself, and the temple. Later, under the Maccabees (167-70 B.C.), the Jews enjoyed autonomy and prosperity, being so successful that they began to proselyte other people in the area and to grow in numbers. Indeed, the body of Jews grew into the millions by the time of Christ; while Babylon became desolate, Judea flourished.

Taken in an eschatological sense, these verses can also find two fulfillments in the latter days. First, they may refer to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, whose missionary work spreads to all nations and prepares for the peaceful conditions under which the Savior will establish his kingdom at the time of his second coming. Second, these verses may refer to the modern-day return of the Jews to the Holy Land and their building of the modern state of Israel. However, the full blessings of these verses will not be realized until the second coming of Christ, when the Jews will accept him as their Savior.

Isaiah foretells that the Israelites in their homeland will eventually recite a taunt-song about the king of Babylon. Structured in flowing poetry, "this taunt, in the form of a lament, upon the death of a world ruler and the fall of his empire, is one of the most powerful poems not only of the Old Testament, but of the whole literature of the world." (Kaiser, Isaiah 13-39, p. 29; Isa. 14, footnote 4a.) In its historical context, the taunt song refers to the fall of the king of Babylon; in an eschatological context, it symbolizes any leader of wickedness, especially Satan:

4When he does this, they are to mock the king of Babylon and say:

"The cruel king has fallen! He will never oppress anyone again! 5The LORD has ended the power of the evil rulers 6who angrily oppressed the peoples and never stopped persecuting the nations they had conquered. 7Now at last the whole world enjoys rest and peace, and everyone sings for joy. 8The cypress trees and the cedars of Lebanon rejoice over the fallen king, because there is no one to cut them down, now that he is gone!

9"The world of the dead is getting ready to welcome the king of Babylon. The ghosts of those who were powerful on earth are stirring about. The ghosts of kings are rising from their thrones. 10They all call out to him, 'Now you are weak as we are! 11You are one of us! You used to be honored with the music of harps, but now here you are in the world of the dead. You lie on a bed of maggots and are covered with a blanket of worms,'"

12King of Babylon, bright morning star, you have fallen from heaven! In the past you conquered nations, but now you have been thrown to the ground. 13You were determined to climb up to heaven and to place your throne above the highest stars. You thought you would sit like a king on that mountain in the north where the gods assemble. 14You said you would climb to the tops of the clouds and be like the Almighty. 15But instead, you have been brought down to the deepest part of the world of the dead.

16The dead will stare and gape at you. They will ask, "Is this the man who shook the earth and made kingdoms tremble? 17Is this the man who destroyed cities and turned the world into a desert? Is this the man who never freed his prisoners or let them go home?"

18All the kings of the earth lie in their magnificent tombs, 19but you have no tomb, and your corpse is thrown out to rot. It is covered by the bodies of soldiers killed in battle, thrown with them into a rocky pit, and trampled down. 20Because you ruined your country and killed your own people, you will not be buried like other kings. None of your evil family will survive. 21Let the slaughter begin! The sons of this king will die because of their ancestors' sins. None of them will ever rule the earth or cover it with cities. (TEV)

A. On earth. (See Rev. 17:5; D&C 43:31; Isa.55:12; Zech. 11:2; the trees also represent people; see Isa. 2:13; 37:24 as discussed in this book.)

B. In the spirit world. (See Ezek. 32:21.)

C. In heaven. (See Moses 4:1-4; D&C 76:25-27; D&C 29:36-38; Rev. 9:11.)

B'. In the spirit world. (See Moses 1:19-21; 4:6; 2 Ne. 2:18-19; 9:9.)

A'. On earth. (See Jude 1:6; Jac. 5:73-75; Rev. 12:4, 7-9; 19:21; D&C 29:27-29; 88:85, 101.)

As highlighted in the chiastic outline in the right margin, the song contains five stanzas, each with a variation of scene—earth/spirit world/heavens/spirit world/earth. The scriptural references listed afterward indicate just a few of the many sources that describe the same events, though nowhere else are they portrayed in such moving poetry.

The pivotal point and most important scene lies in verses 12-15, in which Isaiah identifies the king of Babylon as Lucifer (KJV, "bright morning star" in the Hebrew and in the TEV quoted above). Most scholars identify the "morning star" or Lucifer as a mythical figure or as a figurative representation of a Babylonian king. Latter-day Saints are fortunate to have modern scripture that explains who Lucifer is. Additional modern scripture explains his actions and attitude in greater detail. (Compare Isa. 14:12-14 with D&C 76:25-27; 29:36-37; Moses 4:1-4.)

Lucifer's attempt to usurp God's power and glory "transgresses the limits laid down for both mortal and heavenly beings, for he is trying to take the place reserved for the highest God alone, and is consequently punished by a fall into the deepest and darkest depths of the underworld." (Kaiser, Isaiah 13-39, p. 41.)

The last two stanzas of the song demonstrate that Lucifer will not have any honor such as the mortal kings of earth have, though he will have some temporary power on the earth, even enough to control the elements (v. 16; see Moses 1:19-21). He did not want the doors of the (spirit) prison to be opened (v. 17), but he was powerless against Christ's atoning power. The free gifts of salvation and resurrection are given to all mortals; even the most wicked kings on earth will still "lie in glory, every one in his own house" (or "degree of eternal glory"; see KJV, v. 18). But Lucifer will have no tomb ("house" [KJV] or body, v. 19), and he will be thrown into a pit (of outer darkness) without any posterity (v. 20). Finally, he and his sons of perdition will be cast off the earth when it receives its celestial glory (v. 21). The ultimate humiliation is that they will never be renowned (KJV) or named (NJV), but will fade into oblivion (v. 20).

Isaiah concludes his second Babylonian pronouncement by simply stating the Lord's intentions against temporal, physical Babylon:

22The LORD Almighty says, "I will attack Babylon and bring it to ruin. I will leave nothing—no children, no survivors at all. I, the LORD, have spoken. 23I will turn Babylon into a marsh, and owls will live there, I will sweep Babylon with a broom that will sweep everything away. I, the LORD Almighty have spoken." (TEV)

Babylon will remain an empty, desolate memorial to wickedness because the Lord in his universal power has spoken it. (See Isa. 34, where a similar desolation is promised to Edom.)

After delivering his "double" Babylonian pronouncements, Isaiah continues with two short warnings, one to Assyria and the other to Philistia.

The Fall of Assyria

Isaiah promises that the Lord will "bring" (JST) or "break" (KJV) the Assyrians in the land of Israel. They will feel the measure of his wrath:

24The LORD Almighty has sworn an oath: "What I have planned will happen. What I have determined to do will be done. 25I will destroy the Assyrians in my land of Israel and trample them on my mountains. I will free my people from the Assyrian yoke and from the burdens they have had to bear. 26This is my plan for the world, and my arm is stretched out to punish the nations." 27The LORD Almighty is determined to do this; he has stretched out his arm to punish and no one can stop him. (TEV)

It is difficult to determine whether Isaiah is prophesying about the destruction of Sennacherib's Assyrian army in 701 B.C. or the defeat of the army of the nations led by King Gog in the last days. (Compare Isa. 36-37 with Ezek. 38-39.) In both cases, the Lord's punishment is felt by the wicked nations of the earth.

The Fall of Philistia

In one of the rare Isaianic prophecies or "burdens" that are dated, Isaiah speaks to Philistia around 720 B.C.:

28This is a message that was proclaimed in the year that King Ahaz died.

29People of Philistia, the rod that beat you is broken, but you have no reason to be glad. When one snake dies, a worse one comes in its place. A snake's egg hatches a flying dragon. 30The LORD will be a shepherd to the poor of his people and will let them live in safety. But he will send a terrible famine on you Philistines, and it will not leave any of you alive.

31Howl and cry for help, all you Philistine cities! Be terrified, all of you. A cloud of dust is coming from the north—it is an army with no cowards in its ranks.

32How shall we answer the messengers that come to us from Philistia? We will tell them that the LORD has established Zion and that his suffering people will find safety there. (TEV)

In verses 28-30, Isaiah warns the Philistines against prematurely rejoicing either in the death of Shalmaneser V (727-722) or the freedom Philistia maintained after Sargon's conquest of Samaria and Israel (722-721). For although the king was dead and the threat diminished (one snake had died, v. 29), a worse danger ("out of the serpent's root" [KJV]) would come forth (Sennacherib). (The destruction of Philistia is described later in this book as chapters 36 and 37 of Isaiah are examined.)

Isaiah concludes in verses 30-32 with a promise of help and protection to the Philistines. The Lord is also their shepherd, and if they will come and be a part of Zion, they can find refuge and peace with the children of Israel.

In summary, Isaiah concludes his first series of pronouncements upon foreign nations with a picture of refugees from the nations gathered safely within Zion. In spite of the judgments and destructions that he describes, Isaiah recognizes the source for security and peace, the Lord's kingdom of Zion here upon the earth. Those who seek for Zion will find that peace both physically and spiritually, while those who follow the ways and king of Babylon will find only the eternal judgments of God.
