Victor L. Ludlow, Isaiah: Prophet, Seer, and Poet ( 1982)

WOES UPON MOAB AND SYRIA ISAIAH 15-17

Having spoken to distant Gentile nations in chapters 13 and 14, Isaiah turns his attention to his fellow Semites and delivers the Lord's pronouncements upon them. He speaks primarily to Moab and Syria, neighboring nations immediately east of the Jordan Valley. The Syrians to the northeast of Israel were distant Semitic relatives, while the Moabites to the southeast were more closely related, as they were descendants of Abraham's nephew, Lot. Some Israelite tribes, Gad, Reuben, and part of Manesseh, occupied the territories east of the Jordan River (the Transjordan), and Isaiah also included some promises for them.

Moab (ch. 15-16)

Moab lies in the region east of the Dead Sea. Her inhabitants descended from Moab, the son of Lot and his eldest daughter. (See Gen. 19:31-37.) In chapters 15 and 16, Isaiah pronounces a two-part "burden" upon Moab. Chapter 15 describes the destruction of the cities of Moab and the mourning of its inhabitants, and chapter 16 gives an allusion to the future Messiah while continuing the description of woe. This allusion to the Messiah helps us to see these chapters not only in their historical context but also in their eschatological setting and fulfillment. The eschatological setting of this Moab prophecy is in keeping with this section of prophecies to the nations (Isa. 13-23) and their dual fulfillment—anciently and in the last days. In a latter-day context, Moab can be viewed as representing the enemies of God, with her destruction typifying the consequences coming upon those who oppose Israel at Christ's second coming. A survey of Moabite history preceding Isaiah will help us understand Moab's relationship with the ancient Israelites and how their hatred resulted in wars and came to represent opposition to the Lord's chosen people.

During Isaiah's lifetime, Moab lost her independence, becoming a vassal state to Assyria at least as early as the reign of Tiglath-Pileser III (754-727 B.C.), who destroyed Syria, invaded Israel, annexed large territories east of the Jordan Valley, and deported many Israelites to Assyria. Although the dates of Isaiah's pronouncements upon Moab are not given, it is assumed that they were delivered a few years before the massive Assyrian invasion and conquest of the Transjordan area in 730-727 B.C. (See Map 9 and note the places on the parallel map on page 193 as you read Isaiah's account of the great destruction coming upon Moab.)

15 The Burden of Moab

For in the night that Ar of Moab is laid to waste,

He is brought to ruin;

For in the night that Kir of Moab is laid waste,

He is brought to ruin.

2He is gone up to Bajith, and to Dibon

To the high places, to weep;

Upon Nebo, and upon Medeba, Moab howleth;

On all their heads is baldness,

Every beard is shaven.

3In their streets they gird themselves with sackcloth.

On their housetops, and in their broad places,

Every one howleth, weeping profusely.

4And Heshbon crieth out, and Elealeh;

Their voice is heard even unto Jahaz;

Therefore the armed men of Moab cry aloud;

His soul is faint within him.

5My heart crieth out for Moab;

Her fugitives reach unto Zoar,

A heifer of three years old;

For by the ascent of Luhith

With weeping they go up;

For in the way of Horonaim

They raise up a cry of destruction.

6For the Waters of Nimrim shall be desolate;

For the grass is withered away, the herbage faileth,

There is no green thing.

7Therefore the abundance they have gotten,

And that which they have laid up,

Shall they carry away to the brook of the willows.

8For the cry is gone round about

The borders of Moab;

The howling thereof unto Eglaim,

And the howling thereof unto Beerelim.

9For the waters of Dimon are full of blood;

For I will bring yet more upon Dimon,

A lion upon him that escapeth of Moab,

And upon the remnant of the land. (JPS)

Isaiah begins by telling us that destruction will come upon Moab "in the night," probably meaning that it will be sudden and unexpected. It will come first to Ar and Kir, ancient cities of Moab (Kir was probably Moab's capital at this time). The high places in verse 2 undoubtedly represent the pagan temples, since shrines for idolatrous worship were built on the mountaintops. Isaiah foretells that, eventually, the people will go up not for worshipping, but for weeping and lamentation because their idols cannot protect them from destruction. It follows, then, that their baldness and shaven beards are signs of mourning and perhaps even slavery. Verse 3 supports this idea by saying that the people will wander through their towns girded with sackcloth.

Verse 5 contains a puzzling phrase translated as "an heifer of three years old." The Jewish commentators Rashi and Drauss explain that at three years a heifer is at its best in health and beauty. So, Isaiah may be saying that Moab was to be destroyed at its most prosperous period. (Freehof, Book of Isaiah, p. 95.) Other commentators consider the place of refuge, Zoar, to be represented through this phrase as a young and vigorous city. (See Isa. 15, footnote 5b.) Some, too, simply transliterate the phrase directly into English and consider it to be a name for some area near Zoar. For example, the Revised Standard Version translates the first half of verse 5 as follows:

My heart cries out for Moab;

her fugitives flee to Zoar, to Eglath-shelishiyah.

Regardless, in the context of verse 5, wherever (to Eglath-shelishiyah) or however (as a heifer of three years) the Moabites are wandering, their travels are marked with weeping and crying.

The next verses (6-9) describe the drought, plundering, mourning, and slaughter that will fall upon Moab. Afterward, however, Isaiah changes the context and mood of his pronouncement to describe a period of harmonious relations between Moab and Judah when the Moabites will come under the protection of a righteous king of David.

16 Send ye the lambs for the ruler of the land

Unto the mount of the daughter of Zion.

2For it shall be that, as wandering birds,

As a scattered nest,

So shall the daughters of Moab be

At the fords of Arnon.

3"Give counsel, execute justice;

Make thy shadow as the night in the midst of the noonday;

Hide the outcasts, betray not the fugitive.

4Let mine outcasts dwell with thee;

As for Moab, be thou a covert to him from the face of the spoiler."

For the extortion is at an end, spoiling ceaseth,

They that trampled down are consumed out of the land;

5And a throne is established through mercy,

And there sitteth thereon in truth, in the tent of David,

One that judgeth, and seeketh justice, and is ready in righteousness. (JPS)

Sending lambs to the ruler (v. 1) apparently alludes to an earlier time when Mesha, King of Moab, sent the wool of lambs as a gift to the king of Israel. (2 Kgs. 3:4.) Isaiah says here that the time will come when the lambs will be sent as tribute to a king of Jerusalem, who will represent the Davidic dynasty as the ruler of Israel.

In verse 3, Isaiah gives Judah an unusual command: "Make thy shadow as the night in the midst of the noonday." Like the cloud that covered Israel by day during the exodus, the "shadow" is symbolic of protection and help. Thus, to come under the shadow of the Lord's wings means to receive his divine protection. It appears that Judah's shadow, like night in midday, will hide and protect Moab from her enemies. This relationship strongly contrasts their earlier attitude; the two often fought and rarely protected each other.

The Davidic ruler of verse 5, protector of Moab, can also be interpreted as a messianic figure. Before Christ returns at his second coming and fulfills such a role (see Luke 1:32-33), there will be another "king of the Jews" who will be just and righteous and who might provide aid to the descendants of Moab. (Compare Isaiah 11:1-5.)

The last verses of Isaiah 16 abandon the promise of aid from Israel and return to a straightforward description of the catastrophe and physical desolation to come upon Moab:

6We have heard of the pride of Moab;

He is very proud;

Even of his haughtiness, and his pride, and his arrogance,

His ill-founded boastings.

7Therefore shall Moab wail for Moab,

Every one shall wail;

For the sweet cakes of Kir-hareseth shall ye mourn,

Sorely stricken.

8For the fields of Heshborn languish

And the vine of Sibmah,

Whose choice plants did overcome

The lords of nations;

They reached even to Jazer,

They wandered into the wilderness;

Her branches were spread abroad,

They passed over the sea.

9Therefore I will weep with the weeping of Jazer

For the vine of Sibmah;

I will water thee with my tears,

O Heshbon, and Elealeh;

For upon thy summer fruits and upon thy harvest

The battle shout is fallen.

10And gladness and joy are taken away

Out of the fruitful field;

And in the vineyards there shall be no singing,

No treader shall tread out wine in the presses;

I have made the vintage shout to cease.

11Wherefore my heart moaneth like a harp for Moab,

And mine inward parts of Kir-heres.

12And it shall come to pass, when it is seen that Moab hath wearied himself upon the high place, that he shall come to his sanctuary to pray; but he shall not prevail.

13This is the word that the Lord spoke concerning Moab in time past. 14But now the Lord hath spoken, saying: "Within three years, as the years of hireling, and the glory of Moab shall wax contemptible for all his great multitude; and the remnant shall be very small and without strength." (JPS; italics added)

Notice the chiastic pattern of the primary cities and areas mentioned in these verses as outlined in the right hand column. You might want to locate these places on the map on page 193 and note how the vine-producing areas (vs. 8-9) all lie in the northernmost territories controlled during Isaiah's time by Moab. These rich vineyards were easily destroyed by the invading Assyrian armies. The vineyards were located primarily on the terraced hillsides between the desert wilderness on the east and the Dead Sea on the west (v. 8). As the Assyrians marched through them, each soldier would remove a stone from the terrace walls and throw it into the fields. In this way, the walls were quickly dismantled and strewn about. If the original landowners were still in the area and if it was safe for them to work in their fields, only great effort could restore the walls. However, if such restoration was not possible before the next winter rainy season, much of the fertile soil would wash off the hillsides, and it would take many years before fertility could be restored. Small wonder, then, that the loss of vine-yards would result in the weeping and wailing Isaiah describes, especially if the people not only mourn the loss of their fields but also regret the lack of wine to drink and enjoy.

Verses 13 and 14 conclude the chapter with two interesting time references. First, verse 13 states that "this is the word that the Lord spoke concerning Moab in time past," probably indicating that the previous verses of the Moab pronouncement were originally given at some earlier time. Isaiah does not indicate whether he or someone else gave the first prophecy. Some scholars wonder if these might be the words of Jonah spoken during the reign of Jeroboam II, who expanded Israel's borders as he invaded and conquered Moab. (2 Kgs. 14:25.) Still, any earlier prophet might have given the prophecy which Isaiah, in turn, quotes without indicating its exact sources, just as Jeremiah does over a century later. (Jer. 48:2-5, 29-40; see also Amos 2:1-3.)

But, regardless of who originally gave the Moab prophecy and when it was pronounced, Isaiah acknowledges in verse 13 that it had been revealed earlier, and he then shifts to a second time frame in verse 14 to promise that the warning will finally be fulfilled within three years. This would be analogous to a prophet speaking in a general conference and saying: "The Lord has warned us through earlier prophets that we need to have a year's supply of food, and now I tell you that this food supply will be required within three years." As far as Moab is concerned, there is no indication that she heeded either the earlier prophecy or Isaiah's specific warning.

Since part of this prophecy was later repeated by Jeremiah and, as mentioned earlier, because much of the pronouncement might refer to the last days, it is difficult to pinpoint how this prophecy has been or might be fulfilled. Indeed, these chapters, 15 and 16, have so perplexed scholars that one has written: "There are few passages in the Old Testament which convey so little meaning to the modern reader as do these two chapters." (IB 5:267.)

As indicated above, however, the warnings and promises of these chapters do suggest some events between Moab and Judah in the last days. It seems here, as in chapters 13 and 14, that Isaiah uses the historical situation of his own day to prophesy of future events in the same area. His words allude to latter-day events and contain some messianic expectations that may only be more clearly understood when they are finally fulfilled.

Syria (and Israel) (ch. 17)

As seen in the previous prophecy to Moab, which also contained promises to Judah, Isaiah often weaves prophecies to the house of Israel into his discourses to foreign nations. Thus, it is not surprising that his pronouncement concerning Damascus (the capital of Syria) also includes warnings to Israel as well. His words to the Gentiles are not just a witness to them, but also contain warnings and promises concerning their relationship with Israel.

To those Israelites who live east of the Jordan Valley with Syria on the north and Moab to the south, Isaiah's words to their neighbors are obviously of some consequence, though they probably did not want to hear his warnings to them. His pronouncement to Syria and the eastern Israelites can be easily divided into five parts:

These five elements are in a clear chiastic pattern that spans the entire chapter. It will simply be highlighted in the right-hand column as the applicable verses are quoted.

Syria Will Be Emptied (vs. 1-3)

Isaiah first addresses Syria's capital, Damascus, and delivers a warning for the whole Transjordan territory:

17 An oracle concerning Damascus:

"See, Damascus will no longer be a city

but will become a heap of ruins.

2The cities of Aroer will be deserted and left to the flocks, which will lie down,

with no one to make them afraid.

3The fortified city will disappear in Ephraim,

and royal power from Damascus,

the remnant of Aram will be like the glory of the Israelites,"

declares the Lord Almighty. (NIV)

A. Israel's rival is destroyed.

B. Her people are gone.

C. Fortified places and powers will cease.

The cities of "Aroer" (v. 2) are also known as the cities of the "junipers." At least four places have this name in the Old Testament. One is in Moab (see map earlier in this chapter), although the Aroer mentioned here is in the territory of Damascus. "Aram" (v. 3) is another name for Syria. (See BD "Aram, Aramaeans"; "Syria.") It is the valley wherein Damascus lies.

Israel Will Dwindle (vs. 4-6)

After highlighting the desolation coming upon Syria, Isaiah changes topics and addresses the house of Israel, talking about the losses coming to them:

4"In that day the glory of Jacob will fade;

the fat of his body will waste away.

5It will be as when a reaper gathers the standing grain

and harvests the grain with his arm—

as when a man gleans heads of grain in the Valley of Rephaim.

6Yet some gleanings will remain,

as when an olive tree is beaten,

leaving two or three olives on the topmost branches,

four or five on the fruitful boughs,"

declares the Lord, the God of Israel. (NIV)

D. Jacob becomes thin.

E. A harvesting takes place.

F. Only a little fruit (Israelites) remains on the branches.

The Valley of Rephaim spoken of in verse 5 is a fertile vale northwest of Jerusalem noted for harvests so fruitful that it was the camping place and grazing area for the Philistine armies as they attacked Israel during the days of Saul and David. (See 2 Sam. 5:18, 22; 23:13.)

The warning to Jacob in verse 4 parallels the earlier one to Damascus, in that both warnings include four similar elements:

The People Will Eventually Turn to God (vs. 7-8)

Isaiah now speaks to both groups and perhaps even the world at large as he prophesies concerning a time ("in that day" meaning, most likely, the last days) when all people will turn to the Lord:

7In that day men will look to their Maker

and turn their eyes to the Holy One of Israel.

8They will not look to the altars,

the work of their hands,

and they will have no regard for the Asherah poles

and the incense altars their fingers have made. (NIV)

G. The people look to God.

G'. They look away from idols.

The Asherah poles of verse 8 are the idols, images, or symbols of the pagan fertility goddess, Asherah. The female counterpart to Baal, she was notorious for the prostitution cults associated with her temples. It is also possible that the "poles" mentioned above were phallic symbols with her figure carved upon them. Despite the widespread influence of idolatry in Isaiah's day and the great work ("the work of their hands") in constructing the objects for pagan worship and fertility rituals, Isaiah foresees a time when mankind will eventually be spiritually mature enough to turn away from pagan polytheism and embrace the one Lord of the earth. This trend has been the case historically as monotheistic religions have gradually won out over paganism.

Harvests Will Cease (vs. 9-11)

Isaiah again reverses direction and repeats some earlier themes concerning the empty cities (compare vs. 1-3) and fields (compare vs. 4-6):

9In that day their strong cities, which they left because of the Israelites, will be like places abandoned to thickets and underbrush. And all will be desolation.

10You have forgotten God your Savior;

you have not remembered the Rock, your fortress.

Therefore, though you set out the finest plants

and plant imported vines,

11though on the day you set them out, you make them grow,

and on the morning when you plant them, you bring them to bud,

yet the harvest will be as nothing in the day of disease and incurable pain. (NIV)

F'. Wild brush is everywhere (no fruit on their limbs).

E'. A planting takes place.

D'. No fruit is harvested.

These three verses parallel verses 5 and 6. The correspondence between verse 6 (F on the outline) and 9 (F') is more clear in the King James Version, where the words "uttermost," "bough," and "branch" are repeated in both verses. Similarly, an exact parallelism exists in the original Hebrew.

The phrase "finest plants" in verse 10 is translated as "pleasant plants" in the King James Version and as "plants of pleasantness" in the Jewish Publication Society translation. Some authorities see in this phrase an allusion to the pagan "gardens of Adonis." Adonis is the Greek name for the Syrian pagan god Naaman, meaning "pleasantness." Thus the "plants of pleasantness" might be the "plants of Naaman" (or Adonis), which were important symbols of regeneration in the fertility rituals. In fact, a widespread custom in the eastern Mediterranean area was to plant little seed boxes (gardens of Adonis) at special times in the religious seasonal calendar. Germination of the seeds and plants indicated the revitalized virility of the pagan gods, who would then bring fertility to the people's fields. As prophesied in the verses above, these plants would someday not grow or produce fruit as a sign of the impotence of false gods.

The term "imported vines" in verse 10 probably alludes to the same or a similar ritual. The association of this phrase with pagan worship is more apparent in the King James Version, where it is translated as "strange slips." Slips are small cuttings, also known as scions, grafted into fruit trees or vines. Isaiah is saying here, then, that though faithless people may plant the finest stock and graft the best cuttings, both in full budding growth, they will receive no harvest, especially if the plantings are part of pagan worship. In short, regardless of the people's best efforts in the fields and orchards, God's aid is ultimately necessary to produce a bountiful harvest.

Those Who Threaten the Lord's Children Will Be Suddenly Destroyed (vs. 12-14)

In the beginning of this chapter, Isaiah promises that the ancient enemy of Israel, Syria, will become a ruin. He now concludes the pronouncement with a promise—any nation that speaks out (roars) against the Lord and seeks to plunder his children will be suddenly removed out of its place:

12Oh, the raging of many nations—

they rage like the raging sea!

Oh, the uproar of the peoples—

they roar like the roaring of great waters!

13Although the people roar like the roar of surging waters,

when he rebukes them they flee far away,

driven before the wind like chaff on the hills,

like tumblewood before a gale.

14In the evening, sudden terror!

Before the morning, they are gone!

This is the portion of those who loot us,

the lot of those who plunder us. (NIV)

C'. Nations and people rage and roar (but they are a vain threat).

B'. The people flee before the Lord.

A'. Those who threaten are suddenly swept away.

By comparing these verses with the first verses of the chapter, one can see how the population of Damascus and the other cities and fortified places will be emptied. The parallelism in verse 13 indicates that it is not the powers or armies of men that will send the people fleeing away, but the power of the Lord.

Thus, for Israel at least, the chapter concludes with the promise of special protection. Though thieves, powers, or armies may threaten God's people as night approaches, the enemy will have vanished by morning, leaving the people unharmed.

In reviewing chapter 17 of Isaiah and studying the five separate sections and how they parallel each other, be careful not to lose sight of the message Isaiah is teaching in this passage. Although the pronouncement generally has a negative tone as Isaiah foretells desolation, emptiness, famine, and scattering, it also contains a positive undercurrent as he declares the sovereignty of God and the divine protection God's children will receive. Later in his writings, Isaiah stresses and builds upon these positive themes, though here he remains rather gloomy. For now he gives a cry of warning; later he will raise a voice of hope.
