Victor L. Ludlow, Isaiah: Prophet, Seer, and Poet ( 1982)

EGYPT AND JUDAH ISAIAH 19-20

The nineteenth chapter of Isaiah contains the most important prophecies concerning Egypt in the entire Old Testament. Again, in this chapter, Isaiah skillfully uses the historical events of his day to prophesy of events in the last days. His pronouncement warns Egypt of contemporary dangers and promises future blessings that will finally occur "in that day," the last dispensation. The prophecy as a whole, then, finds complete fulfillment only in the latter days. Indeed, many of the events promised in Isaiah 19 seem to have been fulfilled in the events of the 1970s.

Isaiah 19 begins by describing several calamities that will befall Egypt—internal disorder, disruption of the flow of the Nile River, and inept, ruthless leadership. Conditions will become so serious that Egypt will be greatly afraid of Judah. Still, the chapter concludes with the promise of blessings—when Egypt follows the Lord, he will heal her and enable her to join with other nations in blessing the earth.

Chapter 19 falls into distinct halves—verses 1-15 threatening destruction and verses 19-25 promising redemption. Verses 16-18 serve as a bridge between the two sections. A close study of the chapter also reveals a chiastic pattern between the two sections as outlined below:

I. God's judgments upon Egypt (vs. 1-15)

A. Man versus man—internal chaos in Egypt (1-4)

B. Man versus nature—life along the Nile River destroyed (5-10)

C. Man versus his leaders—anarchy and confusion (11-15)

II. Egypt is full of fear, for Judah terrorizes her (16-18)

III. The Lord's healing of Egypt (19-25)

C'. Man turns to God—the Egyptians serve the Lord (19-21)

B'. Man in harmony with the land—the Lord heals Egypt (22)

A'. Man serves others—Egypt joins Assyria and Israel (23-25)

Man versus Man—Internal Chaos in Egypt (vs. 1-4)

19 The "Egypt" Pronouncement.

Mounted on a swift cloud,

The LORD will come to Egypt;

Egypt's idols shall tremble before Him,

And the heart of the Egyptians shall sink within them.

2"I will incite Egyptian against Egyptian:

They shall war with each other,

Every man with his fellow,

City with city

And kingdom with kingdom.

3Egypt shall be drained of spirit,

And I will confound its plans;

So they will consult the idols and the shades

And the ghosts and the familiar spirits.

4And I will place the Egyptians

At the mercy of a harsh master,

And a ruthless king shall rule them"

—declares the Sovereign, the

LORD of Hosts. (NJV)

"The Lord riding on a swift cloud" (v. 1) is a figure of speech describing the Lord's imminent judgment, which will destroy Egypt's false religion and bring fear into the hearts of her people. (Compare Nahum 1:3.) Civil war results (v. 2) and brings terror to the hearts of the people, with kingdom warring against kingdom (or better said, district against district, since ancient Egypt was comprised of forty-four small kingdoms, called nomes). In their desperation, the Egyptians will seek "familiar spirits" or sorcerers to save themselves (v. 3), but they will inevitably be placed under the yoke of a harsh ruler (v. 4.)

Opinions vary greatly as to who this ruthless king might be. No pharaoh ruling Egypt during Isaiah's time seems to fit this role, so scholars usually point to various later Assyrian, Babylonian, Persian, Greek, or Roman surrogate rulers who conquered Egypt. No consensus has been reached, however, and some scholars speculate that the fulfillment of this prophecy may still lie in the future.

Man versus Nature—Nile River Life Destroyed (vs. 5-10)

5Water shall fail from the seas,

Rivers dry up and be parched,

6Channels turn foul as they ebb,

And Egypt's canals run dry.

Reed and rush shall decay,

7And the Nile papyrus by the Nile-side

And everything sown by the Nile

Shall wither, blow away, and vanish.

8 The fishermen shall lament;

All who cast lines in the Nile shall mourn,

And those who spread nets on the water shall languish.

9The flax workers, too, shall be dismayed,

Both carders and weavers chagrined.

10Her foundations shall be crushed.

And all who make dams shall be despondent. (NJV)

The Nile River has supplied, from the beginning of civilization, the lifeblood of Egypt. Most of the Egyptian population has always clustered on the river's floodplain, where the waters systematically and gradually rise, overflow the banks, and inundate and irrigate the rich fields that would otherwise become desert. The Nile, with a watershed that drains half a continent through a four-thousand mile river-course, annually carries millions of tons of sediment toward the Mediterranean Sea, providing nutrients for many ecological life-systems along its way. At its height in August, the river usually rises twenty-five to thirty feet above its normal course:

The annual flood was one of nature's exquisitely balanced wonders. Sometimes it brought too much water, engulfing villages, and sometimes it brought too little; even in normal years about 30,000,000,000 tons flowed unused to the sea. But the water was not wasted. Every sediment laden drop that emptied into the Mediterranean strengthened the aquatic food chain, nourishing marine life, and maintained an exact balance of salinity. . . . that has made the Nile Valley the agricultural marvel it is. (Sterling, "The Trouble with Superdams," Britannica Yearbook of Science and the Future, 1974, p. 115.)

In verses 5-10, Isaiah, warns that this natural agricultural marvel would someday be disrupted, and the waters of the "sea," the flooded valley, would fail. Various events could cause such a drastic disruption. In ancient times, social disorder (like that described in vs. 1-4) so disrupted normal life along the river that canals and ditches could not be cleaned or maintained. Neither could the fields be properly prepared, planted, and cultivated; therefore, the Nile Valley's productivity would drastically decline until social order was restored.

Another cause could be meager snowfall and rains in the African highlands that provided the Nile waters. This highland water is vital, since Egypt receives an average of only one hour of rain per year. When snow and rains failed in the south, then, the northern Egyptians had only limited flooding and irrigation for their crops until the next year.

The adverse social and weather conditions described above rarely lasted more than a decade, though, and fertility along the Nile was usually quickly restored. In modern times, however, a new kind of social phenomenon arose that changed conditions on the Nile so drastically that its consequences will continue for at least a century.

In 1960, construction began on the Aswan Dam, an engineering wonder but ecological and social nightmare. Built to provide abundant, cheap, clean hydroelectric power, to store water for irrigation, and to control flooding, the dam was to help fulfill President Nasser's dream of bringing Egyptian society out of the "dark ages" and into a powerful position among third world countries. Within a decade, Nasser hoped to deliver the country from poverty and famine, and to double its income through industrialization. Yet more than a decade after the dam's completion in 1971, poverty is still rampant (the average Egyptian worker's daily salary is only three dollars, the nation is deep in debt, and progress toward modernization is very slow).

Countless other problems have resulted from building the dam. Though some problems were anticipated, their magnitude was never even imagined:

Further complications have developed downstream:

As if these problems along the river were not enough, further disruptions have occurred at the mouth of the Nile:

(The sources for this list are Sterling, "The Trouble with Superdams," Britannica Yearbook of Science and the Future, 1974, pp. 115-27, and Lytle, The Aswan High Dam, pp. 2-3.)

After reviewing these facts, reread Isaiah 19:5-10 to appreciate why Egyptians "who make dams shall be despondent" (v. 10, NJV). Many Egyptian leaders, in discussing the Aswan Dam, admit privately that "probably they would not build it if they had it to do over again." (Sterling, p. 127). Some even think that the dam should be destroyed before additional problems develop. Undoubtedly, no event in Egyptian history has so completely disrupted the way of life along the Nile River as the Aswan Dam. It therefore appears that no other event has a better claim to fulfilling Isaiah's prophecy in verses 5-10.

Man versus Leaders—Anarchy and Confusion (vs. 11-15)

11Utter fools are the nobles of Tanis;

The sagest of Pharaoh's advisers

[Have made] absurd predictions.

How can you say to Pharaoh,

"I am a scion of sages,

A scion of Kedemite kings"?

12Where, indeed, are your sages?

Let them tell you, let them discover

What the LORD of Hosts has planned against Egypt.

13The nobles of Tanis have been fools,

The nobles of Memphis deluded;

Egypt has been led astray

By the chiefs of her tribes.

14The LORD has mixed within her

A spirit of distortion,

Which shall lead Egypt astray in all her undertakings

As a vomiting drunkard goes astray;

15Nothing shall be achieved in Egypt

By either head or tail,

Palm branch or reed. (NJV)

In verse 11, the foolish nobles of Tanis (or of Zoan in KJV, the ancient capital of the delta) are absurd enough to claim to be sons of the Kedemite kings, who lived east in the Arabian desert and were renowned for their wisdom. (See 1 Kgs. 4:30-31.) The nobles of Memphis (or Noph, KJV; the traditional capital of all northern or lower Egypt) are also deluded and lead all of Egypt astray (v. 13). Indeed, the whole society, whether of high station or low (symbolized by the palm branch and papyrus reed, respectively), will achieve nothing (v. 15).

As with earlier parts of this chapter, it is difficult to establish a precise historical context for the fulfillment of these words. By the time of Isaiah, Egypt was well into a period of political decline that later resulted in repetitive conquests by various empires. Not until the twentieth century did the Egyptians completely regain their lost independence, but even now they require foreign aid for the people and expertise for the industries. Sometimes the foreign powers and their advisors have hindered more than helped Egypt. Perhaps, again, a modern fulfillment of this prophecy is as likely as any other.

Egypt Is Full of Fear, for Judah Terrorizes Her (vs. 16-18)

16In that day, the Egyptians shall be like women, trembling and terrified because the LORD of Hosts will raise His hand against them.

17And the land of Judah shall also be the dread of the Egyptians; they shall quake whenever anybody mentions it to them, because of what the LORD of Hosts is planning against them.

18In that day, there shall be several towns in the land of Egypt speaking the language of Canaan and swearing loyalty to the LORD of Hosts; one shall be called Town of Heres. (NJV)

An important stylistic and thematic transition occurs in verse 16. Isaiah shifts from poetry to prose and begins this section with the phrase "in that day." This phrase is repeated five additional times in the second part of the chapter, but it is not found at all in the first. Since, for Isaiah, the phrase "in that day" is almost always his way of saying "in the last days" or "in that day just before the Millennium," it is likely that at least the last portion of chapter 19 finds its fulfillment in modern times.

The verses above describe the frenzied fear that overcomes the Egyptians. The Egyptians not only generally lack courage, but specifically fear the Jews, their former slaves. In their male-centered society, the accusation that they have become "like women" is the lowest insult.

Until the time of modern wars between Israel and Egypt—which began in 1948 and included conflicts in 1956, 1967, and 1973—Egypt has historically had no hesitation in carrying on battles in Palestine. Egypt was also so large and strong that she never had reason to fear invasion from any military power of Judah. Although Jewish traders, travelers, and refugees often entered Egypt, Jewish armies never advanced into Egyptian soil until very modern times.

The low point of Egyptian military power in comparison to that of Israel was the Six Day War of June 1967. Dozens of books have been written and countless stories told of how, within hours on June 5, the Israeli air force devastated all Egyptian air bases and two-thirds of her air force. In four days of fighting, Israel destroyed the bulk of the Egyptian army and overran an area of Egyptian territory six times the area of the entire country of Israel.

With control of the Sinai Peninsula, Israel later established some settlements (this could be a fulfillment of verse 18), although many of these areas were evacuated after the 1973 Yom Kippur War agreements. Therefore, the time of more permanent Jewish communities in Egypt is probably still future. Some progress in that direction has been made, though, through recent treaties opening the borders between Israel and Egypt.

One other phrase in verse 18 requires brief explanation: "the language of Canaan." Isaiah's prophecy that "the language of Canaan" will be spoken in "several" (translated "five" in KJV) Egyptian towns has caused much debate. Scholars debate whether these cities will become Jewish possessions, or whether Jews will simply live abroad there, bringing their language with them. However, though the "language of Canaan" most likely means the Hebrew language, it might also imply that the system of thought, custom, and theology indigenous to Canaan will become a part of Egyptian society. In this case, the ideas and ideals of Judaism may become firmly entrenched and practiced in some Egyptian cities.

In short, as illustrated in verses 16-18, one important sign concerning Egypt in the last days will be her greatly improved relationship with Judah. Verses 19-21, in turn, describe a new Egyptian relationship with the Lord.

Man Turns to God—the Egyptians Serve the Lord (vs. 19-21)

19In that day, there shall be an altar to the LORD inside the land of Egypt and a pillar to the LORD at its border. 20They shall serve as a symbol and reminder of the LORD of Hosts in the land of Egypt, so that when [the Egyptians] cry out to the LORD against oppressors, He will send them a savior and champion to deliver them. 21For the LORD will make Himself known to the Egyptians, and the Egyptians shall acknowledge the LORD in that day, and they shall serve [Him] with sacrifice and oblation and shall make vows to the LORD and fulfill them. (NJV)

Beginning with these verses, Isaiah promises great blessings to Egypt. The Egyptians will serve the Lord "in that day" (v. 21), and build a pillar and altar to the Lord (vs. 19, 21). Scholars generally agree that the pillar and altar represent a temple to be built in Egypt.

Some historians feel that this promise was fulfilled by the Jewish colonists living at Elephantine Island from the seventh to fourth centuries B.C. (This island is located at the southern border of Egypt, near Aswan and the first cataract.) About the same time that Lehi left Jerusalem for America, a number of Jews fled from the invading Babylonians and settled at this border post in upper Egypt. Correspondence and other records from this community indicate that they constructed a temple before 525 B.C. which remained standing for at least a century. It was apparently destroyed around 410 B.C. and then later rebuilt. ("Elephantine Papyri," IDB 2:83-85.)

The Roman-Jewish historian Josephus records that another Jewish temple was built centuries later by refugees who fled to the delta area in the second century B.C. (Antiquities, XIII. iii. 1-2.) Very little is known about their settlements and temple at Leontopolis, including whether or not they were an "official" or orthodox Jewish religious community.

It is interesting that Jewish historians traditionally discounted the Josephus account; they did not believe he could be describing a group of orthodox Jews. Most historians believed that "true" Jews would build a temple only in Jerusalem. After all, they did not build one in Babylon during their captivity, so why should they build one anywhere else. With this same argument, some critics have discounted the Book of Mormon, for the Nephites (uprooted Jews) built temples in the new land. (See 2 Ne. 5:16.) Following the discovery of the Elephantine Papyri in 1893 and recent Israeli archaeological findings in the Holy Land, however, many scholars now acknowledge the legitimate existence of many other Israelite temples. (For example, see "Hebrew sanctuaries and temples—those besides Jerusalem," IDB 4:566-68.) Now, some Israeli archaeologists will assert that if a group of ancient religious, practicing Jews were to be isolated from Jerusalem, one would expect them to build their own temple. This is exactly what the Book of Mormon indicates and, apparently, what Isaiah promises for Egypt.

It should not be overlooked, however, that the temple to be built in Egypt does not necessarily have to be a Jewish one. One Latter-day Saint temple is already being built in South Africa, and it is not improbable that one could be erected in northern Africa or even in Egypt at some future time.

Man in Harmony with the Land—the Lord Heals Egypt (v. 22)

22The LORD will first afflict and then heal the Egyptians; when they turn back to the LORD, He will respond to their entreaties and heal them. (NJV)

In this verse, Isaiah explains the Lord's plans for Egypt, plans that the sages were unable to discover or reveal (vs. 12-13). This verse needs to be viewed in a religious context through the terminology Isaiah uses. He implies that the Egyptians are "wicked" and that the Lord will afflict them and bring them to humility. (Compare Alma 32:13.) Also, Isaiah says that they will "turn back" (or repent), meaning that they must have sinned earlier. After they repent, the Lord will respond to their entreaties (prayers) and heal (forgive) them. This promise is among the greatest that any people can receive from the Lord.

Man Serves Others—Egypt Joins Assyria and Israel (vs. 23-25)

23In that day, there shall be a highway from Egypt to Assyria. The Assyrians shall join with the Egyptians and Egyptians with the Assyrians, and then the Egyptians together with the Assyrians shall serve [the LORD]. 24In that day, Israel shall be a third partner with Egypt and Assyria as a blessing on earth; 25for the LORD of Hosts will bless them, saying, "Blessed be My people Egypt, My handiwork Assyria, and My very own Israel." (NJV)

There were various times during the Persian, Greek, and Roman occupations when the areas of Egypt, Israel, and Assyria (Mesopotamia) were joined together through a common means of transportation and communication. In times past, however, the three areas did not ever unite to "bless the nations of the earth." The fulfillment of this Isaianic promise remains in the future. Indeed, most readers of the scriptures who understand the history of the area find it incredible that these peoples could ever come together before a millennial era is established upon the earth.

Still, recent developments in the Middle East have significantly altered the relationship between Israel and her neighbors such that the possibility of unification seems a bit more probable. In fact, diplomatic developments have altered so rapidly, especially between Israel and Egypt, that political scientists are amazed at the drastic change of events. If, in the summer of 1977, experts on the Middle East had been polled and asked if they thought Israel and Egypt would sign a peace treaty before the summer of 1979, scarcely any would have thought it possible. But events beginning in the fall of 1977 started a process that miraculously culminated in the signing of a formal peace treaty between Egypt and Israel on March 26, 1979.

The road to peace between Egypt and Israel was not without its stumbling blocks, however, although President Jimmy Carter and his Camp David talks were helpful in removing those obstacles. Also, each major party involved in the negotiations—President Answar Sadat, Carter, and Prime Minister Menachem Begin—agreed that a fourth party had helped them travel the road to peace. They used different names to describe him—Allah, Adonai, or the Lord—but all acknowledged the divine help they received. In fact, Carter was strengthened by the words of Isaiah, and Sadat and Begin quoted them in reference to the peace settlement. The night before the treaty was signed, Carter "read from the fifth chapter of Isaiah, a Prophet who seemed to walk with the peacemakers the entire week. Isaiah's stern admonition to practice humility and diligence seemed to stay with Carter through the celebration of 'the miracle.'" Sadat and Begin quoted Isaiah 2:4 when they as "two of the world's most implacable antagonists signed a formal treaty of peace and eloquently pledged their determination as men of God to heed the plea of Isaiah to 'beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning-hooks.'" (Time, Apr. 9, 1979, pp. 30-31.)

However, the open dialogue of peace between Egypt and Israel has not been well received in most of the Arab world. In Iraq, for example, (the modern name for the ancient territory of Assyria), the peace treaty was protested in Baghdad by half a million Iraqis marching in mass demonstration. Iraq's long-time hatred of Israel now extends to Egypt, especially after Egypt's mild rebuke of Israel after Israeli bombs destroyed Iraq's largest nuclear reactor on June 7, 1981. Iraq would probably be much more actively involved in fighting Zionism were she not so entrenched in her own conflict with Iran.

And, considering Iraq's strong ties with Russia and the fierce anti-Zionist attitudes of the Iraqi leaders, it seems highly unlikely that Iraq will ever be pro-American, let alone pro-Egyptian or pro-Israeli, within the next few decades. In fact, if experts on the Middle East had been polled in the summer of 1981 about the possibility of peace between Iraq and Israel before 1990, it is unlikely that a very few, if any, would believe that it could occur. But remember that the Lord's efforts between Egypt and Israel wrought a political miracle within two years. Perhaps the future will see a similar miracle and change of heart in Iraqi-Israeli relations.

Whenever it happens, but at some time before the Millennium, it seems quite certain that Iraq will join Israel and Egypt, becoming a third partner with them. These three nations will then be blessed by the Lord and will, in turn, bless the whole earth.

Unlike chapter 19, chapter 20 seems to fit entirely within the historic framework of ancient Egypt, for it provides a warning to the contemporary political powers, although it raises questions about Isaiah's public actions. This short prophecy promises Egypt that she will be conquered by Assyria and that many of her people will become Assyrian slaves. However, the means by which Isaiah gives this warning is most unusual; he emphasizes the impending slavery by walking around without his clothes and sandals. By actually demonstrating to Judah what was to happen to Egypt, Isaiah taught the Jews that they could not trust Egyptian power to rescue them from Assyria. This lesson holds true today; no nation can depend entirely upon its own military power or alliances to preserve it from invasion and destruction. In the end, the Lord's protection, earned through righteousness, is the only guarantee of security. (See Spencer W. Kimball, "The False Gods We Worship," Ensign, June 1976, pp. 3-6.)

The historical setting of this chapter is around 715 B.C., when the Ethiopian Pharaoh Shabako conquered Egypt and seemed likely to establish a powerful dynasty. The princes of various states near Egypt and Judah were given fresh hope of liberation in this new Ethiopian dynasty, a hope that they could now break the yoke of the Assyrian King Sargon II. The northern Philistine city of Ashdod became the center of the resistance. Its king, Azuri, withheld tribute payments from the Assyrians and then sent envoys to encourage the kings of neighboring kingdoms to rebel. But Azuri's revolt was crushed when Sargon deposed him in 713 B.C., replacing him with his brother, Achimiti. The people of Ashdod, in turn, rebelled against Achimiti, replacing him with an Ionian Greek named Jaman. Jaman, too, hoped to create a coalition between other Philistine cities and Edom, Moab, and Judah, with additional support to come from the newly founded Ethiopian-Egyptian empire. But the hoped-for Egyptian help did not materialize. Pharaoh Shabako did not feel that a rebellion against his strong Assyrian enemy was of any value to him. So, in 711 B.C., when the Assyrian army drew near to Philistia and the Ionian ruler fled to Egypt, the pharaoh arrested Jaman and turned him over, bound hand and foot, to Sargon. The revolt in Ashdod was crushed with the aid of an Egyptian army, and the inhabitants of Ashdod, many Egyptians, and others in the surrounding area were taken as Assyrian slaves.

It is not known how much Hezekiah, ruling at the time in Jerusalem, became involved in the movement for revolt. It is assumed that he went no further than conspiracy or else submitted in time to save Judah from an Assyrian invasion.

It is in the midst of this rebellion that Isaiah was commanded to give a sign of the impending slavery. And it was about 711 B.C., as the revolt drew to an end, that Tartan went to Ashdod and Isaiah delivered his prophecy in Jerusalem:

20 It was the year that the Tartan came to Ashdod—being sent by King Sargon of Assyria—and attacked Ashdod and took it.2Previously, the LORD had spoken to Isaiah son of Amoz, saying, "Go, untie the sackcloth from your loins and take your sandals off your feet," which he had done, going naked and barefoot. 3And now the LORD said, "It is a sign and a portent for Egypt and Nubia. Just as My servant Isaiah has gone naked and barefoot for three years, 4so shall the king of Assyria drive off the captives of Egypt and the exiles of Nubia, young and old, naked and barefoot and with bared buttocks—to the shame of Egypt! 5And they shall be dismayed and chagrined because of Nubia their hope and Egypt their boast. 6In that day, the dwellers of this coast-land shall say, 'If this could happen to those we looked to, to whom we fled for help and rescue from the king of Assyria, how can we ourselves escape?'" (NJV)

While this chapter is short and fairly easy to understand once the historical background is known, a few terms and concepts need further explanation.

The Assyrian representative sent by Sargon to the city of Ashdod is known only by his title, Tartan. A tartan was a general, probably the general second in command to the king. (See 2 Kgs. 18:17.) In other words, Sargon himself did not attack Ashdod, but left that and the suppression of the revolt to his general, the tartan.

The most unusual segment of the chapter is verses 2 and 3, in which the Lord commands Isaiah to go "naked and barefoot" as a sign of Egypt's impending humiliation and captivity. Actually, Isaiah was probably not completely naked, but simply without his tunic and outer robes, (Isa. 19, footnote 2a.) In Isaiah's time, men usually wore a loincloth, tunic, and robe when they were in public; while working in the fields or at home, the robe was probably put aside and the tunic remained the main item of attire (the tunic was a loose-fitting linen garment, short-sleeved or sleeveless, that extended to the knees). Slaves, captives, and the lowest manual workers in the society would often not even wear a tunic, but labored in a loincloth. However, it was considered embarrassing for one to be seen in public with only his loincloth, just as today one would be utterly humiliated to be seen in public in his underwear. As evidenced by the end of verse 4, the sign of shame or "nakedness" in Isaiah's time was the exposure of the upper thighs or buttocks.

Even so, one might ask why the Lord would request the prophet to show himself in such humble and improper attire in public. It was probably intended as a graphic sign to the people, one they could not forget or ignore. It was similar to some of the signs Ezekiel gave the Jews during the early stages of their Babylonian captivity, such as cutting his hair, crawling under a wall, and so on. (See Ezek. 4-5.) Isaiah's bizarre behavior and dress was an unusual sign repeated over a three-year period. [^1]

The Israelites' attitude to the fulfillment of Isaiah's prophecy is recorded in the last verse of chapter 20. They recognized that if Egypt, powerful as she was, gave in so easily to Assyria, then Judah was in a very vulnerable position. Their situation is summarized in the final desperate question of "How can we escape?" The only answer, even today, is: "Through the help of the Lord."

Isaiah waits awhile before giving his own answer to that question. First he concludes his pronouncements to the other nations and then in chapters 24-27 records how the Lord's hand will be manifest upon the earth, allowing some to escape the coming destruction.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The prophet compares their attitudes with his own (vs. 1-4)
