Victor L. Ludlow, Isaiah: Prophet, Seer, and Poet ( 1982)

DESERT CARAVANERS, CITY DEFENDERS, AND SEA TRADERS ISAIAH 21-23

Chapters 21-23 comprise one of the most varied and obscure sections of Isaiah. This section contains seven separate pronouncements, five "burdens," and two "personal" prophecies: the burden of the desert of the sea (21:1-10), the burden of Dumah (21:11-12), the burden upon Arabia (21:13-17), the burden of the valley of vision (22:1-14), and the burden of Tyre (23:1-18); and a personal prophecy to Judah's national treasurer, Shebna (22:15-19), and a prophecy to his successor, Eliakim (22:20-25). The seven pronouncements vary not only in subject matter and length, but also in mood, style, and structure: often passages of revelry and despair are randomly rendered side-by-side in prose or poetry to depict contemporary events and future, messianic incidents. This set of seven pronouncements comprises the final three chapters of the collection of Isaiah's prophecies directed to the foreign nations (Isa. 13-23), and precedes the "Apocalypse of Isaiah," his visions of the judgment of the world (Isa. 24-27). Some of the language and imagery in these three chapters was later used by John the Revelator to describe his own apocalypse (the book of Revelation). The similarity suggests the question, "Are the substance and subject of the two seers' visions similar, or did John simply borrow Isaiah's phraseology?" (Compare Isa. 21:9 with Rev. 14:8; Isa. 22:22 with Rev. 3:7; and Isa. 23:8 with Rev. 18:23.) It appears that John merely uses some of Isaiah's terminology, since he comes later historically, but answers to this question and several other questions about the meaning of these chapters will become more obvious as the seven pronouncements are analyzed.

First Pronouncement: The Burden of the Desert of the Sea (21:1-10)

Isaiah's vision opens with a description of a violent desert storm, which represents an unidentified invader coming against an unnamed force in a land known simply as the "desert by the sea":

21 An oracle concerning the Desert by the Sea:

Like whirlwinds sweeping through the southland,

an invader comes from the desert,

from a land of terror.

2A dire vision had been shown to me:

The traitor betrays, the looter takes loot.

Elam, attack! Media, lay siege!

I will bring to an end all the groaning she caused.

3At this my body is racked with pain,

pangs seize me, like those of a woman in labor;

I am staggered by what I hear,

I am bewildered by what I see.

4My heart falters, fear makes me tremble;

the twilight I longed for has become a horror to me.

5They set the tables,

they spread the rugs,

they eat, they drink!

Get up, you officers, oil the shields! (NIV)

In this oracle (or "burden," KJV) upon the "Desert by the Sea," Isaiah records a vision (v. 2) so vivid and terrifying that he himself trembles and fears (vs. 3-4). Isaiah's pain is like that of a "woman in labor" (compare Isa. 13:8) and cause intense emotional sorrow (compare Isa. 15:5; 16:9, 11; Dan. 10:16; Jer. 6:24; Ezek. 30:4, 9; Isa. 21, footnote 3a). Those people actually in the vision, though, seem unaware of the impending disaster as they sit at their banquet. Isaiah must interrupt their festival to warn them to arm and prepare themselves against an attack (v. 5).

Although those under attack remain unidentified, two peoples of the attacking force are identified as Elam and Media (v. 2; see areas G3 and G4 on Map 2). The Elamites were Semites; the Medes descended from Japheth. (Gen. 10:2.) At times these two nations warred against each other, but during Isaiah's age they joined together against the Assyrian Empire. From 850 to 690 B.C. Elam and Media each fought a number of battles with the Assyrians and managed to maintain their independence in spite of the eastern Assyrian expansion. (See 824 B.C. Assyrian boundaries on Map 10.) Shortly after Isaiah's death, however, Assyria gradually expanded into Elamite and Median territories until the two nations lay almost completely within her empire. (See 640 B.C. Assyrian boundaries on Map 10.) The Medes later gained dominion over their own territories and incorporated part of Elam as they pushed back the Assyrians. Indeed, the Medes became so powerful that they eventually attacked the Assyrian heartland and destroyed Nineveh in 612 B.C., (See Map 11.) Almost a century later they and the Persians, Elamites, and other peoples conquered Babylon in 539 B.C., thereby forming the greatest empire the ancient world had ever known. (See Map 12.)

Since Elam and Media united in so many ventures, it is difficult to distinguish which "joint attack" the prophet records in chapter 21. Some scholars feel that the joint effort described was one aimed against the Assyrians during Isaiah's lifetime, about 700 B.C., while others believe that Isaiah foresaw the Elam-Media attack to come upon Babylon in 539 B.C. (See Isa. 21, footnote 2b.)

Limited additional information about the historical context and fulfillment of Isaiah's oracle is given in the last half of his pronouncement. While the first half of the oracle describes Isaiah's intense emotion as he glimpses the siege, the second depicts his wait for the news of the outcome:

6This is what the Lord says to me:

"Go, post a lookout

and have him report what he sees.

7When he sees chariots with teams of horses,

riders on donkeys or riders on camels,

let him be alert, fully alert."

8And the lookout shouted,

"Day after day, my lord, I stand on the watchtower;

every night I stay at my post.

9Look, here comes a man in a chariot

with a team of horses.

And he gives back the answer:

'Babylon has fallen, has fallen!

All the images of its gods

lie shattered on the ground!'"

10O my people, crushed on the threshing floor,

I tell you what I have heard

from the LORD Almighty,

from the God of Israel. (NIV)

A historical context is identified in verse 9, in which the messengers record that Babylon is fallen and her idols shattered.

As noted earlier in this book (in the discussion of Isaiah 13-14) Babylon fell to the Persians in 539 B.C. At that time, however, her idols and pagan temples were not destroyed because of the beneficence of the Persian king, Cyrus. Babylon's idols were destroyed earlier, though, when the Assyrians attacked her in 689 B.C. A long chain of disputes between Elam, Babylon, and Assyria spanned most of Isaiah's life and led to this destruction.

Thus, the Babylonian downfall that Isaiah foresaw seems to be the result of the Assyrian attack in 689 B.C.

Isaiah foresaw that although Assyria was the greatest threat to God's chosen people in Judah, the combined Elam-Media-Babylonian opposition to Assyria would not succeed. Assyria remained a strong empire for almost a century after Isaiah received this vision of the "desert of the sea." It must have discouraged the prophet to know that Assyria would retain its power for so long, especially since the Assyrians had so brutally attacked Israel and Judah.

The concluding verse of Isaiah's oracle leaves the reader anticipating further details:

Full of compassion, he addresses himself to his people, so often put to shame and mistreated in the course of history. . . . Even the poet's concluding words do not remove the doubt as to whether he is foretelling merely the fall of Babylon or going beyond it to the subsequent horrors. (Kaiser, Isaiah 13-39, p. 128.)

Ancient Israel experienced great suffering at the hands of both the Assyrians and Babylonians. And just as Babylon forcibly and physically oppressed ancient Israelites and Jews, God's children continue to suffer spiritually as long as they submit themselves to the enticing of wickedness or "spiritual" Babylon. Isaiah seems to have foreseen all the types of suffering that Babylon would bring upon his people, and thus is grieved as he delivers his oracle. The prophet experienced actual pain from this vision; it was, in a very real sense, a "burden" to him.

Second Pronouncement: The Burden of Dumah (21:11-12)

Isaiah's next oracle is one of the shortest and most enigmatic in his entire book:

11An oracle concerning Dumah:

Someone calls to me from Seir,

"Watchman, what is left of the night?

Watchman, what is left of the night?"

12The watchman replies,

"Morning is coming, but also the night.

If you would ask, then ask;

and come back yet again." (NIV)

Dumah is a desert oasis approximately two hundred and fifty miles southeast of the Dead Sea. (See area E4 on Map 2.) Dumah was also the name of a son of Ishmael who founded an Arabian tribe. (Gen. 25:14.) Seir is the chief mountain range immediately southeast of the Dead Sea in the area of Sela, the home of Esau and his descendants, the Edomites. (See area D4 on Map 3.)

The oracle recounts a nighttime episode in which someone asks a watchman how much of the night has passed. He responds that morning is coming, but that night will inevitably fall again. Morning is symbolic of salvation and deliverance, while night represents distress, misery, and evil. In other words, the watchman implies that although redemption is coming, it will be followed by a period of disaster, oppression, or wickedness. (Compare Isa. 8:22; 9:1.) Or, more broadly, he may be saying that "morning" is coming for the righteous and "night" for the wicked.

Spiritually, Edom symbolizes "the world" (D&C 1:36) and the watchman represents a prophet (Jer. 6:17; Ezek. 3:17). Thus, a prophet's saying "morning and darkness are coming, inquire later when the night will end" could be a manner of prophesying about an apostasy and restoration. The "night" in the question asked the watchman seems to symbolize the night of apostasy or spiritual darkness. The watchman, in reply, says that "the morning cometh" (the Millennium, the Lord at his coming, hope for a benighted world) "and also the night" (wherein there can be no labor performed; the end of probation, mortality [Alma 34:32]). The prophet's cryptic reply seems to mean that time is passing; if you want to ask, come later and ask when the time is closer for these events to be fulfilled. Like John the Revelator, Isaiah saw the glorious, triumphant return of the Lord and the end of the earth. One cannot but hear an echo of this in the final words that seal John's revelation: "Come . . . even so, come, Lord Jesus." (Rev. 22:20.)

Third Pronouncement: The Burden upon Arabia (21:13-17)

Without giving any information to explain the situation of this oracle, Isaiah warns a desert people to provide water and food for the refugees who will soon be coming to their towns:

13An oracle concerning Arabia:

You caravans of Dedanites,

who camp in the thickets of Arabia,

14 bring water for the thirsty;

you who live in Tema

bring food for the fugitives.

15They flee from the sword,

from the drawn sword,

from the bent bow

and from the heat of battle.

16This is what the Lord says to me: "Within one year, as a servant bound by contract would count it, all the pomp of Kedar will come to an end. 17The survivors of the bowmen, the warriors of Kedar, will be few." The LORD, the God of Israel, has spoken. (NIV)

Apparently, an Assyrian military expedition into the Syrian desert forced many people of Kedar to move south to the towns of Tema and Dedan. (See areas D3, 4, 5 on Map 2.) Kedar was the second son of Ishmael and, according to some Arab genealogists, an ancestor of the prophet Muhammed. Kedar's descendants were desert dwellers and herdsmen comparable to the modern Bedouin. (IDB 3:3.) The Dedanites, on the other hand, were an important commercial people who lived in northwest Arabia. (See Ezek. 27:20.) Their ancestry is uncertain, although they are thought to have descended either from Cush (Gen. 10:7) or from Abraham through his third wife, Keturah (Gen. 25:3). They apparently settled in parts of Edom. (IDB 1:812.) Tema was another son of Ishmael, and the oasis named after him was located on the main routes stretching from the Red Sea east to the Persian Gulf and north to Damascus. The Temanites were caravaners who, although they paid tribute to the Assyrians, remained secure in the desert until the Babylonians destroyed their city in 552 B.C. (Job 6:19; Jer. 25:23; compare Jer. 29:28-32.)

Isaiah's pronouncement upon this desert people is quite straightforward, strongly admonishing them to provide refuge and supplies for the Kedarites who are to be invaded and exiled within a year. There is also a slight possibility that the oracle foretells events of the last days, with the unnamed enemies coming from the north representing an eschatological threat and the "food" and "water" symbolizing spiritual as well as physical sustenance to be provided for the influx of refugees.

Fourth Pronouncement: The Burden of the Valley of Vision (22:1-14)

Isaiah harshly rebukes the inhabitants of Jerusalem for their selfish attitude in a time of distress. He also denounces the pride and insensitivity they continue to maintain even under divine chastisement. Although calamities are about to befall Jerusalem because of Sennacherib's invasion, the Judeans' only thoughts are for pleasure.

Isaiah's pronouncement can be separated into four segments:

Into each segment Isaiah incorporates antithetic parallelism to emphasize how Judah's attitudes, expectations, plans, and behavior oppose that which the Lord desires. In the end, however, Judah will experience the opposite of what she desires when she receives the full rewards of her wickedness.

Isaiah begins the oracle by comparing the people's attitudes in the face of the Assyrian invasion with his own:

22 An oracle concerning the Valley of Vision:

What troubles you now,

that you have all gone up on the housetops,

2O town full of commotion,

O city of tumult and revelry?

Your slain were not killed by the sword,

nor did they die in battle.

3All your leaders have fled together;

they have been captured

without using the bow.

All you who were caught were

taken prisoner together,

having fled while the enemy was still far away.

4Therefore I said, "Turn away from me;

let me weep bitterly.

Do not try to console me

over the destruction of my people." (NIV)

While the people of Jerusalem rejoice because they have not been killed or captured, Isaiah mourns for the losses already incurred and those that will follow. Although the Assyrians have already destroyed dozens of Judean cities and taken thousands of Jewish captives, the people in Jerusalem celebrate their freedom. Isaiah sorrows not only for the impending disaster, but also for those who do not understand or seem concerned about the problems Judah faces.

The "valley of vision" in verse 1 refers to Jerusalem, for this holy city is the place where revelation is given. (See Isa. 22 chapter heading and footnote la.) Although built on the tops of the rolling Judean mountains, Jerusalem is laced with hills and valleys. Mount Moriah, the site of the temple, is lower in elevation than most of the hills of Jerusalem that surround it. It is nestled in a valley between Mount Zion to the west and the Mount of Olives to the east.

Isaiah then describes the destruction that the Lord will bring to the "valley of vision." Enemy soldiers and chariots replace revelations and prophecies:

5The Lord, the LORD Almighty, has a day

of tumult and trampling and terror

in the Valley of Vision,

a day of battering down walls and of crying out to the mountains.

6Elam takes up the quiver,

with her charioteers and horses;

Kir uncovers the shield.

7Your choicest valleys are full of chariots,

and horsemen are posted at

the city gates;

8the defenses of Judah are stripped

away. (NIV)

When the Lord's day finally comes to Jerusalem, the people will not celebrate, for their defense will fail. Although the people think the soldiers of Elam and Kir will be able to defeat the Assyrians before they reach Jerusalem (v. 6), the enemy will come to the city gates. (Kir was on the main road between Elam and Babylon, and its inhabitants joined the Elam-Babylonian confederation in opposing Assyria.)

Jerusalem's defenses were immense, but not strong enough to withstand the Assyrians. Isaiah reviews Jerusalem's defenses, telling why the people lack the most important element of defense—the protection of God:

And you looked in that day

to the weapons in the Palace of the Forest:

9you saw that the City of David

had many breaches in its defenses;

you stored up water

in the Lower Pool.

10You counted the buildings in Jerusalem

and tore down houses to strengthen the wall.

11You built a reservoir between the two walls

for the water of the Old Pool,

but you did not look to the One who made it,

or have regard for the One who planned it long ago. (NIV)

A modern scholar described the same defenses:

The carefully thought out policy of Hezekiah is discernible not only in his patient waiting for the opportune moment to rebel against Assyria and in the extensive diplomatic maneuvers which created an association of allies far and near, but also in his efforts to fortify Judah itself against the inevitable struggle against the Assyrians. In a major engineering feat, Hezekiah devised the means for transferring the water from the spring of Gihon, located outside the Jerusalem walls, through an underground tunnel to the pool of Siloam located within the city walls. Monumental evidence for the digging of Hezekiah's tunnel has been preserved in the 'Siloam Inscription'. Furthermore, Hezekiah strengthened the walls of Jerusalem and fortified numerous Judean cities. He reorganized the army, prepared military weapons, and it seems also that he brought mercenary troops into Jerusalem. The reorganization of the army was no doubt associated with the census carried out by Hezekiah in southern Judah. He built store cities of warehouses for agricultural supplies. There is also the possibility that Hezekiah restructured the royal administrative system. Evidence for this political reorganization may be seen in the transference of the office of 'the royal steward' from Shebnah to Eliakim. (Isa. 22:15-25: Hayes, Israelite and Judean History, p. 447.)

Isaiah concludes his oracle upon Jerusalem by comparing the Lord's anticipations with those of the people, noting how they reacted to the threatening situation:

12The Lord, the LORD Almighty,

called you on that day

to weep and to wail,

to tear out your hair and put on sackcloth.

13But see, there is joy and revelry,

slaughtering of cattle and killing of sheep,

eating of meat and drinking of wine!

"Let us eat and drink," you say,

"for tomorrow we die!"

14The LORD Almighty has revealed this in my hearing: "Till your dying day this sin will not be atoned for," says the Lord, the LORD Almighty. (NIV)

To describe the people eating and drinking, Isaiah uses the Hebrew infinitives "to eat" and "to drink," thus implying continuous and excessive indulgence in revelries and orgies. The sentence "Let us eat and drink for tomorrow we may die," could be the slogan of the reckless revellers, although it might also be the prophet's scornful thrust hinting at their impending doom. (Israel Slotki, Isaiah, p. 102; compare 2 Ne. 28:7.)

In comparing Isaiah's feelings with Jerusalem's, it is obvious that Isaiah mourns not only for the physical hardships descending upon Jerusalem, but also for the spiritual gulf separating God from his chosen people. The people may think that their troubles are over when the Assyrians finally depart, but they must still face the Lord and the consequences of their sins (v. 14).

Fifth Pronouncement: A Prophecy of Shebna (22:15-19)

After portraying the unconcerned and sinful condition of Jerusalem's inhabitants, Isaiah singles out a leading citizen and describes his selfish, vain actions. The individual selected is Shebna, the leader of the king's court, a position similar to a present-day secretary of state. Isaiah apparently confronts Shebna in the Kidron Valley near the tombs of the kings:

15This is what the Lord, the LORD

Almighty, says:

"Go, say to this steward,

to Shebna, who is in charge of the palace:

16What are you doing here and who gave you permission to cut out a grave for yourself here,

hewing your grave on the height

and chiseling your resting place in the rock?

17"Beware, the LORD is about to take firm hold of you

and hurl you away, O you mighty man.

18He will roll you up tightly like a ball

and throw you into a large country.

There you will die

and there your splendid chariots will remain—

you disgrace to your master's house!

19I will depose you from your office,

and you will be ousted from your position. (NIV)

Like the dashed expectations of those in Jerusalem, Shebna's hope for a magnificent tomb in Jerusalem is destined to come to naught. Indeed, Shebna was eventually disgraced in office and demoted to the office of secretary or scribe of the king's court. (Isa. 36:3.) This position was still influential, however, being the post second only to the head of the court.

According to some scholars, Shebna was actually a foreigner who rose to power in Jerusalem. They give three primary reasons for this supposition: (1) his father is never mentioned, although other officials are identified by their families (see Isa. 22:20; 36:3); (2) his name is not Hebrew; and (3) Isaiah makes a strong contrast between "here" in Jerusalem where Shebna hews out his tomb and "there" where he will die. (Young, The Book of Isaiah 2:106; Slotki, Isaiah, p. 103.)

Many scholars also believe that Shebna favored a strong pro-Egyptian policy, and that Jerusalem's immunity from Sargon's campaign of 711 B.C. resulted from a shift in Judean policy at the time when Shebna was removed from office. In short, the Jewish government became more submissive to Assyria. (IDB 4:312.)

In any case, Isaiah presents two strong contrasts in this short discourse: Shebna planned a glorious tomb for himself in Jerusalem, but the Lord has planned another burial in a foreign land; Shebna, indifferent to Jerusalem's fate, builds himself a permanent tomb while Isaiah weeps over the fate of his people.

Sixth Pronouncement: A Prophecy to Eliakim (22:20-25)

Here Isaiah continues speaking to Shebna, but prophesies about the person who will replace him: Eliakim is to be invested with the keys and authority of Shebna's office. Isaiah has a warning for Eliakim, however, concerning the way in which his family will rely upon Eliakim's position and influence for protection:

20"In that day I will summon my servant, Eliakim son of Hilkiah. 21I will clothe him with your robe and fasten your sash around him and hand your authority over to him. He will be a father to those who live in Jerusalem and to the house of Judah. 22I will place on his shoulder the key to the house of David; what he opens no one can shut, and what he shuts no one can open. 23I will drive him like a peg into a firm place; he will be a seat of honor for the house of his father. 24All the glory of his family will hang on him; its offspring and offshoots—all its lesser vessels, from the bowls to all the jars.

25"In that day," declares the LORD Almighty, "The peg driven into the firm place will give way; it will be sheared off and will fall, and the load hanging on it will be cut down." The LORD has spoken. (NIV)

In hanging all their hopes upon Eliakim's position as a "peg in a firm place," Eliakim's family will be disappointed, for when he loses his position of influence they will fall with him.

Some of the terminology of this warning also seems to refer to the priesthood keys and atoning powers of Jesus Christ. First of all, the name Eliakim means "God shall cause to arise," a messianic title pointing to the Resurrection. (See Isa. 22, footnote 20a.) Secondly, Eliakim is called as a servant of God (v. 20). Third, he holds the physical keys to the king's storerooms. Fourth, Eliakim serves as a "nail in a sure place" (KJV) for his family, meaning that they depend upon him for security. Similarly, Christ was crucified by a "nail in a sure place," thus fulfilling the demands of the Atonement under the law of justice. (See Ezra 9:8; Zech. 12:10; 13:6; John 20:25; D&C 45:51-53; TG "Jesus Christ, Crucifixion of"; BD "Crucifixion.")

Important differences remain between Eliakim and Christ, however. Eliakim's office was temporal, temporary, and unsuccessful, while Christ's mission is heavenly, eternal, and triumphant. Eliakim failed as a "nail in a sure place" but Christ's "nail in a sure place" (crucifixion) secured the eternal blessings of the Atonement.

Seventh Pronouncement: The Burden of Tyre (23:1-18)

It is appropriate that the concluding prophecy in Isaiah's pronouncements upon the foreign nations (chs. 13-23) be an oracle against Tyre. Tyre had much in common with Babylon (to whom Isaiah had directed his first foreign pronouncement), although the two came into prominence by contrasting means: Babylon was at the heart of political kingdoms, Tyre was the central commercial city; Babylon was the traditional center of land power, Tyre was the leading sea power; Babylon extended her empire by war, Tyre expanded her influence through trade; Babylon tore down and destroyed other cities, Tyre planted colonies and built new cities. (See Young, The Book of Isaiah 2:121.)

The name of Tyre is also a symbol of the ways of the world: while Babylon represents wickedness and idolatry, Tyre symbolizes worldliness and materialism. Isaiah first foretells how Tyre's commercial power will be broken:

23 An oracle concerning Tyre:

Wail, O ships of Tarshish!

For Tyre is destroyed

and left without house or harbor.

From the land of Cyprus

word has come to them.

2Be silent, you people of the island

and you merchants of Sidon,

whom the seafarers have enriched.

3On the great waters

came the grain of the Shihor;

the harvest of the Nile was the revenue of Tyre,

and she became the marketplace of the nations.

4Be ashamed, O Sidon, and you, O fortress of the sea,

for the sea has spoken:

"I have neither been in labor nor given birth;

I have neither reared sons nor brought up daughters."

5When word comes to Egypt,

They will be in anguish at the report from Tyre.

6Cross over to Tarshish;

wail, you people of the island.

7Is this your city of revelry,

the old, old city,

whose feet have taken her

to settle in far-off lands? (NIV)

The oracle begins with four parallel couplets that mention important Phoenician trade cities:

a. Tarshish and Cyprus (Chittim, KJV) (v. 1)

b. Sidon, Shihor, and the Nile (2-3)

b. Sidon and Egypt (4-5)

a. Tarshish and "people of the island" (Tyre and Cyprus?) (6-7)

Most of these sites are identified on Map 2, and each is important for different reasons:

Tyre is in southern Phoenicia with the oldest settlements on the mainland and the important seaport located on a small island. Tyre was usually the strongest of the Phoenician city-states and was noted for its purple dye, the most famous and precious of the dyes in ancient times (area D3 on Map 2; this area is part of modern Lebanon).

Tarshish is west of Phoenicia either in Asia Minor (Tarsus, in modern Turkey) or, more likely, on the Iberian Peninsula (Tartessus, in modern Spain). The "ships of Tarshish" were noted for their long travel, power, and heavy loads. In addition to dyed clothes, they delivered timber, grain, oil, wine, metal, slaves, and horses. (See Isa. 2:16 and pp. 90-91 in this book where they are also discussed.)

Cyprus, identified as Chittim in the King James Version, is a large island west of Phoenicia. It was controlled by Tyre during most of Isaiah's lifetime. It later came under the control of the Assyrians after the subjugation of the Phoenician city-states by Sargon and Sennacherib. It was an important seaport and trade center for the Phoenicians (area C3 on Map 2; today the island is controlled by both the Greeks and the Turks).

Sidon, called Zidon in the King James Version, was located along the central Phoenician coast about twenty-five miles north of Tyre. At times a rival with Tyre, it was usually subject to the kings of Tyre. It was noted for its fishing and industries, such as producing purple dye (area D3 on Map 2; also part of modern Lebanon).

Shihor, called Sihor in the King James Version, was probably located in the swamps of northeastern Egypt. Its precise location is unknown, but it is sometimes mentioned with Ramses or Zoan, which is located in the eastern delta; much of Egypt's grain was shipped from this area (area C4 on Map 2; part of modern Egypt). (See IDB 1:753-54; 4:328, 343-44, 517-18, 721-22; see also BD "Tyre," "Sidon," "Phoenicia.")

As shown by the description of these cities, the Phoenician trade empire extended throughout the Mediterranean Sea and encompassed areas that are today located in at least a half dozen different countries.

Isaiah promised Tyre, however, that she would lose her dominion of the sea and that the effects of the loss would be felt throughout her empire. He then told why and through whom this humiliation was coming:

8Who planned this against Tyre,

the bestower of crowns,

whose merchants are princes,

whose traders are renowned in the earth?

9The LORD Almighty planned it,

to bring low the pride of all glory

and to humble all who are renowned on the earth. (NIV)

Although the Lord used the Assyrians to subdue Tyre, he did it primarily to humble the proud Phoenicians.

Isaiah repeats his warning, listing the major Phoenician cities and colonies once again, thus emphasizing the inevitability of the impending destruction:

10Go through your land;

the Daughter of Tarshish, like the Nile,

will no longer be a haven for you.

11The LORD has stretched out his hand over the sea

and made its kingdoms tremble.

He has given an order concerning Phoenicia

that her fortresses be destroyed.

12He said, "No more of your reveling,

O Virgin Daughter of Sidon, now crushed!

"Up, cross over to Cyprus;

even there you will find no rest."

13Look at the land of the Babylonians,

this people that is now of no account!

The Assyrians have made it

a place for desert creatures;

they raised up their siege towers,

they stripped its fortresses bare

and turned it into a ruin.

14Wail, you ships of Tarshish;

your fortress is destroyed! (NIV)

In his second warning, Isaiah singles out the Assyrians as the instruments of God's judgment. As seen in the discussion and maps concerning Isaiah 36 and 37 in this book, Sennacherib gained absolute control of Phoenicia, thus initiating Tyre's humiliation.

Isaiah concludes his pronouncement upon Tyre with a note of hope, promising an end to the Lord's punishment and a time when Phoenician profits will benefit the Lord's righteous children:

15At that time Tyre will be forgotten for seventy years, the span of a king's life. But at the end of these seventy years, it will happen to Tyre as in the song of a prostitute:

16"Take up a harp, walk through the city,

O prostitute forgotten;

play the harp well, sing many a song,

so that you will be remembered."

17At the end of seventy years, the LORD will deal with Tyre. She will return to her hire as a prostitute and will ply her trade with all the kingdoms on the face of the earth.

18Yet her profit and her earnings will be set apart for the LORD; they will not be stored up or hoarded. Her profits will go to those who live before the LORD, for abundant food and fine clothes. (NIV)

The term "seventy years" seems to have a double meaning. About seventy years after Sennacherib humiliated Tyre and placed his own ruler on the throne, the Assyrians quickly declined in power. The small countries in the Mediterranean area were thereby able to reestablish some independence (701 B.C.). Tyre later fell to the Babylonians about the same time as Jerusalem did (587-586 B.C.) and thereafter never regained any real power as a nation. Although Tyre was freed after seventy years of bondage, she did not set apart her riches to the Lord. Therefore, since the numbers seven and seventy can also represent completeness, perfection, and wholeness, perhaps Isaiah is also promising that after an appropriate period of time the riches of Tyre will be dedicated to the Lord. (IDB 4:295.)

The destruction of Tyre also parallels the destruction of spiritual Babylon in the last days. John the Revelator used a number of Isaiah's descriptive terms to portray Babylon as a symbol of wickedness. (See Rev. 14:8; 16:19; 17:1-5, 15, 18; 18:3, 11, 15, 17-19, 23.) Both Isaiah and John denounced the worldly wealth of the two cities, and both visions of destruction serve as a warning to the entire world to avoid the bondage of wealth and pride. (See 2 Ne. 28:17-19; D&C 132:12-14.)

In conclusion, the seven pronouncements of Isaiah in chapters 21-23 deal with a variety of countries, people, historical contexts, and possibilities of prophetic fulfillment. The dominant theme throughout them all, however, is that worldly aspirations, wickedness, selfishness, and pride will eventually be thwarted. Generally given in a punitive tone, these oracles warn the wicked of the Lord's sure judgments upon the world. In the following chapters (24-27), Isaiah elaborates upon this theme and expands it to describe a universal judgment to come upon all mankind. He also encourages hope, however, as he promises the Resurrection and a new life of righteousness.
