Victor L. Ludlow, Isaiah: Prophet, Seer, and Poet ( 1982)

ISAIAH'S APOCALYPSE ISAIAH 24-25

A seer can know of things which are past, and also of things which are to come, and by them shall all things be revealed, or, rather, shall secret things be made manifest, and hidden things shall come to light, and things which are not known shall be made known by them, and also things shall be made known by them which otherwise could not be known. (Mosiah 8:17; italics added.)

Isaiah was a great seer because things that were not known and recorded in other writings of his time were made known to him.

Isaiah's seership becomes fully evident in chapters 24-27. He records a cycle of prophecies that has no parallel in the writings of earlier Old Testament prophets, although it is echoed in the later writings of Daniel (ch. 7-12), Zechariah (ch. 9-14), and John (Rev. 7-22). He sees the judgment, Christ's second coming, the establishment of Zion, the resurrection, and the glory of the millennial and celestial periods. He records so many profound insights in these four chapters that they are often called the "apocalypse of Isaiah." (See Kaiser, Isaiah 13-39, p. 173; IDB 1:157.) Although a fitting capstone to the preceding chapters, Isaiah's apocalypse also advances new concepts that will lead into the new insights and prophecies recorded in Isaiah's later writings.

Chapters 24 and 25 introduce Isaiah's apocalypse (revelation), each developing contrasting themes and moods: chapter 24 ominously foretells destruction and sadness, while chapter 25 auspiciously promises new life and gladness. In these two chapters Isaiah speaks as prophet, seer, and poet: as a prophet he warns and testifies of the consequences of wickedness; as a seer he reveals future events upon this earth and spiritual developments in the post-earthly spirit world; as a poet he combines semantic parallelism, sound, repetitions, and symbolism to memorably portray the condition of the earth in the last days.

Characteristically, Isaiah begins chapter 24 with the bold interjection "behold," thus emphasizing the importance of the message that follows. He describes a catastrophe that will afflict all classes of society:

24 Behold,

The LORD will strip the earth bare,

And lay it waste,

And twist its surface,

And scatter its inhabitants.

2Layman and priest shall fare alike,

Slave and master,

Handmaid and mistress,

Buyer and seller,

Lender and borrower,

Creditor and debtor.

3The earth shall be bare, bare;

It shall be plundered, plundered;

For it is the LORD who spoke this word. (NJV)

A quick review of Isaiah's poetic technique as illustrated by these verses reveals the variety of form at his command. The first three verses are chiastic, following a sequence of (a) Lord, (b) bare earth and disaster, (c) people affected, (b') bare earth and disaster, (a') Lord. Furthermore, these verses contain antithetic, and climactic parallelism. In verse 3 Isaiah employs direct repetition in order to emphasize the extent of "barrenness" and "plundering."

In biblical Hebrew, the repetition of a word, for example, "bare, bare" makes the word comparative ("more bare") or superlative ("most bare"). By repeating "bare" three times in verses 1-3, Isaiah stresses his point—the earth will be extremely bare! Isaiah also uses assonance in verse 1 (boqeq "empty" and boleqah "waste") and alliteration in verse 3 (hiboq-tiboq "empty-empty" and hiboz-tiboz "spoiled-spoled") to further tighten his poetic form. Thus, through structure, sound, and meaning, Isaiah combines many forms of parallelism in just three verses.

In contrasting different classes of people (v. 2), Isaiah first indicates that both priests and laity will suffer. As a representative of God, the ancient priest occupied an exalted position of authority. But similar to the Israelites as a chosen people, the priest as God's representative has strayed into wickedness and will no longer live worthy of God's blessings; indeed, the people and priest together will experience God's judgments. (Compare Spencer W. Kimball's similar feelings about religious leaders and "priests who encourage the defilement of men and wink at the eroding trends and who deny the omniscience of God." [CR, Apr. 1971, p. 9.])

Isaiah testifies concerning the certainty of the Lord's judgment in verse 3, which concludes with one of Isaiah's favorite insertions: "the Lord has spoken." This short clause characterizes Isaiah's prophetic authority and strengthens the majestic force of his prophecies.

After testifying briefly about what is coming to whom, Isaiah explains why God's judgments are coming:

4The earth is withered, sear;

The world languishes, it is sear;

The most exalted people on earth languish.

5For the earth was defiled

Under its inhabitants;

Because they transgressed teachings,

Violated laws,

Broke the ancient covenant.

6That is why a curse consumes the earth,

And its inhabitants pay the penalty;

That is why earth's dwellers have dwindled,

And but few men are left. (NJV)

The "most exalted people on earth" could be those who exalt themselves and thus become the proud or haughty (v. 4, KJV). They might also be the ancient Israelites or members of Christ's latter-day church who have been called and ordained to great callings but who "languish" and fail to fulfill their stewardship. Whoever they are, their primary sin is that they have changed the teachings, laws, and covenants of the Lord (v. 5). Each gospel principle, commandment, and ordinance was designed by God to help his children grow spiritually. Isaiah emphasizes that their changes have occurred upon three levels of the gospel: the knowledge level (teachings, instruction, or understanding), the action level (laws, commandments, or guidelines), and the contractual level (covenants, ordinances, or promises). In other words, complete apostasy among the people necessitates the Lord's curse upon the whole earth. These people must suffer until only a few of them remain upon the earth.

Isaiah continues to describe in greater detail the effects of God's judgments:

7The new wine fails,

The vine languishes;

And all the merry-hearted sigh.

8Stilled is the merriment of timbrels,

Ended the clamor of revelers,

Stilled the merriment of lyres.

9They drink their wine without song;

Liquor tastes bitter to the drinker.

10Towns are broken, empty;

Every house is shut, none enters;

11Even over wine, a cry goes up in the streets:

The sun has set on all joy,

The gladness of the earth is banished.

12Desolation is left in the town

And the gate is battered to ruins. (NJV)

Before elaborating further upon the disastrous consequences of God's judgment upon the world, Isaiah interjects some positive results of the period of chastisement:

13For thus shall it be among the peoples

In the midst of the earth:

As when the olive tree is beaten out,

Like gleanings when the vintage is over.

14These shall lift up their voices,

Exult in the majesty of the LORD.

They shall shout from the sea:

15Therefore, honor the LORD with lights

In the coastlands of the sea—

the name of the LORD, the God of Israel.

16From the end of the earth

We hear singing:

Glory to the righteous!

And I said:

I waste away! I waste away! Woe is me!

The faithless have acted faithlessly;

The faithless have broken faith! (NJV)

Some of God's children will be gleaned in righteousness out of the world's wickedness. These will praise the Lord throughout the earth. [^1] They are:

A new group of persons, distinguished by an emphatic pronoun [therefore] from the rest of mankind, which was treated as a whole in the previous prophecy [vs. 1-12]. . . . This group is to rejoice at the majesty of Yahweh, and . . . it is obvious to suppose that they are members of the people of God. (Kaiser, Isaiah 13-39, p. 187).

The chosen few do not sing a taunt song against their destroyed brothers and sisters, nor do they praise their own righteousness, but they praise their Savior and the light and glory he brings to the earth. These verses of praise bring hope to an otherwise gloomy revelation of judgment.

Despite the prospect of a glorious future, Isaiah cannot remain hopeful in the midst of the wickedness that surrounds him. In verse 16, he bemoans his ineffectual capacity to change the people's behavior as he contrasts the contemporary state of wickedness around him with the future age of righteousness.

Isaiah expresses his grief in six short Hebrew words that all end with the same sound. They are transliterated and translated as follows:

razi li razi li oi li

(leanness to me) (leanness to me) (woe is to me)

Isaiah's expression in English would be similar to "Skinny me, skinny me—pity me!"

He concludes verse 16 by repeating the same root, beged, five times, twice as a participle, twice as a perfect verb, and once as a noun. It would have sounded like this: bodgim bagadu, uveged bogdim bagadu. In order to retain a sense of the sound and meaning of these words, one scholar has rendered them as "Plunderers plunder, even with plunder do plunderers plunder." (Young, The Book of Isaiah 2:174.)

Isaiah continues his discourse by portraying the helplessness that will befall people on the earth, the earth itself, and people in the spirit world. First, the people on the earth:

17Terror, and pit, and trap

Upon you who dwell on earth!

18He who flees at the report of the terror

Shall fall into the pit;

And he who climbs out of the pit

Shall be caught in the trap.

For sluices are opened on high,

And earth's foundations tremble. (NJV)

The wicked will futilely attempt to avoid God's many judgments. Although they may escape from one, they will fall into another, and if they escape from the second judgment, they will be ensnared in a third. [^2]

Isaiah indicates that the earth will also be in a helpless condition:

19The earth is breaking, breaking;

The earth is crumbling, crumbling.

20The earth is swaying like a drunkard;

It is rocking to and fro like a hut.

Its iniquity shall weigh it down,

And it shall fall, to rise no more. (NJV)

The climactic parallelism of verse 19 leads into the severe consequence portrayed in verse 20. The progressive steps in verse 19 are explained by one scholar as follows:

In the description there appears to be an ascending gradation of thought. The first verb implies a breaking or shattering, as though pieces of the earth were broken off; it is probably onomatopoeic. The word is suitable for describing an earthquake or some great convulsion that breaks the earth in pieces. The second verb is probably stronger, and suggests that the earth is actually divided by being split through; while the last verb denotes a violent or great shaking of the earth. Quite possibly the imagery or figure of the earthquake lies at the basis of the portrayal, but Isaiah's purpose is not to describe an earthquake; rather he is pointing to a tremendous shaking of the earth that will come when the punitive judgment of God strikes. (Young, The Book of Isaiah 2:176.)

The eventual fulfillment of these verses is also promised in modern scripture, which says that "not many days hence" the earth will "tremble and reel to and fro as a drunken man." (D&C 49:23; 88:87.)

Apparently, people other than those living upon the earth will be involved in the events described by Isaiah. Spirit beings from above the earth (the "hosts of heaven") and those still bound to this earth ("captives" in a spirit "prison") will also be affected:

21In that day, the LORD will punish

The host of heaven in heaven

And the kings of the earth on earth.

22They shall be gathered in a dungeon

As captives are gathered;

And shall be locked up in a prison.

But after many days they shall be remembered. (NJV)

The "hosts of heaven" that the Lord punishes are most likely the original followers of Satan who were cast out of God's presence. They will suffer with the spirits of the wicked who lived on this earth. Yet after a time, the spirits of this earth will be remembered and "visited" (KJV) by messengers teaching the gospel of Jesus Christ. (See D&C 138; DS 2:155; MD, p. 755.)

Isaiah concludes his prophecy with a promise that the Lord himself will come to the earth in such radiant glory that the sun and moon will pale in comparison:

23Then the moon shall be ashamed,

And the sun shall be abashed.

For the LORD of Hosts will reign

On Mount Zion and in Jerusalem,

And the Presence will be revealed to His elders. (NJV)

The "elders" who will receive the Lord upon the earth might be those who hold his priesthood in the latter days, although they could also be the "elders" or ancient ones who lived upon this earth in earlier dispensations who "shall come to visit" their descendants (D&C 116:1) and will help usher in the Lord's rule. (See BD "Adam"; D&C 133:49.)

In chapter 24, Isaiah answers many questions about God's judgments upon this earth and its inhabitants. He foretells primarily what will happen (vs. 1-3, 7-12, 17-23), although he also describes to whom the judgments will come (v. 2), where they will come (vs. 17, 21-22), and why they will come to both the wicked (vs. 4-6) and the righteous (vs. 13-16). One important question Isaiah does not answer is when they will occur.

From Isaiah's time and perspective, he could be describing any one of three important periods in the earth's history. First, the earthquakes, the helplessness of the people, and a visiting of the spirits in prison might describe the disaster in the Americas at the time of Christ's crucifixion and his visit to the spirit world. (See 3 Ne. 8-9; D&C 138.) Second, similar events will affect this earth prior to Christ's second coming, and many spirits will be "remembered" and rise up from the dead. (See D&C 45:33; 88:89; 63:49.) Third, at the end of the Millennium, there will be a great cleansing of the earth prior to the last reuniting of spirits to their bodies, the resurrection of the unjust. (D&C 76:71-112; 88:99-102.) The earth will then be celestial, a body of light that will cause the sun to be "abashed" and the moon (which is lit by the sun) to be "ashamed" (v. 23; compare D&C 29:22-25; 130:7; 77:1-2).

Isaiah's use of imagery in this poem makes this prophecy a truly great piece of literature that would be repeated and remembered by generations of Israelites even though they might not enjoy its sober message of judgment. Isaiah's beautiful prophecy promises divine justice and carries some hope for those who are righteous (vs. 14-16) and await the Lord's reign on this earth (v. 23).

Isaiah becomes even more hopeful as his apocalypse unfolds. In chapter 25, he breaks forth into an exulting hymn, declaring a time of feasting, closeness to God, resurrection, joy, and victory.

He begins with praise for the Lord's power over the unrighteous and protection of the needy:

25 O LORD, You are my God;

I will extol You, I will praise Your name.

For You planned graciousness of old,

Counsels of steadfast faithfulness.

2For You have turned a city into a stone heap,

A walled town into a ruin,

The citadel of strangers into rubble,

Never to be rebuilt.

3Therefore a fierce people must honor You,

A city of cruel nations must fear You.

4For You have been a refuge for the poor man,

A shelter for the needy man in his distress—

Shelter from rainstorm, shade from heat.

When the fury of tyrants was like a winter rainstorm,

5The rage of strangers like heat in the desert,

You subdued the heat with the shade of clouds,

The singing of the tyrants was vanquished. (NJV)

God's pre-earthly councils in heaven are alluded to in verse 1, in which Isaiah thanks God for fulfilling his foreordained plans. The prophet also portrays the range of God's emotions by describing both God's anger against the tyrants and his concern for the poor and needy.

Isaiah describes how and why the righteous people will rejoice:

6The LORD of Hosts will make on this mount

For all the peoples

A banquet of rich viands,

A banquet of choice wines—

Of rich viands seasoned with marrow,

Of choice wines well refined.

7And He will destroy on this mount the shroud

That is drawn over the faces of all the peoples

And the covering that is spread

Over all the nations:

8He will destroy death forever.

My Lord God will wipe the tears away

From all faces

And will put an end to the reproach of His people

Over all the earth—

For it is the LORD who has spoken. (NJV)

Finally, after the days of tribulation, the earth's inhabitants will rejoice, feast, and celebrate together with the Lord (v. 6; see D&C 58:3-12). The veil of spiritual darkness and separation from the Lord will be taken away (v. 7; see D&C 38:8; 67:10; 110:1). Death will be destroyed and the reproach of sin will be removed through the power of the Atonement and Resurrection (v. 8). These promises of eternal life and happiness with God stand in sharp contrast to the mood of the preceding prophecy of judgment and destruction.

Isaiah continues to briefly describe what the people will say in that day:

9In that day they shall say:

This is our God;

We trusted in Him, and He delivered us.

This is the LORD, in whom we trusted;

Let us rejoice and exult in His deliverance! (NJV)

He concludes his hymn with sober words of warning for the proud people who live on this "mountain" or this earth:

10For the hand of the LORD shall descend

Upon this mount,

And Moab shall be trampled under Him

As straw is threshed to bits at Madmenah.

11Then He will spread out His hands in their homeland,

As a swimmer spreads his hands out to swim,

And He will humble their pride

Along with the emblems of their power.

12Yea, the secure fortification of their walls

He will lay low and humble,

Will raze to the ground, to the very dust. (NJV)

As the Lord sweeps his hand through the land (like a swimmer spreads his hands through the water), he will humble the proud and haughty ones (like those of Moab; see Isa. 15-16; Madmenah is a village north of Jerusalem; see Isa. 10:31).

Reviewing Isaiah 24 and 25, one sees a pattern that is very common in Isaiah's writings; Isaiah often delivers a pronouncement of serious warnings mingled with a note of optimism (as in chapter 24) and then follows it with a prophecy of joyful promises, concluding with a somber tone of caution (as in chapter 25).

One also sees in Isaiah's writings the unique way in which he combines his gifts as prophet, seer, and poet. He was a mighty seer, one of those whom Joseph Smith described when he said,

Search the revelations of God; study the prophecies and rejoice that God grants unto the world Seers and Prophets. They are they who saw the mysteries of godliness; . . . they saw the glory of the Lord when he showed the transfiguration of the earth on the mount; . . . they saw the day of judgment when all men received according to their works, and they saw the heaven and the earth flee away to make room for the city of God, when the righteous receive an inheritance in eternity.

Joseph then added a challenge to those who read the words of Isaiah and the other seers: "Fellow sojourners upon earth, it is your privilege to purify yourselves and come up to the same glory, and see for yourselves and know for yourselves." (TPJS, pp. 12-13.) As we improve our gifts of prophecy, inspiration, and expression, we will come to understand the words of Isaiah, the great prophet, seer, and poet.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Jewish tradition applies the "gleanings" to the remnants of Israel among the Gentiles. (Slotki, Isaiah, p. 112.) Latter-day Saints recognize that remnants of Israel will be among the Lord's "gleanings" but that other people will also become part of God's harvest in the last days.
[^2] Strong assonance helps convey the meaning of this verse. All three dangers (terror, pit, and trap) begin with the same two letters in the Hebrew; pachad and pachat and pach are befalling the people.
