Victor L. Ludlow, Isaiah: Prophet, Seer, and Poet ( 1982)

A SONG OF JUDAH AND THE DELIVERANCE OF ISRAEL ISAIAH 26-27

Beginning with chapter 13 and continuing through chapter 27, Isaiah prophesies the destruction of the enemies of God's people and the glorious salvation that awaits the righteous. Isaiah begins his pronouncements to specific nations in chapter 13, which portrays the downfall of the Babylonian kingdom, representing the center of land power, and concludes with chapter 23 on Tyre, representing the center of sea power. Moving from the particular judgments that God gives the various nations of the earth, Isaiah portrays in chapter 24 the whole world under the judgment of God. But God's purpose is not just to condemn the world; Isaiah's single chapter on judgment is followed by three chapters on God's glorious salvation.

Chapter 25 begins with Isaiah's song of praise to the Lord for God's concern for the weak and helpless, and then describes the joy awaiting the covenant people after judgment. Moab is singled out as a representative of the proud heathen nations that receive God's harsh judgment.

Chapter 26 is the song of rejoicing and thanksgiving that Judah will sing in the last days when Zion has been ultimately defended and her enemies humiliated. In praising the Lord, Judah expresses her trust in him, for even though she long endured sufferings and waited many centuries to see his judgments, she knows that he will remember his covenants and redeem his people. The chapter concludes with a description of the Lord's vengeance upon the wicked. This theme carries over into chapter 27, which begins with a promise of the Lord's power over Leviathan, the symbol of Satan.

Chapter 27 continues with a song of the vineyard, which celebrates the day of Israel's deliverance. The chapter also promises better days when God's purposes for his people will be fulfilled after they are chastised and return to him. It concludes with a prophecy of the gathering and restoration of Israel in the last days.

As chapters 25-27 develop the theme of salvation through the three songs of Isaiah, Judah, and the vineyard, the mood is obviously hopeful and joyful. The last two chapters in this set can be outlined as follows:

I. Song of Judah (26:1-19)

A. A hymn of thanksgiving and victory (26:1-6)

B. A prayer of entreaty and faith (26:7-19)

II. The Lord's slaying of Leviathan, Satan (26:20-27:1)

III. Deliverance of Israel (27:2-13)

A. A song of the Lord's vineyard (27:2-6)

B. The meaning of Israel's suffering (27:7-11)

C. A day of harvesting the Lord's people (27:12-13)

At the end of chapter 25, the Moabites had been brought into shameful disgrace. In chapters 26 and 27 (as shown in the outline above) the people of Zion are brought forth to joyful restoration. Some warnings of punishment are found in these chapters, but they are usually found alongside affirmations of peace and blessings.

A Song of Judah (26:1-19)

Isaiah begins his prophecy with the phrase "In that day," placing this section in an eschatological setting. The song in verses 1-6 will be sung "in the land of Judah" during the last days:

26 In that day this song will be sung in the land of Judah:

We have a strong city;

God makes salvation its walls and ramparts.

2Open the gates

that the righteous nation may enter,

the nation that keeps faith.

3You will keep in perfect peace

him whose mind is steadfast,

because he trusts in you.

4Trust in the LORD forever,

for the LORD, the LORD,

is the Rock eternal.

5He humbles those who dwell on high,

he lays the lofty city low;

he levels it to the ground and casts it down to the dust.

6Feet trample it down—

the feet of the oppressed,

the footsteps of the poor. (NIV)

This song contrasts two cities. The first, apparently Jerusalem, is a city of peace and security; her gates can be opened with no fear of attack. The description implies that the people had been previously in distress, either physically or spiritually. The opened gates represent peace in the land. Upon entering the gates, the righteous nation may be entering an actual city—either old or new Jerusalem—or the celestial city of the Lord through the gateway of baptism, forgiveness, and cleansing by the Holy Ghost. (Compare Ps. 24 with 2 Ne. 9:41; 31:17-21.) Thus, Judah's song in the last days could result in either thanks for the literal, physical deliverance of Jerusalem or praise to God through those who join the Lord's church and kingdom upon the earth. The "perfect peace" they enjoy is emphasized in the original Hebrew by the repetition of "peace, peace."

The second city Judah will sing of is a city of wickedness, perhaps representing Babylon (vs. 5-6). This proud city will be brought to the dust while the Lord's city is protected; the feet of those formerly oppressed will trample the wicked oppressors into the dust. Therefore, the chosen people will sing first for their own redemption and then for the Lord's power over their enemies.

Isaiah next turns to a prayer in which the people of God are portrayed as an offering to the Lord. This prayer contains several stages. First, the Lord blesses the righteous (v. 7). Next, the people explain that they wait for the Lord to bring judgments upon the wicked and salvation to the righteous (vs. 8-11). Verses 12-15 appear to describe the Millennium, and verses 16-18 portray the events immediately preceding it. Verse 19 concludes with a beautiful promise of the Resurrection. The entire prayer begins with Isaiah's petition for all Israel:

7The path of the righteous is level;

O upright One, you make the way of the righteous smooth.

8Yes, LORD, walking in the way of your laws,

we wait for you;

your name and renown are the desire of our hearts.

9My soul yearns for you in the night;

in the morning my spirit longs for you.

When your judgments come upon the earth,

the people of the world learn righteousness.

10Though grace is shown to the wicked,

they do not learn righteousness;

even in a land of uprightness they go on doing evil

and regard not the majesty of the LORD.

11O LORD, your hand is lifted high,

but they do not see it.

Let them see your zeal for your people and be put to shame;

let the fire reserved for your enemies consume them. (NIV)

In contrast to verse 9, verse 10 explains that even though the wicked are taught the truth, they do not learn righteousness. The point to be taken from these statements is that certain people are wicked, not just because they were raised by wicked parents, but because they choose wickedness over righteousness, though the Lord himself is their teacher. The judgments to come upon the wicked are just indeed. Verse 11 carries this idea even further: the wicked are shown miracles, but still do not see. Finally, their end is consumption by the fire set aside for the enemies of God. The whole judgment here described hints at the second coming of Christ, when the Lord will destroy the wicked and bless the righteous.

Verses 12-15 seem to describe the Millennium, since the Lord has already established peace in the land:

12LORD, you establish peace for us;

all that we have accomplished you have done for us.

13O LORD, our God, other lords besides you have ruled over us,

but your name alone do we honor.

14They are now dead, they live no more;

those departed spirits do not rise.

You punished them and brought them to ruin;

you wiped out all memory of them.

15You have enlarged the nation, O LORD;

you have enlarged the nation.

You have gained glory for yourself;

you have extended all the borders of the land. (NIV)

Israel has had problems and persecutions, but Isaiah recognizes that she will be remembered by the Lord. Though Israel has been ruled by other Lords (or masters, v. 13), only the one true master will eventually reign as Lord over Israel.

Isaiah next seems to describe the situation of the people of God, especially the Jews, during their long absence from the lands of their inheritance:

16LORD, they came to you in their distress;

when you disciplined them,

they could barely whisper a prayer.

17As a woman with child and about to give birth

writhes and cries out in her pain,

so were we in your presence, O LORD.

18We were with child, we writhed in pain,

but we gave birth to wind.

We have not brought salvation to the earth;

we have not given birth to people of the world. (NIV)

Scattered Israel travailed and yet gave birth to wind or nothingness. They, as the covenant people, were supposed to bring the gospel of God to the world, but because they themselves were led astray, they did not fulfill their purpose. Still, even though many perished, the Lord will not forget them. He will call them forth from the dead:

19But your dead will live;

their bodies will rise.

You who dwell in the dust,

wake up and shout for joy.

Your dew is like the dew of the morning;

the earth will give birth to her dead. (NIV)

Scholars are usually very confused over this verse, stumbling over the grammar and wondering at the meaning of the promise.

Grammatically, the verse is difficult because of the inexplicable changes in pronouns in the first part. One scholar, Otto Kaiser, describes the verse as follows: "One has to read this short passage several times in order to become really aware of the irritation caused by the change of possessive pronouns. The attempt to work out who is speaking and to identify the literary category is like solving a puzzle." (Isaiah 13-39, p. 215.)

In the Hebrew, the first two phrases are literally, "shall live your dead ones," and "my corpse [that] shall arise." Another scholar, Edward Young, explains them as follows:

In thus speaking the prophet identifies himself with the Lord's purposes. The dead are those who belong to the Lord, but the nation is Isaiah's. He is concerned over its downfall as is the Lord, for he speaks as a prophet of the Lord. To be noted also is the chiastic arrangement of words, an arrangement which lends strength to the description; thus, there will live (A) thy dead ones (B), and my corpse (B) they will arise (A).

By means of this additional statement, my corpse they will arise, the prophet clearly introduces the doctrine of the resurrection of the body.

Isaiah contrasts this verse and verse 14: the death of the righteous is filled with the hope of the Resurrection, while the death of the wicked results in oblivion.

Isaiah also gives an interesting analogy between the earth's dew and the Resurrection. Scholar George A. Smith beautifully explains the comparison:

The wonder of dew is that it is given from a clear heaven, that it comes to sight with the dawn. If the Oriental looks up when dew is falling he sees nothing to thank for it between him and the stars. If he sees dew in the morning, it is equal liquid and lustre; it seems to distil from the beams of the sun—the sun, which riseth with healing under his wings. The dew is thus doubly 'dew of lights.' But our prophet ascribes the dew of God, that is to raise the dead, neither to stars nor dawn, but, because of its Divine power, to that higher supernal glory which the Hebrew conceived to have existed before the sun, and which they styled, as they styled their God, by the plural of majesty: A dew of lights is Thy dew. As when the dawn comes, the drooping flowers of yesterday are seen erect and lustrous with the dew, every spike a crown of glory, so also shall be the resurrection of the dead. (The Book of Isaiah, pp. 468-69.)

In short, verse 19 seems to promise a resurrection both to the individuals and nation of Israel. (Compare verses 15 and 19 with Young's quotation and Joseph Fielding Smith's statement that this verse refers especially to Israel; CR, Apr. 1924, p. 44.) A full understanding of the postmortal spirit world easily explains how people whose bodies are dead can still live on (as postulated in the first phrase of the verse). Also, a knowledge of Christ's resurrection elucidates the fact that when the Lord's body rises, the bodies of the dead will be resurrected (second phrase in the verse). Thus, those whose bodies have laid in the earth will be born again into a new life and will be able to shout for joy (remainder of verse 19). Isaiah's words do complement a more complete understanding of the spirit world and Resurrection, although they may confuse secular scholars who lack revelation concerning these teachings.

The LORD'S Slaying of Leviathan, or Satan (26:20-27:1)

Before the resurrection can become a reality, the power of death must be overcome, and before the gates of a heavenly Jerusalem can be opened to a righteous nation (v. 2), the power of sin must be defeated. Isaiah describes the Lord's power over the "author of death" in the next few verses:

20Go, my people, enter your rooms and shut the doors behind you;

hide yourselves for a little while until his wrath has passed by.

21See, the LORD is coming out of his dwelling

to punish the people of the earth for their sins.

The earth will disclose the blood shed upon her;

she will conceal her slain no longer.

27 In that day,

the LORD will punish with his sword,

his fierce, great and powerful sword,

Leviathan the gliding serpent,

Leviathan the coiling serpent;

he will slay the monster of the sea. (NIV)

This whole section alludes to the symbols of the passover in its description of the Lord's war with the wicked. For example, in verse 20, the Lord's people are told to flee from the coming disaster, enter their homes, shut their doors, and hide until the Lord's destruction passes over. This means of protection hardly seems adequate if the destruction described here is a military invasion or some large-scale natural catastrophe. It should be remembered, though, that when the Lord killed the firstborn of Egypt by the tenth plague, the only protection the Israelites had was the closed doors of their homes and lamb's blood on the doorposts. In other words, rather than destroying everyone, the Lord will punish only those who merit his judgments, just as at the time of the passover.

Leviathan represents the forces of chaos that originally opposed the creator of this earth. (See Isa. 27, footnote 1c.) The serpent or sea monster (or dragon, KJV) also represents the personification of chaos, Satan himself. (See Rev. 12:9; 20:2.) Leviathan probably includes not only Satan, but all who serve him. Some scholars believe that Isaiah simply borrowed the term from a Canaanite myth, but more likely the Canaanite myths about Leviathan are apostate versions of an earlier record about the earth's creation out of a state of disorder. (Compare Kaiser, Isaiah 13-19, p. 221 with Abr. 4:1-2.)

Isaiah knew that the Lord would have at least one major confrontation with Satan or Leviathan and his forces. Since three epithets are given—the gliding serpent, the coiling serpent, the monster of the sea—some scholars believe that the Lord has three enemies to slay. (Young, The Book of Isaiah 2:233.) However, it is also likely that the threefold enemy represents three major conflicts the Lord Jesus Christ has to wage with Satan. First, Christ was the advocate of the Father's plan and helped cast Satan out of heaven. Second, the Savior had to overcome temptation, sin, and death through his exemplary life, the Atonement, and the Resurrection. Finally, before the earth can progress from a telestial to a terrestrial or finally a celestial state, Christ and his forces must battle the forces of sin, and Christ will again overpower Satan, who will finally be banished to outer darkness.

The Deliverance of Israel (27:2-13)

After Leviathan has been overcome, a song will be sung "in that day." Isaiah describes the song that will be sung about the Lord's vineyard:

2In that day—

"Sing about a fruitful vineyard:

3 I, the LORD, watch over it;

I water it continually

I guard it day and night so that no one may harm it.

4 I am not angry.

If only there were briers and thorns confronting me!

I would march against them in battle;

I would set them all on fire.

5Or else let them come to me for refuge;

let them make peace with me,

yes, let them make peace with me."

6In days to come Jacob will take root,

Israel will bud and blossom

and fill all the world with fruit. (NIV)

Isaiah then poses a rhetorical question (expecting a negative answer) about the Lord's judgments with Israel; he questions whether God has been as harsh with Israel as with her oppressors. Isaiah continues by elaborating upon the consequences to befall Israel:

7Has the LORD struck her

as he struck down those who struck her?

Has she been killed

as those were killed who killed her?

8By warfare and exile you contend with her—

with his fierce blast he drives her out,

as on a day the east wind blows.

9By this, then, will Jacob's guilt be atoned for,

and this will be the full fruitage of the removal of his sin:

When he makes all the altar stone

to be like chalk stones crushed to pieces,

no Asherah poles or incense altars will be left standing.

10The fortified city stands desolate,

an abandoned settlement,

forsaken like the desert;

there the calves graze,

there they lie down;

they strip its branches bare.

11When its twigs are dry, they are broken off

and women come and make fires with them.

For this is a people without understanding;

so their Maker has no compassion on them,

and their Creator shows them no favor. (NIV)

The east wind (v. 8) is probably the hot sirocco that blows out of the Arabian desert and destroys vegetation. Usually arriving in the early summer months while the plants are still young and tender, the sirocco destroys crops and brings chaos to the seas as it carries sand and debris before it. (See Isa. 14:7; Hosea 13:15; Ezek. 27:26; Jer. 18:17.) It is clear that Isaiah is promising severe treatment for Israel.

The unnamed fortified city that is described as desolate in verse 10 may refer to a specific city, such as old or new Jerusalem, Samaria, or Babylon, but more likely represents the community of the children of Israel as a whole (see 26:2). But, finally, a new community and a new Jerusalem will be built which will be the home of the gathered remnants of Israel:

12In that day the LORD will thresh from the flowing Euphrates to the Wadi of Egypt, and you, O Israelites, will be gathered up one by one. 13And in that day a great trumpet will sound. Those who were perishing in Assyria and those who were exiled in Egypt will come and worship the LORD on the holy mountain in Jerusalem. (NIV)

In these two short verses the whole prophecy is put into perspective. Although the children of Israel have strayed from the path of God, "in that day" the Lord will gather them from the entire earth. And although the gathering of Israel in a general sense refers to the gathering of all believers, the gathering here refers to the particular gathering of scattered Israel. The gathering that begins just prior to the second coming of Christ is made complete at the sound of the last trumpet, which ushers in the millennial reign of Christ. At the sounding of the trumpet, all the exiled Israelites will return to the lands of their inheritance, either in old or new Jerusalem, and will there worship the Lord at his holy mountain, the temple.

SCRIPTURAL NOTES AND COMMENTARY

Isaiah 27: A chiastic pattern

The entire twenty-seventh chapter of Isaiah is structured into a neat chiasmus that is more easily recognized in the Hebrew but is also clear in the following English outline:

A. In that day the Lord will conquer Satan (v. 1)

B. The house of Israel (vineyard) is sung about (2)

C. The Lord watches over the people (3)

D. The Lord consumes his enemies with fire (4)

E. The strength and friendship of the Lord for his followers (5)

F. Jacob will grow and prosper (6)

G. Israel has not suffered as much as her oppressor (7-8)

F'. Jacob will be purged (9)

E'. The strength and power of the Lord against his enemies (9)

D'. Animals consume the branches and women make fires with them (10-11)

C'. The Lord knows the people lack understanding (or obedience; see Job 28:28) (11)

B'. The house of Israel gathered one by one (12)

A'. In that day the righteous will worship the Lord together (13)
