Victor L. Ludlow, Isaiah: Prophet, Seer, and Poet ( 1982)

DAYS OF GATHERING, RESTORATION, AND JUDGMENT ISAIAH 32-33

One characteristic of Isaiah's writings is that a pronouncement of judgment is often followed by a promise of a blessed, ideal life. Therefore, having outlined the conditions of wickedness and false trust in chapters 30-31 by warning the people of punishment for their sins, Isaiah naturally proceeds in chapters 32-33 to portray the condition of men and society under the influence of the Spirit of God. He states that although the wicked condition of the people currently warrants punishments, great blessings will follow as their behavior improves. He also describes the ever-increasing polarity between good and evil, contrasting the burning of the wicked with the quiet peace of the righteous.

32 Behold, a king will reign in righteousness,

and princes will rule in justice.

2Each will be like a hiding place from the wind,

a covert from the tempest,

like streams of water in a dry place,

like the shade of a great rock in a weary land.

3Then the eyes of those who see will not be closed,

and the ears of those who hear will hearken.

4The mind of the rash will have good judgment,

and the tongue of the stammerers will speak readily and distinctly. (RSV)

Chapter 32 begins with the promise of a righteous king and just leaders for Israel. This king could be either the Messiah or a righteous man who rules over Israel under the Lord's direction. Likewise, the princes mentioned could be either religious ministers or political administrators. Whatever the case, Isaiah promises that these leaders will protect the people (v. 2) and that all in Israel will be blessed with an understanding of what they see and hear, a spirit of discernment, and an improved ability to communicate (vs. 3-4). With such enlightenment, the chosen people will be able to recognize a person for what he actually is and not for what he appears to be:

5The fool will no more be called noble,

nor the knave said to be honorable.

6For the fool speaks folly,

and his mind plots iniquity:

to practice ungodliness,

to utter error concerning the LORD,

to leave the craving of the hungry unsatisfied,

and to deprive the thirsty of drink.

7The knaveries of the knave are evil;

he devises wicked devices

to ruin the poor with lying words,

even when the plea of the needy is right.

8But he who is noble devises noble things,

and by noble things he stands. (RSV)

In these verses, Isaiah distinguishes four types of people whose identities are sometimes confused by the world. In the several Bible translations, a variety of English terms are used to describe these four categories. Using the Revised Standard Version of verse 5 above as a starting point and comparing it with ten other major English translations, these four types of people can be identified as follows:

In verses 6-8 Isaiah portrays some characteristics of the first three types of people by using alliteration and verb repetition. For example, each verse begins with assonance: naval-nevalah (6), caylai-kaylaiw (7), nadeev-nedeevot (8). Some verbs of action (such as "speaking," "devising") are repeated and are used in both negative and positive contexts. Isaiah especially denounces the wickedness of the two negative personalities (the fool and the knave), for they oppress the hungry and thirsty, the poor and the needy. On the other hand, he commends the one positive personality (the noble) because he thinks and does good deeds. As Isaiah commends the noble (v. 8), one must assume that the same characteristics of generosity and concern would apply to the fourth person (the honorable one, who is not described in detail). Thus, Isaiah recommends that in order to discern the true character of a person, one should measure the charity he has for those in need. (Compare Isaiah's ideas on charity with 1 Cor. 13., Morm. 7, and TG "Charity.")

In the rest of what is now chapter 32, Isaiah contrasts the destruction soon to come upon the unsuspecting Israelites with the peaceful conditions of a later period. Note the parallel ideas of verses 9-14 in comparison to verses 15-20. To make plain the instances of comparison and contrast, similar words or ideas have been italicized in each verse:

Rise up, you women who are at ease, hear my voice;

you complacent daughters, give ear to my speech.

10In a little more than a year

you will shudder, you complacent women;

for the vintage will fail,

the fruit harvest will not come.

11Tremble, you women who are at ease,

shudder, you complacent ones;

strip, and make yourselves bare,

and gird sackcloth upon your loins.

12Beat upon your breasts for the pleasant fields,

for the fruitful vine,

13for the soil of my people

growing up in thorns and briers;

yea, for all the joyous houses

in the joyful city.

14For the palace will be forsaken, the populous city deserted;

the hill and the watchtower will become dens for ever,

joy of wild asses,

a pasture of flocks;

15until the Spirit is poured upon us from on high

and the wilderness becomes

a fruitful field,

and the fruitful field is deemed a forest.

16Then justice will dwell in the wilderness,

and righteousness abide in the fruitful field.

17And the effect of righteousness will be peace,

and the result of righteousness, quietness and trust for ever.

18My people will abide in a peaceful habitation,

in secure dwellings, and in quiet resting places

19And the forest will utterly go down,

and the city will be utterly laid low 20Happy are you who sow beside all waters,

who let feet of the ox and the ass range free. (RSV, italics added)

The major idea of these two contrasting conditions is found in verses 9 and 15: although Israel deserves the severe pronouncement of doom at that time, she will receive the full blessings of God's Spirit in the latter days. Some blessings are already being enjoyed by some Jews who have returned to their homeland and have turned desolated hills and valleys into the productive country described in verses 15-20.

The Jews have recently been gathering to their homeland of Israel from over one hundred nations of the earth. These Jews, who automatically and immediately are accepted as Israeli citizens under the "law of the return," have returned from many countries, such as New Zealand, Lithuania, Argentina, India, Canada, and South Africa. Most of them, however, have come to Israel from middle eastern or eastern European countries. For example, shortly after Israel became independent in 1948, over 120,000 Jews immigrated from Rumania; 100,000 from Russia, Poland, and Iraq; and 30,000 from Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Bulgaria, Turkey, Syria, and Iran. (Gilbert, Jewish History Atlas, pp. 97-99.)

As Isaiah, Jeremiah, and others prophesied, these Jews have returned from "the north" and from the countries to which they had been driven. They now dwell in their own land in the state of Israel. However, most of the Jews now living in Israel do not identify the Lord, Jehovah, as the cause of their gathering. When asked why and by what means they have returned, most Israelis maintain that their country came into existence through political, military, social, and monetary means, not through any divine guidance. For them, the "holocaust complex," a desire for freedom, or better trained armies have maintained their independence. This appears to be a contradiction of those prophecies to be discussed later in a special topic, "The Return of the Jews in the Last Days." These scriptures promise that righteous Israelites will return to their land in the last days and identify their Lord as the force behind their return. It seems that presently irreligious Jews, trusting in their own power, have returned to their promised land and established a strong modern state.

The reader who approaches chapter 33 for the first time without any experience in reading the Psalms and the other eschatological portions of the prophetic books will undoubtedly struggle to comprehend much more than the main outline of its content:

He will understand that it speaks of a powerful enemy who has risen up against Jerusalem, and of the ultimate destruction of that enemy, to be followed by the glorification of Jerusalem. But he will nevertheless be confused by the changing aspects and speakers, and will be irritated by the partial obscurity which is found in some of the statements. But even an experienced reader, well acquainted with the Old Testament, will find constant difficulties, and will wonder whether he has understood correctly what he has read, whether the received text is reliable and whether individual themes have been accurately interpreted. (Kaiser, Isaiah 14-39, p. 339.)

Moving from a theme of general destruction and restoration in chapter 32, Isaiah becomes more symbolic as he prophesies in chapter 33 about the sources of destruction and deliverance. This chapter follows a pattern of chiasmus or introverted parallelism:

Introduction (v. 1)

A. Prayer to the Lord (2-6)

B. Power of the destroyer (7-9)

C. Results upon the wicked (10-12)

D. The Lord will reveal his works (13)

C'. Rewards of the righteous (14-16)

B'. The enemy is gone (17-19)

A'. The Lord's many blessings (20-24)

The first verse of this prophecy contains a pronouncement of woe against an enemy of God's people:

33 Woe to you, destroyer,

who yourself have not been destroyed;

you treacherous one,

with whom none has dealt treacherously!

When you have ceased to destroy,

you will be destroyed;

and when you have made an end of dealing treacherously,

you will be dealt with treacherously. (RSV)

The person Isaiah refers to in this warning is unnamed, but is most often identified as Sennacherib, the king of Assyria who attacked Jerusalem in 701 B.C. Whoever he is, his power will undoubtedly end through destruction as severe as that which he heaped upon others. As seen in Isaiah 16:4 and 21:2, Isaiah uses similar terms to describe the leader of the nations in the last days who will rage over the earth, destroy the nations surrounding Israel, and finally storm against Zion. (Compare Hab. 2:5-8.) This awesome leader, perhaps Gog from the land of Magog (Ezek. 38), would easily generate the destruction that Isaiah prophesied in chapter 32.

Prayer to the Lord

In contrast to the sharp warning of the introduction, the next few verses record Isaiah's fervent prayer and the Lord's promise for his people:

2O LORD, be gracious to us; we wait for thee.

Be our arm every morning,

our salvation in the time of trouble.

3At the thunderous noise peoples flee,

at the lifting up of thyself nations are scattered;

4and spoil is gathered as the caterpillar gathers;

as locusts leap, men leap upon it.

5The LORD is exalted, for he dwells on high;

he will fill Zion with justice and righteousness;

6and he will be the stability of your times,

abundance of salvation,

wisdom, and knowledge;

the fear of the Lord is his treasure. (RSV)

Isaiah first expresses trust in the Lord and his salvation. He then describes chaotic times during which the people will flee and scatter as the Lord is lifted up (v. 3). The lifting up of the Lord could refer to Christ's role as a bearer of light or an ensign of power, or it might be a prophetic reference to his being lifted up on the cross, after which the Jews were scattered by the Romans in A.D. 70. Verse 4 is even more difficult to understand, since the major terms are not easily identifiable. A literal translation of this verse is:

And [as] is gathered your spoil gathers the caterpillar

Like leaping [running] locusts do they leap [run] upon it

Or, if this prophecy refers to the last days, it might read as follows:

And the spoil [or reward of the Lord, that is, the House of Israel] shall be gathered [by his servants and missionaries] as the caterpillar gathers; and as locusts run to and fro shall they [the missionaries] run about [or attach themselves] upon it [the house of Israel].

The restoration will continue as the Lord's presence fills the high places throughout Zion, and stability and enlightenment fill the land (vs. 5-6). First a "stability of . . . times" is promised. During Isaiah's ministry, the milieu or "times" underwent many drastic revolutions and changes: war, chaos, and confusion characterized this period. Isaiah promises, however, that the Lord will eventually provide Israel a period of peace, a "stability of . . . times."

The "abundance of salvation" or deliverance prophesied by Isaiah could be either political or spiritual: the Israelites could be saved from war and physical destruction or from sin and spiritual desolation. In either case, the salvation that Isaiah promises refers to gifts bestowed from without.

Isaiah further promises some gifts found within an individual—wisdom and knowledge. The wisdom and knowledge Isaiah refers to encompasses more than the intellectual and educational processes we usually associate with these terms. Many kinds of "wisdom" literature, which stressed a spiritual devotion along with factual understanding, was already a part of Israelite heritage by Isaiah's time. This type of literature can best be elucidated through a selection of verses from each of the three major wisdom books of the Old Testament:

The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge:

but fools despise wisdom and instruction. (Prov. 1:7.)

Be not wise in thine own eyes:

fear the Lord, and depart from evil. (Prov. 3:7.)

Behold, the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom;

and to depart from evil is understanding. (Job 28:28.)

The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom:

a good understanding have all they that do his commandments. (Ps. 111:10.)

In all these verses, "fear of the Lord" means an acknowledgment of his preeminence. This is the same term and meaning used in Isaiah 11:2, where the prophet describes a righteous leader of the last days as having "the spirit of wisdom and understanding," "the spirit of knowledge and understanding," and "the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord."

Thus, the final and most important gift promised by Isaiah in verse 6 is "the fear of the Lord." Using climactic parallelism, Isaiah moves from the broad universal gifts of God to more specific ones. Finally, he promises the most important gift a wise child of God could request—fear of the Lord. This gift goes beyond a sense of awe and the beginnings of faith to include entire devotion to God. Indeed, this gift is God's special treasure. On the one hand, he shares it with us as he encourages us to respect his glory, develop faith, and strengthen our testimony of him, his Son, and his gospel. On the other hand, we can share this gift with him as we serve him well and bring honor and glory to his name. As we fear the Lord, we honor him and set an example for others so that they can improve their relationship with our Heavenly Father.

Power of the Destroyer

In verse 7 of Isaiah 33, the narrative moves from a future of well-being back to the conflicts and struggles with the enemy of Israel. Isaiah describes the disastrous results of this destroyer:

7Behold, the valiant ones cry without;

the envoys of peace weep bitterly.

8The highways lie waste,

the wayfaring man ceases,

Covenants are broken,

witnesses are despised,

there is no regard for man.

9The land mourns and languishes;

Lebanon is confounded and withers away;

Sharon is like a desert;

and Bashan and Carmel shake off their leaves. (RSV)

Results upon the Wicked

The Lord finally responds to Isaiah's prayer and counters the powers of wickedness as he speaks to the destroyer and his followers:

10"Now I will arise," says the LORD,

"now I will lift myself up;

now I will be exalted.

11You conceive chaff, you bring forth stubble;

your breath is a fire that will consume you.

12And the peoples will be as if burned to lime,

like thorns cut down, that are burned in the fire." (RSV)

The Lord Will Reveal His Works

God then foretells the time that the whole world will know of his works and glory:

13Hear, you who are far off, what I have done

and you who are near,

acknowledge my might. (RSV)

This important promise in verse 13 becomes the pivot point of this chapter and a key theme for the following verses in which the Lord (or Isaiah) comforts those in Zion who fear their weaknesses and wonder how they can abide the presence of the Lord in all his glory.

Rewards of the Righteous

In contrast to the burnings of the wicked (vs. 10-12), Isaiah describes the "burnings" or glory of the righteous and the Lord's blessings for such people:

14The sinners in Zion are afraid;

trembling has seized the godless:

"Who among us can dwell with the devouring fire?

Who among us can dwell with everlasting burnings?"

15He who walks righteously and speaks uprightly,

who despises the gain of oppressions,

who shakes his hands, lest they hold a bribe,

who stops his ears from hearing of bloodshed

and shuts his eyes from looking upon evil,

16he will dwell on the heights;

his place of defense will be the fortresses of rocks:

his bread will be given him, his water will be sure. (RSV)

The beautiful composite parallelism of verse 15 equates different body parts with certain spiritual qualities in order to describe the type of person who can dwell in God's celestial glory. The following chart highlights these comparisons:

Part of body Action Spiritual quality

feet walking righteousness

mouth speaking morality

head? wagging "no" integrity

hands shaking honesty

ears closing justice

eyes shutting virtue

The promise of verse 16 is also noteworthy in the context of the historical setting of this message. Although Israel relied upon physical means for shelter, food, and water, the Lord's guarantee for protection and necessities of life come only to those whose righteousness warrants such blessings. This counsel is applicable today in relationship to our food storage. We ought not to rely upon a rifle or shotgun to protect these supplies, but should be willing to share them with those in need and have faith that the Lord will protect and nourish us.

Another prophet of the Lord has given some commentary on verses 14-16 of Isaiah 33. In general conference of October 1973, Elder Bruce R. McConkie said:

Now if I may, I shall take these words of Isaiah, spoken by the power of the Holy Ghost in the first instance, and give some indication as to how they apply to us and our circumstances.

First, 'He that walketh righteously, and speaketh uprightly.' That is, building on the atoning sacrifice of the Lord Jesus Christ, we must keep the commandments. We must speak the truth and work the works of righteousness. We shall be judged by our thoughts, our words and our deeds.

Second, 'he that despiseth the gain of oppressions.' That is, we must act with equity and justice toward our fellowmen. It is the Lord himself who said that he, at the day of his coming, will be a swift witness against those that oppress the hireling in his wages.

Third, '. . . he that shaketh his hands from holding of bribes.' That is, we must reject every effort to buy influence, and instead deal fairly and impartially with our fellowmen. God is no respecter of persons. He esteemeth all flesh alike; and those only who keep his commandments find special favor with him. Salvation is free; it cannot be purchased with money; and those only are saved who abide the law upon which its receipt is predicated. Bribery is of the world.

Fourth, he '. . . that stoppeth his ears from hearing of blood, shutteth his eyes from seeing evil.' That is, we must not center our attention on evil and wickedness. We must cease to find fault and look for good in government and in the world. We must take an affirmative, wholesome approach to all things. . . .

We have the promise that if we seek him with full purpose of heart, keeping his commandments and walking uprightly before him, we shall indeed see his face and eventually be inheritors with him of eternal life in his Father's kingdom.

President Harold B. Lee then said of Elder McConkie's remarks:

We have heard from Elder Bruce R. McConkie of the Council of the Twelve, who has given us the key by which we can continue to spiritualize ourselves. May we follow his counsel. (Bruce R. McConkie and Harold B. Lee, CR, Oct. 1973, pp. 55-56; italics added.)

The Enemy Is Gone

Isaiah prophesies further to the children of Israel in verses 17-19 of chapter 33. He tells them of their future king or Messiah and of how their enemy will be vanquished:

17Your eyes will see the king in his beauty;

they will behold a land that stretches afar.

18Your mind will muse on the terror:

"Where is he who counted, where is he who weighed the tribute?

Where is he who counted the towers?"

19You will see no more the insolent people,

the people of an obscure speech which you cannot comprehend,

stammering in a tongue which you cannot understand. (RSV)

The Lord's Many Blessings

Isaiah concludes the messages by recording a variety of blessings that will come upon Zion in the last days:

20Look upon Zion, the city of our appointed feasts!

Your eyes will see Jerusalem,

a quiet habitation, an immovable tent,

whose stakes will never be plucked up,

nor will any of its cords be broken.

21But there the LORD in majesty will be for us

a place of broad rivers and streams,

where no galley with oars can go, nor stately ship can pass.

22For the LORD is our judge, the LORD is our ruler,

the LORD is our king; he will save us. [^2]

23Your tackle hangs loose;

it cannot hold the mast firm in its place,

or keep the sail spread out.

Then prey and spoil in abundance will be divided;

even the lame will take the prey.

24And no inhabitant will say, "I am sick;"

the people who dwell there will be forgiven their iniquity. (RSV)

The symbols and ideas in these last verses are more easily understood when they are compared with earlier ideas in the chapter (vs. 2-6, Isaiah's prayer to the Lord).

Conclusion

Isaiah's warnings of a coming desolation (ch. 32) and the "destroyer" (ch. 33) not only portray the impending Assyrian invasion but also (and more importantly) foreshadow the chaotic conditions and the power of God over Israel in the last days. Both chapters contain promises of spiritual and material blessings, including a gathering to the promised land of righteous Israel. Both the Israelites of Isaiah's time and those who claim to be of the house of Israel today can claim these blessings as they honor the Lord in righteousness.

RETURN OF THE JEWS IN THE LAST DAYS

A seeming contradiction is present in some Book of Mormon prophecies concerning the return of the Jews to the Holy Land. These prophecies state that after the Jews begin to believe in Christ, then they will be gathered in from their long dispersion. Obviously, the Jews in Israel today do not believe in Jesus Christ as their messiah. Are they, then, fulfilling these prophecies of Isaiah, Jeremiah, Jacob, Nephi, Mormon, and others? Probably not. They are, however, fulfilling some of the lesser-known prophecies of Jeremiah and the Book of Mormon prophets.

The Book of Mormon explains in greater detail the relationship between the gathering of the Jews and their attitude toward Jehovah. Lehi prophesied that after their scattering, the Jews would be gathered in with the house of Israel and come to a knowledge of the true Messiah, their Lord and Redeemer. (1 Ne. 10:14.) This statement is in harmony with the teachings of Jeremiah Indeed, being contemporaries, Lehi and Jeremiah may have known one another in Jerusalem. Even if not, both had access to the Old Testament scriptures compiled up to that time, Lehi's canon being contained in the Brass Plates of Laban. (1 Ne. 5:13.) In addition, Lehi possessed other records not later incorporated into our Old Testament, such as the prophecies of Zenos. (See 1 Ne. 19:10.)

Zenos prophesied specifically about the Jews, not the whole house of Israel. He stated that the time will come when the Jews would "no more turn aside their hearts against the Holy One of Israel." (1 Ne. 19:15; italics added.) Then, the Lord will remember the covenants which he has made with their fathers and gather them from the corners of the earth back to their land. (1 Ne. 19:16.) This important Book of Mormon prophecy concerning the Jews has been fulfilled only within the past one hundred years. Before then, even back to the time of Paul the apostle, the Jews did not recognize Jesus Christ as their messiah, the Holy One of Israel. And while Jesus himself lived on the earth, the majority of the Jews did not identify him as their messiah. One reason for this was that they expected the Messiah to come in a display of power and glory. They did not realize that he would not come in such glory until a later period when remnants from all of Israel have returned to their lands of inheritance in righteousness.

During the nineteenth century, however, Jewish attitudes toward Jesus and their messiah changed drastically, especially in America. By 1885, one major segment of American Jewry, the Reform Jews, had gone so far as to accept Jesus as a great teacher and prophet, although not as the Savior or the Messiah, since they no longer believe in a messiah, past or future. Most Jews in the world today are no longer offended simply by the mention of Jesus' name. Christian missionaries (including Latter-day Saints) are now often allowed to present their messages, whereas a century ago they would have been turned out of almost all Jewish homes.

This change in Jewish attitude is also evident within the Jewish communities and synagogues. Not only do they mention the name of Jesus, but they also talk about his life and teachings in their schools and literature. This change fulfills another important Book of Mormon prophecy recorded by Jacob, the son of Lehi. He received a special vision about the Jews that indicated that after they were scattered, smitten, and hated, they would "come to the knowledge of their Redeemer" and then be "gathered together again to the lands of their inheritance." (2 Ne. 6:11, italics added.)

Many Jews have come to a "knowledge" of Jesus. Some have read the New Testament more often than many Christians and know a great deal about his life and teachings. Though they may not yet accept him as their messiah (this is why they always refer to him as Jesus and not as Christ), they accept him as a great prophet.

A third important Book of Mormon prophecy concerning the return of the Jews was recorded by Jacob as he quoted a message from the Lord:

When the day cometh that they shall believe in me, that I am Christ, then have I covenanted with their fathers they they shall be restored in the flesh, upon the earth, unto the lands of their inheritance. (2 Ne. 10:7, italics added; compare Deut. 30:1-10.)

This Book of Mormon prophecy has not yet been fulfilled, even though hundreds of Latter-day Saint missionaries throughout the world are now working specifically within Jewish communities.

It is interesting to note that Zenos and Jacob state that when the Jews (1) "no more turn aside their hearts against the Holy One of Israel" or (2) "come to the knowledge of their Redeemer," they would be gathered in again to the lands of their inheritance. However, Jacob later said (in the scripture quoted above) that when the Jews would finally come to believe that Jesus is Christ, then they would be restored unto the lands of their inheritance. What we are witnessing in Israel today is a "gathering" and not a "restoration" of the Jews. Physically they are turning, but they will not be fully secure in the land until they are spiritually strong.

As a resurrected being, Jesus Christ delivered similar teachings about the Jews' belief and their gathering when he visited the Book of Mormon people. (3 Ne. 16, 20.) About three hundred years after Christ instructed the Nephites, the prophet Mormon taught these same principles in connection with the effect his record (the Book of Mormon) would eventually have on the Jews. This record is destined to go to the unbelieving of the Jews, that they might be persuaded to believe in Chirst. The Lord's purpose will be fulfilled when the Jews believe in him and he can then restore them and all the house of Israel to the lands of their inheritance. (Morm. 5:14.)

Summary

When one initially reads Isaiah, Jeremiah, or the Book of Mormon prophets and their prophecies concerning the gathering of Israel in the last days, he will probably remember the oft-repeated promise that when Israel accepts the Lord (or recognizes Christ as Messiah) they will be gathered in. This general understanding is basically correct.

A more precise study of the scriptures reveals, however, that certain important details exist concerning the relationship of the Israelites to their Lord and their gathering to their lands. This is particularly true for one branch of the Israelites, the Jews. In short, one of three conditions must precede any gathering of the Jews: (1) they no longer rebuke Christ, (2) they come to a knowledge of Christ, or (3) they begin to believe in Christ as their messiah.

Although any of these conditions could precede a "gathering" of the Jews, the Lord will not fully accept the inhabitants of Israel as his people until they believe on him as their God. When they become righteous and God-fearing, he will "restore" them to the lands of their inheritance and protect them from their enemies. In other words, although the Lord might lead the Jews back to their land under various conditions, he will not recognize them as fully legitimate heirs of the land until they properly worship him.

Understanding this fact helps answer two questions that Latter-day Saints have as they attempt to understand the events of the last days: (1) Why are most Jews who are returning to Israel essentially non-religious Israelites who do not recognize the Lord or his hand in their gathering? and (2) Why will great punishments still come upon the Jews in the "great and dreadful day" of the Lord if they are his chosen people? The truth is that, along with righteous and honorable people, other non-religious, non-believing, and even wicked Jews are today fulfilling some prophecies of the gathering. The Jews who take the credit for themselves and reject the Lord and his laws will be punished in the future. Knowing this, Latter-day Saints can better understand how the many different prophecies concerning the return of the Jews are being fulfilled.

These prophecies should also motivate Latter-day Saints to be righteous in their own lives, so as to be effective in bringing the gospel truths to scattered Israel and Judah. As the Jews and all the children of Israel begin to believe in Christ as their messiah, they can be gathered to their promised land in righteousness, and they and the whole earth will be blessed.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^2] The earth's population will be decimated (as armies are destroyed), and the heavenly population will decrease (as spirits leave and do not return). The records (or scrolls) of heaven will be sealed (or opened up) as the earth's inhabitants are judged from the heavenly records (some don't return to heaven). (D&C 77:8 and 128:7, 14.) The highway might symbolize the "straight and narrow path," the basic principles and ordinances of the gospel, which God's children follow in order to become part of spiritual Zion. At the beginning of verses 2, 5, 6b, and 8, Isaiah uses the Hebrew conjunction kee (usually translated as "for" or "thus") to introduce and connect four pronouncements of the Lord's vengeance.
