Victor L. Ludlow, Isaiah: Prophet, Seer, and Poet ( 1982)

BURNING PITCH AND A BLOSSOMING ROSE ISAIAH 34-35

These two chapters provide a capstone for chapters 28-33 of Isaiah and epitomize his message to the world. Earlier, Isaiah had prophesied to Israel (in chs. 1-12) and to the Gentile nations (chs. 13-23), and he followed these messages with an apocalyptic vision for the whole world (chs. 24-27). In a similar pattern, after giving warnings and promises to Judah (chs. 28-33), Isaiah again speaks to the whole world in a profound revelation (chs. 34-35).

In these two chapters his message is universal and his poetic style superb. The warnings and judgments of chapter 34 recapitulate many pronouncements given in his earlier chapters, and the hopes and promises of chapter 35 become favorite themes in his later writings, where he repeats its ideas, words, and entire verses. His visions of a blossoming desert, a crippled people becoming whole, and a righteous remnant returning to Zion have inspired countless generations of Bible readers.

Throughout his writings, Isaiah longs for the time when God's justice and mercy will be vindicated. He loves to stress the contrasts between the wicked and the righteous. In order that his listeners will more easily remember the messages he delivers for the Lord, he arranges his writings into thematic patterns and poetry. These two chapters are good examples of this.

Chapter 34 contains Isaiah's harshest pronouncements against the wicked. Echoing the warnings of chapter 13 against Babylon, it graphically portrays the Lord's sword of wrath upon the evil nations. Isaiah's imagery and poetry intensify this picture of dark desolation as he describes death, burning, and wild desert life. The literary excellence continues into the next chapter, but in sharp contrast to chapter 13. Green, watered valleys replace the desolation. Righteous Israelites are protected under the arm of the Lord as they gather to Zion. Songs of rejoicing overcome the shrieks of the desert night-creatures, and the blessings of the righteous take precedence over the remembrance of the wicked.

Isaiah introduces his prophecy by addressing the earth and its inhabitants with two synonomous parallelisms:

34 Come near, you nations, and listen;

pay attention, you peoples!

Let the earth hear, and all that is in it,

the world, and all that comes out of it! (NIV)

He tells the world that the Lord's devastating anger will be upon all nations and that the hosts in heaven will also be affected in judgment (vs. 2-4). Vivid descriptions of destruction, blood, and death follow (vs. 5-7) before Isaiah concludes this section with a promise for Zion (v. 8).

2 [^1]The LORD is angry with all nations;

his wrath is upon all their armies.

He will totally destroy them,

he will give them over to slaughter.

3Their slain will be thrown out,

their dead bodies will send up a stench;

the mountains will be soaked with their blood.

4All the stars of the heavens will be dissolved

and the sky rolled up like a scroll;

all the starry host will fall

like withered leaves from the vine,

like shriveled figs from the fig tree.

5 [^2]My sword has drunk its fill in the heavens;

see, it descends in judgment on Edom,

the people I have totally destroyed.

6The sword of the LORD is bathed in blood,

it is covered with fat—

the blood of lambs and goats,

fat from the kidneys of rams. [^3]

For the LORD has a sacrifice in Bozrah

and a great slaughter in Edom.

7And the wild oxen will fall with them,

the bull calves and the great bulls.

Their land will be drenched with blood,

And the dust will be soaked with fat.

8 [^4]For the LORD has a day of vengeance,

a year of retribution, to uphold Zion's cause. (NIV)

The first pronouncement goes beyond the graphic description of destroyed armies; it includes, in verse form, promises of heavenly manifestations. Though the signs are difficult to interpret, some alternate translations suggest various possible meanings:

All the host of heaven shall molder.

The heavens shall be rolled up like a scroll,

And all their host shall wither,

Like a leaf withering on the vine

Or shriveled fruit on a fig tree. (NJV)

All the host of the heavens shall be dissolved and crumble away, and the skies shall be rolled together as a scroll; and all their host (the stars and the planets) shall drop like a faded leaf from the vine, and as a withered fig falls from the fig tree. (AB)

The sun, moon, and stars will crumble to dust. The sky will disappear like a scroll being rolled up, and the stars will fall like leaves dropping from a vine or a fig tree. (GNB)

The first phrase of verse 4 reads as follows in the King James Version: "And all the host of heaven shall be dissolved." The "host of heaven" could refer either to heavenly bodies (sun, moon, stars, etc.) or to celestial beings (spirits, angels, etc.) in God's presence. The phrase "shall be dissolved" comes from a Hebrew word that also means "to dwindle" or "to decompose." Thus the hosts of heaven dissolving could mean either that stars and planets will be destroyed or that there will be fewer beings in the Lord's presence (since his spirit children come to earth to acquire mortal bodies and some do not return to him). Of course, other possibilities exist, but by combining the two suggestions above with verses 2 and 3, we end up with a more encompassing interpretation composed of two main concepts:

Joseph Smith prophesies of similar signs in the heavens and the earth in Doctrine and Covenants 29:15-16 and 45:39-43.

The second phrase of verse 4, "and the heavens shall be rolled together as a scroll" (KJV), is echoed in many other scriptures. [^5] (See Morm. 5:23; 9:2; 3 Ne. 26:3; Rev. 6:14; D&C 88:95.)

Three possible interpretations of this phrase can be supported by modern revelation recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants:

Interpretations 1 and 2 above parallel concepts 1 and 2 in the earlier part of the verse.

It seems that Isaiah is prophesying about apocalyptic signs that will occur in the heavens during the last days. Though astounding, these phenomena will come about through such natural means that he portrays the events by comparing them to falling leaves and fruit. In his other writings, he mentions more of these cataclysmic events and gives further details. (See Isa. 13:10; 24:23; 30:26; 50:3; 60:19-20; 65:17.)

After describing the universal signs upon the earth and in the heavens, Isaiah narrows his scope and gives two pronouncements on Edom and its capital, Bozrah. Using synonymous parallelism, he gives a double warning—the first is found in verse 5 and the first half of verse 6 and the second is in the second half of verse 6 and in verse 7 as outlined below:

First Pronouncement Second Pronouncement

v. 5 judgment will come to Edom Idumea v. 6b

6a sacrifice of lambs, goats, and rams

sacrifice of oxen, calves, and bulls 7

6a blood and fat on the Lord's sword

blood and fat over the whole land 7

The term "Edom" has a double meaning here. In addition to denoting the country located east of the Dead Sea, it means "the world" and especially "the wicked world." This second definition can be supported by modern revelation (D&C 1:36) and a linguistic evaluation of the term. The Hebrew word Edom also means "red" or "earth" and is the root for the words Adam and man. Therefore, it often connotes human or worldly qualities. As one scholar defines it, "Edom is always figurative of the natural state of man in his antagonism against God." (Vine, Isaiah, p. 84; see also Mosiah 3:19.)

The last pronouncement in this set is found in verse 8, where Isaiah promises "a day of the Lord's vengeance" and "a year of recompences" for the cause of Zion.

The events that Isaiah describes in these first eight verses of chapter 34 are also mentioned in three other standard works. All of these sources should be studied carefully (as well as those cross-referenced in their footnotes):

Rev. 6:12-17: John's vision, which includes many terms similar to those in Isaiah's prophecy, including stars of heaven, figs and fig tree, heaven, scroll, mountains, great day of the Lord's wrath, etc.

3 Ne. 26:1-5: Christ's brief summary of events prior to his return in glory, with mention of the earth, heavens, a scroll, peoples, and nations.

D&C 88:84-98: Joseph Smith's marvelous revelation of key signs before the Lord's second coming. He also uses many ideas found in the first verses of Isaiah 34: day of wrath, judgments, vine (vineyard), blood, earth, bodies in heaven, figs and fig trees, peoples and nations, a scroll or curtain in heaven, etc.

Beginning with verse 9, Isaiah describes the physical conditions of the land of Edom:

9Edom's streams will be turned into pitch,

her dust into burning sulfur;

her land will become blazing pitch!

10It will not be quenched night and day;

its smoke will rise forever.

From generation to generation it will lie desolate;

no one will ever pass through it again.

11The desert owl and screech owl will possess it;

the great owl and the raven will nest there.

God will stretch out over Edom

the measuring line of chaos

and the plumb line of desolation.

12Her nobles will have nothing there to be called a kingdom,

all her princes will vanish away.

13Thorns will overrun her citadels,

nettles and brambles her strongholds.

She will become a haunt for jackals,

a home for owls.

14Desert creatures will meet with hyenas,

and wild goats will bleat to each other;

there the night creatures will also repose

and find for themselves places of rest.

15The owl will nest there and lay eggs,

she will hatch them, and care for her young under the shadow of her wings;

there also the falcons will gather,

each with its mate. (NIV)

Unusual birds and strange animals are mentioned in verses 11 and 14. Their exact identity is ambiguous, as can be demonstrated by comparing the New International Version above with the King James and other versions. Although the exact meaning of the Hebrew terms is unknown, the picture Isaiah presents is graphic and symbolic.

In these verses, we see before us not only a desert wilderness, but also a dreadful desolation where sights and smells of burning sulfur and smoke offend our senses. Thorns and weeds inhibit movement, and strange creatures of the air and night bring foreboding to the heart. It is no wonder humans do not travel through the area (v. 10). Indeed, the destruction is so complete in this land that Isaiah borrows two rhyming terms (tohu and bohu) from Moses' story of the earth's desolate condition before it was organized: without form (confusion) and void (emptiness) (compare v. 10 with Gen. 1:2).

The land is not devoid of all life, however, only of human inhabitants. Having banished men from the area, the Lord transforms their cities and dwellings into nests for birds and dens for animals so that instead of these cities standing as monuments of human achievement, they become memorials of foolish ambition. The homes of men are occupied by animals whose wild dispositions resemble those of the original occupants. As John Calvin said of this series of events:

This overthrow of order is likewise a sad token of the wrath of God, where the earth, which was created for the use of man, beholds its natural lords banished, and is compelled to admit other inhabitants; . . . yet this is also a punishment threatened against the cruelty of a wicked nation, which was eagerly bent on the oppression of neighbors and brethren. (Calvin's Commentaries, Isaiah 3:55-56.)

After prophesying the destruction upon Edom, Isaiah next addresses those who will witness the fulfillment of his predictions as recorded in the scriptures:

16Look in the scroll of the LORD and read:

None of these will be missing,

not one will lack her mate.

For it is his mouth that has given the order,

and his Spirit will gather them together.

17He allots their portions;

his hand distributes them by measure.

They will possess it forever and dwell there from generation to generation. (NIV)

The simple, obvious meaning of these two verses would be the animals described in earlier verses—they will be gathered together with their mates and given their inheritances. A deeper meaning is that if the Lord will provide such order and inheritance for these strange desert creatures, all of which were considered to be unclean by the law of Moses (Lev. 11), how much more must he surely provide for his pure and faithful children! Their names will also be called out from the book of the Lord, and they, with their mates, will be given their lands of eternal inheritance. But their inheritance will not be desert waste places; they will be garden paradises as described by Isaiah in the first verse of chapter 35:

35 The desert and the parched land will be glad;

the wilderness will rejoice and blossom.

Like the crocus, 2it will burst into bloom;

it will rejoice greatly and shout for joy.

The glory of Lebanon will be given to it,

the splendor of Carmel and Sharon;

they will see the glory of the LORD,

the splendor of our God. (NIV)

Isaiah's promise of the "desert blossoming as a rose" (v. 1, KJV) has inspired many people to work toward its fulfillment. The Jews returning from Babylon restored the desolate countryside to productive fields and orchards, as witnessed by the many places recorded in the New Testament. Also, Jews who have returned to the Holy Land during the past century have restored much of that neglected area into fields, groves of fruit trees, and forests. Likewise, the great western desert of North America has blossomed as the Mormon pioneers and their followers, prospective builders of the New Jerusalem, have developed that land. But, more than the increased productivity of the land, Isaiah predicts curative blessings upon the people:

3Strengthen the feeble hands,

steady the knees that give way;

4say to those with fearful hearts,

"Be strong, do not fear;

your God will come,

he will come with vengeance,

with divine retribution

he will come to save you."

5Then will the eyes of the blind be opened

and the ears of the deaf unstopped.

6Then will the lame leap like a deer,

and the tongue of the dumb shout for joy. (NIV)

Just as the earth must be blessed to bring forth its fruits, so also the inhabitants of the land must be strengthened to fulfill their destiny. In verses 3-6, an unnamed being is commissioned to strengthen their limbs and to alleviate their fears. The source of the people's weaknesses or fears is also unnamed, though it could result from the horror of their life in the desert. Desert life for the Hebrew usually symbolizes one of two conditions: either a place of refuge and asylum, or a place into which one is forced as a trial and tribulation. In either case, the desert is where God segregates and tests his people. (See Nibley, An Approach to the Book of Mormon, p. 115.) Regardless of the source or purpose of their fears, Isaiah promises the people that the Lord will save them (v. 4).

Before the Israelites can become productive on the blossoming land, they need strong, healthy bodies. Included in the Lord's blessings are cures for their ailments:

The blind shall see,

the deaf shall hear,

the lame shall jump, and

the dumb shall sing (vs. 5-6).

The cures listed might be either literal or figurative. That is, their physical handicaps will be healed or their spiritual weaknesses overcome. These blessings might even be a combination of the two; the people may remain, for example, physically blind, but they could still be spiritually blessed by "seeing" the gospel truths as they study the scriptures through tapes or braille. (Elder LeGrand Richards has suggested that such modern technological advancements for the blind, deaf, and handicapped are a type of fulfillment for these Isaianic prophecies. See Ensign, May 1976, p. 84.) Indeed, the two may go together, for often after the Lord heals someone physically, he sometimes adds "thy sins are forgiven thee," indicating a double healing process. (Matt. 9:2-8.)

A literal, physical fulfillment of these healing promises will undoubtedly occur as the Lord visits the earth at his second coming. In his earlier appearances to the multitudes of the Old and New Worlds, he healed many of the physically ill. He will surely do likewise when he returns in glory.

Still, the figurative applications of these verses should be understood, for they will also come to pass. Isaiah records earlier that he was told that the people would physically hear and see but would not spiritually understand or perceive the Lord's messages. (Isa. 6:9.) He also promises that some will eventually and completely see and hear his message. (Isa. 6:11-13; 29:18; 32:2-4.) They will see the signs and perceive what the fulfilled prophecies mean. They will hear God's word and understand it. They will burst forth with new spiritual life just as the desert will burst forth with life-giving waters. These waters are promised by Isaiah in the following verses:

6bWater will gush forth in the wilderness

and streams in the desert.

7The burning sand will become a pool,

The thirsty ground bubbling springs.

In the haunts where jackals once lay,

grass and reeds and papyrus will grow. (NIV)

As with the first two verses of chapter 35, these verses have already seen some fulfillment in the deserts of North America and in Israel as irrigation ditches, water pipelines, sprinklers, and drip-irrigation tubes carry life-giving moisture across the land. (See MWW, pp. 10, 237-40.)

Isaiah concludes chapter 35 with prophecies about a special highway. This path may be a literal road, but could also be a "way of holiness" for the remnants of Israel returning to Zion:

8And a highway will be there;

it will be called the Way of Holiness.

The unclean will not journey on it;

it will be for those who walk in that Way;

wicked fools will not go about on it.

9No lion will be there,

nor will any ferocious beast get up on it;

they will not be found there.

But only the redeemed will walk there,

10 and the ransomed of the LORD will return.

They will enter Zion with singing;

everlasting joy will crown their heads.

Gladness and joy will overtake them

and sorrow and sighing will flee away. (NIV)

Verse 8 is incomplete in the Hebrew, and scholars disagree on how to translate it, the second half of the verse being especially challenging. To clarify this verse, Joseph Smith added a number of words to it in his inspired translation. With his additions italicized, the King James translation reads as follows:

And a highway shall be there; for a way shall be cast up

and it shall be called the way of holiness.

The unclean shall not pass over upon it;

but it shall be cast up for those who are clean,

And the wayfaring men,

Though they are accounted fools, shall not err therein.

By reading this verse without the italicized portions, one can easily see that it is incomplete and how varied interpretations would arise. The highway mentioned in this verse could be a literal road, such as the one Isaiah promises in 11:16, because the next verse (9) says that wild animals will not be allowed on it. However, these wild animals might represent evil forces, and the highway could also symbolize a spiritual path that will lead some of God's children back to Zion, where the pure in heart dwell. (D&C 97:21; 133:17-18.) Verses 9 and 10 also suggest a spiritual symbolism for this highway. In short, there are at least three figurative ways in which this highway might represent Israelites returning to Zion in the last days:

Even though we do not understand the exact meaning of the "way to holiness" by which the redeemed of the Lord will return to Zion, Isaiah describes it well enough that we know it is one of the great blessings the Lord will provide in these last days. Whether it is a literal, physical road or a figurative, spiritual path, or both, we know the Lord is preparing a way for his righteous children to return to their rightful places of inheritance.

Personally, Isaiah probably preferred to deliver such messages of promise and hope, but, like most prophets, he was required to deliver many specific warnings and to teach the Israelites about their covenant relationship with God. But, when given the opportunity, he, more than any other Old Testament prophet, excels in elevating Israel's hope for an age of paradisiacal glory. He develops this theme in the last half of his book, in which he extols the qualities of spiritual life and describes the proper role of a servant of the Lord. He also helps later Israelites to anticipate and to prepare for a new earth by encouraging a new relationship with heaven so that God and his children can work harmoniously together.

SCRIPTURAL NOTES AND COMMENTARY

Isaiah 35:2: The "Glory of Lebanon" and the "excellency of Carmel and Sharon"

Lebanon, Carmel, and Sharon were beautiful and productive places during Isaiah's time. All three areas were near the Mediterranean Sea, where they received abundant rain and enjoyed moderate climates. Lebanon is northwest of Israel, Carmel juts into the sea along Israel's western coastline, and Sharon extends along the coast south of Carmel.

Lebanon's glory consisted in her beautiful trees (especially cedars) and magnificent vegetation. The excellency of Carmel was (and still is) in her productive vineyards. The plains of Sharon excelled in all types of fruits and vegetables.

Note how Isaiah transferred the glory and excellency of these areas over to the Lord in the second half of the verse. These areas were bountiful only because of the Lord's favor. If he so desired he could also bestow such blessings upon the deserts. The glory or credit for the productivity of a place did not belong to the area itself, but to the Lord.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Both earthly nations and heavenly orbs will be destroyed or disrupted. The signs of the times preceding the Millennium will include manifestations in the heavens, such as thunder and lightning, darkness, darkened sun, red moon, and falling stars. (D&C 43:25; 133:69; 88:87.) The highway might be Isaiah's way of describing the Zionist movement and other political events that encouraged the return of the Jews to Israel within the past century. This idea of the heavens as a scroll or a curtain is presented by Isaiah a number of times (40:22; 42:5; 44:24; 45:15; 51:13).
[^2] The earth's population will be decimated (as armies are destroyed), and the heavenly population will decrease (as spirits leave and do not return). The records (or scrolls) of heaven will be sealed (or opened up) as the earth's inhabitants are judged from the heavenly records (some don't return to heaven). (D&C 77:8 and 128:7, 14.) The highway might symbolize the "straight and narrow path," the basic principles and ordinances of the gospel, which God's children follow in order to become part of spiritual Zion. At the beginning of verses 2, 5, 6b, and 8, Isaiah uses the Hebrew conjunction kee (usually translated as "for" or "thus") to introduce and connect four pronouncements of the Lord's vengeance.
[^3] The work of this telestial world will be completed, the veil over the earth will be removed, and the earth's inhabitants who have kept a terrestrial law will see Christ at his second coming. (D&C 88:95; 101:23; see also Hymns, no. 123.) More specifically, the highway might refer to the exact procedures required of the members of Christ's Church as they enter the temple and receive the instruction and ordinances necessary to return to our Heavenly Father's presence.
[^4] Honorable (generous, bountiful [KJV], princely, honest, respected, liberal, or gentleman). [^1]
[^5] Blessings to Israel (22-24). Minor additions to other verses (especially vs. 16, 17, and 20).
