Victor L. Ludlow, Isaiah: Prophet, Seer, and Poet ( 1982)

RECEIVING THE STRENGTH OF THE LORD ISAIAH 40

In chapter 40, Isaiah gives a message of comfort and inspiration to countless generations, renewing hope in the advent of the Messiah (vs. 1-5) and proclaiming the immortality, power, love, knowledge, strength, creative abilities, and judgments of God (vs. 6-28). Isaiah concludes with a promise that those who wait and trust in the Lord will share in his powers and renew their strength (through the resurrection so that they will "run, and not be weary," and "walk, and not faint" [vs. 29-31]).

The dominant theme of this chapter stresses the glory of God the Father (Elohim in Hebrew). However, Isaiah's purpose in this discourse seems to extend beyond the extolling of God, since he concludes with a promise that those who follow Jesus Christ (Yahweh or Jehovah in Hebrew) will share God's strength. Thus Isaiah's message is twofold: (1) God is great and glorious, and (2) we can share his glory as we follow his son Jesus Christ.

God's greatness is emphasized throughout the chapter by an extensive use of synonymous parallelism that highlights a number of God's characteristics. In the following outline, the divine attributes are listed in the center column while the outside columns indicate the verses and means by which Isaiah portrays the attributes:

Example Attribute Example

God gives comfort and Living, loving People build lifeless idols;

forgives his people God give them care and attention

(vs. 1-2) (vs. 18-20)

Earth changed and Creative, powerful Earth created by Jehovah

reformed at Christ's God before Adam's coming

coming (3-5) (21)

Flesh is transitory; Supreme, eternal People are numerous; God

God's word is eternal is incomparable (22-25)

(6-8)

Mighty God cares for Active, caring God Mighty God calls for his

his sheep and measures children to come and be

the earth (9-12) judged (26)

The Lord follows the Mysterious, knowing People fear their concerns

divine plan and paths God and ways are unknown to

(13-14) the Lord (27)

Great nations are as Wealthy, wise God God and his wisdom never

nothing before the fade (28)

Lord (15-17)

Since the synonymous parallelism will be more apparent if verses 1-17 are read as a whole, the "matching sets" of verses are printed in parallel columns below. In the first set, compare the tender love of God toward his people (vs. 1-2 on the left) with the care Judah devotes to her lifeless idols (vs. 18-20 on the right):

40 Comfort, oh comfort My people Says your God.

2Speak tenderly to Jerusalem,

And declare to her

That her term of service is over,

That her iniquity is expiated;

For she has received at the hand of the LORD

Double for all her sins. (NJV)

18To whom, then, can you liken God,

What form compares to Him?

19The idol? A woodworker shaped it,

And a smith overlaid it with gold,

Forging links of silver.

20As a gift, he chooses the mulberry—

A wood that does not rot—

Then seeks a skillful woodworker

To make a firm idol,

That will not topple. (NJV)

In the first two verses, God speaks comforting words to be delivered to his people in Jerusalem. The audience he addresses is unidentified, although he apparently speaks to a number of people, since the instruction, to "comfort" is a double, plural command ("you [plural] comfort, you [plural] comfort my people!"). The double imperative provides emphasis to the message and is characteristic of Isaiah's style. Some scholars assume that these verses are set in a heavenly council in which God addresses his heralds. The heralds are God's messengers to the people on earth and could include the prophets, who, like Isaiah, deliver God's words (see the discussion on vs. 3-5 following this section).

Compare God's actions with those of the people making their idols. They choose wood for the core that does not rot and design the idol so it will not easily topple over. Finally, they cover the idol with fine gold and silver and perhaps inlay it with jewels. This is their god, a god they built with their own hands, but which can do nothing for them.

On the other hand, the true and living God can speak to his messengers and provide a way in which his followers and the inhabitants of Jerusalem (who probably represent the members of his Church) can be forgiven of their sins and enjoy the finest blessings, powers, and glory that he possesses. (See Young, The Book of Isaiah, 3:21.)

Isaiah continues his discourse by describing the power God has to transform mountains and valleys into new formations. He also reviews the process of the creation of this earth:

3A voice rings out:

"Clear in the desert

A road for the LORD!

Level in the wilderness

A highway for our God!

4Let every valley be raised,

Every hill and mount made low.

Let the rugged ground become level

And the ridges become a plain.

5The Presence of the LORD shall appear,

And all flesh, as one, shall behold—

For the mouth of the LORD has spoken." (NJV)

21Do you not know?

Have you not heard?

Have you not been told

From the very first!

Have you not discerned

How the earth was founded? (NJV)

Verses 3-5 seem to deal with the role of John the Baptist in preparing the way for Jesus Christ; all four New Testament evangelists clearly indicate that the "voice of him that crieth in the wilderness (KJV)" is indeed John the Baptist. (Matt. 3:3; Mark 1:3; Luke 3:4; John 1:23.) Scriptures from the New World, both ancient and modern, also support this assertion. (See 1 Ne. 10:21; 11:27; 2 Ne. 31:4-18; D&C 13:1.)

However, John the Baptist was an "Elias" or forerunner of Christ in this dispensation as well. (See MD, pp. 221-22; Matt. 11:10.) The fact that John's mission could extend to this dispensation finds support in Luke's account of John, especially in Joseph Smith's inspired translation. (See JST Luke 3:4-11.)

Only at the second coming of Christ, however, will Jerusalem receive forgiveness and peace. John's mission was only the beginning of the fulfillment of Isaiah's prophecy. The prophecy will only be fully realized when the Lord returns to initiate his millennial reign.

Besides John the Baptist, any other "Elias" or forerunner of the Millennium is a messenger preparing the world for Christ. (See Mal. 3:1.) For example, Joseph Fielding Smith identified the Prophet Joseph Smith as a "messenger who was to come and prepare the way" before Christ as prophesied by Malachi and Isaiah. (DS 1:193-95; see also JS-H 1:36, 40.) Other leaders of this dispensation, such as Orson Hyde, were commissioned to give a voice of warning to the world. (HC 4:376.) Indeed, all ordained representatives of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are called to prepare the way before Christ. (D&C 39:20.) The whole Church is responsible to make the earth ready for the time when Christ will transform the mountains and valleys. (D&C 109:74; compare Isaiah 40:4.) Finally, the "voice of one crying in the wilderness" may be the voice of any of the Lord's servants, but the voice is initially the Lord's own, carried by the Spirit to mortals here on earth and through them to the whole world. (See D&C 88:66.)

Verse 4, in which Isaiah speaks of mountains being lowered, valleys exalted, crooked paths straightened, and rough places leveled, appears to have a variety of possible interpretations. At least two literal fulfillments seem possible: (1) the events in America concurrent with Christ's death, and (2) events throughout the entire world prior to his second coming. (See 3 Ne. 8:13, 17-18; D&C 49:23, 133:21-22; compare an earlier similar occurrence during Enoch's ministry, Moses 7:13.) Figuratively, the transformation of the land may symbolize the spiritual vice and coarseness of people, which must be eliminated in order for them to receive Christ and his gospel.

The "glory of the Lord" (KJV) at his "presence" (NJV) is promised in verse 5 to all people of the earth. Elder Orson Pratt described this appearance as a time when Christ "will appear as a being whose splendor and glory will cause the sun to hide his face with shame." He also explained that those who appear with Christ will be clothed in glory, that the "brightness of their countenance will shine forth with all that refulgence and fulness of splendour that shall surround the Son of Man when he appears." (JD 8:50-52; see also D&C 133:49; TG "Jesus Christ, Glory of.")

As seen from the evaluation of verses 3-5, the message the Lord's herald delivers to the world is profound and universal. It is no wonder, then, that as Charles Jennens prepared the libretto for Handel's Messiah, he made extensive uses of Isaiah 40:1-5. (Messiah, part 1, sections 2, 3, 4.) Other portions of the fortieth chapter were used in the Messiah and in Brahm's Requiem.

Isaiah continues his prophetic discourse by promising another voice that shall cry out. This herald compares the transitory nature of man with the eternity of God's word. In the companion parallel passage, Isaiah borrows the same vocabulary and highlights the power of God over the rulers of this earth:

6A voice rings out: "Proclaim!"

Another asks, "What shall I proclaim?"

"All flesh is grass,

All its goodness like flowers of the field:

7Grass withers, flowers fade

When the breath of the LORD blows on them.

Indeed, man is but grass:

8Grass withers, flowers fade—

But the word of our God endures forever!" (NJV)

22It is He who is enthroned above the vault of the earth,

So that its inhabitants seem as grasshoppers;

Who spread out the skies like gauze

Stretched them out like a tent to dwell in.

23He brings potentates to naught,

Makes rulers of the earth as nothing.

24Hardly are they planted,

Hardly are they sown,

Hardly has their stem

Taken root in earth,

When He blows upon them and they dry up,

And the storm bears them off like straw.

25To whom, then, can you liken Me,

To whom can I be compared?—says the Holy One. (NJV)

Strong parallels are apparent between these two passages. In the first section (vs. 6-8), people are compared to grass that the breath of the Lord blows upon until it withers; in the second (vs. 22-25), the earth's inhabitants are like grasshoppers and their rulers like plants that the Lord blows upon until they dry up and are carried off. Isaiah employs a variety of parallelisms in these few verses, especially emblematic (people are like grass or grasshoppers, the Lord's power is like the wind, etc.), antithetic (men and their rulers are compared to God), synthetic (a number of questions and situations keep the reader's attention as he looks for answers and explanations), climactic (both sections conclude with powerful pronouncements about God's nature), and synonymous (the two passages each present the same basic message).

Isaiah's comparisons are found in later scriptural passages— Peter used them in the New Testament (1 Pet. 1:25) and Joseph Smith included them in a revealed proclamation to the rulers of all nations. (See D&C 124:3, 5-8, especially v. 7.)

In the next verses, Isaiah contrasts the power and might of God the judge with the love and concern of God the shepherd:

9Ascend a lofty mountain,

O herald of joy in Zion;

Raise your voice with power,

O herald of joy to Jerusalem—

Raise it, have no fear;

Announce to the cities of Judah:

Behold your God!

10Behold, the Lord GOD comes in might,

And his arm wins triumph for Him;

See, His reward is with Him.

His recompense before Him.

11Like a shepherd He pastures His flock:

He gathers the lambs in His arms

And carries them in His bosom;

Gently He drives the mother sheep.

12Who measured the waters with the hollow of his hand,

And gauged the skies with a span,

And meted earth's dust with a measure,

And weighed the mountains with a scale

And the hills with a balance? (NJV)

26Lift high your eyes and see:

Who created these?

He who sends out their host by count,

Who calls them each by name:

Because of His great might and vast power,

Not one fails to appear. (NJV)

The companion passage in verse 26, though short, continues many parallelisms from verses 9-12: "Ascend, raise, raise" (v. 9) is parallel with "lift high"; might of the Lord's arm (v. 10) is equivalent to the power of creation; a shepherd with his flock (v. 11) is like a being who can name each of his host; and an omnipotent being who can measure the universe (v. 12) is a mighty God to whom all come, at his call, for a final judgment. (See 2 Ne. 9:15-16; Alma 5:38; MD, pp. 401-4.)

The extensive creations of the Lord highlighted in verses 12 and 26 become a major theme of Isaiah in his later writings. Of the slightly more than fifty occurrences of the word bara (create) in the Old Testament, nearly half are in Isaiah 40-56; two are in chapter 40 alone (vs. 26, 28). Bara is a theological word that "does not in itself carry the meaning of creation out of nothing, but it is never used except with God as the subject" or the being who directs the creation. (North, The Second Isaiah, p. 88.) Isaiah's emphasis upon the creation probably reaches a peak in chapter 65, in which he speaks of the Lord creating a new heaven and a new earth. Not only does Isaiah apparently want to humble his listeners and help them fear and obey God, but he also probably wants us to appreciate what God has created and anticipate that he will yet create a new earth, first on a terrestrial level and finally on a celestial level. (See Moses 1:8-10, 35-37; D&C 45:1; 88:1; 93:10.)

Joseph Smith compares the divine powers and creative abilities with their value in developing man's faith as follows:

And it is not less necessary that men should have the idea of the existence of the attribute power in the Deity; for unless God had power over all things, and was able by his power to control all things, and thereby deliver . . . [those] who put their trust in God . . . [then] men feel as though . . . he has power to save all who come to him to the very uttermost. . . . seeing he is God over all, from everlasting to everlasting, the Creator and upholder of all things, no such fear can exist in the minds of those who put their trust in him, so that in this respect their faith can be without wavering. (LOF 4:12; 3:19.)

The two parallel Isaianic sections that describe God's creations (vs. 9-12 and 26) cause man to realize he cannot match God's might. These sections also ask questions that are left unanswered: "Who can measure the earth and the skies?" (v. 12), and "Who has created the earth's inhabitants?" (v. 26). More unanswered questions about man's inability to match God's understanding comprise the next two parallel passages in which Isaiah portrays the omniscience of God:

13Who has plumbed the mind of the LORD,

What man could tell Him His plan?

14Whom did he consult, and who taught Him,

Guided Him in the way of right?

Who guided Him in knowledge

And showed Him the path of wisdom? (NJV)

27Why do you say, O Jacob,

Why declare, O Israel,

"My way is hid from the LORD,

My cause is ignored by my God"? (NJV)

Joseph Smith records a similar comparison of man's knowledge in relation to God's wisdom: "Marvelous [are] his ways; the extent of his doing none can find out." (D&C 76:2; see Alma 26:35; Mosiah 4:9.)

Joseph Smith not only expounds upon the greatness of God's wisdom, but also promises that there is not anyone "who can stay his hand." (D&C 76:3.) Isaiah compares God's unfathomable wisdom and his divine glory with the frailty of mortals in the last set of parallel passages:

15The nations are but a drop in a bucket,

Reckoned as dust on a balance;

The very coastlands He lifts like motes.

16Lebanon is not fuel enough,

Nor its beasts enough for sacrifice.

17All nations are as naught in His sight;

He accounts them as less than nothing. (NJV)

28Do you not know?

Have you not heard?

The LORD is God from of old,

Creator of the earth from end to end,

He never grows faint or weary,

His wisdom cannot be fathomed. (NJV)

In verse 15, Isaiah suggests first that the nations of this earth "are but a drop in a bucket" compared to God's dominion. Secondly, they are powerless compared to him. Verse 16 contains a few awkward phrases as it stresses that the mighty forests of Lebanon cannot nearly provide the power available to God, and its livestock cannot satisfy God's expectations for sacrifice. The pagan worshippers in Lebanon believed that as they performed burnt offerings, the smoke from the wood and offerings traveled up into the heavens, where their gods could ingest it and receive energy and health. Of course, such a source of power is not needed by the true and living God, and besides, no act of sacrifice on our part can begin to compensate him for what he has provided us. Indeed, as verse 17 says, all the nations of the earth (even those with great wealth and armies) are insignificant to him.

Much more important to God than nations, forests, and flocks are his children. Since his chosen people, Israel, fear that the Lord is unaware of them (v. 27), Isaiah stresses in verse 28 that God is the same forever, that he is their creator, and that he will never weaken in fulfilling his task to bring to pass their immortality and eternal life. (Moses 1:39.) With fine insight, Isaiah identifies Israel's expressed doubt of God's salvation as a lack of faith in God's power. To say that God will not do what he says is equivalent to saying that he cannot do it. Isaiah's first answer to this doubt is an affirmation of God's creative power. (McKenzie, Second Isaiah, p. 25.)

Having emphasized the everlasting dominion and strength of God in the last set of parallel passages (vs. 15-17, 28), Isaiah could conclude his message, having edified us and humbled us through his discourse on God's supreme power and glory. However, Isaiah chooses to build further upon his concept of God's glory. He suggests that its greatest value is not to serve as a measurement of God's greatness, but to be shared with his children:

29He gives strength to the weary,

Fresh vigor to the spent.

30Youths may grow faint and weary,

And young men stumble and fall;

31But they who trust in the LORD shall renew their strength

As eagles grow new plumes:

They shall run and not grow weary,

They shall march and not grow faint. (NJV)

A. Divine strength to the weary

B. Youths may weaken

C. Those who trust in the

Lord shall renew their strength

B'. As eagles grow new feathers

A'. People will find weary, strength

A chiastic pattern is outlined in the right column. The two primary words in this section are antithetic to each other, "weary" and "strength." The key word is "trust." Combined in one statement, these three words declare that "weary" people who "trust" in the Lord will receive new "strength."

These three terms can be evaluated through a variety of possible relationships. One scholar describes them as follows:

What the prophet means is that Yahweh communicates some of the unfailing strength of his eternity to those who believe in him. As Yahweh always acts with full vigor, so those who trust in him find their vigor renewed to perpetual fullness. (McKenzie, Second Isaiah, p. 25.)

McKenzie also suggests that the sprouting of wings probably symbolizes restored strength to the feeble, for when "a person who is greatly weakened suddenly begins to run, it is as if he sprouts wings." (Ibid., p. 22.)

Another scholar compares Isaiah's imagery of an eagle growing new feathers as follows:

They [the weary people] shall put forth fresh feathers like the moulting eagle. It has been a common and popular opinion that the eagle lives and retains his rigour to a great age; and that beyond the common lot of other birds, he moults in his old age, and renews his feathers, and with them his youth. (Clarke's Commentary 14:162.)

The concept of divine strength shared with mortals is confirmed by modern revelation. The Lord promised Oliver Cowdery in the early days of this dispensation that he would give unto him "strength such as is not known among men." (D&C 24:12.) On the other hand, David Whitmer was rebuked because he did not rely upon the Lord for strength as he should. (D&C 30:1-2.) The Lord's promise of renewed bodies is given to those who magnify their priesthood callings. (D&C 84:33.)

Isaiah's metaphoric use of eagles' wings is also echoed in modern scripture where the Lord promises Lyman Wight that if he is faithful the Lord will "bear him up as on eagles' wings; and he shall beget glory and honor to himself and unto my name." (D&C 124:18.) In the same revelation, the Lord promises William Law that as he serves the Lord, he will receive great powers and blessings including the promise that "he shall mount up in the imagination of his thoughts as upon eagles' wings." (D&C 124:99.) Other phraseology from Isaiah's promise is found in the Doctrine and Covenants. For example, those who keep the Word of Wisdom are promised that they shall "run and not be weary, and shall walk and not faint." (D&C 89:20; compare Isa. 40:31, KJV.)

An apostle of this dispensation, Orson Pratt, expanded the promises of Isaiah and explained that those who renew their strength and "mount up with wings as eagles" (KJV) will be "renewed with the light of truth, and be enabled to move from place to place at accelerated velocity, even with the speed of light." (JD 3:104.)

Since God promises to share his strength (or power, glory, and dominion) with those who trust in him, Isaiah's promise compares with President Lorenzo Snow's statement: "As man now is, God once was. As now God is, so man may be." (Improvement Era, June 1919, p. 660.) Isaiah stresses what God now is in most of chapter 40, but concludes with a promise of what man may be as he shares God's strength.

In summary, in a new vision Isaiah receives and records God's directives for heralds to proclaim special messages to the people (vs. 1-11), and then testifies concerning God's great knowledge and powers (vs. 12-28). Isaiah does not record the means by which God has received his special qualities (vs. 14, 28), but he does promise that those who trust in the Lord will be able to receive strength and blessings from him (vs. 29-31). In short, those who follow the way of the Lord Jesus Christ in the fulfillment of God's plan will be able to share our Heavenly Father's glory and the greatest gift, eternal life. (See D&C 133:57-62.)

SCRIPTURAL NOTES AND COMMENTARY

Isa. 40:2: Why does Jerusalem have to pay "double" for her sins?

First, it was the rule under the Mosaic law that "for all manner of trespass" a man found guilty by the judges should pay double. (Ex. 22:9.) Because of the Israelites' accountability as the chosen people, the Lord required more of Judea's inhabitants when they sinned than from other nations.

As a corollary, the double punishment might refer to the physical and spiritual suffering that God's children experience after they sin. Although anyone may experience physical consequences when he transgresses laws of God, those who know that the law is one of God's commandments, and still sin against the law, receive spiritual consequences as well.

In addition, the double punishment might be a prophecy of the double scattering that the Jews experienced first at the hand of the Babylonians in the sixth century B.C. and then through the Romans in the first century A.D. Indeed, their punishment may continue into the twentieth century and the period immediately prior to the Millennium, for Elder Orson Hyde recorded in his vision of the Jews that the Lord instructed him to tell the Jews:

The lion is come up from his thicket, and the destroyer of the Gentiles is on his way—he is gone forth from his place to make thy land [Judah] desolate, and thy cities shall be laid waste, without an inhabitant. Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is accomplished—that her iniquity is pardoned, for she hath received of the Lord's hand doubly for all her sins [Isa. 40:2]. (HC 4:376.)

The main idea of verse 2 is to tell Jerusalem that she has proved herself faithful to the Lord through the trials and punishments she has experienced. She has humbled herself and come to the Lord and has more than satisfied the demands of justice. The Lord has therefore forgiven her of her trespasses so that she is ready for the Restoration and other events promised in chapter 40 and the rest of Isaiah.
