Victor L. Ludlow, Isaiah: Prophet, Seer, and Poet ( 1982)

TRUST IN THE LORD AND HIS SERVANT ISAIAH 41-42

In chapters 41-42, Isaiah builds further upon the concepts developed in chapter 40; in chapter 40 Isaiah extolls the Lord's knowledge and strength and promises that those who trust in the Lord can share his strength. Chapters 41-42 present the Lord's invitation to Israel to be his servant and share his glory, but also warn Israel she will be destroyed if she rejects her opportunity.

Without a firm historical context to anchor them in any one setting, these chapters are easily applicable to any generation of God's children; indeed, Isaiah addresses his words to all nations upon the isles by the seas (which includes all land masses), indicating that people everywhere should listen to the Lord's message. At times, however, he speaks directly to Israel and challenges her to heed her special responsibility as God's servant to the world.

In order to reinforce his message, Isaiah repeats key ideas in an extensive example of synonymous parallelism (41:1-20 and 41:21-42:17). In the two parallel halves of the pronouncement, Isaiah reminds Israel of the Lord's continual efforts in her behalf and foretells how God's servant will represent him to Israel. After his "double discourse," Isaiah concludes with more insights concerning the role of the Lord's servant and a sober warning of bondage and divine wrath that will come upon those who disregard the Lord's message (42:18-25).

Isaiah begins both pronouncements by setting a scene in a courtroom. The Lord begins speaking and addresses his remarks to the nations of the earth, particularly those who worship pagan gods;

41Discourse 1, Part A

"Be silent before me, you islands!

Let the nations renew their strength!

Let them come forward and speak; let us meet together at the place of judgment. (NIV)

Discourse 2, Part A

21"Present your case," says the LORD.

"Set forth your arguments," says Jacob's King.

22"Bring in your idols to tell us what is going to happen.

Tell us what the former things were,

so that we may consider them and know their final outcome.

23Or declare to us the things to come,

tell us what the future holds, so we may know that you are gods.

Do something, whether good or bad,

so that we will be dismayed and filled with fear.

24But you are less than nothing and your works are utterly worthless;

he who chooses you is detestable. (NIV)

After concluding chapter 40 with the promise that those who trust in the Lord will "renew their strength" (v. 31), Isaiah begins chapter 41 by inviting the nations to "renew their strength" if they can. Like Elijah with the priests of Baal (1 Kgs. 18), he challenges the pagans to bring forth any signs of power like those the Lord had demonstrated earlier; still their idols remain silent and powerless. (Isa. 40.) Any comparison quickly demonstrates the Lord's omnipotence in contrast to the idols' impotence.

The Lord next highlights the ministry of a prophesied leader who is divinely directed. An important sign of the Lord's power is the fact that no one else has envisioned this messenger and what he will do:

Discourse 1, Part B

2"Who has stirred up one from the east,

calling him in righteousness to his service?

He hands nations over to him and subdues kings before him.

Discourse 2, Part B

25"I have stirred up one from the north, and he comes—

one from the rising sun who calls on my name.

He treads on rulers as if they were mortar,

He turns them to dust with his sword,

to windblown chaff with his bow.

3He pursues them and moves on unscathed,

by a path his feet have not traveled before.

4Who has done this and carried it through,

calling forth the generations from the beginning?

I, the LORD—with the first of them and with the last—I am he."

5The islands have seen it and fear; the ends of the earth tremble.

6They approach and come forward; each helps the other

and says to his brother, "Be strong!"

7The craftsman encourages the goldsmith,

and he who smooths with the hammer

spurs on him who strikes the anvil.

He says of the welding, "It is good."

He nails down the idol so it will not topple. (NIV)

as if he were a potter treading the clay.

26Who told of this from the beginning, so we could know,

or beforehand, so we could say, 'He was right'?

No one told of this, no one foretold it,

no one heard any words from you.

27I was the first to tell Zion, 'Look, here they are!'

I gave to Jerusalem a messenger of good tidings.

28I look but there is no one—

no one among them to give counsel,

no one to give answer when I ask them.

29See, they are all false!

Their deeds amount to nothing;

their images are but wind and confusion." (NIV)

Compare the many striking parallels between the two chapter segments in these few verses:

A. An important person comes from the east (or rising sun)

B. He has power over rulers and kings

C. He turns them into dry powder or molds them as wet clay

D. His feet pursues them and treads them under

E. His coming is foretold

F. The Lord is the one who has announced it

G. People are powerless though they try to obtain counsel from each other

H. The people try to secure their idols, but they cannot ward off the ensuing wind and confusion The powerful person who creates this havoc (vs. 2, 25) is unnamed, though scholars have speculated on a number of persons who could fulfill this prophecy, from Abraham to the future Messiah. If individuals near Isaiah's time are considered, various Assyrian kings or ancient emperors, especially Cyrus, are likely candidates. But if this leader embodies as much spiritual power as he does political force, Christ is the most likely candidate—he came out of the eastern deserts after his forty-day fast to begin his mortal ministry. (Matt. 3:13-4:11.) Apparently, he will come again from the east at his political or second coming. (Isa. 63.) However, it is possible that the promised individual still belongs to the future and might be the evil king of the world (Gog of Magog) or the forces led by Michael who will oppose him. (Dan. 11:44-12:1.)

In verses 8 of chapter 41 and 1 of chapter 42, Isaiah continues his "double pronouncement" by introducing yet another entity who is identified as a servant of the Lord. In the first of these parallel sections, this servant is represented by Israel collectively, and in the corollary verses is personified by an individual messianic figure:

Discourse I, Part C

8"But you, O Israel, my servant,

Jacob, whom I have chosen,

you descendants of Abraham

my friend,

9I took you from the ends of the

earth,

from its farthest corners I

called you.

I said, 'You are my servant';

I have chosen you and have not

reject you.

10So do not fear, for I am with you;

do not be dismayed, for I am

your God.

I will strengthen you and help

you;

I will uphold you with my

righteous right hand."

(NIV)

Discourse 2, Part C

42 "Here is my servant, whom I uphold,

my chosen one in whom I delight;

I will put my Spirit on him

and he will bring justice to the nations.

2He will not shout or cry out, or raise his voice in the streets.

A bruised reed he will not break,

and a smoldering wick he will not snuff out.

3In faithfulness he will bring forth justice;

4 he will not falter or be discouraged

till he establishes justice on earth.

In his law the islands will put their hope."

5This is what God the LORD says—

he who created the heavens and stretched them out,

who spread out the earth and all that comes out of it,

who gives breath to its people, and life to those who walk on it:

6"I, the LORD, have called you in righteousness;

I will take hold of your hand.

I will keep you and will make you

to be a covenant for the people and a light for the Gentiles,

7to open eyes that are blind, to free captives from prison

and to release from the dungeon those who sit in darkness.

8"I am the LORD; that is my name!

I will not give my glory to another or my praise to idols.

9See, the former things have taken place, and new things I declare;

before they spring into being I announce them to you." (NIV)

These verses contain some of Isaiah's most beautiful poetry. For example, verse 10 is paraphrased in a favorite Latter-day Saint hymn, "How Firm a Foundation": "Fear not, I am with thee, O be not dismayed, For I am thy God and will still give thee aid; I'll strengthen thee, help thee, and cause thee to stand, upheld by my righteous, . . . omnipotent hand." (Hymns, no. 66.)

The parallel segment to verse 10 begins chapter 42 and is identified as a hymn, psalm, or servant song of Isaiah. It expands the parallel concepts found in chapter 41 (part C, vs. 8-10). The last two verses echo the preceding B segments, both discourses (41:2-7, 25-29), promising that the Lord will bring forth some prophesied events.

Looking back, then, to the previous sets of verses in which a mysterious individual is promised to come from the east (v. 2) or the northeast (v. 25), it seems possible that the servant is not an individual, but the entire house of Israel (v. 8), which will be gathered from the corners of the earth (v. 9). Indeed, this identification can easily apply to the Jews, who have thus far had two major gatherings to their homeland, the first from the east after the Babylonian captivity (538-500 B.C.) and the second from the north (Europe) and the east (Asia) as they have returned to Palestine in the past century.

In short, the person (or people) promised to come from the east (segment B) may be the servant described in the succeeding set of verses (segment C). Although the precise identity of the person or servant has not been absolutely established, the house of Israel as a people and Jesus Christ himself seem to be the most likely possibilities.

For now, to know the exact identity of the servant is not as important as to understand his character. Reread the servant song in chapter 42 above and note the servant's qualities: spirituality and fairness (v. 2), humility and faithfulness (v. 3), perseverance and justice (v. 4), righteousness and example (v. 6), and power and light (v. 7). Until the servant can be more precisely identified, readers will find it much more valuable to emulate his characteristics than to discover his name. In fact, the servant may not represent a single individual or tribe, but may typify all those who serve the Lord. As Isaiah explains more about servants of the Lord in later chapters and servant songs, identify the traits of these servants and ponder how they can become a productive part of your own personality. In this way, the servant songs and message of Isaiah will find the greatest value and application in your own life.

Turning back to chapters 41 and 42, we see that Isaiah continues his parallel accounts by describing the Lord's protection of Israel and her song of joy to the Lord:

Discourse 1, Part D

41:11"All who rage against you will surely be ashamed and disgraced;

those who oppose you will be as nothing and perish.

12Though you search for your enemies, you will not find them.

Those who wage war against you will be as nothing at all.

13For I am the LORD, your God,

who takes hold of your right hand

Discourse 2, Part D

42:10Sing to the LORD a new song,

his praise from the ends of the earth,

you who go down to the sea, and all that is in it,

you islands, and all who live in them.

11Let the desert and its towns raise their voices;

let the settlements where Kedar lives rejoice.

Let the people of Sela sing for joy;

let them shout from the mountaintops. and says to you, Do not fear;

I will help you.

14Do not be afraid, O worm Jacob,

O little Israel,

for I myself will help you," declares the LORD,

your Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel.

15"See, I will make you into a threshing sledge,

new and sharp, with many teeth.

You will thresh the mountains and crush them,

and reduce the hills to chaff.

16You will winnow them, the wind will pick them up,

and a gale will blow them away.

But you will rejoice in the LORD

and glory in the Holy One of Israel. (NIV)

12Let them give glory to the LORD

and proclaim his praise in the islands.

13The LORD will march out like a mighty man,

like a warrior he will stir up his zeal;

with a shout he will raise the battle cry

and will triumph over his enemies. (NIV)

Isaiah creates beautiful poetry and powerful imagery in these verses. Humble Israel (or "worm Jacob," 41:14) is counseled not to fear, for the Lord will make her into a threshing machine that will crush her enemies into dust that the wind will blow away (vs. 14-16). Righteous Israelites are destined also to inhabit the far reaches of the land, from the Mediterranean Sea to the desert boundaries of Kedar (northeast of Jerusalem in Syria) and Sela (southeast of Jerusalem in Edom; see areas D2 and C3 on Map 10). She will give glory to the Lord (41:16; 42:12) as he triumphs over his enemies (41:15; 42:13).

Isaiah's parallel accounts then describe manifestations of the Lord's power upon the geography of the land: mountains and valleys will be transformed, and water and vegetation will fill the desert. In the first account the Lord protects his followers, and in the parallel version he punishes his enemies:

Discourse 1, Part E

41:17"The poor and needy search for water,

but there is none;

their is none; their tongues are parched with thirst.

Discourse 2, Part E

42:14"For a long time I have kept silent,

I have been quiet and held myself

back. But now, like a woman in But I the LORD will answer them;

I, the God of Israel, will not forsake them.

18I will make rivers flow on barren heights,

and springs within the valleys.

I will turn the desert into pools of water,

and the parched ground into springs.

19I will put in the desert

the cedar and the acacia, the myrtle and the olive.

I will set pines in the wasteland,

the fir and the cypress together,

20so that people may see and know,

may consider and understand,

that the hand of the LORD has done this,

that the Holy One of Israel

has created it. (NIV)

childbirth, I cry out, I gasp and pant.

15I will lay waste the mountains and hills

and dry up all their vegetation;

I will turn rivers into islands and dry up the pools.

16I will lead the blind by ways they have not known,

along unfamiliar paths I will guide them;

I will turn the darkness into light before them

and make the rough places smooth.

These are the things I will do: I will not forsake them.

17But those who trust in idols,

who say to images, 'You are our gods,'

will be turned back in utter shame (NIV)

Probably the most important message in these verses is the Lord's promise that he will assist those who are either physically or spiritually poor, needy, thirsty (41:17), and blind (42:16). A second major point is delivered in the concluding verses in which the Lord gives the purpose for his manifestations of power—people will see the hand of the Lord (41:20) and know the impotence of their idols (42:17).

At the conclusion of Isaiah's parallel accounts, the Lord directs a special message to the listener or reader. Isaiah continues with some earlier terminology as he talks about servants, blindness, Israel, and the Lord's manifestations upon the wicked. However, some of these verses seem full of contradictions that have baffled scholars. One apparent point of inconsistency is the representations of the Lord's servant in very derogatory imagery; he is described as completely blind and deaf. The English text was either so corrupt or confusing that Joseph Smith found it necessary to give an inspired translation of most of these concluding verses of Isaiah 42. His version, with the major changes italicized, is reproduced side-by-side with the New International Version:

42:18"Hear, you deaf; look, you blind, and see!

19Who is blind but my servant,

and deaf like the messenger I send?

Who is blind like the one committed to me,

blind like the servant of the LORD?

20You have seen many things,

but have paid no attention;

your ears are open, but you hear nothing."

21It pleased the LORD for the sake of his righteousness

to make his law great and glorious.

22But this is a people plundered and looted,

all of them trapped in pits or hidden away in prisons.

They have become plunder, with no one to rescue them;

they have been made loot, with no one to say, "Send them back."

23Which of you will listen to this

or pay close attention in time to come?

24Who handed Jacob over to become loot,

and Israel to the plunderers?

Was it not the LORD against whom we have sinned?

For they would not follow his ways;

18Hear, ye deaf; and look, ye blind, that ye may see.

19For I will send my servant unto you who are blind; yea, a messenger to open the eyes of the blind, and unstop the ears of the deaf;

20And they shall be made perfect notwithstanding their blindness, if they will hearken unto the messenger, the LORD's servant.

21Thou art a people, seeing many things, but thou observest not; opening the ears to hear, but thou hearest not.

22The Lord is not well pleased with such a people, but for his righteousness sake he will magnify the law and make it honorable.

23Thou art a people robbed and spoiled; thine enemies, all of them, have snared thee in holes, and they have hid thee in prison houses; they have taken thee for a prey, and none delivereth; for a spoil, and none saith, Restore.

24Who among them will give ear unto thee, or hearken and hear thee for the time to come? and who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the robbers? did not the Lord, he against whom they have sinned?

25For they would not walk in his ways, neither were they obedient unto his law; therefore he hath poured upon them the fury of his anger, and the strength of battle; and they have set them on fire round about, yet they know not, and it burned them, yet they laid it not to heart. (JST)

they did not obey his law.

25So he poured out on them his burning anger, the violence of war.

It enveloped them in flames, yet they did not understand; it consumed them, but they did not take it to heart. (NIV)

The major difference between the two translations is that the Joseph Smith Translation clarifies the ambiguous passages to make clear that the blindness lies with the people, not the servant. Furthermore, the Joseph Smith Translation gives the promise that the people can become perfect in spite of their blindness if they heed the Lord's servant. It also explains that Israel's enemies will be allowed to plunder her as punishment for her sins. In addition, by carefully studying the last two verses of the Joseph Smith Translation and matching the different referents to their various pronouns (thee/Israel; they, them/Israel's enemies or the Gentiles), one can see that the Gentiles will ignore the words of Israel until their sins merit divine wrath upon them.

The Joseph Smith Translation is necessary help in understanding these important verses. With Joseph Smith's inspired revisions, Isaiah's message to Israel becomes much clearer. The relationship between God's children is thereby more easily understood. The reader can also better appreciate why and how the Lord will bless or punish people according to their diligence in following his counsel given through his servants. Isaiah's message is valuable today, since the Lord has called many servants to deliver God's word to us in the last dispensation. The identity and role of some of these servants is discussed in the following section.

THE SERVANT SONGS OF ISAIAH

The first four verses of Isaiah 42 comprise one of the four "major songs" or major poetic passages in which Isaiah describes a servant of the Lord. (The other three are Isa. 49:1-6; 50:4-9; 52:13-53:12.) This servant is not named, so readers and scholars often disagree about the servant's identity. Generally, the Jewish scholars believe the servant is either the prophet Isaiah or a representation of the people of Israel in their chosen rule as the Lord's servants to the world. Christian scholars usually believe Jesus Christ is the servant prophesied by Isaiah. Latter-day Saint readers often recognize that the covenant members of the restored gospel serve as the Lord's servants. They as a people, and the prophet of the restoration, Joseph Smith, may be identified as Isaiah's promised servant.

In order to understand how any of these identities are possible, twelve major characteristics of the servant will be listed as described by Isaiah:

As noted in the many references listed above, strong scriptural support can be gathered for the five possible identities of Isaiah's prophesied servant: ancient Israel, restored Israel, Isaiah, Jesus Christ, and Joseph Smith. Rather than categorically stating that Isaiah's servant songs apply only to one servant, we might be wise in recognizing that the characteristics of God's servant are best exemplified in Christ and are also demonstrated through the lives of all of God's righteous children. In short, the precise identity of the servant is not as important as studying his characteristics and seeking to develop them in our own lives.
