Victor L. Ludlow, Isaiah: Prophet, Seer, and Poet ( 1982)

THE LORD OF THIS EARTH ISAIAH 43

Isaiah 43 builds upon the themes of the previous chapter and follows a pattern by opening with promise and concluding with a message of judgment. The contrast between the two chapters is sharp and clear, for Isaiah's reproach of Israel shifts abruptly to a prophecy of grace, ransom, and restoration by the Lord. (See Isa. 43, footnote la.) Likewise, Isaiah contrasts the glorious redemption Israel will someday enjoy (vs. 1-21) with the people's present dismal condition (vs. 22-28).

As in his earlier writings, Isaiah uses contrast and a full range of poetic techniques to express his ideas, including parallelism, repetition, word play, assonance, symbolism, and irony.

Isaiah 43 easily divides into four segments containing from 6-8 verses each:

Theme Mood

A. Israel's future gathering (vs. 1-7) Positive

B. A trial scene of God before Israel and the other Positive

nations (8-13)

A'. Israel's future blessings (14-21) Positive

B'. A trial scene between God and Israel;

present Israel merits condemnation (22-28) Negative

The chapter points to an ideal relationship to come when Israel finally recognizes the Lord as the sole God of this earth; however, it also forbodes captivity and bondage as long as the people forget the Lord.

The historical context of the chapter is uncertain, although many scholars place it during the Babylonian captivity. Still, other periods of Jewish dispersion and oppression provide a likely context for Isaiah's message of a promised ransom, restoration, and divine blessing. Indeed, the context of the chapter may lie outside the political-historical realm and in the overall spiritual framework of people held captive by their own sins and desirous of a message of hope and deliverance.

Most of the chapter is written in the first person singular, with the Lord himself as the speaker, who promises the deliverance of Israel and reminds her of his power manifested in the creation and the exodus from Egypt. Surely if the Lord can create the earth, he can provide for man; if he can free Israel from Egypt, he can also free man from sin. The Lord stresses in this chapter that there is no other savior on this earth and that he alone is responsible for its inhabitants.

He uses a number of titles to emphasize his sovereign power. Any recipient of these words of the Lord through Isaiah would surely understand that Yahweh (Jehovah) is the Lord of this earth!

The Lord Promises the Gathering of Israel (vs. 1-7)

The promise of release from exile is one of Isaiah's favorite themes; it is amplified in these verses. After Israel is driven to the four corners of the earth, she will be gathered from all directions. Isaiah likens the future gathering to the earlier exodus from Egypt by associating it with similar signs and wonders:

43 But now thus says the LORD,

he who created you, O Jacob,

he who formed you, O Israel:

"Fear not, for I have redeemed you;

I have called you by name, you are mine.

2When you pass through the waters I will be with you;

and through the rivers, they shall not overwhelm you;

when you walk through fire you shall not be burned,

and the flame shall not consume you.

3For I am the LORD your God,

the Holy One of Israel, your Savior.

I give Egypt as your ransom,

Ethiopia and Seba in exchange for you.

4Because you are precious in my eyes,

and honored, and I love you,

I give men in return for you,

peoples in exchange for your life.

5Fear not, for I am with you;

and I will bring your offspring from the east,

and from the west I will gather you;

6I will say to the north, Give up,

and to the south, Do not withhold;

bring my sons from afar

and my daughters from the end of the earth,

7every one who is called by my name,

whom I created for my glory,

whom I formed and made." (RSV)

Isaiah begins by reaffirming to exiled Israel that the Lord is the creator, the one who formed them at Sinai. The prophet uses the same words for create and form as Moses did in his creation account (Gen. 1:1, 26-27), thus emphasizing that Israel gives her survival to God, just as the earth and mankind owe their existence to him.

The Lord's discourse begins in the past tense (v. 1) and then shifts to the future (v. 2ff.), suggesting that the verbs of verse 1 do not refer to a past act. Instead, they promise a redemption yet to come. This is another example of the "prophetic perfect" tense where the fulfillment of a prophecy is so certain that it is spoken of in the perfect or past tense as though it had already happened. (See Isa. 42:9.)

Two names designate the people who will inherit God's blessings, Jacob and Israel. Isaiah uses this double designation seventeen times in chapters 40-49. Of course, the two names are synonymous because both belonged to the same person. It is the order of the two names that makes the repetition significant, for "Jacob" nearly always precedes "Israel," hinting, perhaps, that a change in Jacob's character prompted the Lord to change his name also. Jacob, the "supplanter," who worried about his relationship with his twin brother, Esau, became Israel, the "prevailer," who worked together with God to overcome wickedness. (See BD "Jacob"; "Israel.") Jacob was also at one time a deceiver and had to become as Israel, who prevailed over selfishness. Thus, Isaiah places Jacob before Israel in the chapter as a way of saying that the descendants of Jacob need to rise to the character of Israel; he charges them to be Israelites in deed as well as in lineage.

The name Israel has acquired a variety of connotations over the centuries. A brief review of the three major applications of the term Israelite will be helpful in understanding its different meanings in Isaiah:

So, when Isaiah addresses "Israel," he may be including any one of these categories. Usually, though, he is speaking to either blood or covenant Israelites. Given the context of Isaiah 43, it appears that the Lord is addressing covenant Israel, those whom he has called by name as his peculiar people for his own glory (vs. 1-2; see Mosiah 5:6-15; Deut. 14:2; Moses 1:39).

The Lord uses the imagery of his earlier miracles with Israel to promise future protection to the people. The "waters" and "rivers" of verse 2 allude not only to the earlier miracles at the Red Sea and the Jordan River, but, along with the fire, also represent the dangers and judgments Israel will experience. It is also possible that water and fire symbolize the twin covenants of baptism by water and the Spirit. Whether the water and fire are really physical dangers or if they represent military power (see Isa. 33:14) or covenants (Isa. 48:1; JST 55:1-3), the promise is given to righteous Israel that the Lord will accompany them through their tribulation.

Listed in verse 3 are four special names for God: The LORD (Yahweh), God (Elohim), the Holy One of Israel (Qedosh-Yisrael), and the Savior (Moshiya). Isaiah frequently uses the first three titles in his earlier writings, but the last term, Savior, first appears in this verse. [^1] Many other special names for God besides the four mentioned are found in chapter 43 of Isaiah: "I am He" (v. 10); "I, I am the Lord" (v. 11); "God" (El, v. 12); "Redeemer" (v. 14); "your Holy One" (v. 15); "the Creator of Israel" (v. 15); and "your King" (v. 15). While some of the terms are repeated in the chapter and throughout other sections of Isaiah, the last two titles are found only in the fifteenth verse of this chapter. The variety of titles used by Isaiah in this chapter and throughout his writings demonstrates that he had a deep understanding of the Lord's involvement in the salvation of mankind. The wide range of names also suggests that Isaiah himself had a profound, personal relationship with the Lord.

After identifying himself to Israel by different titles, the Lord continues in verse 3 to promise that he will ransom Israel from the countries of Africa to the southwest. Later in this pronouncement, the Lord similarly promises a deliverance from the Babylonian invaders from the northeast (v. 14).

Verses 5 and 6 emphasize that the final gathering will be worldwide. This literal gathering has been promised by modern prophets, including Joseph Fielding Smith, who quoted those verses and said that "the time was to come when they [the Israelites] would be restored again." (CHMR 4:92.) Such an extensive gathering of Israel has occurred only within the past century. This gathering from the four corners of the earth has been twofold: (1) a gathering of covenant Israelites to the stakes of Zion through the missionary program, and (2) a gathering of the Jews (blood Israelites) to Palestine through the Zionist movement.

While most Latter-day Saints are familiar with much of the success of the Church's missionary program, they are less aware of the conditions surrounding the return of the Jews. In the 1880s, when the gathering of the Jews began, only a few thousand Jews lived in Palestine. Most were students of the Jewish holy books and were supported by contributions from abroad. But, as the Jewish life in Eastern Europe deterioriated because of restrictive legislation and pogroms (mass riots sanctioned by the government that resulted in the destruction of life and property), many Jews sought new homes in America or Palestine. Under the leadership of Theodor Herzl in the early 1900s, the modern Zionist movement was organized and a more systematic return of the Jews began; with restrictive immigration laws in America and the rise of Naziism in Germany, many more Jews immigrated to Palestine during the 1920s. After the catastrophe of the Holocaust, the prayers of many Jews throughout the centuries of long dispersion were finally answered May 14, 1948, when the leadership of Jewish Palestine voted to found the Jewish State of Israel. The founding of the State of Israel has not been without problems, especially in securing the rights of the Arab Palestinians, but with it came the fulfillment of many prophecies and promises to ancient Israel, of which Isaiah 43 is just one. (See Nyman, Great Are the Words of Isaiah, p. 159 for some references by modern prophets to this Isaiah chapter.) Today there are over three million Jews living in Israel, immigrants from over one hundred countries. Truly the gathering has been from the east, west, north, and south!

In verse 4, the Lord gives the reason for his involvement in the gathering: his love for Israel has required him to provide a ransom and to "give men in return" for them. Those sacrificed for the salvation of Israel could include the Jewish and Lamanite victims of persecution, the prophets who have sealed their testimonies with their blood, and, of course, Christ himself. After the purging judgments and sacrifices, however, Israel will be gathered in from the four corners of the earth. And since the exile symbolizes the spiritual separation between the Lord and Israel, the most important prerequisite for the full gathering of Israel is their recognition of the Lord as Savior! The invitation to gather, to be called by the Lord's name, and to take part in his glory (v. 7) is extended to all who desire to unite with covenant Israel through his church, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The relationship between covenant Israel and the Lord is highlighted in the next few verses.

Trial Scene of God before Israel and the Other Nations (vs. 8-13)

These verses are compared to a trial scene because the Lord assembles a community council, calls forth witnesses, and declares a judgment upon the people. As the Lord delivers this speech, he calls forth Israel as a special witness of his fidelity to her:

8Bring forth the people who are blind, yet have eyes,

who are deaf, yet have ears!

9Let all the nations gather together and let the peoples assemble.

Who among them can declare this,

and show us the former things?

Let them bring their witnesses to justify them,

and let them hear and say, It is true.

10"You are my witnesses," says the LORD,

"and my servant whom I have chosen,

that you may know and believe me

and understand that I am He.

Before me no god was formed, nor shall there be any after me.

11I, I am the LORD, and besides me there is no savior.

12I declared and saved and proclaimed,

when there was no strange god among you;

and you are my witnesses," says the LORD.

13"I am God, and also henceforth I am He;

there is none who can deliver from my hand;

I work and who can hinder it?" (RSV)

The people mentioned in verse 8, the blind and deaf, are similar to those described in Isaiah 42:18-23 JST who ignore the prophet's message. These people are blind and deaf because they have not acknowledged God's workings on earth or listened to the Spirit declare his truths. In the time of restoration, however, their eyes and ears will be opened, and they will understand the Lord's role upon this earth. After they hear the witnesses and see the divine reality, they will all come to know the true Lord of this earth (v. 11; see Isa. 45:23).

In verse 9, the Lord summons the nations to bring forth witnesses of his divine plan, if they can. However, they are not able to testify about the former (including premortal) things the Lord has done. So, the Lord turns to Israel and calls his chosen people as witnesses; that God has fulfilled his gracious plan for the world is manifest best in the records of the house of Israel. They alone testify that the Lord has provided salvation and resurrection for the world and eternal life for those who desire to receive it. Israel is not only God's special witness, but also his servant to the world, and her inspired records are to go to all people. No other nation can give a similar witness of its gods.

Israel's message to the world is highlighted in verses 11-13. Here the pronoun I appears twelve times to emphasize that Jehovah alone is the savior of this earth. Verse 11 is the triumphal climax to this declaration, for three important names of God are found therein. The verse begins with "I, I am," a phrase that calls to mind the title, "I AM," the name by which God identified himself to Moses on Mount Sinai. The divine speaker of the verse then declares that he is "the Lord" (Jehovah from the Hebrew Yahweh). He reveals his role as redeemer by identifying himself as the only "savior" of this world. The word savior is the common Old Testament term used to describe the God of Israel. He is to be Israel's ultimate redeemer because he is also the "anointed one," or the Messiah. (Translated into Greek, the Aramaic word Messiah becomes Christ.) Therefore, the terms Savior, Messiah, and Christ all emphasize the importance of Jehovah's role in God's plan. The German scholar F. Delitzsch provides a helpful insight into the relationship between two of these terms:

[Savior] and Jehovah are kindred epithets here; just as in the New Testament the name Jehovah sets, as it were, but only to rise again in the name Jesus, in which it is historically fulfilled. Jehovah's precious self-manifestation in history [as in Isa. 43:11] furnished a pledge of the coming redemption. (Keil-Delitzsch, Commentary on the Old Testament 2:194.)

Thus, Jehovah promises Israel that he will eventually come as the Savior of this earth.

Centuries after Isaiah composed chapter 43, Joseph Smith borrowed some of Isaiah's terminology in his praise of the Lord in the preface to the marvelous revelation on the three degrees of glory: "Hear, O ye heavens, and give ear, O earth, and rejoice ye inhabitants thereof, for the Lord is God, and beside him there is no Savior." (D&C 76:1; see Isa. 1:2; 43:11.) This verse does not say that no other Gods exist, but rather that only Jehovah (Jesus Christ) is the Savior and through him alone is salvation. (See Hel. 5:9; 2 Ne. 25:20.) The first chapter of Genesis indicates that other Gods have been involved with this earth, but the Lord, in speaking to ancient Israel, wants it clearly understood that he is to be their sole savior. (See Gen. 1:26.)

Continuing in verse 12, the Lord charges Israel to accept her role as a special witness of him. In addition to foretelling his triumph, Israel is to serve as a second witness and to announce his role as the Savior to the earth. Members of covenant Israel are now fulfilling this charge as they send missionaries into the world to testify of Jesus Christ. (Bruce R. McConkie, CR, Apr. 1977, p. 135.)

Israel's Future Blessings (vs. 14-21)

The Lord continues his discourse by telling the manner in which he will protect and bless his chosen people:

14Thus says the LORD,

your Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel:

"For your sake I will send to Babylon

and break down all the bars,

and the shouting of the Chaldeans will be turned to lamentations.

15I am the LORD, your Holy One,

the Creator of Israel, your King."

16Thus says the LORD, who makes a way in the sea,

a path in the mighty waters,

17who brings forth chariot and horse, army and warrior;

they lie down, they cannot rise, they are extinguished,

quenched like a wick:

18"Remember not the former things,

nor consider the things of old.

19Behold, I am doing a new thing;

now it springs forth, do you not perceive it?

I will make a way in the wilderness

and rivers in the desert.

20The wild beasts will honor me,

the jackals and the ostriches;

for I give water in the wilderness, rivers in the desert,

to give drink to my chosen people,

21 the people whom I formed for myself

that they might declare my praise." (RSV)

These verses reiterate some inspired promises given by Isaiah in chapter 35 and foreshadow the even greater promises the prophet delivers in chapters 65 and 66. The promised blessings include freedom (v. 14), miracles in the sea (v. 16), protection from every enemy army (v. 17), a restoration (v. 19), and miracles in the desert (vs. 19-20). Isaiah concludes this short discourse by stating God's reason for providing these many blessings—the Lord hopes that his chosen people will declare his praise.

A closer look at some of the verses reveals the possibility of even greater blessings in store for the Lord's righteous people. For example, in verse 14, the Lord's promise that he will break down the bars of Babylon may be twofold: he may be promising release from physical prison or, since Babylon also represents the wicked world, from spiritual captivity. The promise of miracles at sea and protection from enemies suggests a new gathering of Israel and a new exodus to their land, in which the miracles attending the exodus from Egypt are reenacted.

As the gathering Israelites forget the "things of old" (v. 18), they will forget a variety of earlier experiences: physical captivity, spiritual bondage, life and practices in a period of apostasy, lesser laws of earlier dispensations, and so forth. Hence, the new things that will come forth might include a new gospel dispensation, new prophets, new scriptures, and so forth. The miracles of the desert and the animals honoring the Lord suggest a millennial period when complete harmony will exist between God, men, animals, and the earth.

So, finally, the Lord's chosen people will not just drink from the waters of the desert, but from the living waters of the gospel as well. They will share these waters with the beasts of the desert who represent perhaps, the Gentiles. Therefore, both the Gentiles and the Israelites will enjoy the gospel waters. (See John 7:37-39.)

Some events of the new exodus and gathering seem to have occurred within the past century. The return of many Jews to their desert homeland and the Mormon missionary work among Gentiles and Lamanites fulfill some of the promises in the prophecy. However, the complete gathering, with its great miracles and millennial society, has not yet taken place. Indeed, a prophet of this dispensation, Joseph Fielding Smith, has said that this prophecy (Isa. 43) applies to the Ten Tribes, who will journey past their enemies upon miraculous highways to a desert fruitful with water. (See Ludlow, A Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament, pp. 44-45.) Since other important remnants of Israel, especially the Ten Tribes, have yet to be gathered, Isaiah's prophecy cannot be fulfilled until they too return to Zion.

Before moving on to the last verses of Isaiah 43, an overview of the first three sections of the chapter is appropriate. The first verses (1-7) review God's creation of the earth and the Israelites' first exodus; the next section (vs. 8-13) highlights some roles between the Lord and Israel; the third segment (vs. 14-21) promises a latter exodus in preparation for a new creation or millennial era. These sections are structured both chronologically and chiastically with the most important idea in the middle of the chapter (v. 11), where the Lord promises that he alone is to be the Savior. Christ did come to earth during the meridian of time, long after the first exodus and centuries before the second; likewise, the declaration of his special role with Israel is placed between the accounts of the two gatherings. Following is a chiastic outline of Isaiah 43:1-21:

A. The Lord called to A'. New things to happen as the Lord

Israel in the past (v. 1) blesses his chosen people (vs. 18-21)

B. Protection given through B'. Water and fire are powerless before

fire and water (2) the Lord (16-17)

C. Four titles: Lord, Thy C'. Four titles: Lord, Holy One,

God, Holy One, Savior (3) Creator, King (15)

D. Israel was ransomed from D'. Israel will be freed from the East

the West (Egypt) (3-4) (Babylon) (14)

E. Gathering of covenant E'. None can stop the Lord's work

Israel promised (5-7) (gathering) (13)

F. Let all nations produce F'. Everything since the beginning

witnesses, if they can (8-9) testifies of God's work (13)

G. Israelites are God's G'. You (Israel) are God's witnesses,

witnesses, "saith the Lord" (10) "saith the Lord" (12)

H. No other God will be for H'. No strange God is among Israel

Israel (10) (12)

I. I AM the Lord (Yahweh),

there is no other Savior

(Messiah) (11)

As in most chiastic parallelism, the major idea in this chapter is emphasized at the pivot point and alluded to in other verses near the middle. The idea of the "oneness" of Israel's God is stressed in items H, I, and H' of the outline.

The second most important concept in a chiasmus is usually found near the beginning and end. In A and A' of the pattern above, the relationship between the Lord and Israel is stressed.

The third most important point is often presented twice, halfway between the middle and both ends of the chiasmus. Since a chiasmus divides into two parallel sections, a concept in the middle of each section easily reinforces the major ideas found at the ends of each section. In the example above, items C and C' repeat the concept found in the chiastic pivot point and give additional titles for the Lord.

The placement of the major concepts within a chiastic pattern can be outlined as follows:

Trial Scene between God and Israel (vs. 22-28)

In the last section of Isaiah 43, the Lord accuses Israel of rejecting her role as servant and messenger to the world. In a court scene presided over by the Lord, Israel is found sinful and is condemned to destruction and ridicule:

22"Yet you did not call upon me, O Jacob;

but you have been weary of me, O Israel!

23You have not brought me your

sheep for burnt offerings, or honored me with your sacrifices.

I have not burdened you with offerings,

or wearied you with frankincense.

24You have not bought me sweet cane with money,

or satisfied me with the fat of your sacrifices,

But you have burdened me with your sins,

you have wearied me with your iniquities.

25"I, I am He who blots out your transgressions for my own sake,

and I will not remember your sins.

26Put me in remembrance, let us argue together;

set forth your case, that you may be proved right.

27Your first father sinned,

and your mediators transgressed against me.

28Therefore I profaned the princes of the sanctuary,

I delivered Jacob to utter destruction and Israel to reviling." (RSV)

The Lord's accusation in these verses constitutes one of only two trial speeches in which the Lord opposes his chosen people Israel (the other is in Isa. 50:1-13). In both instances, the primary confrontation is between the Lord and the false pagan gods. the primary issue revolves around the question "Who is true God of this earth?"

In the scene comprising 43:22-28, Israel has apparently brought a charge against the Lord asking why she has been shamed in spite of the sacrifices her people have given (vs. 22-24, 28). God challenges Israel to prove her case in the Lord's court (v. 26), but she is unable to give any evidence of divine injustice. The Lord accuses Israel of sin (v. 27) and explains why he was obliged to act toward her as he did (v. 28).

In contrast to the promise of a future restoration in the first half of chapter 43, God recounts Israel's iniquities. Still, though the Lord employes the negative not (lo in Hebrew) seven times in the first three verses, his climactic negation is an affirmation: "thy sins I will not remember" (v. 25). This promise stands in sharp contrast to the anticipated harsh judgment; after the Lord has described Israel's hypocrisy, one would expect him to deliver a threat. Instead, he promises forgiveness; mercy instead of punishment is extended to Israel.

Verse 25 is a profound promise for those of God's children who repent and follow him—they will benefit from his atonement since he blots out their transgressions for his sake. In other words, Christ promised to be our Savior, and in order to fulfill his own covenants and "all righteousness," it was necessary for him to provide the atoning sacrifice. Isaiah later highlights the Lord's voluntary sacrifice in chapter 53 through a song about a suffering servant. Also, a modern prophet, Spencer W. Kimball, built upon verse 25 when he exhorted modern Israelites to forgive and forget the sins of others as the Lord forgives theirs. (CR, Oct. 1949, p. 133.)

After promising that he will not remember Israel's sins, the Lord challenges Israel to remember him (v. 26). He then reminds the people that their first father and leaders had sinned against him (v. 27). It is unclear who is meant by their first father. Some commentators have suggested Adam or Abraham, but the context and the parallelism of verses 27 and 28 strongly suggest Jacob as the first father who is being discussed. The parallelism matches the first father and mediators who have sinned (v. 27) with the priests and Jacob who will be punished (v. 28). However, all of the ancestors or "fathers" of Israel sinned somewhat as mortal beings, and Israel's ancestors who came out of Eygpt were especially noted for their sinful behavior. (See Isa. 43, footnote 27a.) In any case, because of Israel's earlier sins and the continued wickedness of the people, the Lord promises that he will deliver them up to destruction, curses (KJV), and humiliation.

A great variety of destructions followed Israel over the centuries after Isaiah recorded this warning. During the prophet's own lifetime, the northern tribes were taken captive. Over a century later, Judah was destroyed and her people taken captive to Babylon. Similar destruction and dispersion came when the Romans warred upon the Jews shortly after the time of Christ. Centuries of harassment and persecution by Christians and Moslems followed, and, finally, the minions of Hitler destroyed one-third of the Jews. The Lamanite branch of Israel has undergone similar persecution. Israel will yet suffer before millennial peace is finally established.

Although the harshness of these last verses contrasts with the promises found in most of the chapter, the ideas parallel the same pattern outlined earlier. Verse 22 continues the theme of the Lord's relationship with Israel (items A and A' on the outline), the fire and oil of Israel's sacrifices parallel the fire and water of the Lord's protection (vs. 23-24; B and B'), the titles and role of Jehovah are given (vs. 25-26; C, C', and I), and reasons for the scattering complement promises of the gathering (vs. 27-28; D and D'). Just as these verses build upon the themes found earlier in the chapter, they also lead naturally into the first verses of chapter 44, where Israel's role with the Lord is amplified, refreshing water is promised, and the names and titles of God are highlighted. In short, although the material we now find in Isaiah 40-47 is currently divided into eight units or chapters, it actually divides into many smaller segments, all of which revolve around the Lord's relationship with his chosen people. The four segments of chapter 43 complement this section of Isaiah, since they contain many of the Lord's titles and emphasize his role with Israel—only he is to be their Savior!

In conclusion, at least three major principles are developed in Isaiah 43: first, that there is only one Lord and Savior of this earth; second, the reasons for the scattering and promises for the gathering; and third, a combination of the first two concepts, the witness relationship between Israel and the Lord—as Israel fails in this role she is scattered, and as she testifies faithfully of the Lord, she is gathered. [^2] The witness relationship is very important for both parties, since Israel and the Lord will eventually testify of each other to the whole world. For now, Israel bears the responsibility of carrying God's word to the world. As she turns away from the Lord and refuses to take her message to others in peace and love, she will remain scattered among the nations in an atmosphere of war and hatred. But as she becomes the true servant of Christ, she will be blessed with a millennial society.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] This excludes the fifteen times the root shows up as a part of Isaiah's own name.
[^2] Clear chiastic patterns in the Hebrew. The concept of "there is no other God" shows up.
