Victor L. Ludlow, Isaiah: Prophet, Seer, and Poet ( 1982)

THE FALL OF BABYLON ISAIAH 46-47

Isaiah introduces no new themes in chapters 46 and 47, but does employ different poetic styles to reiterate two messages he delivered earlier: his prophecies on Babylon recorded in chapters 13 through 14 and his affirmation of the omnipotence of Jehovah in chapters 40-45. In chapters 46 and 47, Isaiah contrasts the impotence of the Babylonian gods with the supreme power of Israel's Jehovah. The Babylonian idols are carried from their defeated country into exile, while the God of Israel delivers his people from captivity and leads them to freedom.

While these prophecies are directed mainly to the Jews during the Babylonian exile, Isaiah's poetry also contains a universal warning against idol worship (46) and worldly ambition (47). "Idols" can represent any man-made object or endeavor that mortals esteem higher than God. In turn, the power of "Babylon" can symbolize the influences of wickedness that pervade the earth. Thus, these chapters are relevant today, for they warn us against the false trust we might place in earthly goods or powers.

The two chapters can be briefly outlined as follows:

I. Idolatry and Jehovah (Yahweh) compared (ch. 46)

A. The fall of Bel (vs. 1-4)

B. Yahweh is without equal (5-7)

C. Yahweh is Lord of the future (8-13)

II. Lament for Babylon (ch. 47)

A. Babylon's shame (vs. 1-5)

B. Babylon's abuse (6-9)

C. Babylon's sorcery (10-19)

Isaiah begins his first poem by comparing the helplessness of idols with God's constant care:

46 Bel is crouching, Nebo cringing.

Their idols are being loaded on animals, on beasts of burden,

carried off like bundles on weary beasts.

2They are cringing and crouching together,

powerless to save the ones who carry them,

as they themselves go off into captivity.

3'Listen to me, House of Jacob,

all you who remain of the House of Israel,

you who have been carried since birth,

whom I have carried since the time you were born.

4'In your old age I shall be still the same,

when your hair is gray I shall still support you.

I have already done so, I have carried you,

I shall still support and deliver you.' (JB)

Bel and Nebo were the two most prominent deities in the Assyro-Babylonian pantheon. Bel was originally the god of heaven and, as such, the father and chief of the gods. He was the equivalent of the Canaanite Baal ("lord") and was also known as Bel-Marduk, the god of the city of Babylon. Nebo, the god of wisdom, divine interpretation, and writing, was the chief god of Borsippa (a neighboring city south of Babylon) and the son of Marduk. His importance is demonstrated by the many royal names formed from Nebo (or Nabu) such as Nebuchadnezzar, Nabopolassar, and so on. Nebo later became the chief god of the neo-Babylonian or Chaldean dynasty that overthrew the Assyrians a century after Isaiah's death. Bel the chief god and Nebo the god of learning were the Babylonian apostate versions of Jehovah and the Holy Ghost.

Isaiah describes how the empire represented by these gods is about to fall while the gods' images are being moved from danger and loaded on beasts of burden. Ancient man believed that each god had a certain territory in which he was to be worshiped. (Though a god could be worshiped anywhere, it was most effective to worship him in his own land.) If a person moved to another location, he would then worship and give honor to the god of that particular land. Ancient man also believed that the lives of the gods were reflected in their own lives. For example, if the people of one city were defeated by the people of another city, they believed it to be because there had been a war in heaven in which the god of the victorious nation defeated their god. Because Isaiah understood the true nature of the Gods of heaven, he describes (vs. 3-4) the ways in which Israel's God is different from the gods of the Gentile nations.

Isaiah calls upon the remnant of Israel, particularly the kingdom of Judah, to listen as he describes the ways in which the Lord has protected them since the birth of the Israelite nations. (See Isa. 43:1-2.) God's actions contrast with those of the pagan gods, who are so helpless that they have to be carried from place to place. For example, Jehovah's power contrasts with that of Bel and his son Nebo, who are carried into captivity with those who worship them. While the ancients believed that the Babylonian gods had been defeated, Isaiah proclaims that Jehovah has never been defeated and has borne his people continually.

Isaiah next speaks in the first person as if he were the Lord and challenges the Jews to compare him with the idols:

5To whom can you compare me, equate me,

to whom claim I am similar, or comparable?

6These prodigals weigh out gold from their purses

and silver on the scales.

They engage a goldsmith to make a god

then worship and prostrate themselves before it.

7They lift it on their shoulders and carry it,

and put it where it is meant to stand.

It never moves from the spot.

You may invoke it, it never replies,

It never saves anyone in trouble. (JB)

The utter helplessness of the pagan gods is apparent, for the people have to pay a goldsmith not only to construct their idol but to provide the materials for the statue. Upon its completion, the people must pick up and carry the god to its final resting place. What good can a god like this do for anyone? The capstone to this section is the last two lines, in which the complete uselessness of idols is summed up: "You may invoke it, it never replies, it never saves anyone in trouble." What a contrast between the God of Israel and idols!

Jewish legends, as later recorded in the Book of Jasher, include a story about Abraham's encounter with idols. This story illustrates the helplessness of idols very well. Perhaps Isaiah's prophecy recalled this story to the minds of the ancient Israelites. It seems that Terah, Abraham's father, was an idolator and had in his home a whole room full of idols, which he regularly worshiped. As Abraham grew up in the home, he wondered about these gods. One day he asked his mother about them and how he could please them. She replied that by giving them food and drink, he could gain favor in their eyes. So Abraham went out and slew a lamb and prepared a meal for the gods. He took it in before the gods and went out. The next day he returned only to find the food still there. He thought to himself that perhaps he had not given enough and it angered the gods and therefore they did not eat. So he prepared more food and placed it before them. Again, the next day, it still was not eaten. Thinking that perhaps it was not cooked enough, he prepared yet another meal. But upon his return the third day, it still was not eaten.

Then, the account says, the Spirit of the Lord came upon Abraham, telling him that these idols were both deaf and blind, having neither life nor power because they were only wood and stone. Abraham went out, got an ax, and returned and destroyed the gods. Leaving the largest idol unharmed in the middle of the room, he placed the ax in its hand and went out. Terah, having heard all the noise, came in to see what had happened. Abraham explained that he had brought food and drink so that he might find favor in the eyes of the gods. "Upon placing the food before them," said Abraham, "the smaller gods put forth their hands to partake first before the great god could eat. This infuriated the great god who took the ax in hand and destroyed all the other gods." To this, Terah made the following reply:

41What is this tale that thou hast told? Thou speakest lies to me.

42Is there in these gods spirit, soul or power to do all thou hast told me? Are they not wood and stone, and have I not myself made them, and canst thou speak such lies, saying that the large god that was with them smote them? It is thou that didst place the hatchet in his hand, and then sayest he smote them all.

43And Abram answered his father and said to him: And how canst thou then serve these idols in whom there is no power to do anything? Can those idols in which thou trustest deliver thee? Can they hear thy prayers when thou callest upon them? Can they deliver thee from the hands of thy enemies, or will they fight thy battles for thee against thy enemies, that thou shouldest serve wood and stone which can neither speak nor hear? (BOJ 11:41-43.)

After speaking further to Terah, Abraham took the hatchet from the idol and broke the image into pieces as a demonstration of the idol's helplessness. (BOJ 11:21-49.)

Many apocryphal stories and the teachings of many prophets earlier than Isaiah continually reminded the Israelites of the helplessness of idols. Isaiah alludes to former witnesses in describing how God has been able not only to help Israel but to foretell the future and bring about the complete fulfillment of all his plans:

8Remember this and be dismayed,

stir your memories again, you sinners,

9remember things long past.

I am God unrivaled

God who has no like.

10From the beginning I foretold the future,

and predicted beforehand what is to be.

I say: My purpose shall last;

I will do whatever I choose.

11I call a bird of prey from the east,

my man of destiny from a far country.

No sooner is it said than done,

no sooner planned than performed.

12Listen to me, faint hearts,

who feel far from victory.

13I bring my victory near, already it is close,

my salvation will not be late.

I will give salvation to Zion,

my glory shall be for Israel. (JB)

This section is a further reminder to the exiles that their God had "from ancient times" accurately predicted future events (v. 10). Leaving the immediate theme of idols, God sternly rebukes the exiles' unwillingness to believe in his promises of salvation from exile (vs. 8, 12). He appeals to the long history of miracles he performed in behalf of his people, reaffirms his uniqueness as God, and again reminds Israel that he has foretold the future from the beginning, thereby leaving no doubt that he alone is God (vs. 8-10; compare Isa. 43:8-12.) The Jews seem to have lost trust and confidence in God, and for this reason God continually reaffirms his power in these closing verses.

Verse 11 appears to be another description of Cyrus coming like "a bird of prey from the east" to serve as God's agent. [^1] Continuing to give confidence to Israel, the Lord says that "no sooner is it said than done . . ." and the exiles are called upon to listen even though they "feel far from victory" (v. 12). "I bring my victory near," promises God (v. 13). Zion and Israel will finally have salvation, and the glory of the Lord will dwell with them once more.

Chapter 46, though proclaiming the helplessness of idols, has its focus in these last six verses. This chapter is one of hope, proclaiming salvation to God's people. Having earlier prophesied of Israel's salvation from the Babylonian exile through Cyrus the Great (Isa. 44-45), in chapter 46, Isaiah describes the uselessness of the Babylonian gods and the final triumph of Jehovah over them. Isaiah turns to a description of the fall of Babylon itself and prophesies that she will sit on the ground, dethroned, shamed, and deserted.

Chapter 47 is a beautifully written taunt song describing the destruction of Babylon. Using poetic parallelism and descriptive imagery, Isaiah speaks both to the people of his time and of all ages in portraying Babylon's shame:

47 Down with you! Sit in the dust,

virgin, daughter of Babylon.

Sit on the ground, dethroned, daughter of the Chaldaeans.

Never again will you be called tender and delicate.

2Take the millstones, grind the meal.

Remove your veil,

tie up your skirt, uncover your legs.

Wade through rivers.

3Let your nakedness be seen, and your shame exposed.

I am going to take vengeance and no one can stop me.

4Our redeemer, Yahweh Sabaoth [^2] his name,

the Holy One of Israel, says:

5Sit in silence and creep into shadows,

daughter of the Chaldaeans, for you will no longer be called sovereign lady of the kingdom. (JB)

"Chaldaeans" (vs. 1, 5) is a term with double meaning, used first to describe the inhabitants of southern Babylonia and second to represent magicians, sorcerers, astrologers, and diviners of all sorts. Isaiah prophesies that the daughter of the Chaldaeans will be brought low from her high-class background to the humiliating position of a slave.

Her work is done while she sits in the dust, a sign of extreme humiliation in Babylon. (Compare Jer. 13:18.) Isaiah uses six feminine imperative verbs in verse 2 to describe her status as a slave. While sitting, she has to "take" the two millstones that formed the common hand mill and "grind" the meal, a task of the lowest menial slaves. Furthermore she has to "remove" her veil and thus subject herself to public view, an inappropriate gesture for a married woman that many Arab women still shun to this day. Then she has to "tie" or lift up her skirt and "uncover" her legs in order to be unrestricted in her work. Finally, she must "wade" through the streams and canals that must be crossed daily by a working person in Babylon. Isaiah describes the punishment of Babylon, which is similar to the way the Israelites themselves were treated earlier in Mesopotamia.

Not only must a slave girl submit herself to hard labor, but she is also often sexually abused, as alluded to in verse 3. The promise that Babylon will have her nakedness revealed means that she will be seen for what she truly is. The final result will be Babylon's disgrace and her own recognition that she has fallen out of favor with men (and the Lord, v. 5).

Part of the reason for Babylon's punishment is that she has abused her power over the Israelites. Speaking for the Lord, Isaiah describes her oppression against the Lord's children and promises that she will soon be without a husband and children:

6I was angry with my people,

I profaned my heritage.

I had surrendered it into your hands,

but you showed them no mercy.

On the aged you laid your crushing yoke.

7You said, 'for ever

I shall be sovereign lady.'

You never took these things to heart

or pondered on their outcome.

8So listen now, voluptuous woman, lolling at ease

and saying to yourself,

'I, and none besides me.

I shall never be widowed, never know loss of children.'

9Yet both these things shall happen to you

both suddenly and on the same day.

Loss of children, widowhood, at once

will come to you;

in spite of all your witchcraft and the power of all your spells. (JB)

The Lord's denouncements upon ancient Babylon for her physical abuse of the Israelites can also easily apply to spiritual Babylon's religious oppression of God's children. As promised in similar words in Revelation 18:7-8, both Babylons will meet the same fate, in spite of their magical or evil powers.

As Isaiah concludes his taunt song, he analyzes the intellectual resources at Babylon's disposal. He recognized that the connection between Babylon's absolute power and her wisdom was based upon secular learning at best and manipulative deception at worst. One scholar describes Isaiah's insights about the power of this intellectual wisdom in Babylon as follows:

This is probably the first occasion in world-history when the way of making power absolute was not conceived in material terms such as armies, armaments, and financial resources, but in terms of the intellectual substructures of power. The literature of the neo-Babylonian empire furnishes us with enough knowledge of the diversity and profusion of Mesopotamia's intellectual and religious life during the period to lead us to understand this. (Westermann, Isaiah 40-66, p. 192.)

Isaiah warns Babylon about the ultimate danger of her wisdom:

10You were bold in your wickedness and said,

"There is no one to see me."

That wisdom and knowledge of yours

led you astray.

You said to yourself,

"I, and none besides me."

11A calamity shall fall on you

which you will not be able to charm away,

a disaster shall overtake you

which you will not be able to avert,

unforeseen ruin will suddenly descend on you.

12Keep to your spells then,

and all your sorceries,

for which you have worn yourself out since your youth.

Do you think they will help you?

Do you think they will make anyone nervous?

13You have spent weary hours with your many advisers.

Let them come forward now and save you, these who analyze the heavens,

who study the stars

and announce month by month

what will happen to you next.

14Oh, they will be like wisps of straw

and the fire will burn them.

They will not save their lives from the power of the flame.

No embers these, for baking, no fireside to sit by.

15This is what your wizards will be for you,

those men for whom you have worn yourself out since your youth.

They will all go off, each his own way,

powerless to save you. (JB)

It appears that in Isaiah's time, as today, astrologers predicted the course of events for the people and their communities. Evidently, the people of Israel placed more credence in the words of the astrologers than in the words of the prophets.

Despite Babylon's intellectualism and craftiness, she will stand helpless like the idols of her false gods in the face of destruction. Ancient Babylon fell and became an empty desert; there will be none to save spiritual Babylon from her ultimate disgrace (v. 15, see commentary on Isaiah 13-14).

On the other hand, the Lord is constantly ready to guide, protect, and save Israel and the righteous. (Isa. 45.) His salvation will come and rest in Zion for all Israel to enjoy. (Isa. 46:13.) All who desire to share God's glory must get "out from Babylon" and gather together "in Zion" in order to maintain the purity required of God's true children. (D&C 133:4-5.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Jehovah is the Lord of this earth (48:12-13, 17; compare 41:4, 28-29; 43:11-15, 22-24; 44:6). Jehovah is the Lord (50:2; 51:5, 15; 52:6; 53:4-12; 54:5; 55:5). Preamble ("these are the words" of the king [or of Moses]; Deut. 1:5). Preamble (vs. 1-2); Hearken, O Israel, to the Lord. He is selected before birth (foreordained) (v. 1). Isaiah, Israel's major prophet at the end of the eighth century B.C., was the last great prophet before the scattering of Israel. Elijah the Prophet to return to the earth. (Mal, 4:5-6; 3 Ne. 24-25; D&C 98:16-17; D&C 110:13-16; JS-H 1:36-39.) April 3, 1836, Kirtland Temple; on the same day, Moses visited Joseph Smith and restored the keys for the gathering of Israel. A new temple will be built in Jerusalem. (Isa. 60:13; Zech. 8:7-9; Ezek. 40:48; D&C 124:36-37; MS 52:740; HC 5:423.) Cheyne, The Prophecies of Isaiah 2:4; Beacon Bible Commentary, p. 130; Ottley, The Book of Isaiah According to the Septuagint, p. 329.
[^2] God can predict things before they occur (48:3-9, 14-16; compare 41:21-29; 45:19-21). Israel's suffering (50:1-3; 51:17-23; 57:3-58:7). Historical prologue (the acts of the king or the Lord with Israel are reviewed; Deut. 1:6-4:49). Historical prologue (3-8a); the Lord reviews his earlier actions with Israel. He is hidden in the Lord's hand (v. 2). Jesus Christ personally fulfilled the Father's promises to Jacob. Descendants of Judah to gather. (Isa. 11:12; Jer. 16:14-21; Zech. 2:11-12; 10:6-9, 12; 1 Ne. 19:13-17; 2 Ne. 10:7-8; Ether 13:11-12; D&C 110:1; 111:1; JS-H 1:40; HC 4:456; 5:336-37.) In 1881, only one out of three hundred of the world's Jews were in Palestine; in 1882, Russian May Laws resulted in large-scale emigration (mostly to the United States) and the first major immigration wave to Palestine; other waves followed, until by 1980, approximately one out of five Jews were in Israel. A leader named David . . . will lead Israel. (Isa. 11:1-6; 55:3-4; Ezek. 37:21-25; Jer. 23:3-8; 30:3-9; Hosea 3:4-5; Zech. 3:8-9; 6:11-13; HC 6:253; HC 4:457.) Cleon Skousen, Treasures from the Book of Mormon 1:1172; VIP, p. 113; DNTC 2:129; Joseph F. McConkie, His Name Shall Be Joseph, pp. 111-20.
