Victor L. Ludlow, Isaiah: Prophet, Seer, and Poet ( 1982)

ISRAEL, ISRAEL, ISRAEL IN THE LAST DAYS ISAIAH 48-49

Rarely does Isaiah take a single topic and develop it extensively in a given chapter; he usually combines three or four themes by weaving segments of each in and out of his writings throughout the course of many chapters. Any given topic is customarily treated for a few verses, abandoned, then emphasized and expanded when it surfaces in later verses and chapters.

As one studies Isaiah's literary tapestry, he admires the overwhelming beauty of the entire scene created by the myriads of recurring themes so masterfully interwoven by the grand artist. In addition, he can study an individual thread of a message and contemplate its composition and setting as it is woven into the tapestry of chapters.

Chapters 48 and 49 comprise a tapestry that combines threads already spun in chapters 40-47; they intertwine them with some new themes that are emphasized further in chapters 50-58. They both review chapters 40-47 and preview chapters 50-58. Here are a few of the earlier themes repeated in chapters 48 and 49:

Most of the themes mentioned here are found also in chapters 50-58. However, the role of Cyrus is not mentioned or even alluded to in the later chapters. Also, God's power to know the future is alluded to only in 55:8-13. Instead of witnessing that God can predict the future, Isaiah prophesies in chapters 50-58 what the Lord will do. Most of his promises are positive, and the ways in which Israel will be blessed become the dominant message. The following list shows where four of the above themes are repeated in chapters 50-58:

Isaiah gradually shifts emphasis in chapters 48 and 49 by moving from the context of his own age toward the latter days, and from a voice of warning to a voice of promise. Also, his tone becomes more hopeful as he anticipates the fulfillment of the Lord's promises through the work of his servants and the gathering of Israel.

It is no wonder, then, that the Book of Mormon leaders often quoted Isaiah 48 and 49 as they taught the Nephites about their destiny. In fact, chapters 48 and 49 are the first Isaianic chapters to be quoted in their entirety in the Book of Mormon. (1 Ne. 20-21.) Also, approximately one-third of the Isaianic verses in the Book of Mormon containing major changes are located in these two chapters. Therefore, as the New Jewish Version of these chapters is quoted throughout this text, the Book of Mormon changes will be added in italics. Some of these changes help to clarify passages that have perplexed scholars over the centuries. For example, C. Westermann states that there are "serious textual difficulties" in chapter 48 and that, so far, "editors have not succeeded in finding any convincing solution." He added that editors almost unanimously agree that chapter 49 contains additions by later scribes and that "we have to take account of transpositions, and also omissions." (Isaiah 40-66, pp. 195, 200, 213.) Interestingly, the Book of Mormon does support the premise that a few additions and even more omissions were made to the Isaiah text of chapters 48 and 49. The changes will be highlighted later.

The format of chapter 48 is very similar to a pattern used by Moses in the Book of Deuteronomy and by ancient kings in their treaties. The classical format of a treaty between a king and his vassal or, as Moses organized it, a covenant between the Lord and his people, has the following elements:

Although in a slightly different order, the same six elements are present in Isaiah 48:

These will each be discussed in turn.

Preamble (vs. 1-2)

Perhaps the best introduction to chapter 48 is by Nephi:

Hear ye the words of the prophet, ye who are a remnant of the house of Israel, a branch who have been broken off; hear ye the words of the prophet, which were written unto all the house of Israel, and liken them unto themselves, that ye may have hope as well as your brethren from whom ye have been broken off; for after this manner has the prophet written. (1 Ne. 19:24.)

Isaiah's own words of introduction are:

48 Hearken and listen to this,

O House of Jacob,

Who bear the name Israel

And have issued from the waters of Judah,

Or out of the waters of baptism,

Who swear by the name of the

LORD

And invoke the God of Israel—

Though they swear not in truth and sincerity—

2Nevertheless for you are called after the Holy City

And you do not lean on the God of

Israel, who is the Lord of hosts, Yea whose name is LORD of Hosts.

(NJV, italicized phrases from 1 Ne.)

A number of words and phrases are added in the 1 Nephi 20 rendition of these verses. The most significant addition is the phrase identifying the "waters of Judah" as the "waters of baptism" (v. 1).

This addition fits quite well within the verse, since the people are called first by their natural name as descendants of Jacob and then by their covenant title as followers of Israel. A parallelism naturally develops if the verse is also interpreted to mean that people come first out of the "waters of Judah" (the amniotic fluids of the womb, or the "loins"; RSV, NIV, and other translations) and then out of the "waters of baptism," representing a covenant or spiritual birth. The covenant then continues through the first verses as the people also make oaths in God's name and are then called after the name of his holy city.

Interestingly, the phrase "or out of the waters of baptism" was not in the original 1830 edition of the Book of Mormon, but appeared first in the 1840 printing. Latter-Day Saint scholar Daniel H. Ludlow provides some interesting background on this phrase:

The term "or out of the waters of baptism" did not appear in the first edition of the Book of Mormon. It first appeared in the edition of 1840 on page 53, and the sentence in which it appeared was punctuated as follows: "Hearken and hear this, O house of Jacob, who are called by the name of Israel, and are come forth out of the waters of Judah, (or out of the waters of baptism,) who swear by the name of the Lord," etc. It is not absolutely clear who was responsible for the insertion of this phrase, although the title page of this edition indicates that it was the "Third Edition, Carefully Revised by the Translator" and was published in Nauvoo, Illinois.

In the "Committee Copy" of the Book of Mormon that was used by Elder James E. Talmage and his committee in making the changes for the 1920 edition, the words "or out of the waters of baptism" were not printed in the text although they had been inserted in red ink in parentheses. However, the parentheses were crossed out by red pencil. These words are printed in the current edition of the Book of Mormon without the parentheses. (CSBM, p. 120.)

It seems unlikely that the additional phrase came from the prophet Isaiah himself or was inserted by Nephi in his copy of the text. Most likely, Joseph Smith inserted it to identify or amplify the phrase "out of the waters of Judah," a phrase that may have implied baptism to the ancient Israelites but that is meaningless to modern readers. Latter-day Saint scholar Hugh Nibley feels it was Joseph Smith's prerogative as translator to insert the clarifying phrase. (Since Cumorah, p. 151.)

As indicated earlier in the discussion on Isaiah chapter 1, the ordinance of baptism was known to the Jewish people. (See Moses 6:64-65.) It appears that Isaiah was rebuking those in Israel who called themselves Israelites because of their lineage, but who broke the commandments and covenants that true Israelites should maintain. Their hypocrisy is emphasized in verse 2, especially in the Book of Mormon translation; they called themselves a part of God's community, but did not rely upon him for spiritual guidance. Claus Westermann explains the distinction between the lineage and covenant relationships of Israel:

The people addressed are the 'house of Jacob'. Strictly speaking, this means Jacob's own family. This is then explained in the first two appositions—those who bear the name of the patriarch Jacob and are descended from Judah. This indicates the first basis upon which the history of Israel rests—that solidarity, initiated by the blessing, which reaches back beyond the clans (north and south) to unite the generation now alive with the patriarchs who had received the promise of a future for the chosen people. The further appositions all refer to the other bases of Israel's history—her worship. (Isaiah 40-66, pp. 196-97.)

The term Israel appears frequently in Isaiah's writings, particularly after chapter 47, and the prophet applies it in at least three ways to mean blood Israel, covenant Israel, or the land of Israel. Blood Israelites are the literal descendants of Jacob or Israel (the "house of Jacob," v. 1). Covenant Israelites are those who accept the God and covenants of Israel (and call themselves Israel, v. 1; see Isa. 44:5). Land Israelites are the inhabitants of the land that was granted to the tribes of Israel, the area called Canaan, the Holy Land, or Palestine. (In chapter 49, Isaiah promises that a "covenant people" will be restored to their ancestral land as they are gathered from afar—in other words, covenant Israelites will also become land Israelites; vs. 8, 12, 22.) In reading Isaiah's prophecies concerning the Israelites in chapters 48 and 49, one must pay careful attention in order to understand which group of Israelites the prophet is addressing.

Historical Prologue (vs. 3-8a)

As Isaiah reviews Israel's covenant relationship with the Lord, he stresses the Lord's foreknowledge (italics indicate passages added and brackets mark segments omitted in 1 Ne. 20):

3 Behold long ago, I foretold things that happened,

From My mouth they issued, and I announced them;

Suddenly I acted [and they came to pass].

4 And I did it because I know how stubborn you are

(Your neck is like an iron sinew

And your forehead bronze),

5 Therefore I told you long beforehand,

Announced things to you ere they happened—

And I showed them that you might not say, "My idol caused them,

My carved and molten images ordained them."

6 You have heard all this; look, must you not acknowledge it?

As of now, I announce to you new things,

Well-guarded secrets you did not know.

7 Only now are they created, and not of old;

Before today you had not heard them;

When they were declared unto you;

You cannot say, "I knew them already."

8 You had never heard, you had never known,

Your ears were not opened of old. (NJV)

In these verses, the Lord gives some reasons why he reveals things of the future to his people. His aim is not simply to enlighten Israel about her destiny or to prepare her for future dangers or blessings. Instead, he foretells some events (about which no one else can prophesy) so that when they do finally occur, the stubborn Israelites cannot claim that their pagan idols caused the events. Eventually, all people will recognize that the Lord truly did foretell and bring about all that he promised.

As Isaiah spoke, he prophesied new things that had not been recorded earlier. In verse 7, he states that Israel had not heard of these words. Verse 8 suggests that even when the prophetic words were delivered, they did not really hear them or know what they meant. Thus, Isaiah could have been delivering new prophecies that were available but that the Israelites did not understand. In any case, Isaiah gave new, inspired insights to help his people realize that God's foreordained and prophetic work comes about through divine powers and not through idols or false gods.

Stipulations of the Covenant (vs. 8b-13a)

The Lord explains that his efforts are in fulfillment of the covenants made with Israel. He promises that in spite of Israel's rebellion, he will not completely destroy her; still, he will not let her disregard her covenant without punishment:

8b Though I know that you are treacherous,

That you were called a rebel from birth,

9 Nevertheless for the sake of My name I control My wrath;

To My own glory, I am patient with you,

And I will not destroy you.

10 See, I refine you, but not as silver;

I test you in the furnace of affliction.

11 For My sake, My own sake, do I act—

Lest [My name] is dishonored!

I will not give My glory to another.

12 Listen to Me, O Jacob,

Israel, whom I have called:

I am He—I am the first,

And I am the last as well.

13 My own hand founded the earth,

My right hand spread out the skies. (NJV)

Verse 10 contains a discrepancy between the King James Version and the Book of Mormon. The King James Version phrase "but not with silver" is deleted from the Book of Mormon. It disrupts the flow of the verse so badly that many commentators have said that its "meaning is obscure," that it has "defeated all commentators up to the present," and that it was probably "altered by a scribe who took the meaning to be 'I have not sold thee for money.'" [^1] However, by omitting the phrase "but not with silver," the verse becomes simple and clear. Perhaps this verse is an example of a "gloss," an addition made by a later scribe in order to clarify the verse as he understood it. If so, the gloss was assuredly written after 600 B.C. when the Brass Plates of Laban were taken from Jerusalem, because the phrase is not quoted in the Book of Mormon version of this verse.

In verse 13, the Lord's creation of the heavens and earth is reviewed; in a structure of synonymous parallelism, Isaiah records that the Lord's "hand founded the earth" and his "right hand spread out the skies." Identifying the Lord's hand of power as the right hand helps explain why the right hand is traditionally favored in secular society and in religious matters. President Joseph Fielding Smith quoted this Isaiah passage and explained that "showing favor to the right hand or side is not something invented by man but was revealed from the heavens in the beginning. There are numerous passages in the scriptures referring to the right hand, indicating that it is a symbol of righteousness and was used in the making of covenants." (AGQ 1:156.)

Perpetuation of the Covenant (vs. 13b-15)

The Lord petitions assembled Israel to sustain his work among them:

13b I call unto them, let them stand up.

14 Assemble, all of you, and listen!

Who among you foretold these things unto them:

"He whom the LORD loves

And he will fulfill his word which he has declared by them;

And he shall work His will against Babylon,

And, with His might, against Chaldea"?

15 Also, says the Lord; I the Lord

I, I predicted and I called him to declare,

I have brought him and he shall succeed in his mission. (NJV)

To fulfill his purposes, the Lord will bring forth a servant who will foretell the future, fulfill the Lord's word, wield power over Babylon, and ultimately succeed in his foreordained mission. Although Isaiah or Cyrus could possibly fit the description of this servant, the Lord Jesus Christ best exemplifies these qualities. It seems strange that the Lord Jehovah, who is delivering this message through Isaiah, would speak of himself in the third person as "he" and "him." Yet the Lord might be a spokesman for God the Father in delivering the Father's promise about Jesus Christ. Thus Jesus could deliver a prophecy about himself and still use the third person. Identifying the servant as Jesus Christ enriches the interpretation of these verses. The Lord, Jehovah, asks assembled Israel to recognize him as Heavenly Father's servant and to believe that through him all things will be fulfilled.

Witnesses of the Covenant (v. 16)

The Lord himself testifies of his relationship to Heavenly Father as he speaks further to Israel:

16 Draw near to Me [and hear this]:

From the beginning, I did not speak in secret;

From the time anything was declared [existed], have spoken [was there].

"And now the Lord GOD has sent me, endowed with His spirit." (NJV)

The Book of Mormon modifies verse 16 slightly by changing one statement about the Lord. The idea that "since the beginning, the Lord has existed" is changed to "when anything has been declared, the Lord has spoken it." In essence, the Book of Mormon version describes the Lord's role as being active rather than passive.

The verse concludes with what appears to be Isaiah's own witness. He testifies through the Spirit that the Lord God ("my lord, Jehovah") sent him. Thus, verse 16 contains the testimonies of both divine and mortal beings, for both the Lord and Isaiah bear witness to the people.

Blessings and Curses (vs. 17-22)

Isaiah's covenant pronouncement concludes with a listing of opposites, the good and bad that will befall Israel depending upon her actions:

17 Thus said the LORD your Redeemer,

The Holy One of Israel:

I have sent him, the LORD am your God,

Instructing you for your own benefit.

Guiding you in the way you should go, has done it.

18 If only you would heed My commands!

Then your prosperity would be like a river,

Your triumph like the waves of the sea.

19 Your offspring would be as many as the sand,

Their issue as many as its grains.

Their name would never be cut off

Or obliterated from before Me.

20 Go forth from Babylon,

Flee from Chaldea!

Declare this with loud shouting,

Announce this,

Bring out the word to the ends of the earth!

Say: "The LORD has redeemed

His servant Jacob!"

21 They have known no thirst

Though He led them through parched places;

He made water flow for them from the rock;

He cleaved the rock and water gushed forth.

22 And notwithstanding he has done all this, and greater also,

There is no safety—said the LORD—for the wicked. (NJV)

It seems the sad nature of many that, in spite of the great blessings promised them for righteousness, they choose to rebel against the Lord. Instead of receiving peace, joy, and great posterity, they choose confusion, misery, and isolation. These concluding verses review what the Lord has promised his people. Yet in spite of his power and all that he does, he cannot overrule the eternal laws of justice and give eternal "peace" (KJV) to the wicked (v. 22). As this chapter emphasizes, God reminds the Israelites of his covenants with them but cannot force them to receive his blessings.

COVENANT ISRAEL'S COURT SCENE

In chapter 49, Isaiah builds upon the message of chapter 48, addressing scattered Israelites throughout the ages. While chapter 48 may apply more to the ancient members of covenant Israel, chapter 49 speaks to modern Israelites who claim to be part of the covenant people. Every Latter-day Saint should carefully study this chapter to see how he or she can become a true member of the house of Israel.

President Wilford Woodruff mentioned one reason this chapter is important for Latter-day Saints:

The revelations that are in the Bible, the predictions of the patriarchs and prophets who saw by vision and revelation the last dispensation and fulness of times plainly tell us what is to come to pass. The 49th chapter of Isaiah is having its fulfillment. (SOT, pp. 96, 112.)

Isaiah reviewed in chapter 48 Israel's covenant relationship by following a pattern developed in ancient contracts and treaties. He seems to follow a similar pattern in chapter 49 by modeling his discourse after an ancient court scene or contract lawsuit. In an ancient lawsuit, after one party broke a covenant or contract, the other party (the plaintiff) could call the accused before a judge or the elders of the community. A court would then be convened, following four steps: the summons, the plaintiff's charge, the defendant's plea, and the judge's indictment. Chapter 49 follows these four steps.

The Summons (vs. 1-6)

The Lord himself issues the summons to scattered Israel. However, since Isaiah delivers the summons, it appears that he is talking about himself as he speaks about his role with Israel:

49 And again: hearken O house of Israel,

All you who are broken off and are driven out,

Because of the wickedness of the pastors of my people;

Yea, all you who are broken off, who are scattered abroad,

Who are of my people, O house of Israel.

Listen, O coastlands, to me,

And give heed, O nations afar:

The LORD appointed me before I was born,

He named me while I was in my mother's womb,

2 He made my mouth like a sharpened blade,

He hid me in the shadow of His hand.

And He made me like a polished arrow;

He concealed me in His quiver.

3 And He said to me, "You are My servant,

Israel in whom I glory."

4 I thought, "I have labored in vain,

I have spent my strength for empty breath."

But my case rested with the LORD,

My recompense was in the hands of my God.

5 And now the LORD has resolved—

He who formed me in the womb to be His servant—

To bring back Jacob to Himself,

That Israel may be restored to Him.

And I have been honored in the sight of the LORD,

My God has been my strength.

6 For He has said:

"It is too little that you should be My servant

In that I raise up the tribes of Jacob

And restore the survivors of Israel:

I will also make you a light of nations,

That My salvation may reach the ends of the earth."

(NJV, italicized phrases added)

The Book of Mormon version of this chapter includes a number of phrases not found in any biblical texts. The addition specifically directs the message to the scattered remnants of Israel, while the biblical texts imply that Isaiah's message is directed to the world at large. This distinction is important because when the Lord's servant is introduced later in verse 1, the reader more clearly understands that the servant has stewardship over a specific community.

These six verses comprise one of the four recognized "servant songs" of Isaiah (along with 42:1-4; 50:4-9; and 52:13-53:12; see pp. 358-60). Various scholars offer numerous possible identities for this servant: Isaiah, the nation Israel, Jesus Christ, and even Joseph Smith. [^2]

In order to appreciate how the identity of the servant might be someone besides Isaiah, who authored the servant song, a few important characteristics of the servant will be listed and then some possible reasons will be given explaining why Israel, Jesus Christ, or Joseph Smith might fit the description of the promised servant:

Israel: Elder Bruce R. McConkie states that Israelites were chosen for their particular lineage based upon their worthiness in the premortal life and the foreknowledge of God. (MD, p. 216.)

Jesus Christ: Abraham records that Jesus was called before the earth was organized. (Abr. 3:27; see Moses 4:1-4; Like 1:31; 2:21.)

Joseph Smith: Joseph of Egypt prophesied of Joseph Smith, and Joseph Smith testified that he was foreordained to be a prophet in this dispensation. (2 Ne. 3:15; D&C 127:2; TPJS, p. 365.)

Israel: The servants of the Lord through the chosen lineage have been hid "from the word with Christ." (D&C 86:8-9.)

Jesus Christ: For four thousand years Jehovah did his work hidden from men until he finally came to earth himself. (Isa. 52:6.)

Joseph Smith: He was among those addressed by the Lord in the last days who was hid up. (D&C 86:9.)

Israel: This people has been prepared by the Lord to receive their proper calling. (D&C 136:31; Isa. 48:12, 17.)

Jesus Christ: He learned obedience in all things through suffering and lived a perfect life. (Heb. 5:8-9; 3 Ne. 12:48.)

Joseph Smith: The prophet specifically quoted this characteristic in relation to himself. (TPJS, p. 304; HC 5:401.)

Israel: Ancient Israelites were often discouraged, and modern members of Christ's kingdom sometimes believe they have failed in their opportunities. (Isa. 49:14, 21, 24; D&C 84:3-5; 124:49-50.)

Jesus Christ: The Messiah was rejected by his own people. (John 1:11; Luke 19:14; D&C 39:3.)

Joseph Smith: The modern prophet eloquently expressed his discouragement while imprisoned in Liberty Jail. (D&C 121:1-6; 122:1-4, see also D&C 3:4; 21:7-8; 24:7-9.)

Israel: The servants of covenant Israel will assist in gathering the rest of Israel, including the Lamanites, Ten Tribes, and the Jews. (Jacob 5:61-75; D&C 133:30-32; compare Gen. 49:22-26.)

Jesus Christ: Although Israel was not gathered during the Savior's mortal ministry, he visited the remnants of Israel after his resurrection and prophesied concerning their gathering. (Matt. 23:37; 3 Ne. 15:11-24; John 10:16; Jacob 5:50-53.)

Joseph Smith: Joseph received the keys for gathering Israel. (D&C 90:3-4; 110:11; 2 Ne. 3:13.)

In answer to the question "Who is the servant referred to in Isaiah 49:1-6?" it seems that the limited evidence suggests that the term "servant" generally applies to the house of Israel's major representatives throughout the ages:

It appears that the servant song in chapter 49 is talking more about Ephraim than the other possibilities; however, more important than identifying the exact servant described here is understanding the servant's characteristics and desiring to incorporate his traits into our own lives so that we can become true servants of the Lord. (See Jacob 5:61-63.)

The Plaintiff's Charge (vs. 7-13)

The Lord delivers the accusation to Israel, reminding her of the actions that fulfilled his obligations in their contract or covenant:

7 Thus said the LORD,

The Redeemer of Israel, his Holy One,

To the despised being,

To the abhorred nation,

To the slave of rulers:

Kings shall see and stand up;

Nobles, and they shall prostrate themselves—

To the honor of the LORD who is faithful,

[To the Holy One of Israel who chose you.]

8 Thus said the LORD:

In an hour of favor I answer you, O isles of the sea,

And on a day of salvation I help you—

I created you and appointed you my servant for a covenant people—

Restoring the land,

Allotting anew the desolate holdings,

9 Saying to the prisoners, "Go free,"

To those who are in darkness, "Show yourselves."

They shall pasture along the roads,

On every bare height shall be their pasture.

10 They shall not hunger or thirst,

Hot wind and sun shall not strike them;

For He who loves them will lead them,

He will guide them to springs of water.

11 I will make all My mountains a road,

And My highways shall be built up.

12 And then, O House of Israel,

Look! These are coming from afar,

These from the north and the west,

And these from the land of Sinim.

13 Shout, O heavens, and rejoice, O earth!

For the feet of those who are in the east shall be established;

Break into shouting, O hills!

For they shall be smitten no more;

For the LORD has comforted His people,

And has taken back His afflicted ones in love. (NJV)

Again, the Book of Mormon version of these verses contains a number of changes.

In verse 8 the Lord not only promises Israel's return from the far continents beyond Asia (the isles of the sea) but also indicates the role covenant Israel will play in that gathering: "The picture refers primarily not to the return from the Babylonian exile, but to the reestablishment of the Davidic kingdom under the Messiah when all the true seed of Abraham will receive their promised inheritance." (Young, The Book of Isaiah 2:279.) All this will be done in an "acceptable time" (KJV) to the Lord, sometime in the last days. (D&C 93:51.)

The prisoners set free (v. 9) could represent these who will live when "light shall break forth among them that set in darkness, and it shall be the fulness of my gospel." (D&C 46:28.) In other words, the people will be freed from the bondage of false beliefs and traditions by the restoration of the gospel. Also, the Lord might be promising freedom from spirit prison and the bonds of sin for those who repent, as well as liberation from the grave for all of God's children. (D&C 128:22.)

The gathering promised in verse 12 will be so extensive that remnants will come from as far as the land of Sinim. There has been much debate upon the location of Sinim. Some scholars believe it to be a place near Aswan, Egypt. (See Westermann, Isaiah 40-66, p. 216.) Others feel that the deserts of Sinim in Egypt form no suitable contrast to the gathering from the north and the sea as promised in the earlier part of the verse, since Egypt is too close to the Holy Land. Some scholars suggest that China is the land of Sinim:

Quite possibly, therefore, the reference is to a district to the east, so far away that it stands for a quarter of the earth. China may be that reference. The Arabic tsin may favor this. One cannot, however, be dogmatic. What is important is that a faraway district, a quarter of the earth, is intended, for the return to God in Christ will be worldwide. (Young, The Book of Isaiah 2:294; see Slotki, Isaiah, p. 12.)

Whether Sinim is near or far from Jerusalem, the fact that Israelites gather from there seems to be an unexpected miracle.

The Defendant's Plea (vs. 14, 21, 24)

In response to the Lord's charge of a broken covenant and his claim of continual involvement with Israel, the defendant, Israel, gives three complaints: (1) the Lord has forsaken her; (2) she is left alone without any friends, childless and captive (vs. 14, 21); and (3) she fears she has been robbed of her heritage (v. 24).

The Judge's Indictment (vs. 15-20, 22-23, 25-26)

The Lord answers all three complaints in turn, promising the solutions he will bring about. As one complaint is answered, Israel responds with another:

14 Behold, Zion says,

"The LORD has forsaken me,

My Lord has forgotten me."

But he will show that he has not.

15 Can a woman forget her baby,

Or disown the child of her womb?

Though she might forget,

I could never forget you, O house of Israel.

16 See, I have engraved you

On the palms of My hands,

Your walls are ever before Me.

17 Swiftly your children are coming against

Those who ravaged yea, and those who ruined

you shall leave you.

18 Look up all around you and see:

They are all assembled, they are come to you!

As I live —declares the LORD—

You shall don them all like jewels,

Deck yourself with them even like a bride.

19 As for your ruins and desolate places

And your land laid waste—

You shall soon be crowded with settlers,

First complaint: Israel is forgotten

The Lord's response

The Lord's promise

While destroyers stay far from you.

20The children you though you had lost

Shall yet say in your hearing,

"The place is too crowded for me;

Make room for me to settle." (NJV)

In verse 14, Isaiah portrays Israel's lost faith in the Lord's ability to save her. The prophet concludes by asserting that the Lord will no more forget the house of Israel than a mother will forget her child.

In verse 16, the Lord promises that his hands will bear witness of his efforts for Zion. Just as a workman's hands often indicate his type of manual labor, the Lord's hands will reveal the nature of his labors: nail prints in his hands remind Israel of his fulfillment of the Atonement covenant. (Zech. 12:10; 13:6; D&C 45:48-53.)

Walls will stand as a perpetual memorial to the successful work of the Lord (v. 16), and her numbers will grow so quickly that there will be scarcely any room for all the people (vs. 17-20).

After Israel is promised a future restoration with great numbers, she complains that she has so few friends and children as a beginning:

21 And you will say to yourself,

"Who bore these for me

When I was bereaved and barren,

Exiled and disdained—

By whom, then, were these reared?

I was left all alone—

And where have these been?"

22 Thus said the Lord GOD:

I will raise My hand to nations

And lift up My ensign to peoples;

And they shall bring your sons in their bosoms

And carry your daughters on their backs.

23 Kings shall tend your children,

Their queens shall serve you as nurses.

They shall bow to you, face to the ground,

And lick the dust of your feet.

And you shall know that I am the LORD—

Those who trust in Me shall not be ashamed. (NJV)

Second complaint:

Israel is childless

The Lord's promise

Verses 22 and 23 answer Israel's question as to how she will grow so quickly. Her growth will come from the Gentile nations who will assist both temporally and spiritually to gather Israel. (D&C 77:11; 1 Ne. 22:3.) It is a paradox that the barren and widowed woman would find herself with so many children, but the gathering of Israel will be so sudden that it will catch her by complete surprise.

This gathering of Israel through the aid of foreign nations is taking place today. Since the Church was restored in 1830, the Jewish population in the Holy Land has grown from seven thousand to over three million people. Whereas in 1830 only one out of five hundred Jews resided in Palestine, one out of five now live in the modern state of Israel. Many foreign nations have supported the movement: Britain assisted in the establishment of a Jewish homeland in Palestine after World War I; Holland and Denmark helped protect many Jews from the holocaust; the United States, Russia, and others in the United Nations voted for the creation of a Jewish free state in 1947; the United States and France assisted Israel with military equipment in the first decades of her existence after 1948; and German reparation payments and large contributions from the United States and other nations have helped Israel financially. Truly, many nations have helped provide for the Jews over the centuries, assisting in their return and reestablishment as a nation.

Isaiah was not the only prophet who recorded many prophecies about Israel in the last days. Most Old Testament prophets spoke of this time immediately preceding the Millennium. Taken collectively, they have recorded dozens, even hundreds, of prophecies about the last days. However, even when different prophets discuss the same events, they do not record them in the same order; thus, it is difficult for us to determine the exact sequence of these prophecies.

The prophets also would often mix different types of prophecies (on social conditions, political developments, miracles, signs, etc.) and then leave it to us to sort them out and to see how they might interrelate. We could select hundreds of prophecies and then compile many lists of different types of prophecies about the last days (such as weather phenomena, social disturbances, wars, growth of the Church, return and role of the Ten Tribes, building of Zion in Jackson County, return of the Jews, etc.). We would often find more than one prophet foretelling the same event (for example, the moon not giving forth light or turning "into blood"—Isa. 13:10; 60:19; Ezek. 32:7; Joel 2:10, 31; 3:15; Acts 2:20; D&C 29:14; 34:9; 45:42; 88:87). When prophets living in different times and places say the same thing, their prophecies must be important and will be fulfilled as testified by these many witnesses. (See Amos 3:7.)

Of the many possible lists of prophecies of the last days, the following list includes only a selection of scriptures about Jews in the last days. The references are from prophets living in different dispensations (including our own) and on different continents. These prophecies were not yet fulfilled in 1830 when the Church was organized, but some of them have since been fulfilled (or have begun to be fulfilled), and all of them must be fulfilled before the Millennium is over. (For further lists of Old Testament prophecies about the last days, see CSOT, pp. 23-62.)

The following chart shows some of the major prophecies about the Jews that have been fulfilled since 1830. It includes key dates and events surrounding their fulfillment.

Prophecies Pertaining to the Return of Judah That Have Been Fulfilled or at Least Partially Fulfilled

Many other important prophecies about the Jews in the last days remain to be fulfilled:

Prophecies Pertaining to the Return of Judah That Are Largely Still in the Future

This list highlights only some major prophecies about the Jews in the last days; similar prophecies about the growth, spiritual and political strength, and gathering of the Lamanites are also finding fulfillment or preparation for their fulfillment. President Spencer W. Kimball said about the Lamanites:

The brighter day has dawned. The scattering has been accomplished; the gathering is in process. May the Lord bless us all as we become nursing fathers and mothers (see Isa. 49:23 and 1 Ne. 21:23) unto our Lamanite brethren and hasten the fulfillment of the great promises made to them. (CR, Oct. 1965, p. 72.)

Prophecies concerning the Ten Tribes and their return and growth also will be fulfilled. (D&C 133:26-33; TG "Israel, Ten Lost Tribes of.") Finally, all Israel will be gathered and restored in great numbers, as promised by the Lord through Isaiah. (See TG "Israel, Gathering of.")

The gathering will be so vast that Israel issues her last complaint, or more correctly, a question about how this work could be brought forth from her powerful enemies:

24 Can spoil be taken from a warrior

Or captives retrieved from a victor?

25 Yet thus said the LORD:

Captives shall be taken from a warrior

And spoil shall be retrieved from a tyrant;

For the Mighty God shall deliver his covenant people.

For thus saith the Lord:

For I will contend with your adversaries,

[And I will deliver your children.]

26 I will make your oppressors eat their own flesh,

They shall be drunk with their own blood as with wine.

And all mankind shall know

That I the LORD am your Savior,

The Mighty One of Jacob, your Redeemer. (NJV)

Third complaint: Israel is robbed

The Lord's response

The Lord's promise The Book of Mormon changes noted above in italics are found in 2 Nephi 6:17, as quoted by Jacob. Interestingly, the same passage as quoted by Nephi in 1 Nephi 21:25 does not have these changes, but is basically the same as the King James Version. It appears that Jacob changed the order of some phrases by dropping the last phrase of verse 25, "I will save thy children" (KJV) and adding the phrase "For the Mighty God shall deliver his covenant children," which conveys the same message found earlier in the verse. The only major difference is his substitution of "covenant people" for "children," defining God's children as those who keep his covenants.

Probably the best summary of Isaiah's prophecies about the house of Israel is found in the Book of Mormon. After quoting chapters 48 and 49, Nephi gives an inspired commentary and concludes with the promise:

Wherefore, he will bring them again out of the captivity, and they shall be gathered together to the lands of their inheritance; and they shall be brought out of obscurity and out of darkness; and they shall know that the Lord is their Savior and their Redeemer, the Mighty One of Israel. (1 Ne. 22:12; see also vs. 3, 6, 11.)

Today, we, the members of covenant Israel, have a marvelous opportunity to share the gospel with the entire house of Israel and all nations as we seek to bring all people out of spiritual darkness into a personal relationship with the Savior.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Jehovah is the Lord of this earth (48:12-13, 17; compare 41:4, 28-29; 43:11-15, 22-24; 44:6). Jehovah is the Lord (50:2; 51:5, 15; 52:6; 53:4-12; 54:5; 55:5). Preamble ("these are the words" of the king [or of Moses]; Deut. 1:5). Preamble (vs. 1-2); Hearken, O Israel, to the Lord. He is selected before birth (foreordained) (v. 1). Isaiah, Israel's major prophet at the end of the eighth century B.C., was the last great prophet before the scattering of Israel. Elijah the Prophet to return to the earth. (Mal, 4:5-6; 3 Ne. 24-25; D&C 98:16-17; D&C 110:13-16; JS-H 1:36-39.) April 3, 1836, Kirtland Temple; on the same day, Moses visited Joseph Smith and restored the keys for the gathering of Israel. A new temple will be built in Jerusalem. (Isa. 60:13; Zech. 8:7-9; Ezek. 40:48; D&C 124:36-37; MS 52:740; HC 5:423.) Cheyne, The Prophecies of Isaiah 2:4; Beacon Bible Commentary, p. 130; Ottley, The Book of Isaiah According to the Septuagint, p. 329.
[^2] God can predict things before they occur (48:3-9, 14-16; compare 41:21-29; 45:19-21). Israel's suffering (50:1-3; 51:17-23; 57:3-58:7). Historical prologue (the acts of the king or the Lord with Israel are reviewed; Deut. 1:6-4:49). Historical prologue (3-8a); the Lord reviews his earlier actions with Israel. He is hidden in the Lord's hand (v. 2). Jesus Christ personally fulfilled the Father's promises to Jacob. Descendants of Judah to gather. (Isa. 11:12; Jer. 16:14-21; Zech. 2:11-12; 10:6-9, 12; 1 Ne. 19:13-17; 2 Ne. 10:7-8; Ether 13:11-12; D&C 110:1; 111:1; JS-H 1:40; HC 4:456; 5:336-37.) In 1881, only one out of three hundred of the world's Jews were in Palestine; in 1882, Russian May Laws resulted in large-scale emigration (mostly to the United States) and the first major immigration wave to Palestine; other waves followed, until by 1980, approximately one out of five Jews were in Israel. A leader named David . . . will lead Israel. (Isa. 11:1-6; 55:3-4; Ezek. 37:21-25; Jer. 23:3-8; 30:3-9; Hosea 3:4-5; Zech. 3:8-9; 6:11-13; HC 6:253; HC 4:457.) Cleon Skousen, Treasures from the Book of Mormon 1:1172; VIP, p. 113; DNTC 2:129; Joseph F. McConkie, His Name Shall Be Joseph, pp. 111-20.
