Victor L. Ludlow, Isaiah: Prophet, Seer, and Poet ( 1982)

HEAR, O JERUSALEM, THE PROPHET'S VOICE ISAIAH 50-51

Isaiah 50 and 51 are set in the middle of the sections of chapters directed to Israel. (Isa. 48-52.) The Book of Mormon prophet Jacob expressed the value of these chapters when, after quoting Isaiah 49-52:2, he said he wanted to teach his people "concerning the covenants of the Lord that he has covenanted with all the house of Israel." (2 Ne. 9:1.) Isaiah speaks specifically to covenant Israel in chapters 50 and 51.

Isaiah begins chapter 50 with a promise of the Savior's redemption, continues with a foreshadowing of the Lord's future mission and suffering, and concludes with a terse reminder of Israel's responsibility to trust in the Lord's word. In chapter 51, Isaiah reminds Israel of her covenant heritage, promises a time when the remnants of Israel will trust in the Lord, testifies concerning the Lord's strength, and foretells the Lord's mercy toward Israel.

Chapter 50 is divided into three main sections: verses 1-3, a call to Israel to return to the Lord and make him their strength; verses 4-9, the third servant song; and verses 10-11, an injunction to all people to follow the servant, including a message of encouragement to the faithful and of warning to the unfaithful.

A Call to Israel (vs. 1-3)

Israel has gone away from the Lord and suffered much punishment, but there is no cause to fear that this separation will be permanent:

50 The Lord says,

"Do you think I sent my people away

like a man who divorces his wife?

Where, then, are the papers of divorce?

Do you think I sold you into captivity

like a man who sells his children as slaves?

No, you went away captivem because of your sins;

you were sent away because of your crimes.

2 "Why did my people fail to respond

when I went to them to save them?

Why did they not answer when I called?

Am I too weak to save them?

I can dry up the sea with a command

and turn rivers into a desert,

so that the fish in them die for lack of water.

3 I can make the sky turn dark,

as if it were mourning for the dead." (TEV; note changes in 2 Ne. 7:1, 2)

In chapter 49, Isaiah foretells a time when scattered Israel would feel that the Lord had forsaken her, but adds, "He will show that he hath not." (Isa. 49:13-17.) This same concern and consolation is found in verse 1.

In the first verse, the Lord asks to see the bill of divorcement between him and Israel. Alluding to the law of divorce given in Deuteronomy 24:1-4, which requires a formal bill of divorcement when a man puts away his wicked wife, the Lord asks a rhetorical question because he knows he has never given such a bill to his beloved. Although they are separated, they are not divorced. (Hosea, a contemporary of Isaiah, used the same analogy in his prophecy; see Hosea 1.)

Furthermore, the Lord avers that he has not sold Israel into bondage and captivity as some fathers did in times of severe economic hardship. In the time of Isaiah, if a man was pressed by his creditors, he had the possibility of relieving his debt by selling his children as slaves. (Ex. 21:7; Neh. 1-5; Matt. 18:25.) And if he died, a creditor might take his children as payment. (2 Kgs. 4:1.) This slavery was not permanent; the person was indentured to work for a fixed number of years. In answer to the question "To whom has the Lord ever been in debt?" Isaiah answers that the Lord is indebted to no one and therefore has not been forced to sell Israel; Israel's separation and captivity is her own fault.

Indeed, verses 2 and 3 indicate that at any time, the Lord could have returned and redeemed Israel if she had just called for his help. The same invitation to call upon God and receive his strength is repeated in modern scripture:

In that day when I came unto mine own, no man among you received me, and you were driven out. When I called again there was none of you to answer; yet my arm was not shortened at all that I could not redeem, neither my power to deliver. Behold, at my rebuke I dry up the sea. I make the rivers a wilderness; their fish stink, and die for thirst. I clothe the heavens with blackness, and make sackcloth their covering. (D&C 133:66-69.)

The Lord's power is particularly manifest in the seas and the heavens, elements over which mortals have the least control. Isaiah reminds Israel that the Lord is able to save and redeem them; he recalls the miracles during the exodus from Egypt. At the Lord's command, the sea was dried and the fish shriveled up. (Ex. 7:21; 14:26-31; see Ps. 74:12-15; 107:33.) The final miracle referred to is the darkness that covered Egypt. (Ex. 10:21.) However, in describing the darkness as a covering of "sackcloth" (KJV) Isaiah presents a double picture. At the second coming of Christ, the heavens will be darkened, and the wicked will mourn in sackcloth. By closing with this symbol, Isaiah reminds Israel both of merciful redemption and the consequences of refusing his invitation.

A Servant Song (vs. 4-9)

After Isaiah and Joseph Smith (in the Doctrine and Covenants) record the Lord's ability to redeem Israel, each prophet extends an invitation to the world to heed the words of the Lord's servants. Joseph Smith records that the Lord's message was that Israel "believed not" and "received not" the Lord's servants when they were sent to her. (D&C 133:71.) Isaiah is more poetic in describing how the Lord's servant was rejected by the people:

4 The Sovereign Lord has taught me what to say,

so that I can strengthen the weary.

Every morning he makes me eager

to hear what he is going to teach me.

5 The Lord has given me understanding

and I have not rebelled

or turned away from him.

6 I bared my back to those who beat me.

I did not stop them when they insulted me,

when they pulled out the hairs of my beard

and spit in my face.

7 But their insults cannot hurt me

because the Sovereign Lord gives me help.

I brace myself to endure them.

I know that I will not be disgraced;

8 for God is near,

and he will prove me innocent.

Does anyone dare bring charges against me?

Let us go to court together!

Let him bring his accusation!

9 The Sovereign Lord himself defends me—

who, then, can prove me guilty?

All my accusers will disappear;

they will vanish like motheaten cloth. (TEV; note changes in 2 Ne. 7:4, 8)

These verses, comprising the third servant song, portray the "servant" as the epitome of righteousness. As with the other servant songs, controversy surrounds the interpretation of these verses. The servant could be any number of people or peoples. Perhaps it is the prophet Isaiah himself telling how he has been insulted, or perhaps it is the nation of Israel that has suffered persecutions throughout the long centuries of their dispersal from the land of Palestine. However, as far as the Bible records, Isaiah was not persecuted during his ministry. Also, the verses do not seem to apply to Israel as a nation, since they suffered a just punishment for their disobedience, whereas the servant suffers undeservedly for others. The most acceptable identification is Christ, because these verses describe events in the life of Jesus. In reading this servant song, however, we should not limit these references to the life of Christ, but should try to apply them to many of God's chosen servants.

Verses 4 and 5 outline the ministry of the servant. The daily discharge of the servant's office is to hear and speak the word of God. God gave him an assignment, and he is not rebellious nor does he turn away from this labor.

Verse 6 is specifically messianic, describing the physical abuse endured by the servant in his service:

The servant now presents details to show how he was not rebellious. The striking language calls to mind immediately the physical sufferings of our Lord (cf. Matt. 26:67ff.; 27:26ff.; John 19:1ff.) . . . The strikers or smiters would be those who have the public duty of beating a criminal. Beating on the back would seem also to be the custom in the punishment of evil men (cf. Prov. 10:13; 19:29; 26:3 and cf. Ps. 129:3).

In addition the servant gave his cheeks to those who pluck out the hair. The reference is to those who deliberately give the most heinous and degrading of insults. The Oriental regarded the beard as a sign of freedom and respect, and to pluck out the hair of the beard (for cheek in effect would refer to a beard) is to show utter contempt. (Young, The Book of Isaiah 3:300.)

In light of his suffering and humiliation, one of Christ's commands has a fuller meaning: "But I say unto you, that ye resist not evil: but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also." (Matt. 5:39.)

As he stood before the soldiers in the common hall of judgment, they spat upon him, smote him with a reed, crowned him with thorns, and bowed before him in mockery. Yet he silently endured the abuse. (Matt. 27.)

Just as Christ endured, so can we. All of us can put ourselves in the position of this servant and apply these verses to the temptations and trials we face. Just as God upheld his Son, so shall he uphold us, as promised in verses 7-9. In all that the innocent suffer, they should not be ashamed. Eventually those who condemn and contend against God's work, whether it be against Christ or one of his servants, will perish and "wax old as a garment." While the emphasis of this servant song seems to be on Christ, its universality is also apparent. Many of God's servants suffer, but as they fulfill their callings, the Lord upholds and defends them.

An Injunction to All People (vs. 10-11)

Isaiah ends this chapter with an antithetical couplet. He asks, "Who among us fears the Lord and heeds the voice of the servant?" Even though we may walk in darkness, we are admonished to trust in the Lord. We might very well understand this passage as an admonition to follow the servant of God, either Christ or his prophets:

10 All of you that have reverence for the Lord

and obey the words of his servant,

the path you walk may be dark indeed,

but trust in the Lord, rely on your God.

11 All of you that plot to destroy others others

will be destroyed by your own plots.

The Lord himself will make this happen;

you will suffer a miserable fate. (TEV)

In contrast to those who follow the Lord (v. 10), Isaiah speaks in verse 11 to those who "walk in the light of their own fires" (KJV). This refers to those who refuse to hear the Lord through the voice of his servants, and thus become a law unto themselves. (D&C 88:35.) This is a major problem in the world today: "They seek not the Lord to establish his righteousness, but every man walketh in his own way, after the image of his own god, whose image is in the likeness of the world." (D&C 1:16.) There is no righteous reward for those who refuse to follow the Lord. They shall "suffer a miserable fate," including eternal sorrow (v. 11; see D&C 133:70-74).

In bridging chapters 50 and 51, it is helpful to see how another ancient prophet teaches with these chapters. Jacob quotes chapters 50 and 51 in the Book of Mormon. (2 Ne. 6-8.) He says that he has read these things so that he might teach his brethren "concerning the covenants of the Lord that he has covenanted with all the house of Israel." (2 Ne. 9:1.) Using Isaiah 50:1-3 as his text, Jacob teaches his listeners that the Jews will be restored to the true church of God and reestablished in the lands of their inheritance (Palestine). (2 Ne. 9:2.) This restoration took place when the Jews returned from the Babylonian captivity between the years 538-515 B.C.

Jacob and his Nephite brethren were concerned about their fellow Jews who were in a serious state of spiritual apostasy when Lehi's family left Jerusalem. In 2 Nephi 9:3,Jacob comments that he is telling the Nephites these things so that they may rejoice. He speaks eloquently of the coming of Jesus Christ in the flesh to atone for the sins of mankind. ( 2 Ne. 9:4-27.) His discourse on the Atonement corresponds with Isaiah 50:4-9.

Jacob then turns his attention to the remainder of chapter 50, verses 10-11, exhorting his people not to rely upon their own wisdom ("light of your fire") but to "fear the Lord" and "listen to the voice of his servant":

When they are learned they think they are wise, and they hearken not unto the counsel of God, for they set it aside, supposing they know of themselves, wherefore, their wisdom is foolishness and it profiteth them not. And they shall perish. (2 Ne. 9:28.)

Jacob concluded the day's teaching to his brethren by speaking extensively on the final judgment, the time when all men will stand before God to be judged. (2 Ne. 9:29-54.) This discourse parallels the end of verse 11 of Isaiah 50.

Continuing his discourse the next day, Jacob speaks more on the servant song, applying it to Christ. (2 Ne. 10:1-6.) In the rest of chapter 10 of 2 Nephi, Jacob applies Isaiah 50 to teach the full meaning of the covenants the Lord has made with the entire house of Israel: (A) he speaks of the Jews accepting Christ in the last days and returning to the lands of their inheritance (2 Ne. 10:7-9; compare Isa. 49:22-23; (B) he foresees America (Zion) being an inheritance to the righteous Gentiles (2 Ne. 10:10-18; compare 3 Ne. 23:2-4); and (C) he concludes by reminding the Nephites of their heritage and reviewing the Lord's work with the house of Israel (2 Ne. 10:18-25).

Isaiah 51, which Jacob had quoted earlier, reverses the order of Jacob's themes: (C') Isaiah begins with a reminder to Israel of her heritage and the Lord's work (51:1-8); (B') Isaiah promises that the righteous will enjoy the blessings of Zion (51:9-16); and (A') he concludes with warnings and promises to the Jews in the last days (51:17-23).

Israel's Heritage (vs. 1-3)

In order for God's covenants to be fulfilled, the Jews must remember whose children they are. It may seem peculiar that God must tell the Jews to remember their noble ancestors, Abraham and Sarah, but they need to remember God's promises with Abraham:

51 The Lord says,

"Listen to me, you that want to be saved,

you that come to me for help.

Think of the rock from which you came,

the quarry from which you were cut.

2 Think of your ancestor, Abraham,

and of Sarah, from whom you are descended.

When I called Abraham, he was childless,

but I blessed him and gave him children

I made his descendants numerous.

3 "I will show compassion to Jerusalem,

to all who live in her ruins.

Though her land is a desert, I will make it a garden,

like the garden I planted in Eden.

Joy and gladness will be there,

and songs of praise and thanks to me. (TEV)

but I blessed him and gave him

New Testament scriptures tell us that Abraham was justified by his works and that his faith and belief in the Savior were counted as righteousness. (Rom. 4:3; James 2:23.) The Lord calls upon his people to do the works of Abraham, seek for the spiritual blessings that Abraham obtained, and look forward to and accept the Savior as Abraham did. (Gal. 3:6-9, 24-29; 4:28; John 8:56-58.)

Next, the Lord recounts the covenants he had made with Abraham, great posterity and lands (v. 3; see Abr. 2:8-11). As the Jews accept Abraham by doing his works and believing in Christ, Zion (Jerusalem) will be comforted and her ruins rebuilt; it will be like Eden, the garden of the Lord. (See D&C 103:17; 132:30-31.) Gladness, joy, and thanksgiving will then abide among those who follow the servant, Christ.

Of course, these ideal conditions will prevail in Palestine and over all the earth only after Christ comes and begins his millennial reign. The precise sequence of events leading to the Millennium is not given in the scriptures. Often in prophetic writings, some events are spoken of one after another in quick succession, giving the impression that the events will all take place in a very short period of time. In reality, the signs may occur over a period of years and even centuries. On the other hand, sometimes the prophet overlaps his prophecies and begins speaking of another prophecy before fully explaining the first. Because of patterns like these, prophecies of the last days are often confusing. For example, in verses 1-3 God admonishes the Jews to remember Abraham and to seek after their Lord. As they do this, they will be comforted and gathered in from their long dispersion to the lands of their inheritance, Palestine. (2 Ne. 10:6.) But this doesn't mean that they all will believe before they return. (The relationship between Jewish attitudes and their returning to Palestine is discussed more fully in the special topic "Return of the Jews in the Last Days" on pp. 301-3 of this book.) In a similar manner, the redemption of the land of Palestine will take time. Today we are blessed to see the beginning of the fulfillment of these covenants. In time, we will witness their complete fulfillment and sing and rejoice with the Jews and the rest of the house of Israel (v. 3).

The Lord's Work (vs. 4-8)

Continuing the theme of the Lord's deliverance, Isaiah speaks for the Lord and calls upon Israel to hearken and give ear, to listen to what the Lord says:

4 "Listen to me, my people, listen to what I say:

I give my teaching to the nations; my laws will bring them light.

5 I will come quickly and save them; the time of victory is near.

I myself will rule over the nations.

Distant lands wait for me to come;

they wait with hope for me to save them.

6 Look up at the heavens; look at the earth!

The heavens will disappear like smoke;

the earth will wear out like old clothing,

and all its people will die like flies.

But the deliverance I bring will last forever;

my victory will be final.

7 "Listen to me, you that know what is right,

who have my teaching fixed in your hearts.

Do not be afraid when people taunt and insult you;

8 they will vanish like motheaten clothing!

But the deliverance I bring will last forever;

my victory will endure for all time." (TEV)

The Jews are here called "my people" and "my nation" to stress the idea that they have not been forsaken by the Lord and that by accepting him they will be God's children (v. 7; Isa. 50:1-3). The Lord's way is a light to the people (v. 7; Isa. 49:6; compare D&C 93:36). Again, the idea of following one's own wisdom instead of God's is mentioned. (Isa. 50:11.) This could be because the Israelites placed more emphasis upon knowledge and study than upon giving heed to the prophets. (Jacob 4:14.)

In verse 6, the Lord speaks of his second coming and the events surrounding it. Though the telestial order of the heavens and earth may pass away, the victory and triumph of the Lord will endure forever. The passing away of heaven and earth can be interpreted in one of three ways: (1) the Lord pronounces the certainty of his word, counsel, and judgment in contrast to the transitory nature of the world (Matt. 24:35; Luke 21:33; D&C 1:38); (2) the Lord promises the righteous that their salvation or resurrection is eternal and does not depend upon the world; and (3) the Lord foretells the events immediately preceding either the Millennium or the earth's celestial transformation (Isa. 64: Rev. 21:1). In any case, the righteous will see the day when they will not be persecuted or destroyed.

Isaiah admonishes those who do accept the Lord not to fear the insults of men (v. 7). He knows that they will have opposition in following the Lord and warns them not to fear, because those who brandish such insults will pass like an old garment, like wool before a moth. But salvation will uphold those who endure and follow the servant, for God's victory endures forever (v. 8).

The Blessings of Zion (vs. 9-16)

Before Zion can be established among Israel, the Lord must exert his powers to bring it about. If Israel seeks him, he will use his strength to assist her to fulfill her destiny. (Isa. 50:2-3.) In verses 9-11, Israel finally calls upon the Lord, and the Lord responds and recounts his powers (vs. 11-16). First, Israel's petition:

9 Wake up, Lord, and help us!

Use your power and save us;

use it as you did in ancient times.

It was you that cut the sea monster Rahab to pieces.

10 It was you also who dried up the sea

and made a path through the water,

so that those you were saving could cross.

11 Those whom you have rescued

will reach Jerusalem with gladness,

singing and shouting for joy.

They will be happy forever,

forever free from sorrow and grief. (TEV)

As indicated earlier, the sea monster (Rahab) mentioned in v. 9 probably represents Satan (see commentary on Isa. 17:1), but might also represent Egypt. (See MLB text of Isa. 30:7 on p. 280 of this book.) Perhaps Isaiah is reminding the people of the Lord's victory over Satan as well as his miracles in Egypt.

The Lord will again work many miracles for Israel in her later exodus from the "world" back to her promised land. As the Israelites return from many nations, they will come with great rejoicing, for the prophecies are being fulfilled (v. 11; D&C 101:18-19; compare D&C 45:71; 66:11).

Isaiah emphasizes the source of power behind their return in the next few verses. The Lord offers assurance to those who have forgotten him:

12 The Lord says,

"I am the one who strengthens you.

Why should you fear mortalman,

who is no more enduring than grass?

13 Have you forgotten the Lord who made you,

who stretched out the heavens

and laid the earth's foundations?

Why should you live in constant fear

of the fury of those who oppress you,

of those who are ready to destroy you?

Their fury can no longer touch you.

14 Those who are prisoners will soon be set free;

they will live a long life

and have all the food they need.

15 "I am the Lord your God;

I stir up the sea

and make its waves roar.

My name is the Lord Almighty!

16 I stretched out the heavens

and laid the earth's foundations;

I say to Jerusalem, 'You are my people!

I have given you my teaching,

and I protect you with my hand.'" (TEV)

Question A

Question B

Question C

Answer C

Answer B

Answer A

As noted in the right-hand column, the Lord asks Israel three questions: Why do you fear mortal man? Have you forgotten your creator? Why fear your oppressors? He then answers them (in reverse order): You will be freed from your oppressors. I am the great creator. You are my people; I will teach and protect you.

Although these promises seem to be extended to all types of Israelites, they apply more particularly to those who become a part of covenant Israel, members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Joseph Smith foretells that one group of Israelites, the remnants of the Ten Tribes, will come to Ephraim at "the boundaries of the everlasting hills." (See D&C 133:32-35.)

The parallels between these three verses and Isaiah 51:9-16 are evident. They help us to understand Isaiah's words and to see their fulfillment in those who join the Church in this dispensation.

Warnings to Judah in the Last Days (vs. 17-23)

Because of wickedness, the ancient Jews were scattered and taken captive to Babylon. Later, some Jews returned to Jerusalem and rebuilt the temple. Unfortunately, this Jewish community also became wicked, and most of their descendants rejected Christ when he lived on earth. Because of their iniquities, they suffered great destruction, another scattering, and the hatred of men. (See 2 Ne. 6:10-11; 10:3-6.) But punishment, dispersion, and persecution are not to be their permanent condition. The Lord will bless, gather, and protect them as they return to the Lord, especially after they accept him as their Messiah. (2 Ne. 6:11; 10:7-9.)

Isaiah prophesies in the last verses of chapter 51 of the final effects of the Lord's judgments and the world's hatred:

17 Jerusalem, wake up!

Rouse yourself and get up!

You have drunk the cup of punishment

that the Lord in his anger gave you to drink;

you drank it down, and it made you stagger.

18 There is no one to lead you,

no one among your people

to take you by the hand.

19 A double disaster has fallen on you:

your land has been devastated by war,

and your people have starved.

There is no one to show you sympathy.

20 At the corner of every street

your people collapse from weakness;

they are like deer caught in a hunter's net.

They have felt the force of God's anger.

21 You suffering people of Jerusalem,

you that stagger as though you were drunk,

22 the Lord your God defends you and says,

"I am taking away the cup

that I gave you in my anger.

You will no longer have to drink

the wine that makes you stagger.

23 I will give it to those who oppressed you,

to those who made you lie down in the streets

and trampled on you as if you were dirt." (TEV)

This section culminates the Lord's covenants to the house of Judah. In these verses, Isaiah speaks of the time when the covenants of the Lord are fulfilled and the Jews are brought back home again through their righteousness. Verse 17 begins this section with a command for Jerusalem (the Jews) to "rouse" and "get up," that is, to hearken to the voice of God. Isaiah describes them as those who have "drunk the cup of God's punishment." Verse 18 explains why they are suffering and lost, for it reveals the spiritual state of the Jews: they have "no one to lead," meaning that they have no prophets or inspired leaders. Since Jerusalem has no guide from among her own sons, she must look elsewhere for inspired leadership. (This probably means that she must look to the Gentiles or other remnants of Israel for this leadership.) The Book of Mormon rendition of verses 19-20 describes two sons who do come to Jerusalem and give courage and power to the Jews:

These two sons are come unto thee, who shall be sorry for thee—why desolation and destruction, and the famine and the sword—and by whom shall I comfort thee? Thy sons have fainted save these two; they lie at the head of all the streets; as a wild bull in a net, they are full of the fury of the Lord, the rebuke of thy God. (2 Ne. 8:19-20.)

The description of these two sons calls to mind the two witnesses who will be the major factor in keeping enemy armies from totally defeating the Jews. (Rev. 11:1-6.) John the Revelator describes two great servants of God who will stand and fight for Jerusalem against the armies of the world. For three and one-half years they will have power over the heavens, earth, and their enemies. Then they will be killed. (Rev. 11:3-13; see Zech. 4:11-14.) The two sons in Isaiah's prophecy wield similar power and are depicted as a wild bull in a net; while the bull may be captive, it is still dangerous until it is worn down. In a few words, Isaiah describes the ministry of these two great sons. While they can not stop the eventual overthrow of Jerusalem, they keep away the destruction until they are finally subdued and killed.

Joseph Smith prophesied concerning these two witnesses, calling them "two prophets that are to be raised up to the Jewish nation in the last days, at the time of the restoration." (D&C 77:15.) Bruce R. McConkie suggests that these two prophets will be Latter-day Saints, most likely members of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles or of the First Presidency. (DNTC 3:507-11.)

The Lord concludes this prophecy by again commanding the people to attend to his words. He makes a transition from predicting the persecutions of the last days to affirming that he has not forgotten his people. No longer will they have to stagger as they drink the cup of his wrath. Instead, the cup will be given to the tormentors who have trampled his people. (Lying on the ground while someone walks upon you represents captivity or conquest.) This idea of deliverance, both spiritual and temporal, is a keystone of the Savior's plan and will be realized at the time of his second coming when he fulfills all his covenants with the house of Israel.
