Victor L. Ludlow, Isaiah: Prophet, Seer, and Poet ( 1982)

SUFFERING OF THE MESSIAH ISAIAH 53

In chapter 53, Isaiah gives the most sublime messianic prophecy in all the scriptures. Within just a few verses, he provides a preview of four major aspects of Christ's life and mission: (1) his mortal life as the "despised man" (vs. 1-3); (2) his atonement (vs. 4-6); (3) his trial and crucifixion as an "innocent lamb" (vs. 7-9); and (4) his postmortal glory as an exalted son (vs. 10-12). Elder Bruce R. McConkie has said,

As our New Testament now stands, we find Matthew (Matt. 8:17), Philip (Acts 8:27-35), Paul (Rom. 4:25), and Peter (1 Pet. 2:24-25) all quoting, paraphrasing, enlarging upon, and applying to the Lord Jesus various of the verses in this great 53rd chapter of Isaiah. How many sermons have been preached, how many lessons have been taught, how many testimonies have been borne—both in ancient Israel and in the meridian of time—using the utterances of this chapter as the text, we can scarcely imagine. (PM, p. 235.)

Christ's Mortal Life (vs. 1-3)

Isaiah begins chapter 53 with an exclamation in the form of a rhetorical question: "Who has believed our report?" He alludes to the fact that he and other prophets have prophesied of the Messiah, yet few listeners believed. Indeed, of the Jews living during Christ's mortal ministry, only a small number believed that Jesus was their Savior.

In the first verses of the fourth servant song, which comprises all of chapter 53, Isaiah describes the Messiah growing up in arid surroundings, appearing to be like other men, and suffering silently while most of those whom he wanted to save rejected him:

53 Who has believed what we have heard?

And to whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed?

2For he grew up before him like a young plant

and like a root out of dry ground;

he had no form or comeliness that we should look at him,

and no beauty that we should desire him.

3He was despised and rejected by men;

a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief;

and as one from whom men hide their faces

he was despised, and we esteemed him not. (RSV)

53 The people reply,

"Who would have believed what we now report?

Who could have seen the Lord's hand in this?

2It was the will of the Lord that his servant

grow like a plant taking root in dry ground.

He had no dignity or beauty to make us take notice of him.

There was nothing attractive about him.

3We despised him and rejected him;

he endured suffering and pain.

No one would even look at him—

we ignored him as if he were nothing." (TEV)

(Note: To help the reader understand the content and style of this chapter, two translations are given: The RSV, a traditional, eloquent interpretation and the TEV, a contemporary, free-flowing rendition.)

Isaiah asks a second question at the beginning of verse 1: "In whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed?" He implies that the servant will be revealed by the "arm" or power of the Lord. (See Isa. 52:10; John 12:37-38; 1 Ne. 22:10-11; D&C 45:47.) Isaiah spends the rest of the chapter answering this second question.

The servant to be revealed by the Lord's power is not named, but both the prophet Abinadi and the evangelist Philip identify him as Jesus Christ. (Mosiah 15; Acts 8:26-35.) In addition, Matthew, Peter, and Paul apply various verses of Isaiah 53 to Christ. (Matt. 8:17; 1 Pet. 2:24-25; Rom. 4:25.) Modern apostles, such as James E. Talmage, Joseph Fielding Smith, and Bruce R. McConkie, have also stated that Jesus is the subject of Isaiah 53. (JTC, p. 47; DS 1:23-24; PM, pp. 234-35.)

In verse 2, Isaiah speaks of the servant as a young plant, meaning he was tenderly raised from being a newborn, helpless infant and developed like all young children. He grew up in the dry, sterile ground of apostate Judaism and achieved a natural, adult appearance like other men. Joseph Fielding Smith states that "it is expressed here by the prophet that he had no form or comeliness, that is, he was not so distinctive, so different from others that people would recognize him as the Son of God. He appeared as a mortal man." (DS 1:23; see D&C 93:11-17.)

As Isaiah describes in verse 3, Jesus was a man of sorrow and tragedy. Sensitive to the suffering of others, Jesus taught, healed, and blessed countless people during his ministry. Yet he experienced constant sorrow and rejection throughout his life. (Matt. 23:37.) Members of his own family and the people in his hometown rejected him at first. (John 7:5; Luke 4:16-30.) His own chosen people, the Jews, rejected his messianic calling. (John 1:11; 5:18.) As his mortal ministry neared completion, one of his apostles betrayed him and another temporarily denied any knowledge of him. (Luke 22:48, 54-62.) This constant persecution and rejection must have caused Christ great sorrow, for the very people he came to save first turned away from him. (See Mark 9:12; 1 Ne. 19:7-10.)

Christ's Atonement (vs. 4-6)

As much as Christ grieved over Israel's rejection of him, he sorrowed even more for their sins. Indeed, Isaiah beautifully describes how God's faithful servant suffered for the transgressions of all mankind:

4Surely he has borne our griefs and carried our sorrows;

yet we esteemed him stricken, smitten by God, and afflicted.

5But he was wounded for our transgressions,

he was bruised for our iniquities,

upon him was the chastisement that made us whole,

and with his stripes we are healed.

6All we like sheep have gone astray;

we have turned every one to his own way;

and the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all. (RSV)

4"But he endured the suffering that should have been ours,

the pain that we should have borne.

All the while we thought that his suffering

was punishment sent by God.

5But because of our sins he was wounded,

beaten because of the evil we did.

We are healed by the punishment he suffered,

made whole by the blows he received.

6All of us were like sheep that were lost,

each of us going his own way.

But the Lord made the punishment fall on him,

the punishment all of us deserved." (TEV)

Before we can begin to appreciate Christ's atoning sacrifice, we must understand the relationship of the law of justice and the law of mercy. And these two laws are best understood when we know about the necessity of "opposition in all things" and the choices placed before Christ before he took upon himself the sins of the world.

The clearest discussion about the necessity of opposition and choice is given by Lehi in 2 Nephi 2:11-27. There are several reasons why there must be opposition before we can be free and experience joy:

Lehi does not say it is necessary to choose evil in order to recognize good and evil, but he does make it clear that a choice between opposites is necessary for spiritual growth. Indeed, Christ's perfect life demonstrates that the most simple and sure way to attain eternal joy and celestial perfection is to never choose evil but to always follow the Father. (See D&C 130:20, 21; 132:5.)

The law of justice is a natural manifestation of the principles of opposition and agency. It works in relationship to the other laws of God and provides the means by which people receive their just reward. In essence, the law of justice might be explained as follows:

When we have a choice between good and evil, knowing the laws of God and being free agents, we can apply the law of justice in our lives and seek for whatever blessings we desire. On the other hand, as Lehi teaches, if we do not have choices, we cannot receive the full range of possible blessings and punishments. The Doctrine and Covenants references mentioned earlier indicate that blessings and punishments are predicated upon the laws of God. However, before we can live all of God's laws, we must know them and have agency. The relationship of free agency, laws, choices between good and evil, and the other elements of the law of justice are diagramed below:

If we are free to choose between good and evil after we have obtained God's laws, then we are free to receive blessings and joy or to receive punishment and misery.

The law of justice also applies to Christ's atonement. However, as Isaiah explains in 53:4-6, Jesus did not have to suffer for any of his own sins because he lived a perfect life. God satisfied the demands of justice by allowing Christ to accept our punishment. At first thought, that Christ suffered for our sins does not seem just, since the law of justice requires that God must be a God of order and that he must be impartial. Indeed, because of the law of justice, God can inspire such statements as: "I, the Lord, am bound when ye do what I say; but when ye do not what I say, ye have no promise" (D&C 82:10), and "When we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated" (D&C 130:20-21).

The reason that a just and loving God allowed his Son to suffer for others' sins is because of the law of mercy. The law of mercy becomes part of the law of justice, for it introduces the possibility of vicarious payment for the laws that have been broken. In essence, the law of mercy might be paraphrased as follows: whenever a law is transgressed, a payment must be made; however, the person who transgressed the law does not need to make payment if he will repent and if he can find someone else who is both able and willing to make payment. The law of mercy insists that the demands of the law of justice be fully met. As Alma stated, "Justice exerciseth all his demands, and also mercy claimeth all which is her own; and thus, none but the truly penitent are saved. What, do ye suppose that mercy can rob justice? I say unto you, Nay; not one whit. If so God would cease to be God." (Alma 42:24-25.)

The law of justice made the atonement of Jesus Christ necessary. When Adam fell, he transgressed a law with physical and spiritual death as its punishment. Thus, the law of justice demanded payment (or atonement) for the broken law.

The law of mercy made the atonement of Jesus Christ possible. In order for Jesus Christ to pay fully for the law Adam transgressed, it was necessary that the Savior be both able and willing to make atonement. He was willing to make payment because of his great love for mankind, and he was able to make payment because he lived a sinless life and, as the Son of God, had the power to atone for the spiritual and physical death introduced by the Fall. Because of this atonement, he is rightfully referred to as the Savior and Redeemer of all mankind. (For further information, see MD, p. 60; DS 1:126.)

Interestingly, the word forgive does not appear in this chapter of Isaiah, though the Hebrew root nasa, from which the word forgive is usually translated, does appear twice, as "borne" in verse 4, and "bare" in verse 12. (See Isa. 2:9; 33:24.) Christ "bore" or carried our sins so that we do not have to carry their burden. (John 1:29; see I Pet. 1:18-20.) Or, as we say, "He has forgiven us," meaning he "gave" the price "before." Indeed, almost two thousand years before our time, he gave the necessary payment in the Garden of Gethsemane. As we take advantage of his suffering, we can find the joy God wants all men to experience as they are cleansed and worthy to live in his presence. (2 Ne. 2:25; 9:21.)

The relationship between the law of justice and the law of mercy and Christ's atonement is illustrated on the next page.

Before the law of mercy can apply in our lives, we must take advantage of Christ's atonement by repenting of our sins. As presented in the current Latter-day Saint missionary discussions, there are six steps to repentance: (1) recognition, (2) sorrow, (3) confession, (4) seeking forgiveness, (5) restitution, and (6) forsaking sin. Isaiah constantly reminded the Israelites of the necessity to repent and seek for the blessings of the Lord.

Some of the blessings promised Israel and other peoples are not conditional upon the people's repentance and righteousness. [^1] For example, every person benefits unconditionally from one major aspect of the Atonement, the Resurrection. However, as Isaiah and other prophets indicate, there are also conditional aspects of the Atonement, and in order to benefit from these, we must repent of our sins. Otherwise, "mercy could have no claim" upon the person. (Mosiah 3:25-27.) (See Boyd K. Packer, "The Mediator," Ensign, May 1977, pp. 54-56; also published as The Mediator [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1978].)

Christ's Trial and Crucifixion (vs. 7-9)

Isaiah saw beyond Christ's suffering for our sins and prophesied further abuse and suffering that Jesus endured after his atoning sacrifice in the Garden of Gethsemane. Isaiah's description of key events surrounding Christ's death clearly shows that he was a seer:

7He was oppressed, and he was afflicted,

yet he opened not his mouth;

like a lamb that is led to the slaughter,

and like a sheep that before its shearers is dumb,

so he opened not his mouth.

8By oppression and judgment he was taken away;

and as for his generation, who considered

that he was cut off out of the land of the living,

stricken for the transgression of my people?

9And they made his grave with the wicked

and with a rich man in his death,

although he had done no violence,

and there was no deceit in his mouth. (RSV)

7"He was treated harshly, but endured it humbly;

he never said a word.

Like a lamb about to be slaughtered,

like a sheep about to be sheared,

he never said a word.

8He was arrested and sentenced and led off to die,

and no one cared about his fate.

He was put to death for the sins of our people.

9He was placed in a grave with evil men,

he was buried with the rich,

even though he had never committed a crime

or ever told a lie." (TEV)

In each of the first three sections of chapter 53, Isaiah portrays the progressive suffering Christ had to bear: first he was despised, then he was wounded for others, and finally he was cut off from the land of the living.

In reviewing some events associated with Christ's death, Isaiah stresses the oppression that would bring about his crucifixion: Jesus was falsely accused, illegally tried, unjustly humiliated, and inhumanly executed. In spite of the evil oppression heaped upon him, Jesus remained silent, thus fulfilling Isaiah's prophecy that he would be "dumb" or quiet and submissive "as a sheep before the shearers" (v. 7; see Matt. 26:62-63; 27:12-14; John 19:9-11; Luke 23:8-10).

At his crucifixion, Jesus' weak body bore additional torture. Within the twelve sleepless hours before he was placed upon the cross, Jesus had to endure the suffering in Gethsemane, which caused him to bleed at every pore (D&C 19:18), the humiliation of the false trials before Jews and Romans, the flogging and mockery of the Romans, and the burden of the cross on the way to Golgotha. Elder James E. Talmage wrote: "Christ's agony in the garden is unfathomable by the finite mind, both as to intensity and cause . . . he struggled and groaned under a burden such as no other being who has lived on earth might even conceive as possible." (JTC, p. 613; see D&C 19:16-18; Luke 22:44; Mosiah 3:7.) Elder Bruce R. McConkie said that the crucifixion was "the most awful moment of all":

He was laid down upon the implement of torture. His arms were stretched along the cross-beams; and at the centre of the open palms, the point of a huge iron nail was placed, which, by the blow of a mallet, was driven home into the wood. Then through either foot separately, or possibly through both together as they were placed one over the other, another huge nail tore its way through the quivering flesh. (MM 4:211.)

Such was the means by which the Savior was cut off from the land of the living (v. 8; see Mosiah 15:10-11).

In verse 9, Isaiah adds further details about Christ's death and burial. Jesus died between two thieves and was buried in a rich man's grave. (John 19:18; Luke 22:37; 23:32-33; Matt. 27:60.) Again we see the remarkable detail with which Isaiah foretold major events of Christ's mortal mission. Verses 1-9 of chapter 53 are filled with significant details about the Savior's life, atonement, trial, death, and burial.

Christ's Postmortal Glory (vs. 10-12)

Beginning in verse 10, Isaiah signals a change in context by shifting from the past tense to the future. The earlier verbs in this fourth servant song described the grim experiences of the servant; now verbs in the future tense speak only of success and glory for the servant:

10 Yet it was the will of the Lord to bruise him;

he has put him to grief;

when he makes himself an offering for sin,

he shall see his offspring, he shall prolong his days;

the will of the Lord shall prosper in his hand;

11 he shall see the fruit of the

travail of his soul and be satisfied;

by his knowledge shall the righteous one, my servant,

make many to be accounted righteous;

and he shall bear their iniquities.

12Therefore I will divide him a portion with the great,

and he shall divide the spoil with the strong;

because he poured out his soul to death,

and was numbered with the transgressors;

yet he bore the sin of many,

and made intercession for the transgressors. (RSV)

10The Lord says,

"It was my will that he should suffer;

his death was a sacrifice to bring forgiveness.

And so he will see his descendants;

he will live a long life,

and through him my purpose will succeed.

11After a life of suffering, he will again have joy;

he will know that he did not suffer in vain.

My devoted servant, with whom I am pleased,

will bear the punishment of many

and for his sake I will forgive them.

12And so I will give him a place of honor,

a place among great and powerful men.

He willingly gave his life

and shared the fate of evil men.

He took the place of many sinners

and prayed that they might be forgiven." (TEV)

Included among the promises to the suffering servant are offspring, a long (eternal) life, prosperity, satisfaction with his labors, service to others, and a royal inheritance.

These promises are applicable to everyone in the highest degree of celestial glory, but especially to Christ, because he fulfilled every desire of the Father. Obviously, God the Father was not pleased with the way people treated his Son, but he was "pleased" (KJV) or satisfied with his Son's obedience and "offering for sin" (v. 10; see 2 Ne. 9; Alma 12, 42). Christ's atonement and crucifixion met God's strictest demands of justice and thereafter guaranteed resurrection and salvation for all while making forgiveness and celestial glory possible for those who accept all God's requirements. (See Heb. 7:24-25; 9:24.) One of Isaiah's great messianic promises is that the suffering servant will see his "seed" or offspring (v. 10). Of course, all those in the highest degree of celestial glory will enjoy eternal posterity, but Christ's seed includes those who become his spiritually begotten sons and daughters, those who take his name and gospel covenants upon themselves and live accordingly. (Mosiah 5:7; 15:10-13; D&C 93:22; see 4 Ne. 1:17; Morm. 9:26; Moro. 7:19; Rom. 8.)

In verse 11, Isaiah indicates that many people will enjoy the fruits of Christ's labors. As indicated earlier, the unconditional promises of Christ's work guarantee resurrection to all God's children. In addition, his conditional promises provide the means by which God's worthy children can regain his presence and become as he is. Together, the Son and his celestial family will become joint heirs in everything the Father has: possessions, exaltation, glory, power, knowledge, truth, and godhood (v. 12; Rom. 8:17; D&C 50:26-28; 76:50-60; 88:107; 93:15-30; D&C 132:20). And why are all these marvelous eternal blessings possible? Because Christ, the suffering servant and obedient son, "willingly gave his life" (TEV) and "bore the sin of many" (RSV) that we might share eternal joy together (v. 12).

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] This word is translated as "my people" in the JST.
