Victor L. Ludlow, Isaiah: Prophet, Seer, and Poet ( 1982)

THE LORD'S EVERLASTING WAYS WITH ISRAEL ISAIAH 54-55

Isaiah 54 and 55 are beautiful chapters of encouragement; chapter 54 portrays the glory of Zion in the last days, and chapter 55 extends an invitation to all people to partake of the gospel. Building upon the prophecy of the Messiah (Isa. 53), these two chapters promise special blessings from the Savior's mission.

Chapters 54 and 55 also begin a short collection of Isaianic discourses addressed to the entire world. In chapter 54, the Lord promises his loyalty to Zion; in chapter 55, he testifies that his plan will be fulfilled; in chapters 56 and 57 he promises temple blessings to all righteous peoples; and in chapter 58 he testifies that righteous deeds, such as fasting, will be rewarded. This set of five chapters lays a foundation for the following eight chapters concerning the great blessings of a Zion society, a millennial reign, and a new heaven and new earth in the last days. (Isa. 59-66.)

Chapter 54 is written in beautiful poetry and provides a radiant preview of future happiness in Zion. The entire chapter is quoted by the Savior in 3 Nephi 22. But prior to his almost verbatim quotation, Christ presents some events that will precede the fulfillment of Isaiah 54: (1) the Gentiles will receive the gospel and assist in building God's kingdom and gathering Israel; (2) the gospel will be preached to the Lamanites; (3) the gospel will be preached to all the dispersed, including the Ten Tribes; (4) Israel's remnants will gather to Zion; (5) the remnants are to return to the lands of their inheritance. (3 Ne. 20-21.) After giving these prophecies about Israel, the Savior introduces Isaiah 54 with the phrase, "Then shall that which is written come to pass. . . ." (3 Ne. 22:1.) Thus, chapter 54 ties into the prophecies of Israel in the last days, when blood Israel will join the Gentiles as a part of covenant Israel, each in their special lands of inheritances.

In this chapter Isaiah speaks of the Lord's covenants with Israel, comparing them to a marriage relationship:

54 "Sing, O barren woman,

you who never bore a child;

burst into song, shout for joy, you who were never in labor;

because more are the children of the desolate woman

than of her who has a husband," says the Lord.

2"Enlarge the place of your tent,

stretch your tent curtains wide, do not hold back;

lengthen your cords, strengthen your stakes.

3For you will spread out to the right and to the left;

your descendants will dispossess nations

and settle in their desolate cities." (NIV)

The barren woman of verse 1 is undoubtedly Israel, who has not yet brought forth the full fruits of her covenants with the Lord. Isaiah calls Israel barren because of her inability or unwillingness to produce spiritually strong offspring for the Lord.

The woman has been separated from her husband, the Lord, because of her wickedness. (Compare Hosea 1-2.) Thus, she has not had children. However, Isaiah tells her to break forth into song, because many children have been born to the "desolate" or forsaken woman. The desolate woman and her relationship to the wife can be understood in two ways: (1) The desolate woman represents the Gentiles, and the wife Israel; thus the Gentiles will bring forth greater spiritual fruits than Israel has delivered; (2) the desolate woman is Israel in her scattered condition, while the wife is those people remaining in the Holy land. Thus, Israel will bring forth more children (both physically and spiritually) outside the land of her original inheritance than in it. (See Gal. 4:22-31; Rev. 12:1-6.) In either case, Isaiah, uses these images to symbolize the relationship of the Lord to Israel; those who join with covenant Israel are the children of that relationship.

In verse 2, Isaiah indicates that Israel will grow so rapidly that her habitation must be enlarged to accommodate all the new people. He compares her growth to a tent that, if one wishes to make it larger, must have its stakes moved to a further distance from the center pole. It is from Isaiah that Latter-day Saints derive the word stake, their basic unit of ecclesiastical organization and territorial division. Each stake of the tent (the Church or Zion) must be strong and independent enough to provide stability to the tent as it stretches to cover the whole earth. (Isa. 33:20; Moro. 10:31; D&C 45:31-32; 82:14; 109:39, 59; 115:5-6; 133:8-9; see MD, p. 764.)

Isaiah describes Israel's latter-day growth through conversion and gathering as spreading out "to the right and to the left" (v. 3) until Zion inhabits the lands of the "nations" or Gentiles (KJV). The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints fulfills this prophecy as it establishes itself in Gentile nations and spreads over all the world.

Isaiah recognizes that Israel's barren or forsaken years, though they seem long, will gradually fade from her memory after Zion is established. The prophet reminds Israel that the Lord has not forgotten her:

4"Do not be afraid; you will not suffer shame.

Do not fear disgrace; you will not be humiliated.

You will forget the shame of your youth

and remember no more the reproach of your widowhood.

5For your Maker is your husband—

the Lord Almighty is his name—

the Holy One of Israel is your Redeemer;

he is called the God of all the earth.

6The Lord will call you back

as if you were a wife deserted and distressed in spirit—

a wife who married young,

only to be rejected," says your God.

7For a brief moment I abandoned you,

but with deep compassion I will bring you back.

8In a surge of anger

I hid my face from you for a moment,

but with everlasting kindness

I will have compassion on you,"

says the Lord your Redeemer, (NIV)

In verses 7 and 8, Isaiah stresses that Israel's period of suffering is brief when compared to her time of redemption. Likewise, our small moment of separation from God is brief when compared to the vast eternity we can live in his presence. Though Israel and we may merit divine rejection because of wickedness, we both can be welcomed back into God's company because of his "deep compassion" and "everlasting kindness."

As a reminder of the Lord's covenants with Israel, the prophet reviews an everlasting covenant God made with Noah:

9"To me this is like the days of Noah,

when I swore that the waters of

Noah would never again cover the earth.

So now I have sworn not to be angry with you,

never to rebuke you again.

10Though the mountains be shaken and the hills be removed,

yet my unfailing love for you will not be shaken

nor my covenant of peace [^1] be removed,"

says the LORD, who has compassion on you. (NIV)

After God cleansed the earth with a flood, he promised Noah that he would never again destroy the earth in that manner. (Gen. 9:13-17.) Here Isaiah impresses upon Israel that the promise God made to gather and redeem her is as valid as his promise to Noah.

As part of his promise, the Lord says that he will never again rebuke Israel (v. 9). The Lord cannot lie, and since he has sworn not to be angry with Israel nor to rebuke her, and since he has also promised that he will "chasten" or rebuke those whom he loves if they are wicked (D&C 95:1), Isaiah's prophecy means that a time will come when Israel will become righteous enough that she will need no chastisement from the Lord.

When all Israel and the earth as a whole is righteous, the Lord's millennial reign will be established. Isaiah describes Zion's beauty during such a glorious condition:

11"O afflicted city, lashed by storms and not comforted,

I will build you with stones of turquoise,

your foundations with sapphires.

12 I will make your battlements of rubies,

your gates of sparkling jewels,

and all your walls of precious stones. (NIV)

The Apostle John seems to describe the same city in Revelation 21:18-21:

The wall was made of jasper, and the city of pure gold, as pure as glass. The foundations of the city walls were decorated with every kind of precious stone. The first foundation was jasper, the second sapphire, the third chalcedony, the fourth emerald, the fifth sardonyx, the sixth carnelian, the seventh chrysolite, the eighth beryl, the ninth topaz, the tenth chrysoprase, the eleventh jacinth, and the twelfth amethyst. The twelve gates were twelve pearls, each gate made of a single pearl. The street of the city was of pure gold, like transparent glass. (NIV)

Isaiah and John are probably describing New Jerusalem. On the other hand, their description may be symbolic of the material and spiritual wealth throughout the stakes of Zion.

Isaiah concludes his description by emphasizing the peace that will prevail in Israel:

13All your sons will be taught by the Lord.

and great will be your children's peace.

14In righteousness you will be established:

Tyranny will be far from you; you will have nothing to fear.

Terror will be far removed; it will not come near you.

15If anyone does attack you, it will not be my doing;

whoever attacks you will surrender to you.

16"See, it is I who created the blacksmith

who fans the coals into flame

and forges a weapon fit for its work.

And it is I who have created the destroyer to work havoc;

17 no weapon forged against you will prevail,

and you will refute every tongue that accuses you.

This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord,

and this is their vindication

from me," declares the Lord. (NIV)

Isaiah's promise in verse 13 that Israel's children will be taught by the Lord implies an intimate relationship between the people and Christ during the Millennium. If parents will properly teach their children here and now, then these children can enjoy the great legacy of having Christ himself as their teacher and leader. (D&C 45:58; see D&C 68:25-28.) As President Kimball said about this promise of Isaiah, "Surely every good parent would like this peace for his offspring. It comes from the simple life of the true Latter-day Saint as he makes his home and family supreme." (Ensign, July 1973, p. 16.)

In verses 14-15, Isaiah promises other blessings, including righteousness, freedom from oppression and fear, and protection and peace. He concludes with the Lord's promise that no power will prevail against His people. (See D&C 71:9-10; 109:25.)

In short, Isaiah 54 is a promise to Zion and her righteous members. It embodies various poetic forms to depict the relationship between the Lord and covenant Israel. The metaphor of the husband and wife is used throughout the chapter:

Husband provides wife: Jehovah provides Israel: Verses

Children Great numbers 1-3

Love Reconciliation 4-8

Commitment Covenant relationship 9-10

Material comfort Prosperity 11-12

Protection Peace 13-17

The third element (a commitment and covenant relationship) becomes the pivot point for all the other promises and blessings. Because of the Lord's covenant relationship with Israel, he has an eternal commitment to bless those who want to become a part of covenant Israel. The Lord's goal in his commitment is "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:38.)

Having stressed in chapter 54 the Lord's covenant with Israel, Isaiah describes in chapter 55 how the blessings of immortality and eternal life are offered to all people. He also indicates that those who do achieve eternal life in God's celestial presence become an everlasting sign that God's plan and glory is being achieved. Structured in clear chiastic parallelism, this discourse:

A. Invites all to receive the everlasting gospel (vs. 1-3).

B. Promises help (4-5).

C. Requests a turning back to the Lord (6-7).

D. States that God's plans and ways are not man's plans and ways (8).

E. Testifies that the heavens (spiritual plans) are above the earth (mortal designs) (9).

D'. States again that God's plans and ways are not like man's (9).

C'. Declares that some things have already returned back to God (10-11).

B'. Promises that we can be led back to God's presence (12).

A'. Invites us to become God's everlasting sign (13).

Through the ages, gospel truths have been taught by prophets, apostles, and other inspired teachers and servants of God. (Moses 5:12; Abr. 2:6; Deut. 4:5; Acts 5:42; Jacob 1:19; D&C 42:12-14; see TG "Teaching.") Our Heavenly Father has often extended an invitation through the prophets to his children to come and partake of his goodness. (2 Ne. 26:25; John 4:13-14; 6:47-51; Rev. 3:18; 21:6; 22:17.) In chapter 55, Isaiah extends God's invitation not only to the people of his day, but also to readers and listeners throughout the ages. This invitation to partake of the gospel establishes a positive, tender mood from the very beginning of the prophet's discourse:

55 "Come, all you who are? thirsty,

come to the waters;

and you who have no money, come, buy and eat!

Come, buy wine and milk

without money and without cost.

2 Why spend money on what is not bread,

and your labor on what does not satisfy?

Listen, listen to me, and eat what is good,

and your soul will delight in the richest of fare.

3 Give ear and come to me; hear me, that your soul may live.

I will make an everlasting covenant with you,

my faithful love promised to David." (NIV)

The word "thirst" (v. 1) immediately reminds the listener of the human necessity for liquids. Isaiah mentions three common liquids: (1) water, always helpful and usually available to satisfy thirst; (2) wine, less plentiful and available only after some effort, but good for satisfying thirst and in times of rejoicing (Zech. 10:7); (3) milk, common and important for strength, growth, and nourishment. (1 Pet. 2:2.) By applying these three terms in a spiritual context, we see that Isaiah is not only inviting the people to satisfy their physical thirst, but promising them joy and strength as they spiritually drink what the Lord has to offer.

Isaiah quickly lets his audience know that his invitation is symbolic. He tells them that what he is offering can be acquired "without money and without cost" (v. 1). He asks why they spend their money and effort on temporal things, which do not ultimately satisfy (v. 2). This passage was quoted by Jacob in his great sermon on the Atonement and formed the basis for his invitation that all come and partake of the blessings of redemption. (2 Ne. 9:50-51.)

Christ is clearly the "living water" and the "bread of life" (John 4:13; 6:47-51), whose gifts are free to all men. The gospel of Jesus Christ has no monetary price attached to it; one does not have to buy his Church membership or the blessing of resurrection. The invitation to come unto Christ and freely obtain these gifts does not suggest, however, that they can be obtained without effort, though one does not need worldly goods to acquire them. (See Prov. 9:4-6; Ps. 116:10; Alma 37:35 for similar promises about gaining wisdom.) The price is a pure heart and a contrite spirit.

Attracting his listener's attention with a number of imperatives (listen, eat, give ear, come, hear), Isaiah concludes his invitation by promising the Lord's everlasting covenant to the people (v. 3). Of course, the Lord has made many covenants and promises, most of which are conditional upon worthiness before they are fulfilled. For example, the covenant ordinance of baptism promises forgiveness of sins if one has faith, repents, and sins no more. The covenant promises of the sacrament, temple endowment, and temple marriage are all conditional upon righteousness. However, some promises and covenants of the Lord are unconditional; all will receive them. For example, everyone will be taught the gospel before their final judgment, either during earth life or in the spirit world. (D&C 1:2.) At the end of verse 3, Isaiah promises another unconditional blessing, the "sure mercies of David" (KJV). In Acts 13, Paul applies the phrase "sure mercies of David" to the resurrection of Christ (vs. 26-41, esp. 34). Thus, one "everlasting covenant" and "sure mercy of David" that is promised to David and all God's children is the promise of immortality with resurrected bodies. (See Ps. 89:2-4, 27-29.)

However, before God's unconditional promises can be fulfilled, Christ must come and open the gates. Isaiah alludes to Christ and others who aid in the Father's plan in the next two verses of chapter 55:

4 "See, I have made him a witness to the peoples,

a leader and commander of the peoples.

5 Surely you will summon nations you know not,

and nations that do not know you will hasten to you,

because of the Lord your God,

the Holy One of Israel,

for he has endowed you with splendor." (NIV)

in verse 4 refers foremost to the Messiah, but also to David and others who represent the Messiah. (Isa. 11:1; Ezek. 34:23-24; 37:24-25; Jer. 30:9; Hosea 3:5.) Christ is the first and supreme witness of the Father and his plan. (John 18:37; Rev. 1:5.) He is also our way back to the Father's presence, and the source of all righteousness.

The strange nation of verse 5 that will help Israel probably refers to the Gentiles who restore the gospel to the house of Israel in the last days. (Eph. 2:11-12; 3 Ne. 21.) This prophecy is being fulfilled through missionary work in the Church today. (See pp. 203-10.)

Of course, before anybody can partake of the "bread and water" or saving covenants of the gospel, they must learn the truth and repent. Isaiah challenges the people to seek the Lord and repent:

6 Seek the Lord while he may be found;

call on him while he is near.

7 Let the wicked forsake his way and the evil man his thoughts.

Let him turn to the Lord, and he will have mercy on him,

and to our God, for he will freely pardon. (NIV)

Isaiah's testimony that repentance will bring the Lord's forgiveness is simply but clearly stated in verse 7. His promise carries a subtle warning, however, that we have a limited period of time to draw close to the Lord and repent (v. 6). The Lord later combined this counsel with advice from the Sermon on the Mount as he spoke through Joseph Smith:

And again, verily I say unto you, my friends, I leave these sayings with you to ponder in your hearts, with this commandment which I give unto you, that ye shall call upon me while I am near—Draw near unto me and I will draw near unto you; seek me diligently and ye shall find me; ask, and ye shall receive; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. (D&C 88:62-63.)

Interestingly, the phrase "let him turn to the Lord" in verse 7 is full of meaning and is variously translated as "let him return unto the Lord" (KJV) or "let him turn back to the Lord" (NJV). The Hebrew word in the middle of the phrase is shur, meaning "to turn back" or "to turn away." The concept of "turning back" or returning to the Lord implies man's origin and premortal existence with God in a state of cleanliness. Now we are separated from him both physically and spiritually, but he enables us to "return" to him as we "turn away" from worldliness.

The means by which we turn away from sin and return to God is in accordance with God's foreordained plan. Isaiah next talks about this plan:

8 "For my thoughts are not your thoughts,

neither are your ways my ways," declares the Lord.

9 "As the heavens are higher than the earth,

so are my ways higher than your ways

and my thoughts than your thoughts." (NIV)

God's plans, thoughts, ways, words, and actions are not like those of men—they are higher and greater. Isaiah teaches this concept through clear, chiastic parallelism: thoughts/ways/heavens are above the earth/ways/thoughts. Simply stated, however profound men's ideas may be, the Lord's thoughts excel them. This does not mean, however, that man is forever excluded from gaining and sharing God's insights. The Book of Mormon prophet Jacob gives an important key to learning God's ways:

Behold, great and marvelous are the works of the Lord. How unsearchable are the depths of the mysteries of him; and it is impossible that man should find out all his ways. And no man knoweth of his ways save it be revealed unto him; wherefore, brethren, despise not the revelations of God. (Jacob 4:8.)

In comparing the extreme differences between God and man, the psalmist said, "For as the heaven is high above the earth, so great is his mercy toward them that fear him." (Ps. 103:11.) However, the "fear of the Lord" is not meant to be negative, for the psalmist also said that "the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom: a good understanding have all they that do his commandments." (Ps. 110:1.)

Thus, according to the psalmist, those who "fear" or respect the Lord and "do his commandments" will enjoy the "mercy" or blessings of the Lord, which are as great as "the heaven is high above the earth."

Isaiah unites the same concepts of greatness, blessings, and obedience as he concludes chapter 55. First he speaks about elements that leave God's presence, come to earth, and return to God having fulfilled their purpose:

10 "As the rain and the snow come down from heaven,

and do not return to it without watering the earth

and making it bud and flourish,

so that it yields seed for the sower and bread for the eater,

11so is my word that goes out from my mouth:

It will not return to me empty,

but will accomplish what I desire

and achieve the purpose for which I sent it." (NIV)

Rain and snow do not descend in vain; they make the earth fertile and beautiful. (See Job 36:26-28.) Likewise God's word comes to earth for a purpose; it spiritually nourishes man and teaches him the purpose and potential of eternal life.

But God did not create this earth so that he could simply beautify it through rain, nor did he place man upon it simply to have someone to teach; his purpose is to assist his children until they are ready to return to his presence. Isaiah expressed this purpose as follows:

12 "You will go out in joy and be led forth in peace;

the mountains and hills will burst into song before you,

and all the trees of the field will clap their hands.

13 Instead of the thornbush will grow the pine tree,

and instead of briers the myrtle will grow.

This will be for the Lord's renown,

for an everlasting sign,

which will not be destroyed." (NIV)

Isaiah states that we "go out" or leave (God's presence) in joy and that we will eventually be "led home" (NJV) in peace. He did not say that leaving God was meant to be sorrowful or that we would be forced back home to God. We are here because we need the experience and because we can return to God's presence if we follow the prescribed path.

If man achieves the purpose of his creation, the earth herself and the plants and animals upon her (which were organized to provide a beautiful place for man to live) will rejoice (v. 12). Finally, the earth will blossom and reach her own destiny as she becomes the eternal dwelling place for celestial beings (v. 13). As the earth and its inhabitants achieve their full potential, they become an everlasting sign that God's word is true; his work and his glory is "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.) Many have already reached celestial glory (D&C 132:29; 137:1; 138:1); they are eternal witnesses that God's plan, which is higher than any of our plans or any designs of Satan's, does work, and they are an everlasting symbol of God's love and glory.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The gathering in of the faithful outcasts (56:1-8).
