Victor L. Ludlow, Isaiah: Prophet, Seer, and Poet ( 1982)

THE SABBATH AND TEMPLE WORSHIP ISAIAH 56-57

Primarily a prophet and witness to the house of Israel, Isaiah also delivered important discourses to the Gentiles. In chapters 56 and 57, he specifically addresses the foreigners and others who have been excluded from the assembly of Israel. He extends to them the same promises available to the Israelites—the blessings of the Lord, especially His presence.

It seems that toward the end of Isaiah's life, he was prompted to compile his writings and edit them into a form that would inspire his readers. Some scholars wonder if Isaiah might have arranged his discourses into their present order, which is out of sequence chronologically but allows and even encourages multiple levels of meaning. When Isaiah first uttered his pronouncements, they were relevant for the Israelites of his day. But as his work achieved its final form, these same prophecies took on broader meanings by extending their message to all peoples in later ages. Christ alluded to the universal application of Isaiah's words when he said that Isaiah surely "spake as touching all things concerning my people" and "it must needs be that he must speak also to the Gentiles." (3 Ne. 23:2.)

Chapter 56 begins with God's invitation to outsiders, strangers, and the childless to come to his holy mountain and house (the temple) and take part in his eternal kingdom. These eight verses are a prelude to a later, more complete development of this idea in the closing chapters of Isaiah (65-66), in which the prophet teaches the peril of being eternally excluded from God's glory. Chapter 56 concludes and chapter 57 continues with a promise of the Gentile's unrighteous dominion over the wayward Israelites. Chapter 57 also has two short sermons: the first denounces wickedness and invites the people to trust in the Lord; the second promises blessings to the Lord's people and warns them of the consequence of wickedness. The symmetry of these two chapters provides another glimpse into Isaiah's prophetic and poetic powers. They can be divided into four sections:

The Gathering In of the Faithful Outcasts (56:1-8)

The first verses of chapter 56 stress a major theme of the latter chapters of Isaiah—the return of exiles and the welcoming of Gentiles into God's fold. In a chiastic poem, Isaiah extends the Lord's invitation to all those desiring to share the blessings in Zion:

56 Be just and fair to all, the Lord God says. Do what's right and good, for I am coming soon to rescue you. 2Blessed is the man who refuses to work during my Sabbath days of rest, but honors them; and blessed is the man who checks himself from doing wrong.

3And my blessings are for Gentiles, too, when they accept the Lord; don't let them think that I will make them second-class citizens. And this is for the eunuchs too. They can be as much mine as anyone. 4For I say this to the eunuchs who keep his Sabbaths holy and choose the things that please him, and come to grips with his laws: 5I will give them—in my house, within my walls—a name far greater than the honor they would receive from having sons and daughters. For the name that I will give them is an everlasting one; it will never disappear.

6As for the Gentiles, the outsiders who join the people of the Lord and serve him and love his name, and are his servants and don't desecrate the Sabbath, and have accepted his covenant and promises, 7I will bring them also to my holy mountain of Jerusalem, and make them full of joy within my House of Prayer.

I will accept their sacrifices and offerings, for my Temple shall be called "A House of Prayer for All People"! 8For the Lord God who brings back the outcasts of Israel says, I will bring others too besides my people Israel. (LB, italics added)

A. The Lord will rescue

B. The blessed people

C. Sabbath keepers

D. Blessings for Gentiles

E. Eunuchs accepted by the Lord

F. Blessings conditional upon following the Lord

E'. Blessings greater than children

D'. Invitation to Gentiles

C'. Sabbath keepers

B'. The joyfull people

A'. The Lord will gather

The segments in italics indicate the chiastic pattern outlined in the right margin. The central idea is commitment to the Lord. Specifically, Isaiah mentions three conditions for the reception of the Lord's blessings within the temple: keeping the Sabbath holy, choosing the right, and obeying God's laws.

The next most important idea is in the opening and closing segments of the poem. Isaiah teaches that the Lord has promised that all who are righteous and obedient shall be gathered and receive salvation. Isaiah emphasizes the comprehensiveness of this deliverance and gathering, and states that these blessings are for all, Jew and Gentile. The incoming Gentiles, afraid that they will be denied some of the blessings, are assured that they will be acceptable to the Lord and brought to the "Holy Mount," that is, the temple.

Beginning in verse 1, the Lord calls upon mankind to do what is right and just. He promises that their actions will not be in vain, for his "salvation is near to come" (KJV). The Lord's spiritual salvation came during his mortal ministry. Yet his political salvation or coming to "rescue" (LB) all the righteous remains as an unfulfilled promise today. However, we know that his salvation will come soon. Thus, Isaiah's words carry relevance both for his contemporaries and for those who read them today.

Verse 2 echoes the same ideas, adding that people will be happy if they do these things. Also, the Lord admonishes the people to observe the Sabbath in order to prepare for his salvation. (This command sets the stage for verses 3-8, in which the Lord specifies certain non-Israelites, foreigners, and eunuchs who will be eligible for his salvation.) Of course, the observance of the Sabbath was traditionally practiced only by the Israelites; the Gentiles would not have observed it. But because this message is for all who will listen, both Jews and Gentiles, the Lord makes special mention of this requirement, which the incoming children are to observe in order to be prepared for his coming.

When modern Christian readers hear the term Sabbath, they think only of Sunday services, but for the ancient Israelites, the Sabbath carried far greater connotations. (Deut. 5:14-15.) More than a weekly day of worship, Sabbath observance was applied to all religious festivals, including Passover, Shavuot (Pentecost), Succot (Tabernacles), and Yom Kippur (Day of Atonement). Israel even celebrated "Sabbaths" of years (every seventh year), during which the land was not plowed, and the Sabbath year of Jubilees for release from debts and personal servitude. Thus, Sabbaths (v. 4) meant all the religious holidays and the remembrances these holidays invoked of the Lord's dealings with his people. These many Sabbaths reviewed many aspects of the Israelites' commitment to God and served as a sign of their covenant relationship. (Ex. 31:13, 16-17; D&C 59:9-19.) Thus, when Isaiah warns against polluting the Sabbath and admonishes Israel to keep all the Lord's Sabbaths, he means far more than simply resting from one's labors one day a week. (See BD "Sabbath," "Feasts," "Fasts.")

In verse 3, Isaiah extends the Lord's blessings to the Gentiles and the childless. These foreigners (strangers, KJV) and eunuchs were earlier restricted in their religious participation with the Israelites.

The strangers in Israel's midst were usually non-Israelites who accepted Israelite rule. (2 Sam. 1:13; Ezek. 14:7; see BD "Stranger.") Strangers were usually not full citizens, though they shared certain legal rights and responsibilities. Some were barred from entering the tabernacle and even the temple courtyards. (Deut. 23:3.) Although often ostracized and even persecuted, the strangers were under God's protection, and he commanded the Israelites to treat them kindly. (Lev. 19:33-34; Josh. 9:1-10:7; see Eph. 2:11-15, 19; Gal. 3:27-29.)

The eunuchs were particularly restricted in their social acceptance by the Israelites. Under Mosaic law, eunuchs were not allowed into full Israelite fellowship, especially in the sacrificial, tabernacle, and priesthood ordinances. (Lev. 21:17-23; Deut. 23:1-2.) This law was probably given to Israel because wholeness of body typified spiritual wholeness: those who had been emasculated were considered religiously unfit in Israel. (See BD "Eunuch.") Also, the eunuchs enjoyed no inheritance in Israel, since they could not found a family and carry on a tribal name. They were barren as a "dry tree" (v. 3, KJV).

The Lord's beautiful promise in verses 4 and 5 is that the Gentiles and eunuchs, those previously excluded from the complete Israelite covenant, will share God's full blessings if they keep his laws. The major blessing is given in verse 5 with the invitation to receive an everlasting name in the Lord's house, the temple. Particularly, the "outcasts" are promised a "name" and a "place" (KJV) or a "memorial" (NIV) or "monument" (RSV, NJV). One reason for multiple translations is that in the Hebrew the outcasts are promised a "hand and a name," and scholars vary in their interpretation of how a "hand" represents the Lord's temple promises. Of course, they assume that the "name" received is Israel, because these newcomers would be considered as Israelites. This is partially correct, since people willing to share Israel's religious beliefs and responsibilities are known as covenant Israelites, just as those who accept and follow Christ assume his name. (Mosiah 5:7; 3 Ne. 30:2; D&C 45:28.) However, worthy Latter-day Saints who enjoy full involvement with temple worship also recognize that names and hands play an important role in making covenants in endowment and temple sealings. These church members not only take upon themselves the name of Christ and become heirs to the blessings of Israel, but also receive a new name. (See D&C 130:11; MD, pp. 533-34.) More than receiving a hand of fellowship, they also raise their hands in the Lord's house and covenant to keep all his commandments. (See D&C 88:119-21, 130-36.) Thus, the promise of "a hand and a name" implies that the strangers and eunuchs will enjoy the full blessings and ordinances of the temple.

The "hand" of a covenant and the everlasting "name" these people receive is far more valuable than any wealth or posterity (v. 5). If one keeps his sacred covenants, he receives worlds without end and a numberless, eternal posterity. Thus, the strangers and eunuchs who were excluded from Israel and had no children can still share all of Jacob's blessings, including eternal families. And what must they do to receive these blessings? The same as any member of Israel—obey the covenant. (See DNTC 2:276.)

Apparently, the blessings received by the righteous outcasts in the Lord's house are comparable to the "mansions prepared" for the faithful "in the house of the Father" promised in Doctrine and Covenants 81:6: "And if thou art faithful unto the end thou shalt have a crown of immortality, and eternal life."

Verse 7 restates all the previously promised blessings to come upon both Jews and Gentiles. First, the promise of gathering to "my holy mountain" (KJV) is repeated. Next, the Lord promises that their sacrifices and offerings will be received upon his altars. Eventually the Lord's house will not be the exclusive privilege of blood Israel, but "a house of prayer for all people." This promise was fulfilled on June 9, 1978, when the temple blessings were made available to all worthy people, regardless of race. As the Lord promised in verse 8, he has gathered many others to him in addition to the outcasts of Israel.

The Downfall of Israel through Their Wickedness (56:9-57:2)

Isaiah turns from the righteous outcasts who would join Israel and addresses those Gentiles who will come as beasts to devour wicked Israel. He rebukes Israel's leaders who ignore the impending disaster because of their own lazy drunkenness. He also recognizes that with Israel's destruction many righteous will suffer, and he outlines their status in his discourse, which continues into chapter 57:

9Come, wild animals of the field; come, tear apart the sheep; come, wild animals of the forest, devour my people. 10For the leaders of my people—the Lord's watchmen, his shepherds—are all blind to every danger. They are featherbrained and give no warning when danger comes. They love to lie there, love to sleep, to dream. 11And they are as greedy as dogs, never satisfied; they are stupid shepherds who only look after their own interest, each trying to get as much as he can for himself from every possible source.

12"Come," they say. "We'll get some wine and have a party; let's all get drunk. This is really living; let it go on and on, and tomorrow will be better yet!"

57 The good men perish; the godly die before their time and no one seems to care or wonder why. No one seems to realize that God is taking them away from evil days ahead. 2For the godly who die shall rest in peace. (LB)

Isaiah uses pastoral imagery to describe the incompetence and ignorance of the leaders, who leave the "flock" (Israel) open to wild animals (Gentile armies). The Lord introduces this gloomy prophecy in verse 9 by calling the beasts to "come and devour." Because this pronouncement was probably written late in Isaiah's life, after the northern tribes were already taken captive, the prophet is apparently discussing the leaders of Judah in these verses. These blind, unconcerned leaders leave Judah vulnerable to the Babylonians in the sixth century B.C. and later to the Romans after the leaders' rejection of Jesus Christ in the first century A.D. Since the Babylonian captivity, the Jews were open to the false teachings of men and thereby were often led astray from the true teachings of the Lord. Long before the birth of Jesus, they lived in a state of apostasy. Christ, while teaching in Palestine, used this same imagery of wild beasts to describe apostasy and false prophets: "Beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves." (Matt. 7:15.) Isaiah's imagery does not imply that the leaders themselves were the "ravening wolves," but that because of their conduct Israel was left open to those who entered and began the work of destruction.

In verses 10 and 11, Isaiah describes the conduct of the leaders themselves. He says that they are blind and compares them to dogs, dumb dogs, sleeping dogs, greedy dogs, and finally to shepherds who know not (see KJV). All of these were strong indictments against them. First, the watchmen were blind, meaning they had no vision (physically or spiritually) of the approaching danger. (See Ezek. 3:17; 34:1.) Not only were they unaware of the danger, but they were like "dumb dogs" who can't bark out a warning even when the danger is obvious. Even worse than their blindness or dumbness is their attitude, which prevents them from attending to their tasks. Finally, they are greedy, watching out only for themselves. Concerning the disastrous results of these "dogs," the medieval Jewish scholar Kimchi observes,

The flock is intrusted to the care of these watchmen. The wild beasts come; these dogs bark not; and the wild beasts devour the flock. Thus they do not profit the flock. Yea, they injure it; for the owner trusts in them, that they will watch and be faithful; but they are not. These are the false teachers and careless shepherds. (Quoted in Adam Clarke, The Holy Bible . . . with a Commentary and Critical Notes 4:212.)

Unfortunately, Isaiah's imagery seems to describe leaders of many religions in our time. These figures seem to refer to those who possess the gospel themselves (who watch over the flock) but do not make it available to others. His words are comparable to Nephi's comments about the churches of our day (2 Ne. 28:3-9) and Moroni's prophecy about false religions in the last days (Morm. 8:31-33, 37-39.)

If the negligent watchmen were the only casualties, their loss would only serve to satisfy justice. However, along with them many innocent people suffer and are destroyed. In 57:1, Isaiah describes how good people are taken away through slavery or death because of the evil in their society. He promises, however, that the pious will still enjoy some inner peace as they "rest in their beds" (v. 2, KJV). The people resting "in their beds" or "on their couches" (NJV) could be those enjoying some peace in mortality, but this verse probably refers to the rest their bodies experience in the grave while their postmortal spirits walk in "uprightness" (v. 2, KJV) in paradise. Whether in the mortal world or in the spirit world, the righteous who suffer because of another's wickedness can still know peace and rest.

A Rebuke of the Wicked (57:3-13)

Isaiah contrasts the peace of the righteous with the acts of the wicked, which will bring the wicked into a state of eternal turmoil (57:3-13, 20-21). He vividly describes the people's wickedness:

3But you—come here, you witches' sons, you offspring of adulterers and harlots! 4Who is it you mock, making faces and sticking out your tongues? You children of sinners and liars! 5You worship your idols with great zeal beneath the shade of every tree, and slay your children as human sacrifices down in the valleys, under overhanging rocks. 6Your gods are the smooth stones in the valleys. You worship them and they, not I, are your inheritance. Does all this make me happy? 7, 8You have committed adultery on the tops of the mountains, for you worship idols there, deserting me. Behind closed doors you set your idols up and worship someone other than me. This is adultery, for you are giving these idols your love, instead of loving me. 9You have taken pleasant incense and perfume to Molech as your gift. You have traveled far, even to hell itself, to find new gods to love. 10You grew weary in your search, but you never gave up. You strengthened yourself and went on. 11Why were you more afraid of them than of me? How is it that you gave not even a second thought to me? Is it because I've been too gentle, that you have no fear of me?

12And then there is your "righteousness" and your "good works"—none of which will save you. 13Let's see if the whole collection of your idols can help you when you cry to them to save you! They are so weak that the wind can carry them off! A breath can puff them away. But he who trusts in me shall possess the land and inherit my Holy Mountain. (LB)

The epithets "witch," "adulterer," and "harlot" in verses 3 and 4 personify the abject wickedness of Israel; it is rare in prophetic literature that so many abusive terms are used in a single stanza. (Compare Ezek. 16; 23.) These verses seem a natural outgrowth of the preceding section, which describes the corruption of Israel's leaders. The watchmen have relaxed and evil has flooded in.

Commentators differ widely in fixing a historical background for this prophecy. It is possible that Isaiah is describing the social conditions in Judah toward the end of his life. Manasseh, who ruled Judah after his father Hezekiah, was an apostate with strong Assyrian and pagan sympathies. Manasseh's persecution of the innocent is depicted in verse 1; the sacrificing of his own son to Molech is referred to in verses 5 and 9. (See 2 Kgs. 21:6.) In another context and in keeping with the Babylonian setting for many Isaianic writings, this situation hints at the wicked condition prevailing among the Samaritans and Jews who were left behind in Palestine after Nebuchadnezzar deported many Jews in 586 B.C. The later reforms undertaken by Ezra and Nehemiah were rejected by the Samaritans, who had mixed the worship of Jehovah with idolatrous rites and beliefs similar to those described above. Either situation could have been used by Isaiah to prophesy of Judah's wickedness.

Isaiah highlights two major abuses of the people, immorality and the sacrifice of children. In verses 5, 7, and 8, he plunges into a vivid description of their wickedness. They worship with "great zeal" as they "inflame themselves" (KJV) under the terebinths (v. 5). The precise meaning of this phrase is lost to modern readers, but the Hebrew word translated as "great zeal" or "enflaming yourselves" means to arouse a person sexually. (Young, The Book of Isaiah 3:402.) Ancient idol worship was inseparably connected with ritual prostitution and fertility cults. Since ancient economies were founded upon agriculture, the people's dependence upon the fertility of the ground was absolute. As the pagan worship developed in ancient cultures, the belief developed that if a farmer had intercourse with a priestess at a local temple and she became pregnant, this was a sign that the fertility god would look favorably upon his crops.

Also, ancient man believed that the lives and interactions of the gods were reflected in the life of man. That is, if man acted out certain activities on earth then this would facilitate their taking place in heaven. So, if people involved themselves in fertility acts in their pagan temples, then their gods would bless the land with productivity. Thus, the pagan temples usually became centers of ritual or religious prostitution. Isaiah describes this in verse 5. As the wicked Israelites commit adultery through pagan worship, they break their covenant with God. Verses 7 and 8 give further evidence of their zeal in pursuing immorality.

The people were not only steeped in adultery through their pagan worship, but sacrificed their children. The ritual of the pagan god Molech required the worshipper to sacrifice his firstborn son. Molech was a large brass god with a hollow stomach, in which a great fire was kindled and into which the child was placed.

Both of these pagan practices are denounced in numerous scriptural references. (Deut. 12:2; 1 Kgs. 14:23; Jer. 2:20; 3:6; 13; 17:2; Hosea 4:13-14; Ezek. 6:13; Jer. 32:35; Ezek. 20:26-31.) However, in spite of God's obvious displeasure with both acts, they have found their way, metaphorically, into modern practice. No longer practiced as pagan religious rituals, the twin sins of immorality and abortion have the same evil effect in contemporary society. They strike at the root of the procreative processes and disrupt the respect people should have for life. They also indicate people's selfishness and their desire for personal gratification rather than controlling their passions, respecting marital covenants, and committing themselves to raising a family. These sins continue to take people from God and subject them to the buffetings of Satan.

In verse 9, Isaiah continues his theme: through these sexual and ritual acts the people have made covenants with the pagan gods. The oils, perfumes, and envoys are representative of tribute paid to alien cults and their prostitutes. But Isaiah exposes the true nature of this tribute and to whom it is paid. Their covenant has been with none other than Satan.

The people are so entrenched in their sins that they have lost their fear of God and his judgments (v. 12). The Lord attempts to alert them to their foolishness by asserting that their idols will profit them nothing: their idols will not hear their petitions, but will be carried away by the wind (vs. 12-13).

This brief discourse concludes with a promise that those who repent and trust in the Lord will enjoy his blessings. Indeed, the righteous will become a part of his "holy mountain," the temple and its covenants and promises.

A Promise to the Righteous (57:14-21)

In sharp contrast to the scathing denunciation and heavy style of the preceding pronouncement, Isaiah now employs flowing diction and subdued expectation as he promises the repentant sufferers the tender healing and protection of the Lord:

14I will say, Rebuild the road! Clear away the rocks and stones. Prepare a glorious highway for my people's return from captivity.

15The high and lofty one who inhabits eternity, the Holy One, says this: I live in that high and holy place where those with contrite, humble spirits dwell; and I refresh the humble and give new courage to those with repentant hearts. 16For I will not fight against you forever, nor always show my wrath; if I did, all mankind would perish—the very souls that I have made. 17I was angry and smote these greedy men. But they went right on sinning, doing everything their evil hearts desired. 18I have seen what they do, but I will heal them anyway! I will lead them and comfort them, helping them to mourn and to confess their sins. 19Peace, peace to them, both near and far, for I will heal them all. 20But those who still reject me are like the restless sea, which is never still, but always churns up mire and dirt. 21There is no peace, says my God, for them! (LB)

The highway of salvation described in verse 14 is a common image in Isaiah (40:3; 62:10; see TG "Highway"). While the phrase "cast ye up, cast ye up, prepare the way" (KJV) generally refers to the coming of the lost Ten Tribes (D&C 133:23-28), Isaiah seems to be using it here as a figure of speech. He calls for the removal of everything that hinders spiritual growth, especially the weeds of wickedness that he denounced in the previous discourse. This spiritual way is to be the road upon which people return to spiritual health. In a latter-day context, this way could represent the restoration of the gospel through Joseph Smith. The light and knowledge restored to mankind clears the road. No longer are the people who seek God in spiritual darkness; the way of salvation is clear for them to travel back into God's presence.

God has accomplished this. He is high and lofty, his name is holy, and he dwells in holiness (v. 15). Yet his exalted position does not hinder his kindness and condescension to man. He dwells with the contrite and lowly of spirit. He heals, bringing back to life those of a lowly countenance. Indeed, verse 16 emphasizes this point as Isaiah proclaims that God, in his abundant grace, will not contend or be angry, but will give life. He retains compassion for those "souls" or premortal spirits he created. The only reason he cursed them and turned away from them is because they followed their own heart instead of his way (v. 17). Verse 18 reaffirms God's commitment to heal and comfort those who have suffered his wrath. The people of whom the Lord speaks in these verses are probably either the righteous who have suffered because of corrupt leaders (56:9-57:1-2) or those who have seen the error of their ways and have developed faith in the Lord (57:13, 15).

In closing, Isaiah makes some statements that encompass the righteous and the wicked (vs. 19-21). The righteous, wherever they may be, will be healed (v. 19), but the wicked can never rest. They are like a troubled sea that continually tosses mud and mire (v. 20). The wicked who think that they can continue in their wickedness will ultimately realize that they find no peace in their actions. (Isa. 56:12; 57:10, 21.) They will not be safe from the great judgment day when Christ comes to judge all mankind. (Moro. 10:34; see Isa. 48:22.)

President Harold B. Lee often quoted these last three verses of chapter 57 and applied them in at least three different contexts. For example, he placed them in the setting of Latter-day Saints struggling against the world (CR, Apr. 1942, p. 87); he applied them to different types of Latter-day Saints within the Church (CR, Oct. 1947, p. 67); and finally, in his last general conference, he applied them to all who seek wickedness and lack true self-love or self-respect:

To those who fail to heed the warnings of those who are striving to teach these principles and choose to go in the opposite course, they will eventually find themselves in the pitiable state which you are witnessing so often among us. The prophet Isaiah described the tragic result most dramatically when he repeated the words of God which came to him as he sought to fortify his people against the wickedness of the world, and I quote his words: [Isa. 57:19-21.]

As I have prayerfully thought of the reasons why one chooses this course which is dramatically described by the prophet Isaiah—when one who has departed from the path which would have given him peace is like the troubled sea, casting up mire and dirt—it seems to me that it all results from the failure of the individual to have self-respect. (CR, Oct. 1973, p. 4.)

Just as President Lee often returned to these verses of Isaiah and found insight and application from them, all students of the scriptures should continually reread the scriptures and seek to understand the prophets' words, which can enlighten and strengthen them.

SCRIPTURAL NOTES AND COMMENTARY

Isaiah 57: Chiastic Outline

This chapter contains a neat, clear chiasmus:

State of the Righteous and Wicked

A. The righteous enter A'. No peace for the

into peace (v. 1) wicked (v. 21)

B. Mental and spiritual B'. Mental and spiritual

rest for the righteous in anguish for the wicked in

paradise (2) spirit prison (20)

C. Evil seed brings forth C'. Righteousness brings

nothing but spiritual death forth fruits of everlasting

(3) life (19)

D. Acts of wickedness are D'. Fruits of righteousness

denounced (4-12) are promised (14-18)

E. Those who continue to E'. Those who continue to

trust in false gods (Satan) trust in the Lord will

will receive nothing; they receive his blessings and

will inherit eternal inherit eternal life (13b)

damnation (13a)
