Victor L. Ludlow, Isaiah: Prophet, Seer, and Poet ( 1982)

THE MESSIAH COMES AND DELIVERS VICTORY ISAIAH 63-64

After describing the exaltation of Zion and her growth through the influx of Gentiles (Isa. 62), Isaiah explains in chapter 63 the destruction of Israel's enemies. In order for Zion to fill the entire earth, the enemies of righteousness must be displaced through the power of the Lord. After Isaiah prophesies concerning the Lord's power to cleanse the earth, he reminds Israel of what the Lord has already done and pleads with the Lord to bring about his promised salvation. Isaiah develops his major themes in chapter 63 and 64 as follows:

A. Dialogue with Christ about his second coming (63:1-6)

B. The Lord's former greater deed (63:7-14)

C. Isaiah's intercessory prayer for Israel (63:15—64:12)

Dialogue with Christ about His Second Coming (63:1-6)

Chapter 63 begins with a dialogue between a watchman on the walls of Jerusalem and an approaching stranger. Isaiah is the watchman, and the stranger is a mighty conqueror coming from the direction of Edom, one of Israel's worst enemies. The conversation begins with a question and the stranger's response:

63 Who is this coming from Edom,

from Bozrah in garments stained with crimson,

so richly clothed,

marching so full of strength?

—It is I, who speak of integrity and am powerful to save. (JB)

The stranger is distinguished by three characteristics: (1) he comes from Edom, (2) his fine garments are stained red, and (3) he effuses majestic strength.

The stranger's coming from Edom can be variously interpreted. First, it can mean that he is coming literally from the east, from the direction of Edom, which lies east and south of the Dead Sea. Travelers from Edom and its capital city of Bozrah usually traveled north on the King's Highway past the Dead Sea and then turned west through Jericho toward Jerusalem. (See Map 3.) Second, Edom represents the "world," or the worldly powers and nations that oppose God. (See Isa. 63, footnote 1b; D&C 1:36.) The word Edom in the Hebrew comes from the root meaning "earth," "dirt," or "red." Thus, Edom also means "red earth," and the stranger in red garments coming from Edom could symbolize his coming from the red hills of the earth. That is, the redness that stained his clothes may have also colored the earth. (Compare D&C 133:46.)

The stained, red clothing is the second identifying characteristic of the stranger.

The third characteristic is the stranger's dignity, heightened by his authoritative reply. Although he does not give his name, it appears that he is the Lord himself, who has come to Jerusalem with the power to save its people.

The watchman's attention, however, is attracted to the red garments or robes of the Lord. Isaiah's short question about the clothing brings forth a long response:

2—Why are your garments red,

your clothes as if you had trodden the winepress?

3—I have trodden the winepress alone.

Of the men of my people not one was with me.

In my anger I trod them down,

trampled them in my wrath.

Their juice spattered my garments,

and all my clothes are stained.

4For in my heart was a day of vengeance,

my year of redemption had come.

5I looked: there was no one to help;

aghast: not one could I find to support me.

My own arm then was my mainstay,

my wrath my support.

6I crushed the people in my fury,

trampled them in my anger,

and made the juice of them run all over the ground. (JB)

A

B

C

D

E

A'

B'

C'

Isaiah's question makes it apparent that Christ's clothing is unnaturally red. It looks like the clothing of servants that becomes spotted as they trample the grapes and splash the juices.

The Lord's response indicates many important qualities of his mission, as outlined in the right column above:

A. He alone could fulfill his mission

B. His anger caused him to destroy the wicked

C. Their blood (juice) stained his clothes

D. He had a day of vengeance for the wicked

E. He had a year of redemption for the righteous

Three of the ideas—A, B, C—are repeated and reinforced in verses 5 and 6. When these verses were repeated in the Doctrine and Covenants, verses 5 and 6 were not included. (See D&C 133:50-52.)

The image of Christ as a vengeful, bloodstained warrior is somewhat different from the usual Christian concept of Christ at his second coming. However, it is in line with Isaiah's earlier teachings (Isa. 59:15-20; 34:8; 61:2) and the prophecies of Joseph Smith (D&C 133:46-53; 97:22-26). The day of vengeance, however, is only upon the wicked, and the Lord's wrath is free of malice or impurity—he simply requires justice for all sinners. (D&C 133:50-51; D&C 29:17.)

The earlier verses of chapter 63 refer to the atonement of Christ. To begin with, Isaiah describes the conqueror as coming in red robes from Edom and Bozrah. As indicated earlier, the word Edom shares the same Hebrew root as the word earth. Also, the word Bozrah can mean "sheep fold." A figurative reading of verse 1 thus reads, "Who is this that cometh from the world (meaning Christ's earthly life), with dyed garments from the sheepfold (meaning the members of the Church)?" The sacrifices that ancient Israelites performed were symbols of the perfect sacrifice to be offered by Christ. (2 Ne. 11:4; Moses 5:6-8.) Furthermore, a part of the ancient sacrifice was to offer up a sheep or animal from among the "fold" (Lev. 1:2) that should be unblemished, the best one. Christ's life and atonement demonstrate that he was the only unblemished child of God on this earth, and therefore the only possible sacrifice for us.

Next, Isaiah says that the conqueror is "mighty to save" (KJV). Christ was the only one mighty enough to save. But the English word save does not convey the full meaning of the Hebrew word lehoshi'a, which should be translated "cause to save." That is, Christ's atonement can "cause" salvation from sin, but his powers do not automatically save everyone; each person must repent and seek forgiveness through the proper ordinances.

The final major feature of this person is that his garments are stained red. This refers to Christ's atonement: "And being in an agony he prayed more earnestly: and his sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground." (Luke 22:44.)

Interestingly, Isaiah notes that Christ's clothing was red "like him that treadeth in the winefat." And Christ responds, "I have trodden the winepress." The imagery of the winepress is most interesting; geth means "garden" and semane means "a press for liquids," an oil or wine press. It was in the "garden of the winepress," Gethsemane, that the Atonement took place.

Also, Christ took upon himself the sins of the world alone in the garden. This is emphasized in Isaiah 63:1-6.

In short, the first half dozen verses of Isaiah 63 contain strong images of Christ's atonement, which took place almost two thousand years ago. However, in their context in the book of Isaiah and in the Doctrine and Covenants, these verses have a more particular application to some time in the future when Christ comes in his "day of vengeance" upon the wicked. [^1]

The Lord's Former Great Deeds (63:7-14)

Verse 4 promises a "year of redemption" that will come to the righteous. This could be the year of Jubilee, during which it was customary to free Hebrew slaves. (Lev. 25; see pp. 483-84.) However, it more likely refers to the freedom from persecution granted the righteous when the Lord's millennial reign is established.

Isaiah reinforces the hope for a future redemption by reviewing the powerful acts of the Lord in the past, particularly during the exodus from Egypt:

7Let me sing the praises of Yahweh's goodness,

and of his marvelous deeds,

in return for all that he has done for us

and for the great kindness

he has shown us in his mercy

and in his boundless goodness.

8He said, "Truly they are my people,

sons and no rogues."

He proved himself their saviour

9in all their troubles.

It was neither messenger nor angel

but his Presence that saved them.

In his love and pity

he redeemed them himself,

he lifted them up, carried them,

throughout the days of old.

10But they rebelled, they grieved

his holy spirit.

Then he turned enemy,

and himself waged war on them.

11They remembered the days of old,

of Moses his servant

Where is he who brought out of the sea

the shepherd of his flock?

Where is he who endowed him

with his holy spirit,

12who at the right hand of Moses

set to work with his glorious arm,

who divided the waters before them

to win himself everlasting renown,

13who made them walk through the ocean

as easily as a horse through the desert?

14They stumbled as little as an ox

going down to the plain.

The spirit of Yahweh led them to rest.

This is how you guided your people

to win yourself glorious renown. (JB)

After an introduction in verse 7, Isaiah recounts God's kind acts toward Israel, first mentioning Israel's election as the chosen people (v. 8). Isaiah calls Israel the sons of God and adds that, as such, they should never deal falsely with God. He concludes verse 8 with the remark that God's loving kindness is best manifest in his becoming their savior.

Isaiah highlights in verse 9 the kindness and mercy of Jehovah; he reminds Israel that in all their affliction Jehovah was willing to aid them. The phrase "the angel of his presence saved them" (v. 9, KJV) echoes Moses' words. Moses indicates that this angel is the Lord himself. (Ex. 33:12-15; see D&C 133:52-53.)

In verse 10, Isaiah reminds Israel that she has rebelled against the Lord in spite of the Lord's kindness and Moses' warnings. (Compare Ex. 23:21 with Ex. 17:1-7; 32:1-14.) Instead of being faithful sons of God (v. 8), the people have dealt falsely with God, becoming his enemy. The people begin to wonder what happened to the God who has wrought such wonders for them earlier. In verses 11-14, Isaiah twists their own questions to remind them of how the Lord once guided Israel.

Isaiah's Intercessory Prayer for Israel (63:15—64:12)

Isaiah speaks for all Israel to the Lord and prays for her final redemption. Isaiah's prayer contains five elements in a loose chiastic pattern:

A. A petition to the Lord to remember Israel (63:15-17)

B. A statement on the consequences of Israel's sins (63:18-19)

C. A hope that the Lord will make his power known (64:1-5a)

B'. A statement on Israel's sinfulness (64:5b-7)

A'. A petition that the Lord will forget his anger against Israel (64:8-12)

Isaiah first addresses the Lord and then petitions him to remember and return to Israel:

15Look down from heaven, look down

from your holy and glorious dwelling.

Where is your ardour, your might,

the yearning of your inmost heart?

Do not let your compassion go unmoved,

16for you are our Father.

For Abraham does not own us

and Israel does not acknowledge us;

you, Yahweh, yourself are our Father,

Our Redeemer is your ancient name.

17Why, Yahweh, leave us to stray from your ways

and harden our hearts against fearing you?

Return, for the sake of your servants,

the tribes of your inheritance. (JB)

Isaiah realizes that the people are so extremely wicked that neither Abraham nor Jacob would now accept the Israelites as members of their family (v. 16). Besides, these ancient patriarchs are long dead and unable to directly help the children of Israel upon the earth. However, the Lord is the father of this earth, the gospel, the Atonement, salvation, and redemption. Surely he will not forget or disclaim Israel, in spite of her wickedness.

In verse 17 it seems that Isaiah holds the Lord partially accountable for Israel's wickedness. In the King James Version, the first part of this verse reads, "O Lord, why hast thou made us to err from thy ways, and hardened our heart from thy fear?" The same is implied in the Jerusalem Bible. However, Joseph Smith clarified this verse in his translation: "O Lord, why has thou suffered us to err from thy ways, and to harden our heart from thy fear?" Instead of the Lord "making" the Israelites to sin and "hardening" their hearts, he "suffered" or allowed the Israelites to sin and harden their own hearts. The Lord does not cause anyone to stray from righteousness, but he does allow people to sin according to their own will.

As the people sinned, they brought upon themselves both physical and spiritual consequences, for new rulers gained power over them. Isaiah recognizes that the Lord has allowed these foreign leaders to control Israel because she no longer follows the Lord:

18Why have the wicked set foot in your sanctuary,

why are our enemies trampling your sanctuary?

19We have long been like people you do not rule,

people who do not bear your name. (JB)

Isaiah earnestly hopes for a time when the Lord will reign as sole ruler over Israel and his divine power will extend worldwide. He wishes that the Lord could come and rule immediately:

64 Oh, that you would tear the heavens open and come down

—at your Presence the mountains would melt,

2as fire sets brushwood alight,

as fire causes water to boil—

to make known your name to your enemies,

and make the nations tremble at your Presence,

3working unexpected miracles

4such as no one has ever heard of before.

No ear has heard,

no eye has seen

any god but you act like this

for those who trust him.

5You guide those who act with integrity

and keep your ways in mind. (JB)

These verses are repeated in the Doctrine and Covenants in the context of the last dispensation when the gospel is preached to every nation. (See Rev. 14:6-7.) As God's servants and missionaries take the gospel to the world, they also call upon the Lord, repeating the words of Isaiah. They too request that the Lord's power be made manifest to the nations. (See D&C 133:37-45.)

When the Lord finally demonstrates his power, all the world will observe his miracles and tremble before him (v. 2; D&C 34:8). Some of these manifestations will be seen by all people, but only those who wait for him (KJV), trust in him (JB), and love him (1 Cor. 2:9) will behold all the great things that have never been previously revealed (v. 4).

Isaiah knows that his own generation is unworthy of the Lord's power and presence. He recognizes that any wicked generation does not witness the Lord's glorious powers. Instead, they give themselves over to the power of sin:

You were angry when we were sinners;

we had long been rebels against you.

6We were all like men unclean,

all that integrity of ours like filthy clothing.

We have all withered like leaves

and our sins blew us away like the wind.

7No one invoked your name

or roused himself to catch hold of you.

For you hid your face from us

and gave us up to the power of our sins. (JB)

Isaiah clearly identifies the cause of the people's separation from the Lord as their own sins. It is not that the Lord was unable to help them, but that they did not turn to him and request his aid. Therefore, the Lord hid his face from the people and turned them over to the buffetings of Satan (v. 7).

Isaiah hopes that Israel will forsake her sins and that the Lord will not have to continually chastise her. As Isaiah concludes chapter 64, he reviews the relationship between Israel and the Lord and petitions the Lord to cease his anger and punishment, to speak again to Israel and redeem her:

8And yet, Yahweh, you are our Father;

we the clay, you the potter,

we are all the work of your hand.

9Do not let your anger go too far, Yahweh,

or go on thinking of our sins for ever.

See, see, we are all your people;

10your holy cities are a wilderness,

Zion a wilderness,

Jerusalem a desolation,

11our holy and glorious Temple,

in which our fathers prayed to you,

is burnt to the ground;

all that gave us pleasure lies in ruins.

12Yahweh, can you go unmoved by all of this,

oppressing us beyond measure by your silence? (JB)

Verse 8 contains the well-known allegory of the potter and the clay: the Lord is the potter and we are the clay. Verse 9 grows out of verse 8 and suggests that the Lord should not be too angry with us because we are all his people. Isaiah represents a humble, repentant people as he concludes the chapters and requests the Lord's action in their behalf. These repentant people are ready to be shaped by the master into vessels of eternal glory.

Isaiah continues his pattern of contrasts in these chapters. For example, in 63:4 he promises a "day of vengeance" and a "year of redemption." Due to the wickedness of his audience, most of Isaiah's discourses warn about the "day of vengeance." However, in these later chapters, Isaiah speaks more often about the "year of redemption."

The phrases "day of vengeance" and "year of redemption" show the ratio of the Lord's vengeance and redemption: he will execute vengeance for only a day, but his redemption lasts for a year. In other words, his punishments will be temporary, but his blessings permanent.

ISAIAH IN THE DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS

Except for Section 113, Isaiah is not directly quoted or mentioned in the Doctrine and Covenants, although dozens of verses from his work are quoted. A study of the Isaiah passages in the Doctrine and Covenants helps one understand both books of scripture: the Doctrine and Covenants applies Isaiah's prophecies to the last days, and the book of Isaiah expands the meaning of the Doctrine and Covenants.

Nine of the 138 sections in the Doctrine and Covenants use Isaiah's words and ideas extensively: 1, 45, 88, 101, 109, 113, 124, 128, and 133. These sections contain passages from half of the Isaiah chapters, especially Isaiah 1, 8, 11, 13, 24, 28, 35, 40, 50, 52, 60, 62-65.

Section 1

Section 1 of the Doctrine and Covenants compares with Isaiah 1 in two ways: both were written later in the ministries of the prophets who wrote them, and both serve as a preface to the books of which they are a part. Although these two chapters do not share phraseology, they share similar messages, for both denounce the broken covenants of the chosen people (D&C 1:15-16; Isa. 1:10-15), extend an invitation to repent (D&C 1:32; Isa. 1:18), and promise a future day of judgment (D&C 1:8-10; Isa. 1:25) and righteousness (D&C 1:22-28; Isa. 1:19, 26-27).

Section 45

Section 45:42 contains a prophecy very similar to Isaiah's prophecy in Isaiah 13:10 about the darkening of the sun, the moon turning to blood, and the stars falling. (See also D&C 29:14; 34:9; 88:87; 133:49.) Both chapters talk about major disturbances upon the earth (D&C 45:26; Isa. 13:13) and the Lord's destruction of the wicked (D&C 45:68-69; Isa. 13:4-13).

Section 88

Two unusual terms appear in both Isaiah and the Doctrine and Covenants. First, both works use the image of "wings" (D&C 88:45; Isa. 18:1): Isaiah gives a prophecy to a land shadowed by wings; Joseph Smith describes the earth and stars as "rolling on their wings." However, Joseph adds that the stars roll on their wings "in their glory, in the midst of the power of God." Applying this idea to Isaiah's prophecy reinforces the interpretation that the land Isaiah addresses in chapter 18 is a chosen land protected by the Lord's power.

Both scriptures use the phrase "uplifted hands" (D&C 88:132, 135; Isa. 1:15) to describe the act of prayer. Although we today do not ordinarily raise our hands while praying, it was a tradition for earlier Israelites.

Section 101

Section 101 contains strong echoes of Isaiah chapter 65, particularly verses 20-22. Phrases from Isaiah 65:20-22 are used in section 101:30 and phrases from Isaiah 65:21-22 are used in section 101:101. These verses describe the long, prosperous lives of those who live during the Millennium. Study the context of both books of scripture to appreciate how these conditions will be brought about in the last days.

Section 109

In section 109, the dedicatory prayer for the Kirtland Temple, Joseph Smith invokes the Lord's judgments upon those who spread lies about his work and servants (vs. 29-30). In chapter 28, Isaiah describes an overflowing scourge, hail, and waters that will come upon liars (vs. 15-18). Taken together, these two writings demonstrate the prophets' power to invoke judgments upon the wicked and their ability to prophesy signs of the last days. Also, these passages help explain why catastrophes come upon the earth's inhabitants.

Section 113

This is the only section in which the Isaiah passages are specifically identified, since it consists of a question-and-answer format with phrases from two Isaiah chapters as the subject matter. Terms from verses 1 and 10 of Isaiah 11 are explained in verses 1-6 of section 113, and phrases from Isaiah 52:1-2, 7-8, 10 are explained in verses 7-10 of section 113.

Section 124

One important development in the last days is that Gentiles and rulers of nations will help build Zion. This theme is stressed in verses 5-11 of section 124. Isaiah gives further details about this work in chapter 60 of his work, especially in verses 3, 10-17. A review of the earlier discussions on chapters 32-33, 48-49, and 60-61 of Isaiah highlights many Isaianic prophecies concerning the gathering of Israel and the building of Zion in the last days. The careful study of section 124 reveals many of the same prophecies. And continued study of current events in the growth of the Church throughout the world shows the fulfillment of many of these prophecies. Through further prayer and effort, all of them will be fulfilled, and the Lord's hand will be demonstrated through the Gentiles and their leaders.

Section 128

Three specific terms—gladness, Immanuel, and witnesses—found in both Isaiah and the Doctrine and Covenants can be more clearly understood as one studies their context in both works.

Glad or gladness shows up eight times in verses 19-23 of section 128 and only fifteen times in the rest of the Doctrine and Covenants. Similarly, the same term is found eleven times in Isaiah and only twenty-one other times in the rest of the prophetic works of the Old Testament. Therefore, section 128:19-23 and Isaiah complement each other by showing different ways God's children achieve and express "gladness." The eleven references in Isaiah are 16:10; 22:13; 25:9; 30:29; 35:1, 10; 39:2; 51:3, 11; 65:18; 66:10. (Other Isaiah passages that describe joy and gladness are: 14:7; 44:23; 48:20; 49:13; 52:7-10; see also 12:5; 26:19; 42:10; 55:9-12.)

The term Immanuel occurs only five times in the standard works. It appears twice in the Book of Mormon, during Nephi's quotation of Isaiah (2 Ne. 17:14; 18:8). It occurs twice in Isaiah (7:14; 8:8) and once in Doctrine and Covenants 128:22. Section 128 presents the foreordination and the redemptive role of Immanuel, while the Isaiah passages record Isaiah's original Immanuel prophecy and a declaration that this earth belongs to the Promised One.

The role of witnesses is very important in the Lord's plan for teaching the gospel. By comparing section 128 with Isaiah 29 and 2 Nephi 27, one quickly appreciates the role of scriptures and prophets as special witnesses in the last days. Before the Lord can bring judgment upon the people, he must give them an opportunity to hear the gospel and receive the testimonies of witnesses that the gospel is true. Then if the people reject the truth, they can be held accountable and judged according to the witnesses they have received. Further ideas about the witnesses of prophets and scriptures are discussed on pp. 268-77

Section 133

Section 133 contains more Isaiah passages than any other section of the Doctrine and Covenants. It is similar to chapters 35, 50, and 62-64 of Isaiah, as well as almost a dozen other Isaianic passages. Given originally as the appendix or conclusion to the Doctrine and Covenants, section 133 was received by Joseph Smith just two days after he received section 1. Section 133 is a proclamation to be sent to the entire world and, as such, includes promises about the return of the remnants of Israel, the Lord's glorious second coming, and the establishment of Zion. It is no wonder that it contains so many similarities to Isaiah's writings.

As Joseph Smith prophesies about the return of Israel in Doctrine and Covenants 133:27-33, he includes some of Isaiah's phraseology. (Isa. 35:7-10; see Isa. 51:9-11.) Both passages mention water in the desert, a highway for the returning remnants, and the gathering of the righteous and their songs of joy. By comparing passages and contexts, one can better understand the events surrounding the return of the Ten Tribes and other remnants of Israel in the last days.

Isaiah 50 is echoed in section 133, in which Joseph Smith speaks about the Lord's manifestation of power in the last days. Phrases and concepts from Isaiah 50:2, 3, and 11 are repeated in Doctrine and Covenants 133:66-70. These comparisons are discussed on pages 419-25.

Most of the Isaiah passages are centered in verses 40-53 of section 133, but are recorded in a different order. This shuffled order is comparable to Christ's quotations of Isaiah 52 recorded in 3 Nephi. It appears that neither section 133 nor Isaiah 62-64 is organized in a strict chronological or thematic order. The Lord probably deliberately mixes the sequence of prophecies about the last days. (See pp. 414-15, 437.) Rather than giving a complete, detailed chronological list, he reveals different items in varying sequence so that each reader can study the prophecies and search for himself to see how they are being fulfilled.

Many other cross references between the book of Isaiah and the Doctrine and Covenants can be found in the footnotes and Topical Guide entries of the Latter-day Saint edition of the King James Version of the Bible.

Before concluding this special topic on Isaiah in the Doctrine and Covenants, an important question needs to be asked and some possible answers presented: "Why is so much Isaiah phraseology found in the Doctrine and Covenants?" At least four answers are possible:

I discount the first explanation, and doubt if the second adequately explains the similarities between the two works. I believe that either subtle inspiration (coupled with a natural use of King James phraseology) or direct revelation best explains why there is so much Isaiah phraseology in the Doctrine and Covenants.

In conclusion, the writings of Isaiah and Joseph Smith provide complementary and often overlapping accounts about many events in the last days. Studying both records together provides insights about our day that neither scripture gives by itself. These two books serve as strong witnesses for each other and testify not only that God has revealed great truths to his prophets, but also that he continues to do so. As we understand more about how God's word has been and continues to be revealed, we can better appreciate the messages of the scriptures and the personal promptings of the Spirit.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Slaying an ox/killing a man. The ox is an animal for sacrifice, but if the sacrificer lacks the spirit of faith and devotion, he has simply committed an act of murder like the killing of a man.
