Victor L. Ludlow, Isaiah: Prophet, Seer, and Poet ( 1982)

A NEW HEAVEN AND A NEW EARTH ISAIAH 65-66

Isaiah's last two chapters comprise a set of prophecies that complement each other and serve as a bookend match to the first two chapters in Isaiah's book. Scholars generally agree that Isaiah 65 and 66 reinforce each other since they both foretell the Lord's judgment (65:1-16; 66:1-6), millennial blessings for Israel (65:17-25; 66:7-16), new heavens and a new earth (65:17; 66:22), and the Lord's presence and peace in Jerusalem (65:18-19; 66:8-12). In addition, these two chapters reiterate and complement the message of chapters 1 and 2.

In his first two chapters, Isaiah describes the Israelites' religious rebellion and lists those practices that particularly displease the Lord. He also promises redemption for Zion and the establishment of the "mountain of the Lord's house" for Israel. Similarly, in chapters 65 and 66 Isaiah warns the people and lists particularly offensive religious practices; he concludes with the promise of a glorious Zion with the presence of the Lord. These two chapters contain many parallel ideas that are also scattered through other chapters of Isaiah. Some of the more striking parallels are listed below:

The Lord almost destroys Israel The Lord barely leaves some survivors

(65:8-10) (1:9)

The Lord's sword upon the wicked The Lord's sword for the disobedient

(65:11-12) (1:19-20)

A new Jerusalem (65:17-19) A new city in Zion (1:24-28)

Prayers answered (65:24) Prayers rejected (1:15)

A voice from the temple (66:5-6) The Lord's word from his house (2:3)

Jerusalem restored (66:10-14) Jerusalem blessed (1:26; 2:3)

The Lord's anger and sword The Lord's sword and terror

(66:15-16) (1:20; 2:10, 19, 21)

Gathering of Israel from the nations Many people gather to Zion (1:26-27;

(66:17-21) 2:3-5)

It is unlikely that so many similarities would exist between the two sets of chapters without deliberate planning. Also, Isaiah 1 generally parallels chapter 65 while Isaiah 2 parallels chapter 66, indicating a highly structured composition.

In addition to comparing chapters 1 and 2 with Isaiah 65 and 66, one should also read a few selected chapters in other books of scripture that provide further parallel insights. For example, in 3 Nephi 21, Jesus Christ expands and explains Isaiah's teachings concerning a new earth and a new Jerusalem that are so well expressed in chapters 65 and 66. In Revelation 18-21, John uses the imagery of a woman quickly delivering a male son to represent the birth of Zion (compare 66:7-9 with Rev. 12:1-5) and prophesies about a new heaven and a new earth and other events described in Isaiah 65 and 66. In section 101 of the Doctrine and Covenants, Joseph Smith uses the imagery of a vineyard to represent Israel (compare Isa. 65:8 with D&C 101:45-62) and speaks about the speedy resurrection of people in the Millennium (Isa. 65:20; D&C 101:30), harmony between people and animals (Isa. 65:25; D&C 101:26), wickedness being conquered by the Lord's sword (Isa. 65:11-12; 66:15-16; D&C 101:10-11), a gathering of Israel to Zion (Isa. 66:17-21; D&C 101:67-75), and the prosperity of Zion, which the righteous will inherit (Isa. 65:21-22; D&C 101:30, 101). From the strong similarities in the writings of Nephi (as taught directly by Jesus Christ), John, and Joseph Smith it is obvious that the Lord has revealed the same glorious vision of a new heaven and a new earth to other servants besides Isaiah. (See also 2 Ne. 30:8-15; 2 Pet. 3:10-13; D&C 29.)

Isaiah's witness as a prophet, his inspiration as a seer, and his genius as a poet are all demonstrated in chapters 65 and 66.

Isaiah 65 seems to be the Lord's answer to the prophet's intercessory prayer in chapter 64. The prayer concludes with the petition, "O Lord, will you remain silent and keep punishing us?" The Lord's response is:

65 "I revealed myself to those who did not ask for me;

I was found by those who did not seek me.

To a nation that did not call on my name,

I said, 'Here am I, here am I.'

2All day long I have held out my hands

to an obstinate people,

who walk in ways not good,

pursuing their own imaginations—" (NIV)

A quick reading of these verses suggests either that the Lord is silent with Israel because he has revealed himself to a people who have not called upon him (meaning perhaps the Gentiles) or that he is ironically chastising the Israelites because he continues speaking to them though they ignore him. Joseph Smith clarifies these two verses in his inspired translation:

1I am found of them who seek after me. I give unto all them that ask of me; I am not found of them that sought me not, or that inquireth not after me. 2I said unto my servant, Behold me, look upon me; I will send you unto a nation that is not called after my name, for I have spread out my hands all the day to a people who walketh not in my ways, and their works are evil and not good, and they walk after their own thoughts. (JST; italics added)

The Lord ordinarily will speak to those who seek him. However, he commissioned Isaiah to go to a nation that ignored the Lord. Most translations indicate that the Lord is rebuking a people who do not call upon and obey him. The most likely identification for this unnamed people is Israel, although the Lord could be speaking to any of Heavenly Father's children who neglect him.

Isaiah continues by describing the people's wickedness:

3"a people who continually provoke me

to my very face,

offering sacrifices in gardens

and burning incense on altars of brick;

4who sit among the graves

and spend their nights keeping secret vigil;

who eat the flesh of pigs,

and whose pots hold broth of unclean meat;

5who say, 'Keep away; don't come near me,

for I am too sacred for you!'

Such people are smoke in my nostrils,

a fire that keeps burning all day." (NIV)

Some of Isaiah's rebukes identify Israel as the people addressed in these verses. For example, in verse 3, he describes acts that do not readily appear to be unrighteous, such as the offering of sacrifices in gardens and the burning of incense on brick altars. However, the Israelites had been specifically instructed by Moses not to worship in groves of trees, but to destroy them. (Ex. 34:1-3; Deut. 16:21; see 2 Kgs. 23:4-6, 14.) The prophets had also instructed the people to offer sacrifices only upon altars of unhewn stone. (Ex. 20:24-25; Deut. 27:5; Josh. 8:31.) Lingering in the graveyards suggests an attempt to commune with the spirits, a practice strictly forbidden (v. 4; see Lev. 19:31; Deut. 18:10; Josh. 13:22). Also, their eating of swine and other unclean meat clearly violated God's commandments to Israel. (Lev. 11:7-8; Deut. 14:7-8.)

Earlier, the people had petitioned, "O Lord, why are you silent and angry with us?" (Isa. 64:12.) The Lord answers that the people's blatant wickedness offends him like a continual fire and smoke (v. 5). So, their cities are destroyed with fire and smoke. (Isa. 64:11.) The Lord states that he will remain silent no longer, but will let his voice be heard in retribution:

6"See, it stands written before me:

I will not keep silent but will pay back in full;

I will pay it back into their laps—

7both your sins and the sins of your father,"

says the Lord.

"Because they burned sacrifices on the mountains

and defied me on the hills,

I will measure into their laps

the full payment for their former deeds." (NIV)

Thus, the Lord's final answer to the earlier question is that the people's sins have caused his silence and anger.

Still, the Lord desires to punish Israel, but not destroy her. As Isaiah foretold in chapter 1:9, Israel will not be utterly destroyed as was Sodom and Gomorrah; a small remnant will remain. In chapter 65, Isaiah indicates that Israel retains the potential to bring forth the sweet fruits of righteousness. He promises those of Israel who are righteous that they will possess the earth:

8This is what the Lord says:

"As when juice is still found in a cluster of grapes

and men say, 'Don't destroy it, there is yet some good in it,'

so will I do in behalf of my servants;

I will not destroy them all.

9I will bring forth descendants from Jacob,

and from Judah those who will possess my mountains;

my chosen people will inherit them,

and there will my servants live.

10Sharon will become a pasture for flocks,

and the Valley of Achor a resting place for herds,

for my people who seek me. (NIV)

These verses begin a separate poem that continues to the end of chapter 65. The poem begins and ends with a verbal flag—"the Lord says"—that signals his listeners to witness the prophetic authority of the message. The poem is organized in a chiastic pattern with the pivot point in verse 17:

A. The Lord said not to destroy bad A'. The Lord said nothing evil or

grapes because some good was still vile was to be done (everyone

present (v. 8) will be good) (v. 26)

B. Servants and animals dwell in the B'. People and animals will be at

land (9-10) peace on the earth (23-25)

C. The wicked warned (11) C'. Chosen ones blessed (22)

D. War (12) D'. Peace (21)

E. The righteous vs. the wicked (13) E'. The innocent vs. sinners (JST

20)

F. Shouting, crying, and howling (14) F'. Rejoicing, no more weeping

and wailing (19)

G. Cursing (15) G'. Blessings (18)

H. Former troubles shall be forgotten H'. Former things shall not be

(16) remembered (17)

I. The Lord is creating a new heaven and a new earth (17)

The pivot point stresses the Lord's major goal, a new heaven and earth. But before an ideal environment can be established, the earth's spiritual pollution must be removed. In verse 11, the Lord again distresses the evil polluters and prophesies their destiny:

11"But as for you who forsake the Lord

and forget my holy mountain,

who spread a table for Fortune

and fill bowls of mixed wine for Destiny,

12I will destine you for the sword,

and you will all bend down for the slaughter;

for I called but you did not answer,

I spoke but you did not listen.

You did evil in my sight

and chose what displeases me." (NIV)

Note the irony in Israel's imagery: the people use fortune-telling and wine to seek their destiny, but the Lord destines them to destruction by the sword; the people bend down as if in the attitude of humility or prayer, but they will eventually bend down to be slaughtered.

The Lord warns the wicked of their punishments, which are contrasted with the rewards of the righteous in the next verses:

13Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord says:

"My servants will eat,

but you will go hungry;

my servants will drink,

but you will go thirsty;

my servants will rejoice,

but you will be put to shame.

14My servants will sing

out of the joy of their hearts,

but you will cry out

from anguish of heart

and wail in brokenness of spirit.

15You will leave your name

to my chosen ones as a curse;

the Sovereign Lord will put you to death,

but to his servants he will give another name.

16Whoever invokes a blessing in the land

will do so by the God of truth;

he who takes an oath in the land

will swear by the God of truth.

For the past troubles will be forgotten

and hidden from my eyes. (NIV)

Verse 15 contains interesting implications to Christians and Latter-day Saints. Christians see the fulfillment of "another name" in Acts 11:26, where the disciples of Jesus call themselves "Christians" (v. 26). Latter-day Saints think of the "new name" mentioned in Revelation 3:12. At any rate, the Lord is preparing for something new, and the Lord's servants will share his priesthood power as they invoke blessings and make covenants in his name (v. 16).

The end of the Lord's preparations will be a new creation:

17"Behold, I will create

new heavens and a new earth.

The former things will not be remembered,

nor will they come to mind. (NIV)

Note the synonymous parallelism in the second half of verses 16 and 17, which highlights the pivot point of the poem:

past troubles forgotten

hidden from eyes (16)

former things not remembered

gone from mind 17)

In other words, whatever the conditions of life on earth were earlier, they will be forgotten in the bliss of the Lord's new earth. The former conditions can refer to the physical circumstances of life or the spiritual state of the people.

Some Latter-day Saint readers assume that the Lord's promise of a new heaven and earth emphasizes the earth's final state as a celestial sphere. However, President Joseph Fielding Smith repeatedly stressed that this chapter of Isaiah does not refer to a celestialized earth. Instead, the new heavens and earth prophesied by Isaiah will come at the beginning of the Millennium. (SOT, pp. 36-37; CHMR 2:217; AGQ 1:110-11; 2:20-21.)

The changes brought about at the ushering in of the Millennium will be so drastic that the earth itself will be transformed. (See MD, p. 495.) The new earth created in the Millennium will not be organized out of new materials; our present earth will come into a state of "paradisiacal glory."

The phrase "former things will not be remembered" can refer not only to the physical transformation of the earth but to changes in social order and spirituality of the people. People reared in a millennial world will have difficulty understanding what life was like when selfishness, wickedness, wars, disease, and other problems prevailed. Likewise, it is hard for us today to appreciate what millennial life will be like. (See MD, pp. 492-501.) Isaiah attempts to describe these conditions in the rest of chapter 65.

The following verses in Isaiah 65 also support a millennial setting because people will continue living and dying, missionary work will go on, and man's daily labors will continue. In contrast to the cries of the wicked as they are cleansed from the earth (vs. 14-15), the righteous will rejoice in the new millennial earth:

18But be glad and rejoice forever

in what I will create,

for I will create Jerusalem to be a delight

and its people a joy.

19I will rejoice over Jerusalem

and take delight in my people;

the sound of weeping and of crying

will be heard in it no more. (NIV)

Isaiah promises long life on this new earth, but his words were apparently distorted later so that an inconsistency developed in verse 20: the verse says that all people will live at least one hundred years, but it also states that some people will die before they reach one hundred. Joseph Smith's Translation clarifies this verse:

20"Never again will there be in it

an infant that lives but a few days,

or an old man who does not live out his years;

he who dies at a hundred

will be thought a mere youth;

he who fails to reach a hundred

will be considered accursed." (NIV)

20In those days there shall be no more thence an infant of days, nor an old man that hath not filled his days; for the child shall not die, but shall live to be an hundred years old; but the sinner, living to be an hundred years old, shall be accursed. (JST)

Joseph Smith further amplifies the meaning of the verse in Doctrine and Covenants 101, in which he prophesies concerning the Millennium: "In that day an infant shall not die until he is old; and his life shall be as the age of a tree." (D&C 101:30).

The Prophet Joseph also says that when people die during the Millennium their bodies will not sleep in the earth (while their spirits are in the spirit world), but that they will die and be resurrected "in the twinkling of an eye." (D&C 101:31.)

This concept of an instantaneous resurrection helps clarify verse 20, which says that sinners in the Millennium "living to be an hundred years old, shall be accursed" (JST). Ordinarily, we all have the post-earthly period in spirit prison to pay the "uttermost farthing" or every demand of justice for our sins. (Matt. 5:25-26.) As Elder Bruce R. McConkie has stated, "According to the terms and conditions of the great plan of redemption, justice demands that a penalty be paid for every violation of the Lord's laws." (MD, p. 406; italics added.) He also said that the wicked are sent to the spirit prison, where they must satisfy every demand of justice before they can be resurrected. (MD, pp. 349-51, 755, 761-62.)

However, people living during the Millennium will not be able to satisfy the demands of justice in spirit prison; they must do it completely in the flesh before their resurrection. Most people living during the Millennium will probably repent of their sins and allow Christ's atonement to satisfy justice (see pp. 449-53), but some may exercise their free agency and choose not to repent. They will then have to personally suffer for their sins here on earth before they are resurrected. (See D&C 19:17-20.) Thus, Isaiah's promise that all people living on the new earth will live to be a hundred years old can be reconciled with his words that a sinner living to be a hundred "shall be accursed." The sinner will still live a long life, but will be "accursed" or made to suffer for his own sins before his resurrection. (D&C 63:50-51; 101:29-31; see MD, pp. 495-501.)

Verse 20 shows that two characteristics of all people during the Millennium will be a long life and the retention of agency and the capacity to sin. In verse 20, Isaiah contrasts infants with old men and the righteous with sinners, just as he contrasted in verse 13 the rewards of the righteous with the punishments of the wicked. Although grossly wicked people will not live on the earth during the Millennium, people of a terrestrial order will still be here, subject to personal failings. (D&C 76:71-80; see MD, pp. 783-84.)

On the whole, however, life during the Millennium will be more glorious than under any previous society. Isaiah beautifully describes the millennial society:

21"They will build houses and dwell in them;

they will plant vineyards and eat their fruit.

22No longer will they build houses and others live in them,

or plant and others eat.

For as the days of a tree,

so will be the days of my people;

my chosen ones will long enjoy

the works of their hands.

23They will not toil in vain

or bear children doomed to misfortune;

for they will be a people blessed by the Lord,

they and their descendants with them.

24Before they call I will answer;

while they are still speaking I will hear.

25The wolf and the lamb will feed together,

and the lion will eat straw like the ox,

but dust will be the serpent's food.

They will neither harm nor destroy

in all my holy mountain," says the Lord. (NIV)

Compare these verses to Isaiah's description of Israel in Isaiah 1, in which desolation visited the land, cities and vineyards were destroyed, strangers ate the fruit of the land, and the Lord cursed the Israelites. Probably the most striking promise is in verse 24, in which the Lord covenants to answer the people's prayers even before they call to him. What a pleasant contrast to Isaiah 1:15, in which Israel's prayers were rejected. (See D&C 101:27.)

Some of the promises in these verses echo earlier prophecies of Isaiah, particularly his description of millennial peace in chapter 11. In both of these chapters, Isaiah foretells harmony among all life and universal righteousness upon the Lord's "holy mountain" (the entire earth).

Isaiah repeats in chapter 66 these themes and others found in Isaiah 11 and 65. Chapter 66 contains some warnings, but primarily promises blessings. The chapter is a single long poem with nine major ideas in a chiastic pattern:

A. The Lord's work in heaven and on earth (1-2)

B. Hypocritical sacrifices and rejection of the wicked (3-4)

C. The Lord repays his enemies (5-6)

D. Zion's delivery (7-9)

E. The righteous will rejoice with Zion (10)

D'. Zion's nourishment (11-13)

C'. The Lord's fury upon his foes (14-17)

B'. Pure sacrifices and glory of gathered Israel (18-21)

A'. The Lord's work in heaven and on earth (22-24)

The Lord's Work in Heaven and on Earth (66:1-2)

The Lord testifies concerning his handiwork, heaven and earth:

66 This is what the Lord says:

"Heaven is my throne

and the earth is my footstool.

Where is the house you will build for me?

Where will my resting place be?

2Has not my hand made all these things,

and so they came into being?" declares the Lord.

"This is the one I esteem:

he who is humble and contrite in spirit,

and trembles at my word." (NIV)

Note the transition in verse 2 from the Lord's efforts in heaven and earth to his pride in his ultimate product—a humble, obedient person. More than building the earth as a place of residence, the Lord wants the earth to be a place where a person develops righteousness. (See Moses 1:39.)

Hypocritical Sacrifices and Rejection of the Wicked (66:3-4)

With simple but powerful poetry, Isaiah portrays the people's hypocrisy and promises the Lord's punishments:

3"But whoever sacrifices a bull is like one who kills a man,

and whoever offers a lamb,

like one who breaks a dog's neck;

whoever makes a grain offering is like one who presents pig's blood,

and whoever burns memorial incense,

like one who worships an idol.

They have chosen their own ways, and their souls delight in their abominations;

4so I also will choose harsh treatment for them

and bring upon them what they dread.

For when I called, no one answered,

when I spoke, no one listened.

They did evil in my sight and chose what displeases me." (NIV)

In verse 3, Isaiah employs four parallel phrases, each consisting of two parts, to portray opposites—a legitimate sacrifice and an act contrary to Mosaic law:

In essence, the Israelites took a form of Mosaic worship and turned it into a mockery. They maintained the external appearance of the ordinances, but lost the spiritual significance. Thus, the very forms of worship designed to save them became an abomination that condemned them to suffer God's wrath. By choosing their wicked ways, the people chose to have the Lord's terrible judgments come upon them (v. 4).

The Lord Repays His Enemies (66:5-6)

The Lord finally chooses to bring justice upon the oppressors of his people:

5Hear the word of the Lord,

you who tremble at his word:

"Your brothers who hate you

and exclude you because of my name, have said,

'Let the Lord be glorified,

that we may see your joy!'

Yet they will be put to shame.

6Hear that uproar from the city,

hear that noise from the temple!

It is the sound of the Lord repaying his enemies all they deserve." (NIV)

The wicked should be careful when they ask the Lord to demonstrate his glory, because they will be the ones to feel his wrath. (See Alma 30; 3 Ne. 1, 6, 8.)

Zion's Delivery (66:7-9)

With poetic imagery, Isaiah compares Zion to a woman who brings forth a special manchild, who represents the Millennium:

7"Before she goes into labor,

she gives birth;

before the pains come upon her,

she delivers a son.

8Who has ever heard of such a thing?

Who has ever seen such things?

Can a country be born in a day

or a nation be brought forth in a moment?

Yet no sooner is Zion in labor

than she gives birth to her children.

9Do I bring to the moment of birth

and not give delivery?" says the Lord.

"Do I close up the womb

when I bring to delivery?" says your God. (NIV)

Ordinarily there are contractions and other physical signs preceding the birth of a child, but Zion will give birth to an ideal millennial society before the labor pains come upon her. In this prophecy, Isaiah apparently promises that shortly after Zion is established in Jackson County, great numbers of unexpected peoples, including the Ten Tribes and other Israelite remnants, will join with Zion to prepare the earth for the Millennium. These verses convey the feeling of suddenness and surprise at Zion's rapid growth. (Compare Rev. 12:1-5; [vs. 1-7 in JST].)

The Righteous Will Rejoice in Zion (66:10)

Isaiah invites all people to join with Zion:

10"Rejoice with Jerusalem and be glad for her,

all you who love her;

rejoice greatly with her,

all you who mourn over her." (NIV)

Note that the people who associate with Zion will be those who love her and mourn over her. In other words, they will be close to Zion and sensitive to her earlier suffering, probably because they themselves experienced it.

Zion's Nourishment (66:11-13)

Isaiah promises beautiful blessings to those who seek strength from Zion:

11"For you will nurse and be satisfied

at her comforting breasts;

you will drink deeply

and delight in her overflowing abundance."

12For this is what the Lord says:

"I will extend peace to her like a river,

and the wealth of nations like a flooding stream;

you will nurse and be carried on her arm

and dandled on her knees.

13As a mother comforts her child,

so will I comfort you;

and you will be comforted over Jerusalem." (NIV)

Isaiah's imagery of a mother and child beautifully conveys God's tender love for his children. (Compare Isa. 49:14-23; 54:1-10.)

The Lord's Fury upon His Foes (66:14-17)

Although the Lord's people will rejoice as they enjoy his millennial presence, God's kingdom will be established only after the wicked are destroyed:

14When you see this, your heart will rejoice

and you will flourish like grass;

the hand of the Lord will be made known to his servants,

but his fury will be shown to his foes.

15See, the Lord is coming with fire,

and his chariots are like a whirlwind;

he will bring down his anger with fury,

and his rebuke with flames of fire.

16For with fire and with his sword

the Lord will execute judgment upon all men,

and many will be those slain by the LORD.

17"Those who consecrate and purify themselves to go into the gardens, following the one in the midst of those who eat the flesh of pigs and rats and other abominable things—they will meet their end together," declares the Lord. (NIV)

The establishment of the Millennium will be a partial judgment of the earth's inhabitants, since those worthy of a terrestrial glory will be permitted to remain on earth. All people on earth will be judged, and the wicked will be destroyed. (Matt. 25:31-46; Mal. 3:2-3; D&C 88:95-99; 101:24; 133:50-53.)

Pure Sacrifices and Glory of Gathered Israel (66:18-21)

The theme of punishment is abruptly dropped in verses 18-21, in which the Lord sends forth his servants to gather all nations to see his glory:

18"And I, because of their actions and their imaginations, am about to come and gather all nations and tongues, and they will come and see my glory.

19"I will set a sign among them, and I will send some of those who survive to the nations—to Tarshish, to the Libyans and Lydians (famous as archers), to Tubal and Greece, and to the distant islands, that have not heard of my fame or seen my glory. They will proclaim my glory among the nations. 20And they will bring all your brothers, from all the nations, to my holy mountain in Jerusalem as an offering to the Lord—on horses, in chariots and wagons, and mules and camels," says the Lord. "They will bring them, as the Israelites bring their grain offerings, to the temple of the Lord in ceremonially clean vessels. 21And I will select some of them also to be priests and Levites," says the Lord. (NIV)

The names in verse 19 refer to such places as modern Spain, Libya, Turkey, and Greece. (See Map 10.) These countries were considered to be the ends of the earth in Isaiah's day. Thus, he prophesies that the Lord's word will go to all the nations of the earth.

Verse 20 is amplified in Doctrine and Covenants 128. An "offering" in "clean vessels" seems symbolic of the names of the dead for whom the righteous do vicarious work in the last days. These names are brought from all over the world to the temples.

The Lord's Work in Heaven and on Earth (66:22-24)

Isaiah concludes his writings with a testimony: the heavens, the earth, and all glorified, resurrected people serve as a witness for the Lord and his righteous plan and deeds; the memorials of the wicked will be a perpetual witness of the folly of sin:

22"As the new heavens and the new earth that I make will endure before me," declares the Lord, "so will your name and descendants endure. 23From one New Moon to another and from one Sabbath to another, all mankind will come and bow down before me," says the Lord. 24"And they will go out and look upon the dead bodies of those who rebelled against me; their worm will not die, nor will their fire be quenched, and they will be loathsome to all mankind." (NIV)

It seems somewhat unusual that Isaiah concludes his prophecies with a sober tone, describing "dead bodies," "worms," and eternal "fires." However, Isaiah often mixes negative and positive messages together.

In fact, Isaiah follows a similar pattern in many chapters. He often starts in a somewhat negative tone as he rebukes the sinners and their wickedness. He quickly becomes very specific as he lists their sins, calls them to repentance, and warns them of the judgments descending upon them. However, Isaiah is not a pessimist; he usually extends a message of hope and a promise of redemption to his listeners. He then extends a prophecy of blessings and restoration for those who repent, especially in the last days. Still, Isaiah's optimism is tempered by reality. He does not usually conclude a prophecy or discourse on a high note; instead, he ends with a sober admonition. This pattern may be diagrammed as follows:

This pattern is easily identified in Isaiah 66 and is also characteristic of the entire book of Isaiah:

Warnings of wickedness (ch. 1-23)

Judgments upon the world (24-25)

Humility of Israel (36-39)

People seeking the Lord (40-47)

Blessings of the Messiah and the last days (48-64)

A final promise and warning (65-66)

In evaluating chapters 65 and 66 in the context of the whole book of Isaiah, one sees how they summarize his writings and provide a last promise and warning to Israel. As one studies these last two chapters and compares them with the first two chapters of Isaiah, he sees the opening and closing framework of the prophet's teaching. The other sixty-two chapters provide the panoramic gospel message Isaiah gives to the world.
