“I’m scared!” Adam blurted out as he and Mom drove to the church.

“There’s no need to be scared, Son,” Mom reassured him.

“But what will he ask me? What if I don’t know the answers? Will I still get to be baptized?”

“You don’t need to worry. It will be very much like the father’s interviews you have each month,” Mom replied, parking the car.

“But why do we have to do it in the bishop’s office?” Adam asked as he shut the car door.

“Because that’s where he interviews all the boys and girls before they’re baptized. It helps them understand how important baptism is. And it reminds them that the bishop has the priesthood keys—the authority—to authorize ordinances in our ward.”

Adam and Mom sat down outside the bishop’s door. Soon it opened. “Hello, you two,” the bishop greeted them warmly. “Adam, come in. I’ve been looking forward to our visit all day.”

Mom gave Adam a smile of encouragement as the door closed behind him.

After a few questions about school, the bishop asked, “Adam, do you love Jesus?”

Adam nodded.

“Would you tell me what you’re doing to show Him that you love Him?”

“Well, I want to be baptized like He was. And I try to be a good example to my friends so they’ll want to know about the Church.”

“Very good. Anything else?”

“I pay my tithing, go to church, and say my prayers. And I’m preparing to serve a mission.”

“Excellent! I want you to know that I appreciate how kind and helpful you are to others, too,” the bishop added. “That’s another important way you show love for the Savior. Let’s read Mosiah 18:10, a scripture about baptism.”

Adam took the book from the bishop and carefully read, “‘Now I say unto you, if this be the desire of your hearts, what have you against being baptized in the name of the Lord, as a witness before him that ye have entered into a covenant with him, that ye will serve him and keep his commandments, that he may pour out his Spirit more abundantly upon you?’”

“Adam, are you willing to serve the Lord and keep His commandments?” the bishop asked.

“Yes!”

“Well then, you’re ready to be baptized.”

The two stood up. The bishop shook Adam’s hand. “Congratulations! I’m very, very proud of you.”

“Thanks, Dad,” Adam said with a grin.
