THE GODHEAD

THE SUPREME COUNCIL. "We believe in God, the Eternal Father, and in His Son, Jesus Christ, and in the Holy Ghost."1.1

We accept these three personages as the supreme governing council in the heavens. The Father and the Son have tabernacles of flesh and bones, and the Holy Ghost is a personage of Spirit. 1.2 We worship the Father in the name of the Son, who is the Mediator between God and man, and his is the only name given whereby man can be saved.1.3 We accept Jesus as the Only Begotten Son of the Father in the flesh, although we are all his offspring in the spirit, and therefore his children.1.4

FATHERHOOD OF GOD. We are taught in the scriptures that God is literally, and not in a figurative sense, our very Eternal Father. The words of our Redeemer spoken to Mary near the tomb from which he had risen and gained the victory over death, are most sublime and filled with glorious meaning: "Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to my Father: but go
 to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God and your God." 1.5 In these words the truth of the Fatherhood of God is emphatically pronounced by his Only Begotten Son, who declares that he is our brother and that we have the same Eternal Father. 1.6

MODERN KNOWLEDGE OF GOD

APOSTATE CONCEPTS OF GOD. In the year 1820, when the First Vision was received, the universal doctrine in the Protestant as well as the Catholic world, relating to the Godhead, in substance, was as follows:

"There is but one only living and true God who is infinite in being and perfection, a most pure spirit, invisible, without body, parts, or passions, immutable, immense, eternal, incomprehensible, almighty, most wise, most holy, most free, most absolute, working all things according to the counsel of his own immutable and most righteous will," 2.7

JOSEPH SMITH RESTORED KNOWLEDGE OF GOD. The vision of Joseph Smith made it clear that the Father and the Son are separate personages, having bodies as tangible as the body of man. It was further revealed to him that the Holy Ghost is a personage of Spirit, distinct and separate from the personalities of the Father and the Son.

SCRIPTURES SHOW PERSONALITY OF GOD. This all-important truth staggered the world; yet, when we consider the clear expressions of holy writ, it is a most astounding and wonderful fact that man could have gone so far astray. The Savior said, "My Father is greater than I," 2.8 and he invited his disciples, after his resurrection, to handle him and see that it was he, for, said he, "A spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have."2.9 The apostles clearly understood the distinct entities of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to which they constantly referred in their epistles; and Paul informed the Corinthians of the fact that when all things are subjected to the Father, "Then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him that put all things under him, that God may be all in all."2.10

Joseph Smith beheld the Father and the Son; therefore he could testify with personal knowledge that the scriptures were true wherein we read: "So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them." 3.11 This was to be understood literally, and not in some mystical or figurative sense. 3.12

GAINING KNOWLEDGE ABOUT GOD. I know, as these my brethren know, that God lives; that Jesus Christ is the Only Begotten Son of God in the flesh, and the Redeemer of the world. But I have not learned all that there is to know about him and our Father; neither have you; for in this mortal life it is impossible for us fully to comprehend the mission of our Lord and Redeemer, to know him and just who and what he is, and the extent of the great work he accomplished. But if we shall be worthy to enter into the presence of God the Father and Jesus Christ his Son and there be crowned with exaltation, it will be necessary for us to
 know them in the fulness. However, until we do enter into their presence and receive this great blessing, we will not fully know the only true God and Jesus Christ whom he has sent.3.13

ANY RIGHTEOUS MAN CAN SEE GOD. The Lord has established all things in order and has given us a perfect system. We cannot improve upon it. If we would carry out that which the Lord has revealed, as he has revealed it, then all things would be perfect; for the organization is a perfect organization: the theory of it, the plan of it, is without flaw. If we followed all the orders that have been given to us in the priesthood and otherwise; if we would put into practice the great doctrines which have been revealed in the revelations contained in the holy scriptures, it would only be a matter of a very short time until this great people would be in the same condition, absolutely, as were the people in the city of Enoch. We would be able to walk with God, we would be able to behold his face, because then faith would abound in the hearts of the people to the extent that it would be impossible for the Lord to withhold himself, and he would reveal himself unto us as he has done in times past.4.14

GOSPEL AND PRIESTHOOD NEEDED TO SEE GOD. We cannot tie the hands of the Lord. The Father and the Son appeared to the Prophet Joseph Smith before the Church was organized and the priesthood restored to the earth. Under those conditions the Lord could appear to one who sought for light as he did in the case of Joseph Smith.

Now that the Church is organized, and the power of the priesthood is here, no one can see the face of God, even the Father, without the blessings of the gospel and the authority of the priesthood. 4.15

WALKING WITH GOD. The statement that men anciently "walked with God" we accept, of course, as a figure of speech. It means that they were in perfect harmony and at the same time receiving constant guidance and revelation from the Lord. It does not mean that they were privileged to walk along the streets, for instance, as Jesus walked with the two disciples after his resurrection.4.16

FEAR THE LORD. The Lord is merciful and kind and does not require of those who serve him that they be afraid and tremble before him. There is no delight in his heart in the "fear" of the wicked because of their sins. Most scriptural passages which tell us to "fear the Lord" have no reference to fright.

The word "fear" has more than the one meaning which we so universally use. The scriptural meaning is "to have reverential awe." In Young's Concordance of the Bible, under the word "fear" we find several meanings, such as "terror," from the Hebrew word "emah"; "dread" from the Hebrew "pachdah"; reverence" from the Hebrew "yare." So we see that the word "fear" as used in the English language, had different shades of meaning in the Hebrew, and that language used different words to connote those shades of meaning.

LOVE THE LORD. When the Lord requires that we "fear" him and keep his commandments, he means that we should pay to him that homage and reverence which we owe to our Eternal Father and his Son Jesus Christ. To fear the Lord is to love him. That is the sense in which the word is used. The Lord is not asking us to be afraid of him, but to draw near unto him, and the greatest of all the commandments is, that we love him.5.17

HOW GOD PROGRESSES

GOD HAS ALL POWER AND WISDOM. My grandfather, Hyrum Smith, at the conference of the Church, April, 1844, in the course of his remarks said: "I want to put down all false influences. If I thought I should be saved and any in the congregation be lost, I should not be happy. For this purpose Jesus effected a resurrection. Our Savior is competent to save all from death and hell [i.e. by repentance], I can prove it out of the revelations. I would not serve a God that had not all wisdom and all power."

Do we believe that God has all "wisdom"? If so, in that, he is absolute. If there is something he does not know, then he is not absolute in "wisdom," and to think such a thing is absurd, Does he have all "power"? If so then there is nothing in which he lacks. If he is lacking in "wisdom" and in "power" then he is not supreme and there must be something greater than he is, and this is absurd.

JOSEPH SMITH TEACHES OMNIPOTENCE OF GOD, In the Lectures on Faith, which appeared in the earlier editions of the Doctrine and Covenants, we find the following which was prepared by the Prophet Joseph Smith:

"There are two personages [i.e. of flesh and bones] who constitute the great, matchless, governing, and supreme, power over all things, by whom all things were created and made, that are created and made, whether visible or invisible, whether in heaven, on earth, or in the earth, under the earth, or throughout the immensity of space. They are the Father and the Son -- the Father being a personage of spirit,6.18 glory, and power, possessing all perfection and fulness, the Son, who was in the bosom of the Father, a personage of tabernacle, made or fashioned like unto man, or being in the form and likeness of man, or rather man was formed after his likeness and in his image; he is also the express image and likeness of the personage of the Father, possessing all the fulness of the Father, or the same fulness with the Father."6.19

"God is the only supreme governor and independent being in whom all fulness and perfection dwell; who is omnipotent, omnipresent, and omniscient; without beginning of days or end of life; and that in him every good gift and every good principle dwell." 6.20

"Without the knowledge of all things God would not be able to save any portion of his creatures; for it is by reason of the knowledge which he has of all things, from the beginning
 to the end, that enables him to give that understanding to his creatures by which they are made partakers of eternal life; and if it were not for the idea existing in the minds of men that God had all knowledge it would be impossible for them to exercise faith in him." 7.21

PROGRESSION BY INCREASING HIS CREATIONS. The Book of Moses informs us that the great work of the Father is in creating worlds and peopling them, and "there is no end to my works, neither to my words," he says, "For behold, this is my work and my glory-to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man,"7.22 and in this is his progression.

Commenting on this the Prophet Joseph Smith has said: "What did Jesus do? Why; I do the things I saw my Father do when worlds come rolling into existence, My Father worked out his kingdom with fear and trembling, and I must do the same [that is Christ must do the same]; and when I get my kingdom, I shall present it to my Father, so that he may obtain kingdom upon kingdom, and it will exalt him in glory. He will then take a higher exaltation, and I [Christ] will take his place, and thereby become exalted myself, So that Jesus treads in the tracks of his Father, and inherits what God did before; and God is thus glorified and exalted in the salvation and exaltation of all his children."7.23

Do you not see that it is in this manner that our Eternal Father is progressing? Not by seeking knowledge which he does not have, for such a thought cannot be maintained in the light of scripture. It is not through ignorance and learning hidden truth that he progresses, for if there are truths which he does not know, then these things are greater than he, and this cannot be. Why can't we learn wisdom and believe what the Lord has revealed?

HOW GOD DOES NOT PROGRESS

FALSE NOTIONS ABOUT GOD'S PROGRESSION. It seems very strange to me that members of the Church will hold to the doctrine, "God increases in knowledge as time goes on." Or that they can believe (as a recently published article says): "If absolute perfection were attainable, there would eventually come a time when those who had chosen the better way would reach the ultimate; and if the ultimate could be gained, progression would cease, This cannot be, for as before specified nothing in nature remains at a standstill. When progression abdicates the throne, retrogression is the degrading successor."

But, how does anyone know? Where has the Lord ever revealed to us that he is lacking in knowledge? That he is still learning new truth; discovering new laws that are unknown to him? I think this kind of doctrine is very dangerous. I don't know where the Lord has ever declared such a thing. It is not contained in any revelation that I have read. Man's opinion unaided by the revelations of the Lord, does not make it so.

PERFECTION OF GOD NOT "RELATIVE." I believe that God knows all things and that his understanding is perfect, not "relative." I have never seen or heard of any revealed fact to the contrary. I believe that our Heavenly Father and his Son Jesus Christ are perfect. I offer
 no excuse for the simplicity of my faith.

Who dares say that the quality of "virtue" is limited with our Father and his Son? Is their truthfulness only "relative"? Could they be more truthful? More honorable? More virtuous or loving? How foolish such questions are, and how much more foolish would be the answer if we said: "Yes, the Lord is limited in his truthfulness, honor, virtue." Well, if he is absolute in these qualities, is he on the road of retrogression in them? According to the argument this must be so if the absolute is reached. Then why should we say that his knowledge is limited and that hidden law and truths abound which he has not discovered. Who made those laws and where do they come from?

SCRIPTURES PROVE OMNIPOTENCE OF GOD, I believe, literally, what is written in these scriptures:

"O how great the holiness of our God! For he knoweth all things, and there is not anything save he knows it."9.24

"Thus saith the Lord your God, even Jesus Christ, the Great I AM, Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the same which looked upon the wide expanse of eternity, and all the seraphic hosts of heaven, before the world was made;

"The same which knoweth all things, for all things are present before mine eyes." 9.25

"And now, verily I say unto you, I was in the beginning with the Father, and am the Firstborn; . . .

"The Spirit of truth is of God. I am the Spirit of truth, and John bore record of me, saying: He received a fulness of truth, yea, even of all truth."9.26

"Now have we not reason to rejoice? Yea, I say unto you, there never were men that had so great reason to rejoice as we, since the world began; yea, and my joy is carried away, even unto boasting in my God; for he has all power, all wisdom, and all understanding; he comprehendeth all things, and he is a merciful Being, even unto salvation, to those who will repent and believe on his name."9.27

"Praise ye the Lord: for it is good to sing praises unto our God; for it is pleasant; and praise is comely, . . .

"Great is our Lord, and of great power: his understanding is infinite," 9.28

"He comprehendeth all things, and all things are before him, and all things are round about him; and he is above all things, and in all things, and is through all things, and is round about all things; and all things are by him, and of him, even God, for ever and ever."

The next verse (42) is very significant in revealing to us something regarding the laws:

"And again, verily I say unto you, he hath given a law unto all things, by which they move in their times and their seasons."10.29

GOD PROGRESSES BECAUSE OF KNOWLEDGE. It is not because the Lord is ignorant of law and truth that he is able to progress, but because of his knowledge and wisdom. The Lord is constantly using his knowledge in his work. And his great work is in bringing to pass the immortality and eternal life of man. By the creation of worlds and peopling them, by building and extending, he progresses, but not because the fulness of truth is not understood by him. 10.30

WILL GOD DESTROY HIMSELF? I cannot comprehend God in his perfection having to spend time discovering laws and truth he does not know. Such a thought to me is destructive, not progressive, Should there be truth which God has not discovered, when may he discover it, and, like a chemist who mixes certain elements and blows himself up, when will the Almighty find some hidden truth or law which will shatter all? Is there not a danger that some other personage may discover some greater truth than our Father knows? If such could be the case, what would become of God?

HOW GOD IS EVERLASTING

GOD IS AN EXALTED MAN. Some people are troubled over the statements of the Prophet Joseph Smith as found in the King Follett sermon delivered in Nauvoo in 1844. The matter that seems such a mystery is the statement that our Father in heaven at one time passed through a life and death and is an exalted man. This is one of the mysteries, and to some it appears to contradict other statements in the scriptures. Naturally there are many things that we will not comprehend while in this mortal life and we will not be able to fathom all of the difficulties that lie before us. Our understanding is limited and we judge according to the things we know and with which we are familiar. The things of eternity we will not understand until we reach the goal of eternal life, when all things will be made clear.

We read in the scriptures that God is "infinite and eternal, from everlasting to everlasting the same unchangeable God";"11.31 that he is "the same yesterday, today, and forever"; 11.32 that he "is unchangeable from all eternity to all eternity."11.33 How does this conform to the Prophet's teaching: "God himself was once as we are now, and is an exalted man, . . . that he was once a man like us; yea, that God himself, the Father of us all, dwelt on an earth, the same as Jesus Christ himself did"? 11.34

CHRIST BORN; YET FROM EVERLASTING. Now I suppose that we all understand the fact that Jesus Christ was Jehovah, who led Israel in the days of Abraham and Moses, and in fact from the days of Adam, Also that Jehovah, or Jesus Christ, as a personage of Spirit
 appeared to the Brother of Jared, and that he was born a babe in this world and grew to manhood in this world and therefore he did not always have a tangible body. Yet Jesus says of himself that he is "the first and the last,"11.35 and that he is "the beginning and the end, the same which looked upon the wide expanse of eternity, and all the seraphic hosts of heaven, before the world was made." 11.36

The Prophet says: "If Jesus Christ was the Son of God, and John discovered that God the Father of Jesus Christ had a Father, you may suppose that he had a Father also." Then he asks: "Where was there ever a son without a father? And where was there ever a father without first being a son?"12.37 He points out that the Savior declared that he would do the things his Father did, that is, lay down his life and take it again.12.38

Let me ask, are we not taught that we as sons of God may become like him? 12.39 Is not this a glorious thought? Yet we have to pass through mortality and receive the resurrection and then go on to perfection just as our Father did before us. The Prophet taught that our Father had a Father and so on. Is not this a reasonable thought, especially when we remember that the promises are made to us that we may become like him?

HOW GOD IS FROM ETERNITY TO ETERNITY. However, the thing that seems so puzzling is the statement that God is "the same yesterday, today and forever"; that he is "from all eternity to all eternity." Well, is not this true, and is there any conflict with the thought that he has passed through the same states that we are destined to do? From eternity to eternity means from the spirit existence through the probation which we are in, and then back again to the eternal existence which will follow. Surely this is everlasting, for when we receive the resurrection, we will never die. We all existed in the first eternity. I think I can say of myself and others, we are from eternity; and we will be to eternity everlasting, if we receive the exaltation. The intelligent part of man was never created but always existed. That is true of each of us as well as it is of God, yet we are born sons and daughters of God in the spirit and are destined to exist forever. Those who become like God will also be from eternity to eternity.12.40

REVERENCE FOR GOD

PROFANING NAME OF DEITY. We should hold the name of Deity in the most sacred and solemn respect.12.41 Few things are so distressing or shock the feelings of a refined person more than to hear some uncouth, ignorant, or filthy creature bandy around the name of Deity. Some individuals have become so profane that it appears almost impossible for them to speak two or three sentences without the emphasis -- as they think -- of a vulgar or blasphemous oath. There are some individuals also who seem to think, at least that is the impression they leave upon others, that it is a manly accomplishment and elevates them from the common run of mankind if they can use blasphemous language.

PROFANITY IS FILTHINESS. A person is known as much by his language as he is by the
 company he keeps. People who swear and profane belong to the same class as do those who think, or leave the impression that they think, that to have a cigarette, cigar, or pipe in their mouth, lends dignity and manliness -- do we have to say also womanliness? -- to their character. Filthiness in any form is degrading and soul-destroying and should be avoided as a deadly poison by every member of the Church,

BLASPHEMY IN COMMON CONVERSATION. Good stories have been frequently ruined simply because the authors have not understood the propriety of the use of sacred names. When blasphemous expressions are placed in the mouths of otherwise respectable characters, instead of enhancing the story they detract from its value and interest. How strange it is that some people, and good people at that, think that to use some expression involving the name of the Lord, adds interest, wit, or power to their stories! How often this is seen in the moving pictures, even in shows that otherwise are commendable.

But all such expressions in the theatre, and the use of tobacco and liquor, are detrimental to the morals and spirituality of those who witness them, and especially is it true in the case of the youth of tender years whose character is in the formative stage. It is a shame that such expressions are found so frequently, even in the so-called higher class publications which come into the homes of Latter-day Saints.

Above all other peoples on the earth, the Latter-day Saints should hold in the utmost sacredness and reverence all things that are holy, The people of the world have not been trained as we have been in such matters, notwithstanding there are many honest, devout, and refined people in the world. But we have the guidance of the Holy Spirit and the revelations of the Lord, and he has solemnly taught us in our own day our duty in relation to all such things.

SOME HYMNS PROFANE DEITY, Even in some of the sacred hymns that are universally used, the frequent and familiar use of the name of the Lord enters, and spoils their use so far as we are concerned. A few hymns of this nature, with noble, uplifting thoughts, have found their way into the musical exercises of the Latter-day Saints.

PROPER USE OF LORD'S NAME. There are times, of course, when the use of the name of Deity is perfectly proper. The Lord has given us such examples in the blessings on the sacrament and the ordinance of baptism. The same is true in the conferring of the priesthood, for, as we have been taught, all things are to be done in the name of the Son; all our prayers should be addressed to the Father and brought to a close in the name of the Son,

IMPROPER USE OF LORD'S NAME IN PRAYERS. Even in this, however, we frequently hear improper expressions that jar on the sensitiveness of refined ears, Running the risk of criticism, I would like to call attention to a few expressions which it would be better not to use. At times we hear a very earnest, fervent prayer given in the spirit of pure humility and innocence, closed with this expression: "for Christ's sake. Amen," I never hear this
 expression that it does not bring to my mind the similar use by blasphemers on the streets. Of course, in the prayer, such a thing as an improper expression was not intended and never entered the mind of the one who prayed.

PRAYER IS FOR OUT SAKE. Then again, we do not pray or conduct exercises for his sake, but for our own. Our Redeemer has done everything that is essential for our salvation, and he has taught us that if we serve him with all our soul, and all our days, yet we are unprofitable servants and have done only that which it was our duty to do. Paul says we were bought with a price, and we are not our own.15.42 Our Redeemer has a perfect right to command us, and all that we do is for our own sakes. He can do without us, but we cannot do without him, We are told that we are unprofitable servants, 15.43 and so we are, if we think of trying to pay our Savior back for what he has done for us, for that we never can do; and we cannot by any number of acts, or a full life of faithful service, place our Savior in our debt.

PRAY IN NAME OF CHRIST. How much better it is in our worship, and in our praying when we come to a conclusion, to end what we are doing, with a simple, humble statement, as we have been commanded to do, that it is done "in the name" of Jesus Christ, our Lord! 15.44

CHRIST OUR ELDER BROTHER. Another expression finding its place among us, especially on the part of speakers and writers on gospel themes, is to refer to our Lord as the Christ. Of course there is, and can be, no other. We have been given the information, however, that his name is Jesus Christ, and that he is the Only Begotten of the Father in the flesh, but the Firstborn in the spirit. He is our Elder Brother and was honored by the Father with the fulness of authority and power as a member of the grand Presidency, of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. He was commissioned, before the world was framed, to come to this earth and here offer himself a sacrifice, through the shedding of his blood for the sins of mankind, on condition of their true repentance, and for the transgression of our first parents which brought our fallen, mortal state.

WHEN TO USE TITLE: "THE CHRIST." The name Christ is a title comparable to the title Messiah and meaning The Anointed One, and has reference to the office of our Savior. If the remarks of a speaker have reference to the nature and calling of our Lord in the office which he holds, then the definite article preceding the name is in perfect order, However, when we are speaking of the Redeemer in some other sense than by reference to his official title, it is well for us not to use the article, but the whole name of our Lord, or, even better still, in order to avoid the too frequent repetition, we can say our Redeemer or Savior or the Lord.

The great lesson for us to learn, in all our preaching, writing, and conversations, is to use the titles of Deity sparingly, not with familiarity, or with lack of reverence. 16.45

DID THE FATHER EAT WITH ABRAHAM?

LORD APPEARED TO ABRAHAM. We are not justified in teaching that our Heavenly Father, with other heavenly persons, came down, dusty and weary, and ate with Abraham. This is not taught in the 18th chapter of Genesis. The first verse of that chapter should read as follows: "And the Lord appeared unto him in the plains of Mamre," That is a complete thought. The second part of this paragraph has nothing to do with the Lord's appearing to Abraham, and there should be another paragraph or sentence saying: "And he sat in the tent door in the heat of the day; and he lifted up his eyes and looked, and, lo, three men stood by him." These three men were mortals. They had bodies and were able to eat, to bathe, and sit and rest from their weariness. Not one of these three was the Lord.

ABRAHAM ENTERTAINED HIS BRETHREN. I will give you a key: It was natural for the English to translate, as in verse three, and say "My Lord" in referring to a distinguished individual, because that is the way they recognized distinguished characters; but you will notice that the word Lord in the third paragraph is spelled with one capital and three small letters which indicates that it was not The Lord that was meant. Now in verses 13, 14, 17-20, you will find all of the letters in capitals and that does refer to THE LORD. Now according to the Prophet's revision of this scripture, the third verse reads as follows: "My brethren, if now I have found favor in your sight, pass not away I pray you from thy servant."17.46

DID JACOB WRESTLE WITH AN ANGEL?

MESSENGER BLESSES JACOB, Who wrestled with Jacob on Mount Peniel? The scriptures say it was a man. The Bible interpreters say it was an angel. More than likely it was a messenger sent to Jacob to give him the blessing, To think he wrestled and held an angel who couldn't get away, is out of the question. The term angel as used in the scriptures, at times, refers to messengers who are sent with some important instruction. Later in this chapter when Jacob said he had beheld the Lord, that did not have reference to his wrestling. 17.47
