PRE-EXTISTENCE OF MAN

SAINTS HAVE KNOWLEDGE OF SPIRIT LIFE. The Latter-day Saints are the only people in the world, as far as my knowledge goes, who have a clear, distinct doctrine in regard to the questions: Where did we come from? Why are we here? and, Where are we going? I believe we are the only people in the world who believe in the pre-existence of the human family. There are many who believe in the pre-existence of Jesus Christ,56.1 but they do not believe that we, individually, lived before we came into this life. 56.2

One of the strange things to me is the fact that so many people believe that there is a spirit in man and when he dies that spirit continues to live as an immortal thing, yet that it had no existence until man was born in this mortal life.56.3

WE LIVED AS SPIRIT BEINGS. We lived in the presence of God in the spirit before we came here. We desired to be like him, we saw him, we were in his presence. There is not a soul who has not seen both the Rather and the Son, and in the spirit world we were in their presence; 56.4 but it became necessary for us to gain experiences which could not be obtained in that world of spirits, and so we were accorded the privilege of coming down here upon this earth.56.5

WE HAVE SEEN GOD. When we lived in the presence of our Father, we were not like him; we were just spirits. We did not have bodies of flesh and bones, but he did. He was a glorious personage with a body of flesh and bones, his spirit and body being inseparably connected, and his body shining with a brightness beyond the brightness of the sun. We saw him in his majesty; and when the plan of salvation was presented to us, it was made known to us that if we would pass through this mortal existence, and be true and faithful to all the commandments our Father would give unto us -- thus keeping the second estate as we had kept the first -- we, too, eventually would have the privilege of coming back into his presence with bodies of flesh and bones which would also shine with the brightness of the sun, to share in all the fulness of his kingdom. 57.6

COUNCILS WERE HELD IN PRE-EXISTENCE. In the pre-existence we dwelt in the presence of God our Father. When the time arrived for us to be advanced in the scale of our existence and pass through this mundane probation, councils were held and the spirit children were instructed in matters pertaining to conditions in mortal life, and the reason for such an existence. In the former life we were spirits. In order that we should advance and eventually gain the goal of perfection, it was made known that we would receive tabernacles of flesh and bones and have to pass through mortality where we would be tried and proved to see if we, by trial, would prepare ourselves for exaltation. We were made to realize, in the presence of our glorious Father, who had a tangible body of flesh and bones which shone like the sun, that we were, as spirits, far inferior in our station to him.

SPIRITS WERE TAUGHT ABOUT MORTALITY. We were instructed that by faithfulness in the mortal life which was promised us, we also should, after passing through trials and tribulation, obtain bodies that would also be glorious, just like our Father's. We were duly formed that in this mortal life we would have to walk by faith. Previously we had walked by sight, but now was to come a period of trial to see if by faith we would be true to every covenant and commandment our Father required at our hands. We were informed that many would fail. Those who rebelled against the light which would be revealed to them should be deprived of exaltation. They could not come back to dwell in the presence of God, but would have to take a place in some other sphere where they would be blessed according to their works, and likewise restricted in their privileges.58.7

PLAN OF SALVATION PRESENTED IN PRE-EXISTENCE. There was a council held in heaven, when the Lord called before him his spirit children and presented to them a plan by which they should come down on this earth; partake of mortal life and physical bodies; pass through a probation of mortality, and then go on to a higher exaltation through the resurrection which should be brought about through the atonement of his Only Begotten Son Jesus Christ. 58.8 The thought of passing through mortality and partaking of all the vicissitudes of earth life in which they would gain experiences through suffering, pain, sorrow, temptation and affliction, as well as the pleasures of life in this mundane existence, and then, if faithful, passing on through the resurrection to eternal life in the kingdom of God, to be like him,58.9 filled them with the spirit of rejoicing, and they "shouted for joy," 58.10 The experience and knowledge obtained in this mortal life they could not get in any other way, and the receiving of a physical body was essential to their exaltation.

AGENCY AND PROGRESSION IN PRE-EXISTENCE. God gave his children their free agency even in the spirit world. by which the individual spirits had the privilege, just as men have here, of choosing the good and rejecting the evil, or partaking of the evil to suffer the consequences of their sins. Because of this, some even there were more faithful than others in keeping the commandments of the Lord. Some were of greater intelligence than others, as we find it here, and were honored accordingly. . . .

SOME SPIRITS GREATER THAN OTHERS. The spirits of men had their free agency, some were greater than others, and from among them the Father called and foreordained his prophets and rulers. Jeremiah and Abraham were two of them.59.11 . . . The spirits of men were not equal. They may have had an equal start, 59.12 and we know they were all innocent in the beginning;59.13 but the right of free agency which was given to them enabled some to outstrip others, and thus, through the eons of immortal existence, to become more intelligent, more faithful, for they were free to act for themselves, to think for themselves, to receive the truth or rebel against it. 59.14

CHILDREN OF ISRAEL FOREKNOWN. The Lord declared through Moses the following:

"Remember the days of old, consider the years of many generations: . . . When the Most High divided to the nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the people according to the number of the children of Israel." 59.15

A similar passage to this occurs in Acts where Paul declares to the Athenians that the Lord "hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth, and hath determined the times, before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation." 59.16

These passages clearly indicate that the numbers of the children of Israel were known and the bounds of their habitation fixed, in the days of old when the Lord divided to the nations their inheritance. We conclude, therefore, that there must have been a division of the spirits of men in the spiritual world, and those who were appointed to be the children of Israel were separated and prepared for a special inheritance.

WHY NO REMEMBRANCE OF FIRST ESTATE. This mortal existence is conclusive evidence that all who receive it kept their first estate. In our former, or spirit existence, we walked by sight. We were in the presence of both the Father and the Son, and were instructed by them and under their personal presence. In this mortal life, or second estate, the Lord willed that we should walk by faith and not by sight, that we might, with the great gift of free agency, be proved to see if we would do all things whatsoever the Lord our God commanded us. 60.17 Therefore, he took away from us all knowledge of our spiritual existence and started us out afresh in the form of helpless infants, to grow and learn day by day. In consequence of this we received no former knowledge and wisdom at birth, and, as it is written of the Son of God, who in the beginning made all things, we "received not of the fulness at the first, but received grace for grace." 60.18

PRE-EXISTENT LIFE AFFECTS MORTALITY. Notwithstanding this fact that our recollection of former things was taken away, the character of our lives in the spirit world has much to do with our disposition, desires and mentality here in mortal life. The spirit influences the body to a great extent, just as the body in its desires and cravings has an influence on the spirit. The Lord has caused it to be so. Therefore, those who were the noble and great ones in that former world, the Lord foreordained to be his prophets and rulers here, for he knew them before they were born, and through the action of the spirit on the body, he knows they will be likely to serve him here. Environment and many other causes, however, have great influence on the progress and destiny of man, but we must not lose sight of the fact that the characteristics of the spirit, which were developed through many ages of a former existence, play a very important part in our progression through mortal life.60.19

WHY MEN ARE BORN TO DIFFERENT RACES. We are the children of God. He is our Father and he loves us. He loves all men whether they be white or black. No matter what their color, no matter what the conditions under which they were born and reared, the Lord looks upon all his children in mercy and will do for them just the best that he can. . . .

There is a reason why one man is born black and with other disadvantages, while another is born white with great advantages. The reason is that we once had an estate before we came here, and were obedient, more or less, to the laws that were given us there. Those who were faithful in all things there received greater blessings here, and those who were not faithful received less. 61.20

MEN NOT FOREORDAINED TO DO EVIL. Every soul coming into this world came here with the promise that through obedience he would receive the blessings of salvation. 61.21 No person was foreordained or appointed to sin or to perform a mission of evil. No person is ever predestined to salvation or damnation. Every person has free agency. Cain was promised by the Lord that if he would do well, he would be accepted.61.22 Judas had his agency and acted upon it; no pressure was brought to bear on him to cause him to betray the Lord, but he was led by Lucifer.61.23 If men were appointed to sin and betray their brethren, then justice could not demand that they be punished for sin and betrayal when they are guilty. 61.24

LORD HAS CREATED MANY EARTHS. The Lord never created anything for nothing, nor out of nothing. Everything has a place and was created for a purpose. Man was not created to be destroyed. This work has been going on forever. There never was a time when there was not an earth; never a time when there were not people on it, for that is the work of the Lord, and the heavens are innumerable, and so are the earths that have passed away to their exaltation and glory. As they pass away others take their places, This is not the only world. 62.25

MANY EARTHS INHABITED BY OUR BROTHERS AND SISTERS. We are not the only people that the Lord has created. We have brothers and sisters on other earths. They look like us because they, too, are the children of God and were created in his image, for they are also his offspring.62.26 His great work is to create earths and people them with his children who are called upon to pass through the mortal probation like unto this we are now in, suffering pain, sorrow and the ills of the flesh, coming face to face with sin, with temptation; and having the right within themselves, God-given, to reject the evil and receive the good or reject the good and receive the evil, if they will, with the understanding, of course, that they shall be judged before his bar for their deeds and receive their reward accordingly. Every man has his agency to choose good or evil, to be rewarded or debased, and of course each will be rewarded.62.27

PRE-EXISTENCE OF ALL CREATURES

ALL LIFE CREATED IN THE SPIRIT. Every creature had a spiritual existence. The spirits of men, beasts, and all animal life, existed before the foundations of the earth were laid, and are living entities.62.28 As death, through the fall, is passed upon all, so the resurrection, through the mission of Jesus Christ, comes to all. 62.29

ANIMALS CREATED FOR MAN. I want to give you a little explanation of man's relationship to the animals upon the earth, as the Lord has given it to us by revelation -- not as it is taught by man in the world -- but the true relationship which exists between man and beast. Man is the greatest of all the creations of God. He is his offspring. We are all his children. It was made known through the Prophet Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon, who saw it in vision, that the inhabitants of this earth and other worlds are begotten sons and daughters unto God. 63.30 That ought to put an end -- so far as Latter-day Saints are concerned -- to all this nonsense prevailing in the world regarding the origin of man.

Man, I say, as the offspring of God, is the greatest of all his creations. He is greater than the moon, the sun, and the stars, which are the work of the fingers of God, and are made for the benefit of man. It is man's place to rule, and stand at the head of all other dominions, powers, creations, and beings, which the Lord our God has created.63.31

ANIMALS HAVE SOULS. The idea prevails in general, I believe, in the religious world where the gospel truth is misunderstood, that man is the only being on the earth that has what is called a soul or a spirit. We know this is not the case, for the Lord has said that not only has man a spirit, and is thereby a living soul, but likewise the beasts of the field, the fowl of the air, and the fish of the sea have spirits, and hence are living souls. But this does not make them kinsmen to the sons and daughters of God. They are our Father's creations, not his offspring, and that is the great difference between man and beast.

It would be a very strange world where animals were not found. If, after the resurrection of the dead, we discovered that man was the only living creature with immortality, we would certainly consider it a very strange world. Yet the idea does prevail that man has a spirit and the animals have not. Some people think this is the great thing that distinguishes man from all other beings.

FORM OF ANIMAL SPIRITS. The fish, the fowl, the beasts of the field, lived before they were placed naturally in this earth, and so did the plants that are upon the face of the earth. The spirits that possess the bodies of the animals are in the similitude of their bodies. In other words, the bodies of animals conform to the spirits which possess them, and which existed before they were placed on the earth; "that which is spiritual being in the likeness of that which is temporal; and that which is temporal in the likeness of that which is spiritual; the spirit of man in the likeness of his person, as also the spirit of the beast, and every other creature which God has created." 64.32

THE WAR IN HEAVEN

REBELLIOUS SPIRITS CAST OUT. When the plan of redemption was presented and Jesus was chosen to be the Redeemer of the world, some rebelled. They were not willing to accept him as "the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world," 64.33 . . . In this great rebellion in heaven, Lucifer, or Satan, a son of the morning, and one-third of the hosts thereof were cast
 out into the earth because Lucifer sought to destroy the free agency of man and the one-third of the spirits sided with him, He sought the throne of God, and put forth his plan in boldness in that great council, declaring that he would save all, that not one soul should be lost, provided God would give him the glory and the honor.64.34 When his plan was rejected for a better one, he rebelled and said, as Isaiah states the case: "I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God, . . . I will be like the Most High." 64.35

FREE AGENCY IN PRE-EXISTENCE. If there had been no free agency, there could have been no rebellion in heaven; but what would man amount to without this free agency? He would be no better than a mechanical contrivance. He could not have acted for himself, but in all things would have been acted upon, and hence unable to have received a reward for meritorious conduct. He would have been an automaton; could have had no happiness nor misery, "neither sense nor insensibility,"65.36 and such could hardly be called existence. Under such conditions there could have been no purpose in our creation.

DEVILS DENIED MORTAL BODIES. The punishment of Satan and the third of the host of heaven who followed him, was that they were denied the privilege of being born into this world and receiving mortal bodies. They did not keep their first estate and were denied the opportunity of eternal progression. The Lord cast them out into the earth, where they became the tempters of mankind -- the devil and his angels. "And it must needs be," the Lord has said, "that the devil should tempt the children of men, or they could not be agents unto themselves; for if they never should have bitter they could not know the sweet."65.37

DEVILS STEAL BODIES. At times these fallen spirits steal possession of the bodies of men and women, overpowering the spirit who has rightful ownership. They realize what they have lost and are willing, when opportunity is given them, of possessing bodies of lower animals, so anxious are they to be clothed with flesh even for a season. On one occasion a legion of these evil spirits, when cast out by the Lord, asked the privilege of entering the bodies of a herd of swine. 65.38 Out of Mary Magdalene the Lord cast seven devils.65.39 These evil spirits know the Lord from the knowledge and experience they obtained in the heavens before their banishment for rebellion. They called him by name when he disturbed them in their stolen habitations, saying: "Thou art Christ the Son of God, . . . for they knew that he was Christ." 65.40

NO NEUTRALS IN HEAVEN. There were no neutrals in the war in heaven. All took sides either with Christ or with Satan.66.41 Every man had his agency there, and men receive rewards here based upon their actions there, just as they will receive rewards hereafter for deeds done in the body. The Negro, evidently, is receiving the reward he merits.

ALL SPIRITS INNOCENT IN THE BEGINNING. The Lord has said, "Every spirit of man was innocent in the beginning; and God having redeemed man from the fall, men became again, in their infant state, innocent before God."66.42

This is speaking of the spirits of men when they were created, or born in the spirit, not when they were dwelling in the spirit world, for one-third of them rebelled and were not innocent. When a child comes into this world he is innocent as far as this mortal life is concerned, but children soon lose their innocence as they grow and come in contact with the world. 66.43

MORTALITY

TWO PURPOSES OF EARTH LIFE. We came into this world to die, That was understood before we came here. It is part of the plan, all discussed and arranged long before men were placed upon the earth. When Adam was sent into this world, it was with the understanding that he would violate a law, transgress a law, in order to bring to pass this mortal condition which we find ourselves in today. There are two purposes for life -- one to gain experience that could not be obtained in any other way, and the other to obtain these tabernacles of flesh and bones. Both of these purposes are vital to the existence of man.

In the spirit world we saw our Father. We dwelt in his presence. He tells us in one of these revelations that we saw him, and if we are faithful, we will have the privilege of seeing him again; but we beheld a vast difference between him and us, We were spirits. He was a spirit clothed with a glorious body -- an immortal body. He had become a soul according to the definition which he himself has given, that is, a soul is the spirit and body united. 67.44 We noted the difference, and naturally wanted to become like him.

We were informed that the earth would be prepared where we might have the privilege of going and sojourning for a season, there to obtain bodies, tangible bodies of flesh and bones, but in obtaining these bodies we would have to pass through all the vicissitudes of mortality. We would have to come in contact with pain, with sorrow, with suffering, with sin, as well as with pleasures which we find in the mortal life.67.45 The whole plan was laid before us, and we shouted for joy because this opportunity, this great opportunity, was going to be presented to us, of receiving tabernacles.

MORTALITY A STATE OF CORRUPTION. The tabernacles we were to receive were to be tabernacles of corruption. Do not misunderstand me in the use of that word, for I mean bodies that are changeable, subject to change as we see change in mortality. Our bodies are constantly changing, throwing off the waste and taking on the new to replace the waste. And so in the scriptures they are spoken of as being corruptible bodies,

Notwithstanding that, we rejoiced in the opportunity to receive bodies of that kind, for a season, with the understanding that eventually we would pass through death and then the resurrection, and then we would take up those bodies incorruptible. The spirit and the body in that resurrection would be again united, inseparably, never again to die, never again to receive corruption in the sense in which I am using that term, but to exist forever.67.46 Is there any wonder that the sons of God shouted for joy?

GLORIOUS BODIES FOR THE FAITHFUL. And our Father taught us that if we were faithful in the keeping of the commandments that should be given to us, that we would be like him, and would have glorious bodies shining like the sun, as his glorious body shines, and we should be called his sons and his daughters, and should be clothed with the fulness of all the blessings of his kingdom.68.47

So we were ready and willing to make that journey from the presence of God in the spirit world to the mortal world, here to suffer all that pertains to this life, its pleasures and its sorrows, and to die; and death is just as essential as birth. Who would want to live in this world in this mortal condition, forever, with all the pain and the suffering and the anguish of soul that come? None of us would wish it, and especially if we understood that this is only a temporary probation and that by passing on we should come to a glorious condition of eternal life. We would not want to stay here. And so we have before us the plan of salvation. 68.48

PURPOSE OF WEALTH OF WORLD. We are here for a great purpose. That purpose is not to live 100 years, or less, and plant our fields, reap our crops, gather fruit, live in houses, and surround ourselves with the necessities of mortal life. That is not the purpose of life. These things are necessary to our existence here, and that is the reason why we should be industrious. But hove many men spend their time thinking that all there is in life is to accumulate the things of this world, to live in comfort, and surround themselves with all the luxuries, and privileges, and pleasures it is possible for mortal life to bestow, and never give a thought to anything beyond?

Why, all these things are but temporary blessings. We eat to live. We clothe ourselves to keep warm and covered, We have houses to live in for our comfort and convenience, but we ought to look upon all these blessings as temporary blessings needful while we journey through this life. And that is all the good they are to us. We cannot take any of them with us when we depart. Gold, silver, and precious stones, which are called wealth, are of no use to man, only as they enable him to take care of himself, and to meet his necessities here. 69.49

IMPORTANCE OF THIS MORTAL PROBATION. This mortal probation was to be a brief period, just a short span linking the eternity past with the eternity future. Yet it was to be a period of tremendous importance. It would either give to those who received it the blessing of eternal life, which is the greatest gift of God, and thus qualify them for godhood as sons and daughters of our Eternal Father, or, if they rebelled and refused to comply with the laws and ordinances which were provided for their salvation, it would deny them the great gift and they would be assigned, after the resurrection, to some inferior sphere according to their works. This life is the most vital period in our eternal existence. It is filled with awful responsibilities and dangers. Here we are face to face with innumerable temptations. Lucifer, formerly a son of the morning, now Satan, the deceiver, is here with his rebellious hosts to tempt us and lead us astray.

We have to pass through pain and sorrow and are constantly in need of protection against sin and error. This is given us through the Spirit of God if we will but heed it. All of this was made known to us in the pre-existence, and yet we were glad to take the risk. 69.50

THE STRAITNESS OF THE WAY. Mortality is the testing or proving ground for exaltation to find out who among the children of God are worthy to become Gods themselves, and the Lord has informed us that "few there be that find it."69.51 The way is strait and narrow, but the great difficulty with most of us is that we think it is broad and not restricted. When we are informed that there are straitened commandments and exacting covenants which must in this life be obeyed, we become rebellious and immediately commence arguing about the justice of God and his great mercy, thus losing our sense of correct vision and understanding.70.52

FREE AGENCY IN BOTH ESTATES

AGENCY ESSENTIAL TO SALVATION. The Lord has given to man his agency. that is a divine principle upon which exaltation can come. It is the only principle upon which rewards can be given in righteousness. Satan's plan in the beginning was to compel. He said he would save all men and not one soul should be lost. He would do it if the Father would give him the honor and the glory.70.53 But who wants salvation when it comes through compulsion, if we have not the power within ourselves to choose and to act according to the dictates of conscience? What would salvation mean to you if you were compelled?70.54 And so, that great gift of agency has been given to us. By it we may climb to the heights, we may enter the kingdom of God to sit on the throne and be exalted as sons and daughters of God, but we must be obedient.

AGENCY TO PREACH GOSPEL. I am willing to defend any man in the privilege which is his by his agency. If he wants to worship a cat or a dog; the sun or the moon; a crocodile or a bull -- and men have done all these things -- that is his privilege. But it is also my privilege and right to try to teach him to do better and to accept a better worship. I will defend him in his rights, and at the same time endeavor to teach him that he may see more clearly and walk in the light of truth. 70.55

UNRIGHTEOUS USE OF AGENCY. We Latter-day Saints hold that every man is entitled to his religious views, and should have the privilege of worshiping according to the dictates of his conscience, let him worship how, where, or what he may, And we will protect him in this right. But we are opposed to the custom adopted by certain men who travel through the settlements of our people abusing the authorities of the Church, distorting our doctrines and defaming the dead, for the purpose of destroying the faith and confidence of the Latter-day Saints.
