ATONEMENT BASED ON THE FALL

FALL AND ATONEMENT FOREORDAINED. The plan of salvation, or code of laws, which is known as the gospel of Jesus Christ, was adopted in the heavens, before the foundation of the world was laid. It was appointed there that Adam, our father, should come to this earth and stand at the head of the whole human family, It was a part of this great plan, that he should partake of the forbidden fruit and fall, thus bringing suffering and death into the world, even for the ultimate good of his children.

By many he has been severely criticized because of his fall, but Latter-day Saints, through modern revelation, have learned that such was necessary in order that man should have his agency and, through the various vicissitudes he has to pass, receive a knowledge of both good and evil, without which it would be impossible for him to gain the exaltation prepared for him,

It was also necessary because of Adam's transgression for the Only Begotten Son of the

Father to come to redeem the world from Adam's fall, This also was a part of the plan chosen before the earth was made, for Jesus is called the Lamb that was slain from the foundation of the world. He came and redeemed us from the fall -- even all the inhabitants of the earth. Not only did he redeem us from Adam's transgression, but he also redeemed us from our own sins, on condition that we obey the laws and ordinances of the gospel.121.1

TWOFOLD NATURE OF FALL. Adam's transgression brought these two deaths: spiritual and temporal -- man being banished from the presence of God, and also becoming mortal and subject to all the ills of the flesh. In order that he should be brought back again, there had to be a reparation of the broken law. Justice demanded it.

The fall brought death. That is not a desirable condition. We do not want to be banished from the presence of God. We do not want to be subject forever to mortal conditions. We do not want to die and have our bodies turn to dust, and the spirits that possess these bodies by right, turned over to the realm of Satan and become subject to him.

JUSTICE DEMANDS ATONEMENT FOR FALL. But that was the condition; and if Christ had not come as the atoning sacrifice, in demand of the law of justice, to repair or to atone or to redeem us from the condition that Adam found himself in, and that we find ourselves in; then mortal death would have come; the body would have gone back to the dust from where it came; the spirit would have gone into the realms of Satan's domain, and have been subject to him forever. Justice demanded that the law which was broken be repaired. Justice demanded that by the giving of life Adam and his posterity will be brought back into the presence of God. 122.2

To amend the broken law and redeem us from the power which death held over us through the fall, it was necessary that we be redeemed by an infinite sacrifice by the shedding of blood. For this purpose Jesus Christ came into the world, for he had volunteered in the pre-existence to come and die that we might live.122.3

CHRIST SATISFIES DEMANDS OF JUSTICE. There was never a sin committed in this world for which reparation has not been, or will not have to be made. If I sin, there must be a reparation or penalty required to pay the debt. If you sin, it is the same. There never was any sin committed, big or small, that has not been atoned for, or that will not have to be atoned for. . . .

Justice made certain demands, and Adam could not pay the price, so mercy steps in. The Son of God says: "I will go down and pay the price. I will be the Redeemer and redeem men from Adam's transgression. I will take upon me the sins of the world and redeem or save every soul from his own sins who will repent." That is the only condition. The Savior does not save anybody from his individual sins only on condition of his repentance. So the effect of Adam's transgression was to place all of us in the pit with him. Then the Savior comes along, not subject to that pit, and towers the ladder. He comes down into the pit and makes it
 possible for us to use the ladder to escape. 123.4

ATONEMENT RANSOMS US FROM THE FALL

TWOFOLD NATURE OF ATONEMENT. The atonement of Jesus Christ is of a twofold nature. Because of it, all men are redeemed from mortal death and the grave, and will rise in the resurrection to immortality of the soul. Then again, by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the gospel, man will receive remission of individual sins, through the blood of Christ, and will inherit exaltation in the kingdom of God, which is eternal life.

ATONEMENT BRINGS RESURRECTION TO ALL. The resurrection of the dead must of necessity be just as broad as was the curse that brought death into the world. Paul said, "For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive. But every man in his own order: Christ the first fruits; afterwards they that are Christ's at his coming. Then cometh the end, when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father; when he shall have put down all rule and all authority and power. For he must reign, till he hath put all enemies under his feet. The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death."124.5

From this we learn that the atonement reaches out and embraces every living creature in the resurrection. Just as long as one soul remains unredeemed from mortal death and the grave, death has not been destroyed; therefore, every soul shall be ferreted out and receive the resurrection. Death shall be destroyed and immortality gain the victory. 124.6

CHRIST PAID THE RANSOM. We were in bondage, through Adam's transgression. He and his posterity after him became subject to death. Death had dominion over us, and if that had continued, hell would have had dominion over us. What did Christ do? He ransomed us. He restored us. He brought us back through his atonement, through the shedding of his blood. He paid the price, as Paul says.124.7 He rescued us from captivity and bondage. That is what ransomed means. He liberated us from death. He paid the price that death required; and we, through his redemption, were recovered by the payment of the shedding of his blood.

CHRIST TOOK CAPTIVITY CAPTIVE.124.8 That is the gospel of Jesus Christ. That is what is taught in our scriptures; and it was a very surprising thing to me to run across this kind of doctrine falsely taught by some, that Christ could not be a ransom for us, that he could not redeem us, because that involved the paying of something which nobody could receive, so somebody was cheated.

Nobody was cheated. Death was paid. Hell was robbed, but hell had no right or claim, only that which it had assumed. Death had the claim, and death was forced to give it up because Christ, the Son of God, who was never subject to death, who always had the power over death, came and destroyed death through the shedding of his blood. So we are redeemed.

FEW TO GAIN "AT-ONE-MENT" WITH GOD. We often hear the word atonement defined
 as being "at-one-ment" with God. That is a very small part of it. In fact, the great majority of mankind never becomes one with God, although they receive the atonement. "Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it." 125.9 We do not all become "at one" with God, if we mean that we are brought back again and given the fulness of life which is promised to those who keep the commandments of God and become sons and daughters of God. 124.10

MANKIND BOUGHT WITH A PRICE. I am sorry to say that I have heard of some members of the Church saying that Christ did not buy us with his blood. One of them has said: "That people of the world owed a debt and Jesus paid the debt for all: This thought does violence to justice, for the suffering of the good to pay the debt of the bad is contrary to the law of life." Another says: "That Jesus was a ransom for a captive world: In this case Jesus must have been paid to someone who held the world captive; but in the very nature of his mission or ransom he could not be held captive and God must have deceived the captor."

Well, such thoughts as these might do honor to an infidel, but not to a member of the Church. Those who speak this way need to repent. They should read the scriptures and especially the Book of Mormon. Jesus did come into the world to ransom it. Through his atonement we were bought from death and hell. Death and hell were paid -- paid in full -- and Christ was the only one who could pay that debt. What did Paul mean when he said we were bought with a price?" 124.11 What does Jesus mean when he calls himself our "Redeemer?"124.12 If we were not bought, if we were not ransomed by Jesus Christ, then we are still in our sins and still subject to death and hell. These men, ignorant of the plan of salvation, should read intensively the scriptures.125.13

ATONEMENT A VICARIOUS SACRIFICE. The whole plan of redemption is based on vicarious sacrifice, One without sin standing for the whole human family, all of whom were under the curse. It is most natural and just that he who commits the wrong should pay the penalty -- atone for his wrongdoing. Therefore, when Adam was the transgressor of the law, justice demanded that he, and none else, should answer for the sin and pay the penalty with his life.

But Adam, in breaking the law, himself became subject to the curse, and being under the curse could not atone for or undo, what he had done. Neither could his children, for they also were under the curse, and it required one who was not subject to the curse to atone for that original sin, Moreover, since we were all under the curse, we were also powerless to atone for our individual sins.

It, therefore, became necessary for the Father to send his Only Begotten Son, who was free from sin, to atone for our sins as well as for Adam's transgression, which justice demanded should be done. He accordingly offered himself a sacrifice for sins, and through his death upon the cross took upon himself both Adam's transgression and our individual sins, thereby redeeming us from the fall, and from our sins, on condition of repentance.

ATONEMENT RANSOMS FROM A PIT. Let us illustrate: A man walking along the road happens to fall into a pit so deep and dark that he cannot climb to the surface and regain his freedom. How can he save himself from his predicament? Not by any exertions on his part, for there is no means of escape in the pit. He calls for help and some kindly disposed soul, hearing his cries for relief, hastens to his assistance and by lowering a ladder, gives to him the means by which he may climb again to the surface of the earth.

This was precisely the condition that Adam placed himself and his posterity in, when he partook of the forbidden fruit. All being together in the pit, none could gain the surface and relieve the others. The pit was banishment from the presence of the Lord and temporal death, the dissolution of the body. And all being subject to death, none could provide the means of escape.

Therefore, in his infinite mercy, the Father heard the cries of his children and sent his Only Begotten Son, who was not subject to death nor to sin, to provide the means of escape. This he did through his infinite atonement and the everlasting gospel.

CHRIST HAD LIFE IN HIMSELF

ATONEMENT A VOLUNTARY ACT. The Savior voluntarily laid down his life and took it up again to satisfy the demands of justice, which required this infinite atonement. His Father accepted this offering in the stead of the blood of all those who were under the curse, and consequently helpless. The Savior said, "I lay down my life for the sheep. . . . Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it up again. No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. This commandment have I received of my Father."127.14

WHY CHRIST COULD WORK OUT ATONEMENT. From this we see that he had life in himself, which he received from the Father, being his Only Begotten Son in the flesh. And it was this principle that gave him power to atone for the sins of the world, both for Adam's transgression and for our individual sins, from which we could not of ourselves get free. Therefore, Christ died in our stead, because to punish us would not relieve the situation, for we would still be subject to the curse, even if our blood had been shed, and through his death we receive life and "have it more abundantly."128.15

WHY CHRIST COULD CHOOSE TO LIVE OR DIE. Every man born into this world inherited death from Adam except Jesus Christ. He always was master of death. He had the power to die. He got that from his mother, because she was mortal. He had blood in his body, and blood is the life of the mortal body. When his heart beat, blood circulated through his body just as it does through ours, but there was something else in him far different from us. He did not have a mortal father. Joseph was not his Father. The Father of his body is the Father of our spirits. And he gave to Jesus Christ, his Son, life in himself. Death had no
 power over him. . . .

HOW CHRIST GAINED KEYS OF RESURRECTION. Now, we have not power to lay down our lives and take them again. But Jesus had power to lay down his life, and he had power to take it up again, and when he was put to death on the cross, he yielded to those wicked Jews. When he was nailed to the cross, he meekly submitted, but he had power within himself, and he could have resisted. He came into the world to die that we might live, and his atonement for sin and death is the force by which we are raised to immortality and eternal life.

So Jesus Christ did for us something that we could not do for ourselves, through his infinite atonement. On the third day after the crucifixion he took up his body and gained the keys of the resurrection, and thus has power to open the graves for all men, but this he could not do until he had first passed through death himself and conquered.

Now it is not a hard thing to understand how Jesus Christ, as the Son of God. had this power within himself, because he inherited life from his Father who is eternal and immortal. We may not fully understand how it was that he was required to perform the work for us vicariously through the shedding of his blood, but this is the case, and we owe all to him for he bought us through the shedding of his blood.129.16

THE PRICE CHRIST PAID FOR US

CHRIST SUFFERED FOR ALL WHO REPENT. He came into this world and took upon him our individual sins on condition of our repentance. Christ does not redeem any man from his individual sins who will not repent and who will not accept him. All those who refuse to accept him as the Redeemer and refuse to turn from their sins will have to pay the price of their own sinning.

"For behold, I, God, have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent; But if they would not repent they must suffer even as I; Which suffering caused myself. even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit -- and would that I might not drink the bitter cup, and shrink -- Nevertheless, glory be to the Father, and I partook and finished my preparations unto the children of men." 129.17

INFINITE SUFFERING IN ATONEMENT. This is what he did: He carried, in some way that I cannot understand and you cannot understand, the burden of the combined weight of the sins of the world. It is hard enough for me to carry my own transgressions, and it is hard enough for you to carry yours. None of us is perfect. We all have done things we should not, and when we do things we should not do, we do not feel very good; we are troubled. I have seen men in the gall of bitterness, in the torments and the anguish of their souls, because of their sins. I have seen them cry out in anguish because of their transgressions -- just one
 individual's sins. Can you comprehend the suffering of Jesus Christ when he carried, not merely by physical manifestation but in some spiritual and mental condition or manner, the combined weight of sin?

GREATEST SUFFERING WAS IN GETHSEMANE. We speak of the passion of Jesus Christ. A great many people have an idea that when he was on the cross, and nails were driven into his hands and feet, that was his great suffering. His great suffering was before he ever was placed upon the cross. It was in the Garden of Gethsemane that the blood oozed from the pores of his body: "Which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit -- and would that I might not drink the bitter cup, and shrink,"

That was not when he was on the cross; that was in the garden. That is where he bled from every pore in his body.130.18

Now I cannot comprehend that pain. I have suffered pain, you have suffered pain, and sometimes it has been quite severe; but I cannot comprehend pain, which is mental anguish more than physical, that would cause the blood, like sweat, to come out upon the body. It was something terrible, something terrific; so we can understand why he would cry unto his Father:

"If it be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless not as I will, but as thou wilt." 130.19

RIGHTEOUS ESCAPE SUFFERING THROUGH ATONEMENT. A mortal man could not have stood it -- that is, a man such as we are. I do not care what his fortitude what his power, there was no man ever born into this world that could have stood under the weight of the load that was upon the Son of God, when he was carrying my sins and yours and making it possible that we might escape from our sins. He carried that load for us if we will only accept him as our Redeemer and keep his commandments. Some of us find it so hard, so terribly hard, to do the little things that are asked of us, and yet he was willing to carry all that tremendous load and weight of sin -- not his own, for he had no sin. He did it that we might escape. He paid the price, the penalty of our sinning.

So I say there never was a sin committed that was not atoned for. Christ paid the debt of my sins on one condition, and that is that I will believe in him and keep his commandments. He did that for you and for every other person in the world; but he never paid any debt on the cross, or before he went on the cross, for the sins of any of us, if we will be rebellious. If we are rebellious, we will have to pay the price ourselves.131.20

ATONEMENT AND OUR LACK OF GRATITUDE

CHRIST PAID AN INFINITE PRICE FOR US. It is impossible for weak mortals, and we
 are all weak, fully to comprehend the extent of the suffering of the Son of God. We cannot realize the price he had to pay. . . . It is, however. within our grasp to know and realize that this excruciating agony of his sacrifice has brought to us the greatest blessing that could possibly be given. Moreover, we are able to realize that this extreme suffering -- which was beyond the power of mortal man either to accomplish or endure -- was undertaken because of the great love which the Father and the Son had for mankind.

INGRATITUDE OF DISOBEDIENCE. We are extremely ungrateful to our Father and to his Beloved Son when in all humility with "broken hearts and contrite spirits" we are unwilling to keep the commandments. The violation of any divine commandment is a most ungrateful act, considering all that has been accomplished for us through the atonement of our Savior. 132.21

We will never be able to pay the debt. The gratitude of our hearts should be filled to overflowing in love and obedience for his great and tender mercy. For what he has done, we should never fail him. He bought us with a price, the price of his great suffering and the spilling of his blood in sacrifice on the cross.132.22

Now, he has asked us to keep his commandments. He says they are not grievous, and there are so many of us who are not willing to do it. I am speaking now generally of the people of the earth. We are not willing to do it. That certainly is ingratitude. We are ungrateful.

Every member of this Church who violates the Sabbath day, who is not honest in the paying of his tithing, who will not keep the Word of Wisdom, who wilfully violates any of the other commandments the Lord has given us, is ungrateful to the Son of God, and when ungrateful to the Son of God is ungrateful to the Father who sent him.

INGRATITUDE TO CHRIST. If our Savior would do so much for us, how in the world is it that we are not willing to abide by his commandments, which are not grievous, which do not cause us any suffering if we will only keep them? And yet, people break the Word of Wisdom; they refuse to attend to their duties as officers and members in the Church; many of them stay away from meetings the Lord has called upon them to support. They follow their own desires if they are in conflict with the commandments of the Lord.

If we understood our position, and if we loved the Lord our God with all our heart, with all our soul, and with all our mind, . . . then we would keep his commandments. When we will not do this, I tell you, my brethren and sisters, we show ingratitude to Jesus Christ. 132.23

The crime of ingratitude is one of the most prevalent and I might say at the same time one of the greatest with which mankind is afflicted. The more the Lord blesses us the less we love him. That is the way men show their gratitude unto the Lord for his mercies and his blessings towards them!133.24

THE DOCTRINE OF BLOOD ATONEMENT 133.25

CLEANSING POWER OF BLOOD OF CHRIST. The Latter-day Saints believe in the efficacy of the blood of Christ. They believe that through obedience to the laws and ordinances of the gospel they obtain a remission of sins; but this could not be if Christ had not died for them. 133.26 If you did believe in blood atonement, I might ask you why the blood of Christ was shed, and in whose stead was it shed? I might ask you to explain the words of Paul, "Without shedding of blood is no remission." 133.27

Are you aware that there are certain sins that man may commit for which the atoning blood of Christ does not avail? Do you not know, too, that this doctrine is taught in the Book of Mormon? And is not this further reason why you should discard the book as well as the name? Is it not safe for us to rely upon the scriptures for the solution of problems of this kind? 133.28

TRUE DOCTRINE OF BLOOD ATONEMENT. Just a word or two now, on the subject of blood atonement. What is that doctrine? Unadulterated, if you please, laying aside the pernicious insinuations and lying charges that have so often been made, it is simply this: Through the atonement of Christ all mankind may be saved, by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the gospel. Salvation is twofold: General -- that which comes to all men irrespective of a belief (in this life) in Christ -- and, Individual -- that which man merits through his own acts through life and by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the gospel.

But man may commit certain grievous sins -- according to his light and knowledge -- that will place him beyond the reach of the atoning blood of Christ. If then he would be saved he must make sacrifice of his own life to atone -- so far as in his power lies -- for that sin, for the blood of Christ alone under certain circumstances will not avail.

MURDERERS AND THE ATONEMENT. Do you believe this doctrine? If not, then I do say you do not believe in the true doctrine of the atonement of Christ. This is the doctrine you are pleased to call the "blood atonement of Brighamism." This is the doctrine of Christ our Redeemer, who died for us. This is the doctrine of Joseph Smith, and I accept it.

In whose stead did Christ die? I wish your church members could be fair enough to discuss this subject on its merits.

I again recommend you to a careful reading of the quotations in my open letter. You will find them as follows: Book of Mormon -- 2 Nephi 9:35; Alma 1:13-14 and 42:19. Bible -- Inspired Version, Genesis 9:12-13; Luke 11:50; Hebrews 9:22 and 10:26-29; 1 John 3:15 and 5:16. Doctrine and Covenants 42:18-19, 79; 87:7; 101:80.

To these I will add: "Whoso killeth any person, the murderer shall be put to death by the mouth of witnesses; but one witness shall not testify against any person to cause him to die.

Moreover ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of a murderer, which is guilty of death; but he shall be surely put to death. . . . So ye shall not pollute the land wherein ye are; for blood it defileth the land; and the land cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it."135.29

ANCIENT MEN SLAIN TO ATONE FOR SINS. Do you want a few references of where men were righteously slain to atone for their sins? What about the death of Nehor? 135.30 Of Zemnarihah and his followers?135.31 What about Er and Onan, whom the Lord slew?135.32 Of Nadab and Abihu?135.33 And the death of Achan?135.34

Were not these righteously slain to atone for their sins? And it was of this class of cases that President Young referred in his discourse you misquote. He tells us so, in the same discourse in the portion which you did not quote. It is:

"Now take the wicked, and I can refer you to where the Lord had to slay every soul of the Israelites that went out of Egypt except Caleb and Joshua. He slew them by the hand of their enemies, by the plague and by the sword. Why? Because he loved them and promised Abraham he would save them."135.35

ATONEMENT AND SINS UNTO DEATH. Joseph Smith taught that there were certain sins so grievous that man may commit, that they will place the transgressors beyond the power of the atonement of Christ. If these offenses are committed, then the blood of Christ will not cleanse them from their sins even though they repent. Therefore their only hope is to have their own blood shed to atone, as far as possible, in their behalf. This is scriptural doctrine, and is taught in all the standard works of the Church. The doctrine was established in the beginning. that "Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed; for man shall not shed the blood of man. For a commandment I give, that every man's brother shall preserve the life of man, for in mine own image have I made man."136.36

This was the law among the Nephites: "Wo unto the murderer who deliberately killeth, for he shall die."136.37

John says: "If any man see his brother sin a sin which is not unto death, he shall ask, and he shall give him life for them that sin not unto death. There is a sin unto death: I do not say that ye shall pray for it."136.38

UNIVERSAL PRACTICE OF BLOOD ATONEMENT. Every nation since the world began has practiced blood atonement, at least in part, as that doctrine is based upon the scriptures. And men for certain crimes have had to atone as far as they could for their sins wherein they have placed themselves beyond the redeeming power of the blood of Christ.

But that the Church practices "Blood Atonement" on apostates or any others, which is preached by ministers of the "Reorganization" is a damnable falsehood for which the
 accusers must answer. 136.39

LAW OF CAPITAL PUNISHMENT. In pursuance of and in harmony with this scriptural doctrine, which has been the righteous law from the days of Adam to the present time, the founders of Utah incorporated in the laws of the Territory provisions for the capital punishment of those who wilfully shed the blood of their fellow men. This law, which is now the law of the State, granted unto the condemned murderer the privilege of choosing for himself whether he die by hanging, or whether he be shot, and thus have his blood shed in harmony with the law of God; and thus atone, so far as it is in his power to atone, for the death of his victim. Almost without exception the condemned party chooses the latter death.

This is by the authority of the law of the land, not that of the Church. This law was placed on the statutes through the efforts of the Mormon legislators, and grants to the accused the right of jury trial. It is from this that the vile charge, which you are pleased to repeat, has been maliciously misconstrued by the enemies of the Church, who prefer to believe a lie. When men accuse the Church of practicing "Blood Atonement" on those who deny the faith, or, for that matter, on any living creature, they know that they bear false witness, and they shall stand condemned before the judgment seat of God.137.40

CHURCH NEVER PRACTICED BLOOD ATONEMENT. Your report says: "This doctrine was introduced by Brigham Young" and that it meant "death to anyone who left the Church . . . that the apostate whose throat was cut from ear to ear . . . saved his soul." Why you made this statement you best know; but were you not aware that it was but the repetition of the ravings of enemies of the Church, without one grain of truth?

Did you not know that not a single individual was ever "blood atoned," as you are pleased to call it, for apostasy or any other cause? Were you not aware, in repeating this false charge, that it was made by the most bitter enemies of the Church before the death of the Prophet Joseph Smith? Do you know of anyone whose blood was ever shed by the command of the Church, or members thereof, to "save his soul?" Did you not know that you were embittering the people against the Mormon elders, and that just such malicious charges and false insinuations have made martyrs for the Church, whose blood does not "cease to come up into the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth?" 137.41

Never in the history of this people can the time be pointed to when the Church ever attempted to pass judgment on, or execute an apostate as per your statement. There are men living in Utah today who left the Church in the earliest history of our State who feel as secure, and are just as secure and free from molestation from their former associates as you or any other man could be.138.42

INFINITE SCOPE OF ATONEMENT

NATURE OF THE ATONEMENT. In the Compendium, which was first published in a very
 early day, this is found: "The word atonement signifies deliverance through the offering of a ransom, for the penalty of a broken law. The sense is expressed in Job 33:24: 'Deliver him from going down to the pit: I have found a ransom.' As effected by Jesus Christ, it signifies the deliverance, through his death, and resurrection, of the earth and everything pertaining to it, from the power which death has obtained over them through the transgression of Adam."

On the following page, this: "These passages evidence that redemption from death, through the suffering of Christ, is for all men, both the righteous and the wicked; for this earth, and all things created upon it."138.43

ATONEMENT FOR EARTH AND ALL LIFE. I believe in Jesus Christ as the Son of God and the Only Begotten Son of the Father in the flesh: that he came into the world as the Redeemer, as the Savior; and through his death through his ministry, the shedding of his blood, he has brought to pass redemption from death to all men, to all creatures -- not alone to man, but to every living thing, and even to this earth itself, upon which we stand, for we are informed through the revelations that it too shall receive the resurrection and come forth to be crowned as a celestial body, and to be the abode of celestial beings eternally. 138.44
