NATURE OF GOSPEL COVENANTS

GOD OFFERS COVENANT OF SALVATION. The gospel covenant is the promise of God to grant to man, through man's obedience and acceptance of the ordinances and principles of the gospel, the glory and exaltation of eternal life. It is the Father in Heaven who stipulates the terms of the covenant. Man has no say in the matter or right to alter or annul any provision of the covenant. His duty is to accept on the terms which are presented to him from the Almighty, in full faith and obedience, without complaint or desire because of personal weakness to alter or annul, what the Father offers for man's salvation.152.1

BAPTISM AN EVERLASTING COVENANT. Each ordinance and requirement given to man for the purpose of bringing to pass his salvation and exaltation is a covenant. Baptism for the remission of sins is a covenant. When this ordinance was revealed in this
 dispensation, the Lord called it "a new and an everlasting covenant, even that which was from the beginning." 152.2

This covenant was given in the beginning and was lost to men through apostasy, therefore, when it was revealed again, it became to man a new covenant, although it was from the beginning, and it is everlasting since its effects upon the individual endure forever. Then again, whenever there is need for repentance, baptism is the method, or law, given of the Lord by which the remission of sins shall come, and so this law is everlasting.

EXAMPLES OF MANY EVERLASTING COVENANTS. Keeping the Sabbath day holy is a covenant between man and the Lord for he said: "Ye shall keep the Sabbath therefore; for it is holy unto you: everyone that defileth it shall surely be put to death: for whosoever doeth any work therein, that soul shall be cut off from among his people." 153.3 All of the Ten Commandments are everlasting covenants.153.4 The law of tithing is a form of an everlasting covenant, the covenant of revenue for the Church, although some day we shall be given a higher form of this law known as consecration. 153.5

Marriage is an everlasting covenant, but not as some believe, the new and everlasting covenant. 153.6 The law of marriage to the Church, like the covenant of baptism, is new because it is not the marriage of the world, but for time and for all eternity. Yet this everlasting law of marriage is that which was in the beginning.

PROPHETS FORETELL LATTER-DAY COVENANTS. There are many covenants which the Lord promised Israel he would establish with them in the latter days. These have been spoken of by Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel and other prophets. Isaiah said: "And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem."153.7

Jeremiah, speaking of the covenants which had been given to Israel and which were yet to be given, said: Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah: Not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the day that I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt; which my covenant they brake, although I was an husband unto them, saith the Lord: But this shall be the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel; After those days, saith the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts; and will be their God, and they shall be my people." 154.8

And this from Ezekiel: "Moreover I will make a covenant of peace with them; it shall be an everlasting covenant with them: and I will place them, and multiply them, and will set my sanctuary in the midst of them for evermore."154.9 These predictions have been partly fulfilled in our day.

LORD STIPULATES TERMS OF HIS COVENANTS. When a covenant is made between two men or parties, it is usual for each man or party to have a voice in the contract and its various stipulations. This is not the case with a covenant coming to man from the Lord. It is the duty of man to accept all the provisions of such a sacred covenant established for his eternal benefit.

Man does not have the right to change in any sense whatever, or reject in the slightest degree any part of a covenant which the Lord presents for his benefit and salvation. For a man to presume to change any ordinance offered by the Lord is absurd and should be considered a sad reflection on man's intelligence. Yet such a thing has been done in many instances, and there are those who presume to say that the Lord permits man to change and even mar the Almighty's laws to suit the convenience and the frailties of mankind.

THE LAWS OF GOD ARE UNALTERABLE. They are as fixed and immutable as any of the laws of nature, in fact the laws of nature are the laws of God, and the laws governing in the celestial kingdom are similar in their duration and unchangeableness to the natural laws of the universe.

COVENANTS WITHDRAWN BECAUSE OF UNWORTHINESS. It has become necessary, at times however, for the Lord to withdraw from mankind some of his covenants, and give in the stead thereof a lesser law. This was the case in the days of Moses, when the Lord withdrew the higher ordinances and the Melchizedek Priesthood, because of the rebellion or failure of the Israelites to heed the laws of the Lord. In the place of these laws he gave to them the carnal law to be to them as a schoolmaster to bring them unto Christ. 155.10

Moreover, there have been times when it has been necessary for covenants to be withdrawn, and man has been left to grope in spiritual darkness without the guidance of the Holy Spirit, and without the saving grace of the ordinances and covenants of the gospel. Such was the case in Israel preceding the coming of John the Baptist and Jesus Christ. The long dark day of apostasy, preceding the middle ages and continuing until the restoration of the gospel through Joseph Smith, was another benighted period of this kind.155.11

NO UNNECESSARY COVENANTS OR COMMANDMENTS. We should fully and sincerely comprehend the fact that no requirement, request, or commandment made of man by the Father or the Son is given except for the purpose of advancing man on the path of eternal perfection. Never at any time has the Lord given to man a commandment which was not intended to exalt him and bring him nearer to eternal companionship with the Father and the Son. Too many of us receive the commandments of the Lord in the spirit of indifference or with the attitude of mind toward them that they have been given for the sole purpose of depriving us of some comfort or pleasure without any real profit to be derived in the observance of them.

Every covenant, contract, bond, obligation, and commandment we have received by revelation and coming from the Almighty has the one purpose in view, the exaltation and perfection of the individual who will in full faith and obedience accept it. He that "receiveth a commandment with doubtful heart, and keepeth it with slothfulness, the same is damned," the Lord has said.156.12 Unfortunately there are a great many who receive covenants in that way. 156.13

THE NEW AND EVERLASTING COVENANT

GOSPEL IS THE EVERLASTING COVENANT. What is the new and everlasting covenant? I regret to say that there are some members of the Church who are misled and misinformed in regard to what the new and everlasting covenant really is. The new and everlasting covenant is the sum total of all gospel covenants and obligations, and I want to prove it. In the 66th section of the Doctrine and Covenants, verse 2, I read:

"Verily I say unto you, blessed are you for receiving mine everlasting covenant, even the fulness of my gospel, sent forth unto the children of men, that they might have life and be made partakers of the glories which are to be revealed in the last days, as it was written by the prophets and apostles in days of old."156.14

More definitely stated is the definition of the new and everlasting covenant given to us in section 132 of the Doctrine and Covenants. Now I am going to say before I read this that marriage is not the new and everlasting covenant. If there are any here that have that idea I want to say that right to them. Baptism is not the new and everlasting covenant. Ordination to the priesthood is not the new and everlasting covenant. In section 22 of the Doctrine and Covenants the Lord says that baptism is "a new and an everlasting covenant, even that which was from the beginning." Marriage in the temple of the Lord for time and for eternity is "a" new and everlasting covenant.

MEN DAMNED BY REJECTING COVENANTS. But when we get to thinking that one of the covenants belonging to the gospel of Jesus Christ is "the" new and everlasting covenant, that is where we make a mistake, and I am going to point it out to you now. See how clearly and definitely the Lord speaks. I begin by reading verses 4 and 5, section 132:

"For behold, I reveal unto you a new and an everlasting covenant; and if ye abide not that covenant, then are ye damned; for no one can reject this covenant and be permitted to enter into my glory.

"For all who will have a blessing at my hands shall abide the law which was appointed for that blessing, and the conditions thereof, as were instituted from before the foundations of the world."

That applies to any covenant. It is not merely this one that the Lord is speaking of here that
 is going to bring upon us a condemnation if we violate it or refuse to receive it. That is true of every covenant that belongs to the gospel. Take for instance the covenant of baptism. If you will not have that covenant, you will be damned. If you will not have the covenant of repentance, you will be damned. If you will not take upon you the covenant of faith, you will be damned. And so it is with any covenant of the gospel.

The Lord says in section 84 of the Doctrine and Covenants that we "shall live by every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of God" -- not by this word and that word and reject these others.157.15 We have got to accept every covenant that he gives us if we want exaltation. So the Lord is speaking here of introducing what he calls "a new and an everlasting covenant." Now mark what he says in verse 6:

"And as pertaining to the new and everlasting covenant, it was instituted for the fulness of my glory; and he that receiveth a fulness thereof must and shall abide the law, or he shall be damned, saith the Lord God."

PROVISIONS OF THE EVERLASTING COVENANT. The Lord is very definite here. In these first verses he uses the article "a" and in verse 6 it is "the." "A" covenant means one of many, does it not? But the covenant singles out one particular covenant, and that is what the Lord has done right here in this revelation. After calling attention to the new and everlasting covenant he gives the definition, and I am going to read it to you (verse 7):

"And verily I say unto you, that the conditions of this law [i.e. the new and everlasting covenant] are these: All covenants, contracts, bonds, obligations, oaths, vows, performances, connections, associations, or expectations, that are not made and entered into and sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, of him who is anointed both as well for time and for all eternity, and that too most holy, by revelation and commandment through the medium of mine anointed, whom I have appointed on the earth to hold this power (and I have appointed unto my servant Joseph to hold this power in the last days, and there is never but one on the earth at a time on whom this power and the keys of this priesthood are conferred), are of no efficacy, virtue, or force in and after the resurrection from the dead; for all contracts that are not made unto this end have an end when men are dead."

GOSPEL COVENANT EMBRACES ALL COVENANTS. Now there is a clear-cut definition in detail of the new and everlasting covenant. It is everything -- the fulness of the gospel. So marriage properly performed, baptism, ordination to the priesthood, everything else -- every contract, every obligation, every performance that pertains to the gospel of Jesus Christ, which is sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise according to his law here given, is a part of the new and everlasting covenant.158.16

Man-made covenants, contracts, obligations, vows, associations or expectations, must come to an end, for they are not everlasting. In the end all things that are not of God shall pass away, and only that which he has established and decreed shall stand. Therefore, all who
 seek a place in the kingdom of God are under the obligation and commandment to abide in the new and everlasting covenant, which is the fulness of the gospel with all its rites, covenants, gifts, and obligations, or they "shall be damned, saith the Lord." 159.17

THE GOSPEL COVENANT

THE GOSPEL NEVER CHANGES. This work is based upon fundamental principles that do not change. They must not, they cannot change, because they are eternal. I believe in progression; we all believe in progression; and the Lord has not curtailed us in any respect, but we cannot substitute the ideas of men for that which the Lord has given, or the plan which he has adopted and revealed to us, by which we may be saved.

For instance, there is no name other than that of Jesus Christ by which men shall be saved. Men may formulate plans and adopt theories and introduce strange works and gather and teach many peculiar doctrines, but this teaching is fundamental and from it we cannot depart, that all things are concentrated in and around the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the Redeemer of the world.

DOCTRINES OF CHRIST ALWAYS THE SAME. So we accept him as the Only Begotten of the Father in the flesh, the only one who has dwelt in the flesh who had a Father who was immortal. We must accept, and do accept the great truth that because of his birthright, and of the conditions surrounding his coming into the earth, he became the Redeemer of men, and that through the shedding of his blood we are privileged again to return into the presence of our Father, on conditions of our repentance and acceptance of the great plan of redemption.

We must believe in the resurrection of the dead, absolutely so, that every soul born upon the face of this earth shall come forth in the resurrection, either of the just or of the unjust, for the resurrection shall be universal, and that, too, through the great atonement which was made by the Savior of the world.160.18

GOSPEL TAUGHT FROM BEGINNING. These principles were taught to Adam after he was driven from the Garden of Eden, who repented and was baptized in water for the remission of his sins, and received the Holy Ghost.160.19 . . .

The principles of the gospel were taught from the beginning among the children of Adam. Some believed and accepted them; many others rejected them, bringing down upon their heads the wrath of God, for his anger was kindled against them because of their rebellion. In course of time, when the inhabitants of the earth were sufficiently corrupt, he caused the floods to come upon them, sweeping them off the earth. Noah, who was a preacher of righteousness, continued to preach these saving principles. The gospel was also taught to Abraham, and has always been among men when they were prepared to receive it.160.20

FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. By fulness of the gospel is meant all the ordinances and
 principles that pertain to the exaltation in the celestial kingdom. . . .

While the saints in former dispensations were granted every privilege and power by which they, through their faithfulness, could obtain exaltation even to the fulness, the fact remains that the Lord has reserved many privileges, authorities, powers, and much knowledge for the dispensation of the fulness of times, into which all things are to be eventually gathered and made perfect in the consummation of the purposes of the Lord towards the earth and its inhabitants. 160.21

GOSPEL DISPENSATIONS

NATURE OF A DISPENSATION. A dispensation of the gospel is defined as the granting to divinely chosen officers, by a commission from God, of power and authority to dispense the word of God, and to administer in all the ordinances thereof. However, a dispensation has frequently embraced additional power and included a special commission or warning to the people, the making of a special and definite covenant with man, and the conferring of special powers upon chosen prophets beyond what other prophets may have received.

PARTIAL LIST OF DISPENSATIONS. The first dispensation of the gospel was given to Adam, and he was promised that he and his posterity should be redeemed from death through the atonement of the Messiah.161.22 Enoch had a dispensation granted to him, and through his faithfulness be and his people were translated.161.23 Noah received a dispensation of warning when the whole world had fallen into apostasy, and he was commanded to build the ark in which he and his family were saved from the flood, while all the rest of the world perished.161.24 To Abraham was given a dispensation, and with him the Lord made a special covenant that through him and his posterity all nations of the earth should be blessed. Moreover, he was promised that all who received the gospel should be numbered among his posterity. 161.25 Moses was given a dispensation of gathering and led Israel from Egypt to their promised land. 161.26 John the Baptist was given the dispensation of preparation before the coming of our Redeemer, 161.27 and Jesus Christ granted a dispensation of the gospel to his disciples in the restoration of its fulness and the commission that they should go into all the world and preach the gospel. 161.28

GOSPEL LOST BY APOSTASY. There have been times when the gospel has been taken from men because of their transgression. Such was the case in the days of Noah. Israel turned from the Lord and was left in darkness for many generations preceding the advent of Jesus Christ, and when he came among men, he restored the fulness of the gospel. He sent his disciples to proclaim his message in all the world, but not many centuries had passed before the people had again fallen into error and lost the authority to act in the name of the Lord. This made it necessary for the opening of the heavens, and for the introduction of a new dispensation, to make ready for the second coming of our Lord in the clouds of heaven to reign upon the earth in glory for a thousand years. This event is near, even at our doors.162.29

NUMBER OF DISPENSATIONS. I do not know how many dispensations there have been. Some brethren, basing the statement upon an article by Elder David W, Patten in the early days of the Church, have declared that there are seven; but this does not include the Jaredites, the Nephite nation, nor the Lost Tribes of Israel, whom the Lord visited in the meridian of time following his appearance to the Nephites, and surely, also, the Lord gave dispensations to Lehi and Nephi who lived at the time of the coming of the Savior.162.30

CHRIST RESTORED GOSPEL IN HIS DAY. When Christ came, he found Israel -- the remnant that remained of Judah -- in apostasy and wickedness. Scarcely was there a man remaining who had faith and comprehension enough to worship the true and living God. Our Lord endeavored to bring the wicked nation of Jews to repentance. He offered them the fulness of his gospel -- that same gospel which had been declared to Adam, to Enoch, to Noah and to Abraham -- the higher principles of which had been taken away with Moses, who left with Israel the law instead as a schoolmaster to bring them unto Christ.

There were few among the Jews who would hear the Savior when he came. His mighty works, his spoken words given in authority, his miracles, all that he did, fell on eyes that were blind, ears that were deaf, and hearts without understanding, The Lord again established his Church, and the gospel was declared to the contrite, the oppressed and the poor. He gave his authority to the humble fishermen of Galilee, and after his resurrection, sent them into all the world with the message of salvation to every creature.163.31

GOSPEL IN MERIDIAN OF TIME. The dispensation of the meridian of time is the name given to the dispensation of the ministry of Christ and his apostles. It is so called because our Lord came into the world in the meridian of its mortal history. By revelation we know that it was about 4,000 years from the time of the fall of Adam to the birth of Christ and that it will be about 3,000 years, plus "a little season" from his birth until the end of the mortal earth. We are now living near the close of the sixth thousandth year, or the period known as the "last days," or the time immediately preceding the second advent of Jesus Christ.163.32

When the gospel was restored by our Lord in the day of his ministry, it was his will, of course, that it should remain among men as a means of eternal salvation. However, Jesus knew that this would not be the case, and that the time would come when darkness would take the place of gospel light and the priesthood would be withdrawn from men and the Church driven into the wilderness. 163.33 However, the disciples were sent into all the world to proclaim the plan of salvation, and to give to mankind the privilege of worshiping God in spirit and in truth, if they were willing to receive the truth.

A DISPENSATION RESERVED FOR LAST DAYS. The Lord indicated to the apostles, before his ascension, that the restoration of all things was not for their day or time, and that it was not for them "to know the times or the seasons, which the Father hath put in his own power." Peter and Paul made it very clear in their teachings that there should come another
 dispensation of the gospel to succeed that in which they lived, and this final dispensation should be given shortly before the second coming of the Son of God, to prepare mankind and the earth for the restoration of all things spoken of by all the holy prophets.164.34

THE ABRAHAMIC COVENANT

CHILDREN OF THE COVENANT. Because of Abraham's faithfulness, the Lord promised to make of him -- through his posterity -- a great nation and a blessing to all nations to the end of time. Said the Lord: "And I will bless them through thy name; for as many as receive this Gospel shall be called after thy name, and shall be accounted thy seed, and shall rise up and bless thee, as their father."164.35

The descendants of Abraham, the tribes of Israel, became the chosen people of the Lord according to the promise. The Lord honored them, nourished them, watched over them with a jealous care, until they became a great nation in the land the Lord had given to their fathers. Notwithstanding this tender care and the instructions and warnings this people received from time to time through their prophets, they failed to comprehend the goodness of the Lord and departed from him. Because of their rebellion they were driven out of their land and eventually were scattered among the nations. Their priesthood was lost and they were left in spiritual darkness.165.36

ABRAHAMIC COVENANT CONTINUED TO ISRAEL. These covenants that were made with Abraham continued down and were amplified -- not changed -- as time progressed, and in the days of Moses the Lord gave many commandments based upon these original covenants with the house of Israel. If you will read the 26th chapter of Leviticus and the 28th chapter of Deuteronomy -- there are many other chapters also in the Bible but these two especially -- you will find recorded many things by way of covenant and promise and admonition that the Lord gave to Israel. He told them what would happen if they kept his commandments. He told them the consequences of breaking his commandments. All that was clearly set forth in these scriptures before the Israelites entered the promised land.

ISRAEL SCATTERED FOR REJECTING COVENANTS. As time went on they violated these covenants. They turned away from the admonitions, the commandments, the instructions that the Lord gave them through the Prophet Moses, and eventually, because of that rebellion, the curses came upon them and they were scattered among the nations of the earth. The 10 tribes were led off captive and later went into the north, and where they are no man knows; but among the children of Israel many were scattered among the nations.

Israel, you know, was divided into two nations before that scattering was completed, the nation of Israel being composed of 10 tribes and the nation of Judah of two tribes, after the days of Solomon, under Rehoboam, Solomon's son. Eventually, I say, the 10 tribes, because of their rebellion and their extreme wickedness, were carried off captive.

ANCIENT COVENANTS RENEWED. The Jews continued, possessing the land of Palestine until after the days of Christ. Then, because of their wickedness and the fact that they had risen up against the Son of God, they too were scattered among the nations of the earth and became a hiss and a byword, and were so to remain until, the Lord says, the times of the gentiles shall be fulfilled. Now the Jews are being gathered again, because the times of the gentiles are coming to their close.

The Lord, through his prophets before Israel was completely scattered, spoke of our day. He spoke of the covenants and how in these latter times he would renew these covenants upon Israel, after Israel had been gathered.166.37
