A MARVELOUS WORK AND A WONDER

WHY THE RESTORATION. The everlasting covenant had been broken; the correct understanding of gospel principles had disappeared through apostasy; the right to officiate in the ordinances of the gospel had ceased among men. It became necessary that all this might be restored, and that faith might increase among the people through an opening of the heavens and a restoration of the gospel.167.2

HOW RESTORATION COMES ABOUT. To bring to pass this restoration, there must come an opening of the heavens. Messengers from the presence of God, of necessity, must come to earth. How else could things in heaven be revealed? Men on earth must be chosen and endowed with priesthood to conduct the labor of the Lord on the earth. This is, in the economy of the Almighty, always the plan.

Witnesses must be sent as in former dispensations clothed with divine authority, to warn the people and preach the gospel of repentance, that men may come into harmony with the revealed word of God. It was for this reason that the Lord declared, "This gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations," before the end of unrighteousness shall come.167.3

WHAT IS TO BE RESTORED. In this restoration it is necessary that the Church of Jesus Christ in its simplicity and truth be restored. All the keys and powers of priesthood held by the prophets of former dispensations must be conferred upon God's chosen representatives on the earth. In this manner all the authority and keys of priesthood of the past are to flow into the most glorious and greatest of dispensations, like clear streams flowing into a mighty
 river. The everlasting covenant once given to the ancients, and which Isaiah says was broken, must be restored. 168.4

Covenants which the Lord promised Israel -- and which the gentiles may share through faith and repentance -- are to be conferred. "And they shall teach no more every man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for they shall all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the Lord: for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more."168.5

MILLENNIUM AND THE RESTORATION. When that time shall come, the "earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea." Wickedness shall be destroyed, for with righteousness shall Jehovah "judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of the earth: and he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked."168.6

In that day there shall be no "divided Christianity." All who will not repent and receive the gospel shall soon be removed, and they who shall remain shall learn to worship the true and living God in spirit and in truth. The Church of Jesus Christ shall have sway over all the earth, for Christ shall be the King and Deliverer. Peace shall prevail both among men and among beasts. Satan shall be bound and his dominion, which he has held by usurpation and fraud since the beginning of the earth's temporal existence, shall come to an end. The rightful King shall reign and his saints shall possess the kingdom according to the vision of Daniel. 169.7

Jerusalem shall become a righteous city when Israel is gathered and redeemed. Zion also shall be cleansed of all iniquity, and in that day, when Christ shall rule, the word of the Lord to Isaiah shall be fulfilled, "for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem." 169.8

RESTORATION OF THE EARTH. Isaiah has predicted as a part of this great restoration the coming of "new heavens, and a new earth: and the former shall not be remembered, nor come into mind."169.9 These new heavens and earth are but part of the great restoration as prod claimed in the tenth article of our faith:

"We believe in the literal gathering of Israel and in the restoration of the Ten Tribes; that Zion will be built upon this [the American] continent; that Christ will reign personally upon the earth; and, that the earth will be renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory."

The land surface of the earth is to be returned to one place as it was before it was divided, and the land of Jerusalem and the land of Zion shall be turned back into their own place, and the earth shall be like it was in its paradisiacal glory. The mountains shall be broken down, and the valleys shall not be found, and the great deep shall be driven back into the north, and the islands shall become one land.169.10

A PROPHET NEEDED FOR RESTORATION. Since the prophets predicted that in the last days the Lord would gather Israel and once more reveal to them his covenants, reason demands that these covenants and the keys of this restoration must be given to some chosen messenger. Joseph Smith is that messenger. He was to come in the day when the people drew near to the Lord with their mouths, and with their lips they honored him, but had removed their hearts far from him, and their fear toward him was taught by the precepts of men. It was to be in that day, said the Lord, that "I will proceed to do a marvellous work among this people. even a marvellous work and a wonder: for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid."170.11

RESTORATION: LINE UPON LINE. There is a beautiful thread of consistency running through the scheme of gospel restoration. Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery could not foresee the end from the beginning, but the Lord was the Architect, and made known to them little by little, as knowledge and organization were needed, until the perfect structure of the Church was restored.

Inspiration is discovered in the fact that each part, as it was revealed, dovetailed perfectly with what had come before. There was no need for eliminating, changing, or adjusting any part to make it fit; but each new revelation on doctrine and priesthood fitted in its place perfectly to complete the whole structure, as it had been prepared by the Master Builder. The organization of the Church in all of its parts and functions has been proclaimed, even by enemies of the Church, as being equal in its nearness to perfection to any organization on the earth. 170.12

ELIAS, ELIJAH AND THE RESTORATION

ELIJAH: A LINK BETWEEN DISPENSATIONS. It seems to be most fitting that the last of the old prophets should close his predictions with a promise to future generations, and in that promise speak of a time to come when there would be a linking of the dispensations past with those of latter times.

Malachi's prophetic sayings have proved to be an insurmountable mystery to most commentators. Especially is this true of his declaration of the coming of Elijah.

The reason for this stumbling is due largely to the failure of Bible commentators to comprehend that it is both possible and reasonable for an ancient prophet, who lived nearly 1,000 years before the time of Christ, to be sent in these days with such remarkable power as that described by Malachi and possessed by Elijah.171.13

JOHN THE BAPTIST: AN ELIAS. It has been the popular interpretation to say that this prophecy was fulfilled in the coming of John the Baptist as an Elias, with power to turn the hearts of the fathers to children and children to fathers. One reason for this interpretation is
 the failure of these scholars to understand the words of the angel to Zacharias, in relation to John, which are as follows:

"And he shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elias, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just; to make ready a people prepared for the Lord."171.14

It is true that John came in the spirit and power of Elias, but not to fulfill the promise made by Malachi, which is shown in the context to be something designed to take place in the last days and shortly preceding the great and dreadful day of the Lord, when Christ should make his second advent on the earth.

Neither should it appear unreasonable to one who has faith in the scriptures to believe that an ancient prophet could be sent to the earth in latter times. There is a very vivid story by the writers of the gospels of the appearance of Moses and Elias to Peter, James, and John, while they were with Christ on the Mount of Transfiguration.171.15 Now if Moses and Elias could appear, hundreds of years after they lived on the earth, to these disciples, is it not just as reasonable to believe that they could be sent again with a message of salvation, and with authority to men on the earth in our own day?

ELIAS TO RESTORE ALL THINGS. When the Savior and these disciples came down from the Mount of Transfiguration, the Lord charged them that they were to tell no man of this manifestation until after he should come from the dead. However, they were anxious to know something about the coming of Elias and in answer to their inquiry the Lord said to them: "Elias truly shall first come, and restore all things. But I say unto you, That Elias is come already, and they knew him not, but have done unto him whatsoever they listed." 172.16 Then the disciples knew that the Master spoke of John.

The Savior made it very clear that John the Baptist came as an Elias, or to prepare the way before him, but he also made it clear that there was yet to come at some future time another Elias with the power to restore all things. John did not restore all things during his brief ministry, important though it was. His work was that of preparation for the ministry of Jesus Christ, and in this respect he was an Elias.

The name Elias is more than a proper name; it is also a title. An Elias is one who goes before one greater than himself to prepare the way for the greater who is to follow. In this calling John served, but not as the restorer of all things. It is apparent that the restoration of all things was not the purpose to be accomplished during the meridian of time, when Christ was in his ministry. This great work was reserved for the last days. Let us consider this point for a moment.

RESTORATION TO COME AFTER NEW TESTAMENT TIMES. Just before the ascension of our Lord, the disciples put to him this question: "Lord, wilt thou at this time
 restore again the kingdom to Israel?" He answered them: "It is not for you to know the times or the seasons, which the Father hath put in his own power."172.17

This answer has but one meaning, which is, that the restoration was not for their day. Later this truth became very clear to these disciples. It was shortly after this occurrence when Peter admonished some of the Jews who were instrumental in the death of the Lord. He told them they should repent and be converted, that their sins might be blotted out, "when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord; And he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you: Whom the heaven must receive until the times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began." 173.18

Paul, also, when writing to the Ephesian Saints said that in the dispensation of the fulness of times, the Father was to gather together in one all things in Christ, "both which are in heaven, and which are on earth."173.19

RESTORATION TO PRECEDE SECOND COMING. The disciples knew that the restitution was not to come until the approach of the second coming of Jesus Christ, and it was to be in that day that Elijah was to bring back to the earth his priesthood and restore to men the power to seal on earth and in heaven, so that mankind might have means of escape from the destruction which awaited the wicked in that great and dreadful day of the Lord. This great and dreadful day can be no other time than the coming of Jesus Christ to establish his kingdom in power on the earth, and to cleanse it from all iniquity. It will not be a day of dread and fear to the righteous, but it will be a day of fear and terror to the ungodly. This we have learned from the words of our Savior himself." 173.20

KEYS OF ALL DISPENSATIONS RESTORED. In the restoration of authority it was necessary that John the Baptist -- the messenger who was formerly sent to prepare the way -- should first come.173.21 Then Peter, James and John, who held the keys of the greater priesthood had to come and give their power that the Church could be organized in the earth. Peter, James and John, the three chief apostles, who constituted the Presidency of the Church in that day, were the logical personages to come with this authority.174.22

But others had to come. After the coming of the apostles we do not know just what order was observed. It is natural for us to conclude that the authorities revealed and restored would begin with Adam, "who was the first man."174.23 Then would come Enoch, Noah, and so on down the line of authority to the dispensation of the meridian of time.174.24

ELIAS OF ABRAHAM'S DAY. We have not been informed as to the identity of the man Elias who lived in the days of Abraham. Some think him to be Melchizedek. But we do know that this man Elias held the keys of the dispensation in which Abraham lived. He, too, came and restored his authority, which is the restoration of the gospel with all its covenants as given in the days of Abraham.174.25

ELIAS OF THE RESTORATION. The Elias who was to restore all things is a composite Elias. In other words, the restoration was not made by one personage, but many, and in speaking of Elias coming to restore all things, the Lord was using that title in a plural meaning, having in mind all the prophets who came to restore the fulness of the gospel. This would include John the Baptist, Peter, James and John, and every ancient prophet who restored keys from the days of Adam down. 174.26

WORLD-WIDE SCOPE OF THE RESTORATION

REFORMERS PREPARED WAY FOR RESTORATION. In preparation for this restoration the Lord raised up noble men, such as Luther, Calvin, Knox and others whom we call reformers, and gave them power to break the shackles which bound the people and denied them the sacred right to worship God according to the dictates of conscience. The Almighty gave men their agency, or the power to act for themselves in choosing good or evil, before the foundation of the earth was laid; but the dragon, from the beginning when he was cast out of heaven, has endeavored to deprive men of this great gift of God.

In the days of greatest spiritual darkness, when evil raged, the Lord raised up honorable men, who rebelled against the tyranny of the dragon and his emissaries who held dominion on the earth, and had subdued in abject slavery the consciences of men. 175.27

Latter-day Saints pay all honor to these great and fearless reformers, who shattered the fetters which bound the religious world. The Lord was their Protector in this mission, which was fraught with many perils. In that day, however, the time had not come for the restoration of the fulness of the gospel. The work of the reformers was of great importance, but it was a preparatory work, and they shall in no wise lose their well earned reward.

It was not until the close of the first quarter of the nineteenth century that the time fully came for the restoration of light and truth in its primitive fulness. At that time the world had been prepared sufficiently, both by the establishment of political and religious liberty, for the Church of Jesus Christ and the holy priesthood to be again returned safely to the earth. 175.28

JOEL'S PROPHECY OF LAST DAYS. The second chapter of Joel, beginning with the 27th verse, is as follows:

"And ye shall know that I am in the midst of Israel and that I am the Lord your God, and none else: and my people shall never be ashamed. And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions: And also upon the servants and upon the handmaids in those days will I pour out my spirit. And I will shew wonders in the heavens and in the earth, blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke. The sun shall be turned
 into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great and terrible day of the Lord come. And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be delivered: for in mount Zion and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance, as the Lord hath said, and in the remnant whom the Lord shall call." 176.29

Of course we understand that there shall be two headquarters: Zion and Jerusalem, and out of these cities shall go forth the word of the Lord, and his commandments, not only to those who are members of the Church but unto the nations of the earth, when his kingdom is fully established. 176.30

LORD TO POUR OUT SPIRIT UPON ALL FLESH. The time for the darkening of the sun and the turning of the moon as blood has not yet arrived; but the Lord has already commenced to pour out his Spirit upon all flesh, and we do find even now that the sons and daughters prophesy; the old men dream dreams, and the young men see visions.

Now, my brethren and sisters, I am not going to confine this prophecy to the members of the Church. The Lord said he would pour out his Spirit upon all flesh. That does not mean that upon all flesh the Holy Ghost should be sent, and that they should be participants in the blessings which those are privileged to receive who have been baptized and endowed and become members of the Church;176.31 but the Lord would pour out his blessings and his Spirit upon all people and use them to accomplish his purposes. 176.32

RENAISSANCE PREPARED WAY FOR RESTORATION. I think, properly, we could go back into the days of the revival of learning -- the renaissance, as it is called -- and the reformation in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, to find the beginning of the fulfilment of this promise. The Lord had to begin in those days to prepare the way for the ushering in of the dispensation of the fulness of times, because in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, the Christian world was in absolute darkness; a pall of darkness hung over the earth, such as I suppose it had never seen before, and the corruption of the so-called Christian Church was almost beyond belief.

But during the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, the revival of learning broke through this darkness and paved the way for the reformation which in the sixteenth century gained a foothold. This was really the dawn of our present day. The yoke of that great power, which kept the nations bound, not merely physically but spiritually, was broken; and rays of light commenced to find their way through so that freedom of religious belief and liberty were established.

INVENTIONS PREPARED WAY FOR RESTORATION. If you will take time to reflect, you will find that in the matter of discovery and invention things have come about in a logical way, step by step, as the people were prepared to receive them, and each step has been in the direction of establishing the truth of the everlasting gospel upon the earth. Thus, when people began to study and to learn, as they did in those days, and learning began to
 spread, the printing press came along and made it easy to publish books and other matters and to distribute them amongst the people, so that the entire people could learn to read and write.

Before that time a man who could read and who had education was of the privileged class, usually of the clergy; and if a man were accused of an offense, if he could read and write and show that he had some education, he could demand a trial before the ecclesiastical court, rather than before the civil court, and that was greatly to his advantage, because it took more witnesses to prove a case against men before the ecclesiastical court than it did before the civil courts.

IGNORANCE PREVAILED IN DARK AGES. A man with learning could enter the ministry, and the common people were kept in darkness, more particularly concerning the scriptures, and the idea prevailed that the scriptures were not to be had by the common people. One of the great leaders of religious thought at that time said that he regretted the fact of printing, because through its means the scriptures, the jewel of the Church, he said, were becoming common to the laity; and he deplored it because it was a desecration of sacred things; and that was the spirit of the times.

And so, we can follow these things down step by step: and we see that the discoveries and inventions came logically when most needed. Before the days of Columbus the people thought that beyond the borders of the Atlantic ocean was a sea of darkness, upon the other side of which were dragons, and if anyone should sail out into the deep, they would become a prey to those terrible monsters.

INVENTIONS COME BY SPIRIT OF LORD. There has never been a step taken from that day to this, in discovery or invention, where the Spirit of the Lord (that is, the spirit of which Joel spoke, the Light of Christ, not the Holy Ghost!) was not the prevailing force, resting upon the individual, which caused him to make the discovery or the invention. The world does not understand that but it is perfectly clear to me; nor did the Lord always use those who have faith, nor does he always do so today. He uses such minds as are pliable and can be turned in certain directions to accomplish his work, whether they believe in him or not.

America had to be discovered, because it was upon this land that the gospel was to be restored. There had to be a breaking down of despotic power; feudalism had to come to an end; men had to be freed. If was necessary that parliaments be organized, that the magna charta be given to the people, and that they have a voice in what should and what should not be, in regard to government.

THE CONSTITUTION AND THE RESTORATION. All of this had to be before the establishment of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints upon the earth. These things took place in Europe before the discovery of America. After America was discovered liberty upon this land received an impetus which the old world could not give to it; and through the
 shedding of blood, the land was redeemed (the Lord has said it) and freedom proclaimed in the constitution of the country, so that all peoples of the earth could find a place of refuge in America, the Land of Promise.179.33 When that was accomplished. the time had come for the bringing forth and establishing of the gospel of Jesus Christ upon the earth.

INVENTIONS RESERVED FOR ERA OF RESTORATION. Since that time, there have been a great many discoveries. In fact, since the establishment of the gospel, these discoveries and inventions have been increasing more rapidly and we have seen more, perhaps, let me say in the last quarter of a century, than was seen during all the years from the days of the revival of learning and the reformation down to the visitation of Moroni to the Prophet Joseph Smith.

Among other things that have been discovered and invented -- and I am not confining myself now to this side of the restoration of the gospel, but things which led up to it -- we find: labor saving machinery, weaving, knitting, sewing, farm machinery, and machinery for all kinds of employment. Some of them, of course, came before the establishment of the gospel. The discovery of steam power was before that time, but since that time see how it has developed; see how all of these things have developed. Everyone of these discoveries, which were made known before the coming of Moroni, or let us say, before the establishment of the Church in 1830, have since been developed and perfected in thousands of ways, most marvelously.

INVENTIONS HELP FULFIL PROPHECY OF JOEL. Now, I have referred to these things as being the fulfilment of this prediction made by the Prophet Joel, and which Moroni said to the Prophet Joseph Smith was to be fulfilled in this dispensation of the fulness of times. 180.34 I have only touched it here and there, for time will not permit greater detail. Look at these electric lights here. We are able to sit in this room and see each other, and I am able to read to you by the aid of these lights, which come from electricity. We have known of that for a long time, but it has not been such a long time that we have been using an electric globe, and see how they have been perfected.

Then, too, as already stated, electricity is used as a propelling force, to drive machinery, to drive our cars through the streets and from town to town! It is used for the raising of great weights; great magnets are made through the power of electricity, by which great loads of metal can be raised in the air, and moved from place to place; and in various ways man has learned to use the great force of which they know so little.

INVENTORS USED BY THE LORD. Now, do you think that these discoveries and inventions by Marconi, by Edison, by Bell, by Stephenson and by the other inventors and discoverers without naming them, have come just because these men have been sitting down and concentrating their minds upon these matters and have discovered them through their thought or accidentally? Not in the least, but the Spirit of the Lord, the Light of Christ, has been back of it, and has been impelling them to do these very things; and why? Because the
 time is here; it is ripe. We are ready for these discoveries, these inventions, and they all have a bearing upon the restoration of the gospel and preparation for the time which is yet future, but which is shortly to come, when Christ shall reign on the earth, and for a thousand years peace shall be established. That is what it is all for.

Now, a man like Edison may say, "I do not believe in a supreme being." I do not know whether he does or not; some of these men do not. However, the Lord in his great mercy, overlooks that and uses the man because he is adapted to a certain work, and he, through his Spirit, can inspire this man to do this great work, and so he goes ahead and does it, all for the establishment of the kingdom of God.

SAINTS HAVE MESSAGE OF SALVATION. Sometimes we, in our narrow way of looking at things, think that because we are the Lord's people, he is using us and us only. Because it is our purpose to go forth and preach the gospel, and lead the honest to Zion with songs of everlasting joy, we may have an idea that "we are the people," as Job would say, "and wisdom shall die with us." 181.35 But the Lord is using other forces, other peoples, other powers as well.

We have the great work to perform of salvation for the living and the dead, and those other people are preparing the way in other directions, which we cannot be called upon to do, because our time is to be given to something else.

LORD USES PEOPLE OF WORLD FOR HIS PURPOSES. I am not looking for these great discoveries to come particularly from among the Latter-day Saints, because the Lord has given unto us another work to do, and therefore he is using these people who have the time and who are on the outside to make great scientific discoveries. Not altogether is he using them. He may be using some of us, too, for that matter, but be is doing that, and it looks to me very reasonable that he would pour out his Spirit upon these people abroad.

You know Peter had an idea that the gospel was only for the Jews. The Lord had a hard time convincing him that Cornelius was worthy of baptism and salvation. 182.36 Do not let us get so narrow as to think that because we have the gospel and salvation is with us, that the Lord is confining the fulfilment of these scriptures to the Latter-day Saints alone and that in the pouring out of his Spirit, it is only upon our sons and our daughters, and upon our handmaids and our servants, and upon our old men and upon our young men. We must not think that the Lord uses only those of his Church and kingdom. He is using all that he sees fit to use, even those who revile him, to bring to pass his purposes. These men may say, "I do not believe," and "I have accomplished this," and they may take the honor to themselves, but the honor belongs to God. 182.37

INVENTIONS BY THOSE OUT OF CHURCH. The voice is heard and recognized, perhaps a thousand miles away, and the words leave their impression on the mind of those who are listening almost the same as if they were sitting in the presence of the speaker, as you are
 doing. I think this is very wonderful; and yet, this great discovery did not come through revelation to a member of the Church; it was not sent through one who holds the priesthood. but it came through one not of the Church, but who was inspired of the Lord to give this great blessing to the world. So with many other things: the automobile and the airplane as means of transportation; the talking machine, and all of these great discoveries that have come through scientific research; they have come, most of them, from outside of the Church.

MODERN INVENTIONS PART OF FULNESS OF TIMES. Yet I maintain that had there been no restoration of the gospel, and no organization of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, there would have been no radio; there would have been no airplane, and there would not have been the wonderful discoveries in medicine, chemistry, electricity, and the many other things wherein the world has been benefitted by such discoveries.

Under such conditions these blessings would have been withheld, for they belong to the dispensation of the fulness of times of which the restoration of the gospel and the organization of the Church constitute the central point, from which radiates the Spirit of the Lord throughout the world. The inspiration of the Lord has gone out and taken hold of the minds of men, though they know it not, and they are directed by the Lord. In this manner he brings them into his service that his purposes and his righteousness, in due time, may be supreme on the earth.

Now let me say briefly that I do not believe for one moment that these discoveries have come by chance, or that they have come because of superior intelligence possessed by men today over those who lived in ages that are past. They have come and are coming because the time is ripe, because the Lord has willed it and because he has poured out his Spirit on all flesh." 183.38
