THE KINGDOM OF GOD ON EARTH

TWO KINGDOMS: THE ECCLESIASTICAL AND POLITICAL. The kingdom of God is the Church.229.1

After Christ comes, all the peoples of the earth will be subject to him, but there will be multitudes of people on the face of the earth who will not be members of the Church; yet all will have to be obedient to the laws of the kingdom of God, for it will have dominion upon the whole face of the earth. These people will be subject to the political government, even though they are not members of the ecclesiastical kingdom which is the Church.

This government which embraces all the peoples of the earth, both in and out of the Church, is also sometimes spoken of as the kingdom of God, because the people are subject to the kingdom of God which Christ will set up; but they have their agency and thousands will not be members of the Church until they are converted; yet at the same time they will be subject to the theocratic rule.

THE KINGDOM DURING THE MILLENNIUM. When our Savior comes to rule in the millennium, all governments will become subject unto his government, and this has been referred to as the kingdom of God, which it is; but this is the political kingdom which will embrace all people whether they are in the Church or not.229.2 Of course, when every kindred, tongue and people become subject to the rule of Jesus Christ such will be in that political kingdom. 230.3 We must keep these two thoughts in mind. But the kingdom of God is the Church of Jesus Christ, and it is the kingdom that shall endure forever. When the Savior prayed, "Thy kingdom come," he had reference to the kingdom in heaven which is to come when the millennia] reign starts. 230.4

When Christ comes, the political kingdom will be given to the Church. 230.5 The Lord is going to make an end to all nations; that means this nation as well as any other. 230.6 The kingdom of God is the Church, but during the millennium, the multitudes upon the face of the earth who are not in the Church will have to be governed, and many of their officers, who will be elected, may not be members of the Church.230.7

THE KINGDOM SET UP ON EARTH

CHURCH ORGANIZED IN THIS DISPENSATION. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was organized Tuesday, April 6, 1830, at the home of Peter Whitmer, at Fayette, Seneca county, N. Y., with six members.230.8 These six members, who had been baptized previous to the organization of the Church, were all again baptized on the day of the organization. They are: Joseph Smith, Jr., Oliver Cowdery, Hyrum Smith, Peter Whitmer, Jr., Samuel H. Smith, and David Whitmer. All of these died in the Church, excepting David Whitmer.

At this time Joseph Smith, Jr., and Oliver Cowdery were sustained as the first and second elders of the Church. A revelation was given to the Prophet on this day, in which the Church just organized was commanded to keep a record in which Joseph Smith, Jr., was to be called a seer, translator, prophet and apostle of Jesus Christ, and an elder of the Church. 230.9

FIRST CONFERENCES OF THE CHURCH. On the 9th day of June, 1830, the first conference of the Church was held at Fayette, N. Y., and the following officers were present:

Joseph Smith, Jr., Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, Peter Whitmer and Ziba Peterson, each of whom held the office of elder in the Church. At this conference Samuel H. Smith was ordained an elder; Joseph Smith, senior, and Hyrum Smith were ordained priests. Martin Harris was also ordained a priest, and Hyrum Page and Christian Whitmer, teachers. At the close of this conference there were in the Church seven ordained elders -- including Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery -- three priests and two teachers. The total membership of the Church was 27.

Oliver Cowdery was appointed to keep the Church record and conference minutes until the next conference to be held in September.

The second conference of the Church was held September 26, 1830. On that date the Church had the following officers: eight elders (Thomas B. Marsh having been ordained an elder); four priests (Newel Knight having been ordained a priest); and two teachers: eight holding the Melchizedek Priesthood and six the Aaronic -- 14 in all, so far as we know, who had been ordained to the priesthood.

David Whitmer was appointed to keep the Church record and conference minutes, until the next conference. The membership at the close of the conference was 62.

The third conference was held at Seneca, January 2, 1831, but no minutes were kept.

FIRST HIGH PRIESTS ORDAINED. At the fourth conference, held in Kirtland, June, 1831, the first high priests in this dispensation were ordained. There were 23 in all, among them being the Prophet Joseph Smith, who was ordained a high priest under the hands of Lyman Wight, he (Lyman Wight) having first been ordained to that office by the Prophet. Owing to
 his absence, Oliver Cowdery was not ordained a high priest at this conference, but was ordained by Sidney Rigdon, August 28, following.

At this conference Edward Partridge was also ordained a high priest; he had previously been called to the bishopric, and on this date chose as counselors -- or assistants as they were then called -- John Corrill and Isaac Morley. This was the first bishopric in the Church.

From this time forth the Church grew rapidly in power and strength, notwithstanding the many trials, apostasies and hardships through which it was forced to pass.

FIRST PRESIDENCY ORGANIZED. March 18, 1833, the First Presidency of the Church was organized, with Joseph Smith, president; Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams, counselors. Prior to this, the Prophet was sustained and ordained president of the high priesthood, at a conference held at Amherst, Ohio, January 25, 1832.

Joseph Smith, Sen., was called and ordained by his son Joseph as presiding patriarch, December 18, 1833, In this ordination he was also called a president of the high priesthood. Oliver Cowdery was also associated with the First Presidency.

The first apostles and seventies in this dispensation were ordained at Kirtland, Ohio, in February, 1835, after the return of Zion's Camp, from the members of that camp. The apostles were by revelation chosen and ordained by the witnesses to the Book of Mormon, February 14, 1835, and the first of the seventies were ordained 14 days later. Two quorums of seventies were ordained beginning at this time.

FIRST FOREIGN MISSIONS OPENED. The first foreign mission was the British, which was opened in Lancashire, England, by Elders Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde, Willard Richards, Joseph Fielding, John Goodson, Isaac Russel and John Snider, in 1837. From here the work spread to Ireland, Scotland, Wales and the various parts of England; also to Australia, South America, and East India.

Joseph Ball was set apart in 1842 to South America. Ten years later, Parley P. Pratt and Rufus Allen visited Chile, but met with little success.

The gospel was taken to Jamaica, in 1842., by Henry Sagers. That same year Orson Hyde went to Jerusalem and dedicated the land of Palestine to the return of the Jews. While on this mission he did some work in Germany.

In 1843, Addison Pratt, Noah Rogers, Benjamin F. Grouard and Knowlton F. Hanks were set apart to visit the Islands of the Pacific. Elder Hanks died November 3, following, and was buried at sea. The others labored in the Society Islands and were quite successful.

Elder William Howell was the first missionary to France. He went from England in 1848,
 and organized a branch. In 1850 Elder John Taylor and others went to France and labored there.

MISSIONS OPENED IN MANY NATIONS. That same year (1850) Erastus Snow and Peter O. Hansen arrived in Denmark, John E. Forsgren, in Sweden, Lorenzo Snow and Joseph Toronto, in Italy, and later that same year Thomas H. B. Stenhouse opened the door in Switzerland, and Elder George Q. Cannon and others, in the Hawaiian Islands.

Elder Joseph Richards was the first successfully to carry the gospel to India, where he organized a branch, June 22, 1851. William Donaldson, of the British Army, was the first elder to visit that land, but his labors were without apparent success.

In 1852 missionaries were called to India, China, Siam, Cape of Good Hope, (Africa), Prussia, Gibraltar, the West Indies and Norway. Elders went to New Zealand in 1854, and to Mexico in 1877.

Since that time the gospel has been preached in most of Europe, parts of Asia, South America, the Islands of the Sea, where many of the descendants of the Nephite race reside; and in Japan, which land was dedicated by President Heber J. Grant, September 1, 1901.

In 1903, President Francis M. Lyman also dedicated Finland and Russia for the preaching of the gospel and the gathering of the blood of Israel.

From the time when the first company of saints sailed from Liverpool, June 6, 1840, until the close of the year 1908, over 100,000 saints took passage for Zion. Of the many ships that carried this mighty host not one was lost, and while some of the saints died on the way, and others met with accidents, the result is most marvelous.234.10

THE SAINTS: A PECULIAR PEOPLE

HOW THE SAINTS ARE PECULIAR. The saints are peculiar. This is true of them both regarding their habits and their religious belief. If they are true to their faith, they cannot help being different from other peoples. Their religion requires it of them. This same thing could be said of any other people should they endeavor to serve the Lord according to his teachings.

The saints of former days were peculiar. Peter called them peculiar because they were "called out of darkness into his (Christ's) marvellous light." The Latter-day Saints believe that they too, are a "chosen generation, a royal priesthood," and the true successors of the former-day saints. This calling makes them peculiar.234.11

One of the outstanding peculiarities of the Latter-day Saints is the fact that they call themselves saints. They have been criticized, and often condemned by well meaning but
 misinformed people, because they take upon themselves the name of saints. In the eyes of many this indicates a spirit of arrogance, and the assumption of a title which should only be given to those whose benevolence and Christian living have been outstanding, and then given after such individuals have been dead many years. Among many the idea prevails, falsely, that a person worthy of this title should be duly chosen by proper ecclesiastical authority and canonized.

WHY CHURCH MEMBERS ARE CALLED SAINTS. The Latter-day Saints should be all that their name implies. They should live free from sin; their lives should be in strict harmony with the principles of the gospel. They should live "by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God." 235.12 Thus they are commanded.

However, in accepting the title of saints they are not arrogant, pretentious or self-righteous. They did not choose the name, it was given them by divine commandment. It is the Lord who said: "For thus shall my church be called in the last days, even The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." That the members might be properly impressed with the significance of this title, there follows this admonition: "Verily I say unto you all: Arise and shine forth, that thy light may be a standard for the nations."235.13

In accepting this title, the Latter-day Saints are only conforming to the custom which prevailed among the people of God in all past ages of the earth. The members of the Church in the days of Peter and Paul were called saints. "And it came to pass, as Peter passed throughout all quarters, he came down also to the saints which dwelt at Lydda." 235.14 Paul wrote: "To all that be in Rome, beloved of God, called to be saints: Grace to you and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ."235.15 It is clear, then, that the members of the Church today are conforming to the custom of former times, for they are called in these last days by commandment,"to be saints," and members of the Church of Jesus Christ.236.16

SAINTS ARE THE BEST PEOPLE. We are, notwithstanding our weaknesses, the best people in the world. I do not say that boastingly, for I believe that this truth is evident to all who are willing to observe for themselves. We are morally clean, in every way equal, and in many ways superior to any other people. The reason is that we have received the truth, the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. It is not to us a dead letter, something perhaps to be followed on the Sabbath day and forgotten on the six other days of the week, but our religion is an everyday religion. We are expected to live in accordance with the principles of truth every day of our lives, for these principles are just as true in the middle of the week as they are on the Sabbath day. 236.17

PRIVILEGES AND DUTIES OF SAINTS

PRIVILEGE OF LIVING WHEN GOSPEL ON EARTH. My desire is to see others share in the light of truth as it has been revealed. We can all rejoice in the fact that we have been born in this dispensation when the opportunity is given us to know and understand the truth. I
 have thanked the Lord many times that I was not sent to the earth during the dark ages or when the gospel was not found among men. If we have nothing else, this great privilege of living now, when the fulness of truth has been revealed, is nearly as wonderful a blessing as we could wish.

One of the strangest things that I know is the fact that people live within the shadows of the gospel but will have none of it. They shut their eyes and refuse to see, their ears and refuse to hear, and even among members of the Church we find many who will not live in the light according to their own convictions.236.18

CONDEMNATION FOR SLOTHFUL SAINTS. The man who has received the truth and yet will not walk in it deserves the greater condemnation. A member of this Church who will indulge in the use of tobacco, who will violate the Word of Wisdom, who refuses to pay his tithing, to keep the Sabbath day, or who in any other way will not hearken to the word of the Lord, is not loyal to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. . . .

Here at home in the stakes of Zion, in the shadows of temples, are to be found those who are numbered with the Church who will not keep the commandments of the Lord. Some of them have made covenant in holy places, and yet they do not value the truth; they do not value the teachings of the servants of the Lord, and they will not walk in the knowledge which they possess, much less by every word that proceeds forth from the mouth of God. These shall receive the greater condemnation.237.19

OUR PURPOSE: TO BUILD UP KINGDOM. Every individual radiates some influence. Our influence should be for good, for the building up of the kingdom of God. We should have no other purpose, only to bring to pass this great work and see it established in the earth as the Lord would have it.

In the early days of the Church the brethren came to the Prophet Joseph Smith asking what the Lord would have them do. The answer given to them was "to bring forth and establish the cause of Zion." That is our work, to establish Zion, to build up the kingdom of God, to preach the gospel to every creature in the world, that not one soul may be overlooked where there is the possibility for us to present unto him the truth.237.20

KEEP NAME OF CHURCH ABOVE REPROACH. We must, as a Church and as individuals, keep ourselves clean, our minds pure, our souls clean, uncontaminated by the sins of the world. It is the duty of each one of us individually to keep the good name of this Church unsullied.

Now we have been accused of a great many things. There is not a crime in the category that has not been laid to the charge of the members of the Church. And the Lord said it would be so, that wicked men would speak evil of the truth. We should rejoice when they do that, not in the fact that we are so accused by those who bear false witness, but in the fact that we are
 innocent from all those things. In that we should rejoice.238.21

But it is our duty as a Church, as communities, to keep the good name of this Church above reproach, and it is the duty of each individual member of this Church to keep himself clean, for each one of us carries with him the good name of the Church. Whenever we do anything that is contrary to righteousness, if we are unclean in our lives, if we do not keep the commandments the Lord has given, the whole Church suffers, not merely the guilty individual who sins; and we ought to think of that. If one man sins and his sin is published, the world blames the whole Church. They would not do that with any other organization under the sun. 238.22

THE KINGDOM: ITS ORGANIZATION AND GIFTS

CHRIST PERSONALLY ORGANIZED THE CHURCH. During his mortal ministry Christ himself organized the Church. It is nothing but sectarian stupidity that proclaims that the Savior did not organize the Church. He called attention to the fact that the kingdom of heaven was at hand. He spoke frequently of the kingdom of heaven, and that is the Church. 238.23

Moreover, you will find advice given to a brother who cannot be reconciled with another brother; and he is to tell it to the Church.238.24 How could he tell it to the Church if there wasn't a Church? And Peter declares on the day of Pentecost that the Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved, so they must have had a Church, and there is no evidence that the apostles organized it. In fact, the apostles were awaiting the endowment that came on the day of Pentecost before commencing their ministry.239.25

ORGANIZATION AND GIFTS PART OF TRUE CHURCH. The Church of Jesus Christ, as it was established in the days of the apostles, was governed by apostles, prophets, evangelists, high priests, seventies and other officers, who are not found in the churches of the world today. It is quite generally taught that the apostles and prophets, with the need of revelation and additional scripture, were not needed after the first century; that these officers with revelation from the heavens, were given to the Church for the purpose of establishing it, and then they were taken away and man was left to depend upon the things which had been written.

The apostles, however, taught that the Church as it was established in the first century was to continue with the same officers indefinitely, or through all time. Paul informed the Ephesian Saints that the Lord had given to the Church apostles, prophets, evangelists, pastors and teachers, "For the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ," and that they were to remain in the Church, "Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ." 239.26

Moreover, he taught the Corinthian Saints that these officers, and the gifts of the gospel, were always needed, and that God had set in the Church, "first apostles, secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers, after that miracles, then gifts of healings, helps, governments, diversities of tongues." He also said that all these officers and gifts were essential to the body of Christ, and one part could not say to another, "I have no need of you." 240.27

CHURCH AND KINGDOM RESTORED. The Lord taught Joseph Smith and his associates that it is due to apostasy that these officers with their authority were taken away; and when the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was restored, it was by divine command that apostles, high priests, seventies and elders, were again ordained and with authority sent forth to proclaim the message of salvation to the nations of the earth.240.28

Where can we go and find the words of eternal life? We cannot turn to the right hand neither to the left, for there spiritual darkness reigns. Right here are to be found the words of eternal life, as they are given by revelation and inspiration to the people of Zion, and we know, as Peter did, that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God. This is our message to the world. 240.29

THE KINGDOM TO STAND FOREVER

MAJORITY OF SAINTS TO REMAIN TRUE. I have that assurance in my heart through the teachings I have received from the Spirit of the Lord, and from the inspiration that has come to me from the revelations of the Lord through his servants, that the majority of this people will always remain true. . . .

All things that pertain to the salvation of man have been restored in this dispensation preparatory to the coming of Christ and the setting up of his kingdom with absolute authority over all the earth. When that time comes, and Christ reigns, all that now exists contrary to that kingdom and in conflict with it must come to an end.

If people are engaged in works which are not approved of the Lord, the earlier they come to an understanding of the truth and come out of them and learn to serve the Lord, the better it is for them. It is far better to know the truth and forsake error than to remain in the systems of the world which are not approved by the Lord and therefore in due time must cease to exist. That day is near at hand, and because of it the Lord has sent forth his servants in the world proclaiming his gospel and crying repentance, that all who will may hear and escape. It is within the reach of all who are willing to forsake error, to know the truth and the established work of the Lord. . . .

CHURCH NEVER TO BE OVERCOME. He has given to us the kingdom. He has made us the promise that the enemy of the kingdom shall not overcome. 241.30 We may have trouble. We have had trouble. We may meet with opposition, but that opposition shall fail in its endeavor to destroy the work of God. . . .

The gospel has been restored, and the kingdom given to his saints according to the prophecy of Daniel.241.31 It is not again to be removed, destroyed, or given to other people, and in his own way and time he is going to break down all other systems, that his kingdom may prevail and that he may come and reign as Lord of lords and King of kings upon the face of the whole earth. . .

The Lord has called attention to the fact that he is going to destroy systems and organizations and combinations that are false. And how is he going to do it? By giving their members the truth, if they will receive it; by giving them the privilege of coming out of those organizations to receive the truth and have every opportunity to come into his kingdom, for his hand is outstretched ready to greet them. If they will not come; if they will not receive his message; then, of course, they must fall with their systems. Truth will prevail; truth will stand when all else is removed, and it is destined to cover the face of the earth.

ANGELS ARE NOW REAPING THE EARTH. In one of these scriptures the Lord said the angels are waiting to reap down the earth. 242.32 I heard President Wilford Woodruff make the statement, in this very spot where I now stand, at a conference of the Church, that these angels had been sent forth on their mission to reap down the earth, to tie in bundles the tares for the burning and to gather the saints of God. I heard him make this statement on several occasions. Moreover, he said, from that time forth -- and that was about the year 1894 -- earthquakes, pestilence, war, famine, plague, and other commotions among both men and the elements would increase and continue until the coming of Christ.

In the revelation known to us as the "revelation on war," the Lord declared that he had decreed the overthrow of nations, "until the consumption decreed hath made a full end of all nations." 242.33 In that day, when this shall come to pass, the nation set up by the Lord must reign supreme and all other powers, kingdoms, organizations and societies shall pass away, for so it is decreed. 242.34

SAINTS WILL ALWAYS HAVE A PROPHET TO LEAD THEM. Although the Prophet who stands at the head of the dispensation of the fulness of times, and the Patriarch who stood with him have been taken from us, the Lord has not left us helpless. There has never been a time since the restoration of the gospel when we have not had a prophet, some one to lead us, to direct us, to teach us the commandments of God that we might walk in the strait and narrow path. We are not without leaders; and the time shall never come when the Lord will not find some one that he can trust, in whom he has confidence, and who will be qualified to stand to represent him among the people. This is my testimony, and I rejoice in its truth.

I do not feel that because the Prophet was taken and the Patriarch, because President Young was taken, or President Taylor and other leaders were taken, that the time has come when we have not an inspired leader to teach us the truth. The time will never come when we will not
 be able to put confidence and exercise faith in the teachings and in the instruction of those who lead us. I am satisfied of this for I know the promises of the Lord are sure. I know that these things are true; the Lord has not forsaken his people, and will be with them even to the end. Therefore it behooves us, as Latter-day Saints, to put our trust in the presiding authorities of the Church, in the priesthood of God; and accept of their teachings.

SAINTS SAFE IN FOLLOWING CHURCH AUTHORITIES. No man ever went astray by following the counsel of the authorities of the Church. No man who ever followed the teachings or took advice or counsel from one who stands as the representative of the Lord ever went astray; but men who refused to accept counsel have gone astray and into forbidden paths, and in some instances have even denied the faith. Others who went astray because they failed to understand and to heed the counsels that were given unto them for their eternal good, have humbled themselves and come back to the Church acknowledging their error. . . .

We must put our faith in those whom the Lord hath called, if we want to have a standing before the Lord, and none of us desire, if we have the proper Spirit, to be cut off from among the people. But this punishment will befall those who do not prove faithful and will not pay that heed or give that attention to the counsel of those who are called and appointed and inspired of the Lord to teach and direct us in all things.243.35

YOUTH OF ZION WILL HOLD TO CHURCH. Occasionally someone arises who feels that it is his duty to inform the world that the old members of the Church are still faithful in the doctrines that were taught by the Prophet Joseph Smith, and by President Brigham Young, but that the rising generation is departing from such things, that the children of these fathers are turning from the teachings of their fathers, as they put it. I am here to testify that this is not true. There may be, of course, and are, those among us who are not faithful, who do turn from the footsteps of their fathers. It has always been so. We may expect that in some cases it will continue.

But so far as the Latter-day Saints are concerned, the majority of them will not turn from the faith of their fathers. It is not destined that such should be the case, for when this gospel was restored, the Lord declared through his servants who came from the heavens with the message of salvation, that the gospel was restored for the last time, and that it must grow and increase and the knowledge grow and spread until it shall fill the whole earth. That is the destiny of the thing the world calls Mormonism. So they are wrong in their conclusions when they expect the children to depart from the teachings of their fathers.244.36

CHURCH ALWAYS TO PROGRESS. We are advancing, we are gaining in knowledge, in wisdom, and in power. This is as it should be, and as it will always be in the Church and kingdom of our Father; for there must be progression, there must be advancement. Knowledge will be poured down upon this people, and the Lord will make known unto us from time to time, through revelation, and the Spirit of inspiration, many things that are for our good, when we are prepared and ready to receive them. I speak generally of the Church.

But notwithstanding all our advancement, increase of faith and diligence, there is still great room for improvement. There are many among us who are not living up to their duties, accepting their callings and magnifying them as they should do. There are many among us who fall short and fail in various ways in keeping the commandments of the Lord to that extent of which they are capable.245.37

ZION TO PROSPER. The Lord will bless Zion. He will pour out his Spirit upon the people. He will prosper them if they will remember him, if they will keep his commandments, if they will observe the covenants that they have made before him and not violate them, if they will hold themselves aloof from the world, and not be partakers of the sins of the world.

I do not mean to say that we ought not to associate at any time with those not of our faith, for there are many good people who have not embraced the gospel. We are not required to avoid them, for our mission in the world is with them, to convert them to the truth if we can. But we need not be partakers of the sins of the world. We need not follow the foolish fashions of the world. We need not corrupt ourselves because many in the world are corrupt.

We have received better things. We are walking in the knowledge and the understanding of the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, and are entitled to that inspiration which will warn us of danger and guide us in the path of duty, and give us power to resist and overcome evil. We have the right to call upon the Lord in prayer and in faith for help, for guidance, for the assistance of his Holy Spirit, and we will receive it.

UNITY IN THE KINGDOM. And I pray that we may be true to our covenants, true to each other; that we will cast out of our hearts all that is evil; that we will not speak evil one of another, or be given to backbiting or contention or strife, for the spirit of wickedness destroys faith and tends to divide and separate instead of uniting and strengthening the people. We must stand united as one -- our purposes are the same, our aims are the same.

We are laboring in the direction of eternal life and progression. There is no variance among the teachers in Israel concerning the principles of the gospel. We are united concerning these things. There is no division among the authorities, and there need be no division among the people, but unity, peace, brotherly love, kindness and fellowship one to another. These are the blessings that we are entitled to, if we will live in accordance with the gospel, and the Lord will pour out other and greater blessings, even all that we are able to contain. 246.38

PROPHESIES TRIUMPH OF ZION. I am very greatly impressed, this morning, with the many evidences that proclaim this to be in very deed the place -- the place of Zion; that here are found the people of the Lord with whom he has made covenant, and who have made covenant with him to serve him and keep his commandments; that Zion will grow and prosper until her fame shall fill the earth and her glory and majesty shall cover the face thereof. 246.39
