CHURCH

ORIGIN OF EARLY APOSTATE CULTS

FALSE, "REORGANITE" CLAIMS. The ministers of the "Reorganized" church, 247.1 or the "New Organization," as it was first called, declared that the Church at the death of the Prophet Joseph and Patriarch Hyrum Smith was badly divided, its members scattered to the four winds, and that the Church was rejected with its dead.

They also claim that the "Reorganization" is composed of the faithful who did "not bow the knee to Baal," but remained true to the original faith" as revealed and practiced by the Prophet Joseph Smith.

In the words of their president: "The individuals who kept this covenant [the new and everlasting covenant] were accepted of him [the Lord] and were not rejected, nor their standing before God put in jeopardy by the departure of others from the faith. Whatever the office in the priesthood each held, under the ordinations ordered by the call of God and vote of the church, would remain valid. They could as elders, priests, etc., pursue the duties of warning, expounding, and inviting all to come to Christ, and by command of God could build up the church from any single branch, which, like themselves, had not bowed the knee to Baal, or departed from the faith of the Church as found in the standard works of the body at the death of Joseph and Hyrum Smith."

It is strongly implied in this quotation from the writings of the president of the "Reorganization" that all those who followed President Brigham Young and the Twelve Apostles, lost their priesthood and standing before the Lord, and that the founders of the "New Organization" and their followers were the only ones who remained true and steadfast to the truth.

APOSTATE ATTEMPTS TO DIVIDE THE CHURCH. The evidence in this regard is against them. The truth is that the founders of the "Reorganized" church were the ones who followed every will-o-the-wisp, bowed the knee to Baal, and departed from the faith, while the Twelve and the saints on the other hand, pursued an even course and were steadfast under all trials and difficulties even to the end.

It is not true that the Church was broken, scattered, and rejected following the martyrdom
 and that the "Reorganization" is a portion of the "original church." Their organization did not come into existence until some 16 years after the death of the Prophet and Patriarch and was an outgrowth of the movement under James J. Strang.

There was a movement on foot to divide the Church, following the assassination of the Prophet and Patriarch, but its range was not as extensive as has generally been supposed. The chief actors in this movement were Sidney Rigdon, James J. Strang and William Smith, each of whom aspired to lead the Church.

FALSE CLAIMS OF RIGDON, STRANG, AND WILLIAM SMITH. Mr. Rigdon based his claim to the presidency on the fact that he had been the first counselor to the Prophet Joseph Smith, and therefore by right should be the "guardian" of the Church. His claim was in conflict with the position of the Church and the teachings of the Prophet. He laid his case before the conference of the Church, August 8, 1844, and his claim was rejected by the saints almost unanimously. At the same conference the Twelve Apostles were sustained as the presiding quorum of the Church.

Mr. Strang's claim to the presidency was based on his statement that the Prophet had appointed him as his successor by letter, a few days before the martyrdom, William Smith claimed the right of presidency by virtue of being the brother of the Prophet.

UNSTABLE NATURE OF "REORGANITE" FOUNDERS. Each of these men gathered around him a few followers, principally of that class of restless, erratic individuals, who never remain contented very long in any one place or under any circumstances; but none of them gathered many followers. Their organizations barely existed for a few years and then disappeared, the fragments becoming the nucleus of the "Reorganization."

The movement which resulted in the bringing forth of the "Reorganized" church, was of more recent date and was due principally to the efforts of two men, viz., Jason W. Briggs and Zenas H. Gurley.

Mr. Briggs was born June 25, 1821, at Pompey, Oneida County, New York. He joined the Church June 6, 1841, and members of the "Reorganization" declare that he was ordained an elder in 1842, His home was in Beloit, Wisconsin, from 1842 to 1854.

After the death of the Prophet, Mr. Briggs sustained the Twelve Apostles and the Church and was apparently true to them until the exodus in 1846, At that time he lost heart, turned from the Church in its darkest hour and sought the favor of the world, Some time subsequent to this he joined the movement under James J. Strang. In Strang's organization he did missionary work, received honors and organized a branch.

In 1850 he renounced Mr, Strang and joined with William Smith. In the latter organization he was "ordained" an "apostle." He soon tired of William Smith, and in 1851 joined with

Zenas H. Gurley who was at that time a follower of James J. Strang. These two men then organized a church of their own which afterwards was known as the "Reorganized" church. In 1886 Jason W. Briggs withdrew from this organization of his own begetting, declaring that it was not the Church of Christ.

STATUS OF ZENAS H. GURLEY BEFORE HIS APOSTASY. Zenas H. Gurley was just as unstable as Mr. Briggs. He was born at Bridgewater, New York, May 29, 1801, joined the Church in April, 1838, and moved to Far West, from whence he was driven with the saints in the expulsion of 1838-39. After this expulsion he settled in Nauvoo, where in 1844 he was ordained a seventy, under the direction of President Joseph Young,250.2 and on the 6th day of April, 1845, he was ordained senior president of the 21st quorum of seventy.

He sustained the Twelve and followed their teachings and remained with the Church until February, 1846 (the month of the exodus), when he also left the Church and shortly afterwards joined with James J. Strang. Mr. Gurley was endowed in the Nauvoo Temple with his wife January 6, 1846, and of that event the record of seventies states under date of January 10, 1846:

"President Zenas H. Gurley arose and said that the presidents of the quorum [21st] had received their endowment. He observed that it was remarkable for the unusual outpouring of the Holy Spirit." (Page 29.)

Again speaking of the authorities of the Church he said: "He remembered forcibly the sayings of the First Presidents of Seventy, that we should so live that no charge can be brought against us. A few years ago the men in high standing in this Church were as little as we are. They obtained their exaltation by patient submission to right, and minding their own business." (Page 29.)

On January 25th, 1846, he said: "The saints who have passed through the trials of the Church were generally rooted and grounded in love and have a witness in their own hearts or they would not have remained," (Page 33.)

BRIGGS AND GURLEY DESERTED CHURCH IN DAY OF TRIAL. Within a very few days of this time Zenas H. Gurley deserted the Church because he was unable to face the trials and hardships the saints were forced to undergo. The Mormon people were journeying in a strange land, the prospects before them were dark and some of the members became faint-hearted and were unable to endure to the end. Of this number Jason W. Briggs and Zenas H. Gurley were two who turned back and sought refuge in the apostate organization of James J. Strang.

Indeed, it required a strong heart and a firm-rooted faith for men and women to give up all earthly comforts and undertake a journey of that kind. Death stared the saints in the face; they were poorly clothed, without shelter, save their ragged tents that would not shed the
 rain, and almost destitute of food; yet with the exception of the few who sought the "fleshpots of Egypt," they patiently and determinedly pursued their way until crowned with the victory.

The opinion of the world at that time was that the exodus meant the end of Mormonism, and that the Latter-day Saints had gone to their destruction; for without the necessary means to support life, and isolated as they were from the rest of civilization, they must surely perish in the barren and distant West. Such, too, would doubtless have been the case had not the protecting hand of Jehovah guided them. Is it any wonder under such trying conditions that the hearts of those weak in the faith should fail them.

BRIGGS AND GURLEY JOIN TO FORM "REORGANIZED" CHURCH. In 1849, Mr. Gurley filled a mission for Mr. Strang and made a number of converts to that faith. In 1850, he organized the "Yellowstone branch" for the Strangite church. In 1852 he rejected the claim of Mr. Strang and joined with Mr. Jason W. Briggs, and these two men united their respective Strangite branches, those of Yellowstone and Beloit, and organized themselves into a new religious movement known today as the "Reorganized" church.

In 1853, the leaders of this movement called a number of men to the ministry, "ordained" seven "apostles," and began a proselyting movement. For several years they tried to get "young Joseph," the son of the Prophet Joseph Smith, who had never affiliated with the saints since the exodus from Nauvoo, to join them and become their president. In this they failed, but were diligent and finally, through their continued efforts and the persuasion of his mother, he accepted that position in 1860, was "ordained" president of their church by William Marks, Zenas H. Gurley, and William W. Blair, and he and his successors have continued in that position ever since.

Mr. Gurley remained with this movement till his death, but his family, together with Jason W. Briggs, voluntarily withdrew in 1886.

ONLY A FEW HUNDRED OF SAINTS JOINED "REORGANIZATION." In 1852, when Jason W. Briggs and Zenas H. Gurley combined their Strangite forces, the membership was about 100 souls, most of whom were converts made for Mr. Strang. In 1860 when "young Joseph" assumed the leadership, the membership was 300 souls, most of whom were converts that had never belonged to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Of the members of the Church who were in fellowship in 1844-46, the "Reorganization" has received no more, and likely less than 1,000 converts, which fact shows that the apostasy was not so great in 1844-46, as has been pictured. These statements are based on the testimony of original members of the "Reorganization," as they testified before the U. S. Court of Appeals for the Western District of Missouri in 1894, in the Temple Lot suit, which was for the possession of property, in the hands of the "church of Christ" or "Hedrickites."

Before that court Mr. William W. Blair, who for many years was a member of the presidency of the "Reorganization," and who was one of its oldest members, testified that "1,000 was probably too high an estimate for the members of the original Church, that had joined the 'Reorganized' church." He could "approximately say" that 1,000 had joined the 'Reorganized' church, and possibly that estimate was too large." (Record pp. 180, 181.)

WILLIAM MARKS, APOSTATE, ORDAINED "YOUNG JOSEPH." William Marks was also one of those who joined the "Reorganization" in an early day. At the time of the martyrdom he was president of the Nauvoo Stake, but was disfellowshipped for transgression at the October conference, 1844, and finally excommunicated.

Afterwards he joined the organization under James J. Strang. In that organization he became a "bishop," was a member of the "high council," and later a member of the "first presidency." After the death of James J. Strang, he joined the organization of Charles B. Thompson, another apostate.

This is the same William Marks who "ordained" Joseph Smith, of Lamoni, president of the "Reorganization." In that ordination he was assisted by Zenas H. Gurley and William W. Blair. Mr. Blair never belonged to the Church.

COUNTERFEIT NATURE OF "REORGANIZED" CHURCH. It is almost needless to add that these men held no divine authority and could not bestow the priesthood and officiate in the ordinances of the gospel, and, therefore, the pretentions of the "Reorganized" church are fraudulent. Judged by its history, doctrines and the unstable character of its founders, it is proved to be a counterfeit and nothing more.

Considering the conditions under which the "Reorganization" came into existence, and the fact that in the beginning the original 100 members came from the Strangite church, and that during the existence of that organization from its foundation to 1894, not more than 1,000 members of the "original Church" (i.e. the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints as it stood in 1844) had joined it, we are not to be blamed if we declare that that church is not the successor, a faction or a portion of the "original Church" founded by Joseph Smith the Prophet through the command of God, April 6, 1830.

And after following the history of its founders and pointing out their instability and the manner in which they followed after false leaders, receiving "ordinations" and honors under their hands, we can most emphatically declare that they were not the faithful who did "not bow the knee to Baal," and who kept the "everlasting covenant."254.3

SUCCESSION IN THE PRESIDENCY

TWELVE STAND NEXT TO PRESIDENCY. In the year 1835, when the Twelve Apostles were chosen and their duties defined, the Lord declared that they were equal with the

Presidency as a quorum.254.4 That is, in case of the dissolution or destruction of the First Presidency of the Church, the Twelve should succeed to the Presidency, and would thus act until such time and place as the Lord revealed that the First Presidency should be again organized. And whenever the First Presidency should be disorganized, it would devolve upon the quorum of Apostles to set in order and direct the affairs of the Church. . . .

When the First Presidency is disorganized, the Twelve Apostles become the presiding quorum of the Church until the presidency is again organized, and during that time they are virtually the presidency of the Church -- the presiding quorum.

HOW TWELVE ARE EQUAL TO PRESIDENCY. If through some cause -- which is not likely to arise -- both these quorums should be destroyed, then it would devolve on the seventies to set in order the Church and they would become the presiding quorum. This is the law that God has revealed, and it is the only law and order of the priesthood that he has revealed for the guidance of the Church in succession. You may search the Doctrine and Covenants from beginning to end and will find no other law of succession.255.5

I think it must be conceded that the apostles could not be equal in authority with the Presidency when the First Presidency is fully and properly organized. There could not be two heads -- or three heads -- of equal authority at the same time, for such a thing would lead to confusion. Hence the apostles are equal, as has been stated, in that they have power to assume control of the affairs of the Church when the Presidency is dissolved by the death of the President. 255.6

LAW OF COMMON CONSENT GOVERNS SUCCESSION. In several of the revelations given to the Church in the beginning, the doctrine of common consent is made mandatory. In the revelation of April 6, 1830, the date of the organization of the Church. the Lord says: "The elders are to receive their licenses from other elders, by vote of the church [branch] to which they belong, or from the conferences. . . . No person is to be ordained to any office in this church, where there is a regularly organized branch of the same, without the vote of that church." 255.7 In section 26. verse 2: "All things shall be done by common consent in the church, by much prayer and faith, for all things you shall receive by faith."

The saints, by vote, accepted the Twelve Apostles as the presiding quorum of the Church at this special conference on August 8, and again at the regular conference in October. This fact settled the matter of succession according to the revelations. These authorities and their successors have been sustained at each conference of the Church, twice a year, and at the quarterly conferences of the various stakes four times a year from that day to this.

SUCCESSION DETERMINED AT NAUVOO BY VOTE OF SAINTS. The question of succession was, therefore, settled at Nauvoo when the assembled saints voted to sustain the apostles as the presiding quorum of the Church. The attempt of any party or parties, before any other body, to set up the Church and to ordain officers in conflict with the action of the

Church on the dates previously mentioned, would be illegally done: just as much so as if in the municipality, state or nation, after the majority of the citizens had elected officers (and that almost unanimously) to serve them, a few disgruntled, defeated, candidates and their sympathizers should appoint another election, hold it by themselves, and then declare that the regularly and properly elected officers were rejected and unauthorized to serve. Such a thing in the nation could be no more foolish or absurd than were the attempts of apostates to set up a new organization of the Church from a handful of disgruntled office-seekers and their sympathizers. In one case there would be as much authority as in the other and no more.256.8

ALL BUT A FEW MEMBERS FOLLOWED BRIGHAM YOUNG. At the time of the martyrdom the Church in and about Nauvoo, the headquarters, numbered not to exceed 20,000 souls. This information is based on the best possible authority. And while this was not all the Church membership in the United States, it was the great bulk of the saints, . . .

Now, in the exodus from Nauvoo these saints -- the great bulk of the Church -- continued to be true and faithful and followed the Twelve Apostles.

Governor Thomas Ford, in his History of Illinois, states that in 1846 there were 16,000 Church members with the Twelve on the plains of Iowa, while the 1,000 that remained, a small remnant, were those who were unable to sell their property, or who having no property to sell, were unable to get away. (History of "Reorganized" Church, 3:164.) And this remnant followed as soon as they were able.

In the census report for 1850 -- three years after the settlement of Salt Lake Valley, we learn that the population of Utah was 11,380, all Mormons. That same year the population of Pottawattomie county, Iowa, was 7,828, all Mormons, the Latter-day Saints at Kanesville.

Thus we see that 19,208 members of the Church, who had followed President Brigham Young in the exodus from Nauvoo, were located at these two places. And that is not all, there were other settlements of the saints at Garden Grove, Mount Pisgah, St. Louis, and other places where temporary settlements for the saints were formed during that exodus. These also later gathered to Utah.

Thus we see that almost the entire membership of the Church as it stood in 1844, is accounted for in the following of President Brigham Young and the Twelve.

CHURCH NEVER THREATENED WITH DISSOLUTION. That the Church was not threatened with dissolution the following statistics will show -- I have not at hand the increase of membership of the Church during that period in the United States, but the increase in Great Britain is as follows: In the year 1844, the population of the Church in the British Isles was 7,797. Six years after the martyrdom -- December, 1850 -- that membership had increased to 30,747. This does not show much of a dissolution or falling away!

I do not intend to convey the idea that there was not a falling away, an apostasy, at the time of the martyrdom and the exodus from Nauvoo, for there were many who forsook the cause, but compared with the Church membership, they were but few. Who were they? Did the faithful saints forsake the Church at that time? Did those who risked their lives -- who were shot at with the Prophet and Patriarch forsake the Church? No! We do not find the faithful Latter-day Saints, who had the gospel rooted in their hearts, turning away. 258.9

BRIGHAM YOUNG ORDAINED PRESIDENT BY JOSEPH SMITH. By whom was President Young ordained to the Presidency of the Church? It appears that the emissaries of the "Reorganite" church have discovered in that question a fruitful source of sophistical controversy, and that they are triumphantly asking it wherever they go.

The proper reply is, he was ordained by the Prophet Joseph to that calling, when the Prophet, prompted by the Holy Spirit, conferred upon the Twelve Apostles the power and authority he himself had received. . . .

The Prophet Joseph earnestly desired that his brother Hyrum should live to succeed him in the Presidency of the Church. In the year 1841, by command of the Lord, he ordained him to this exalted position.258.10 . . .

Shortly before the martyrdom, the Prophet tried with all his power to persuade Hyrum not to accompany him to Carthage knowing full well the fate that awaited them there. Had Hyrum stayed behind, and thereby remained in mortality, he would, by virtue of his position and the ordination received in 1841, have become the President of the Church. His brother thought that this should be, 258.11 but through his faithfulness to, and love for, his brother, Hyrum fell a martyr before the Prophet Joseph did.

PROPHET GAVE KEYS TO ALL THE TWELVE. Now mark! The Lord, who knew that Hyrum should receive a martyr 5 crown at Carthage, in the winter of 1843-4, commanded the Prophet to confer upon the heads of the Twelve Apostles, every key, power, and principle, that the Lord had sealed upon his head. The Prophet declared that he knew not why, but the Lord commanded him to endow the Twelve with these keys and priesthood, and after it was done, he rejoiced very much, saying in substance, "Now, if they kill me, you have all the keys and all the ordinances and you can confer them upon others, and the powers of Satan will not be able to tear down the kingdom as fast as you will be able to build it up, and upon your shoulders will the responsibility of leading this people rest."259.12

In this manner the Prophet ordained the Twelve Apostles, which body constitutes the second quorum of the Church, equal in authority with the First Presidency, 259.13 with the keys of the kingdom. Brigham Young was president of the Twelve, and upon him devolved the duty of presiding.

NEW PRESIDENCY ALREADY HAD KEYS OF KINGDOM. Therefore, after the death of Joseph and Hyrum Smith, the Twelve assumed the authority of their office, the duty to preside over the Church. Later, when through revelation the quorum of the First Presidency was reorganized with three presidents -- Brigham Young and Counselors Heber C. Kimball and Willard Richards -- they claimed, and rightfully. that since they were ordained under the hands of Joseph Smith, and from him had received all the keys and powers of the priesthood which the Prophet held, it would have been superfluous to have been ordained again. They were in this capacity, however, set apart and sustained by the unanimous vote of the saints, which was essential to make such ordination of force in the Church.

There is an abundance of testimony to prove that the Prophet did so ordain the Twelve. 260.14 We repeat that Brigham Young received all the keys, powers, authority and priesthood, that were held by Joseph Smith, that enabled him to preside over the High Priesthood, from the Prophet Joseph Smith in Nauvoo in the winter of 1843-4.

HOW QUESTION OF SUCCESSION WAS SETTLED. This important question was settled long ago by the entire body of the saints who accepted the leadership of the Twelve, after the departure of the Prophet and Patriarch, and sustained President Young in his office. It was settled by the approval of the Almighty of the marvelous work he accomplished, and which could not have been done without divine aid and guidance.

To ascribe the mighty deeds Brigham Young performed through the power of the divine Spirit which rested upon him, to the spirit that is the originator of succession, rebellion, apostasy, and falsehood, is to come dangerously near blasphemy. What is it but a repetition of the sin of the adversaries of our Lord who, although they knew that "no man can do these miracles that thou doest, except God be with him,"260.15 yet proclaimed to the people: "He hath an unclean spirit." 260.16 What is it but to assail the disciple with a weapon that is in vain directed against the Master?

There was some excuse for difference of opinion on the subject of succession, immediately after the martyrdom, because the people were not in possession of full information, but there is no excuse now. To use a familiar illustration: At the time of an election citizens are expected to have different opinions as to candidates for office; they are expected to work for those whose views and principles they support.

But when the question is settled at the polls. loyalty demands that all accept the verdict and work together for the common interests of the community. The body of the Latter-day Saints having accepted, as guided by the Holy Spirit, the leadership of the Twelve, there was no longer any valid reason for seeking the leadership of other shepherds.

BRIGHAM YOUNG KNOWN BY HIS FRUITS. The trouble with some of our "Reorganized" brethren is that they look upon the members of the Church as a flock of sheep, that, like other property, can be inherited. This is entirely contrary to the fundamental
 principles of the gospel. The Church belongs to Christ. The leaders and officers are the servants of the Lord and the people of the Lord. It follows that the Lord raises up whoever he pleases, to perform the services necessary from time to time.

Brigham Young was in every way equipped for the peculiar work needed during his time. Who could have done what he did? Sidney Rigdon? Lyman Wight? James J. Strang? The founders of the so-called "Reorganized" church? Let the reader reflect on the facts history records: and then, decide for himself, remembering that every tree is known by its fruit. 261.17

AVOID USING NAME "JOSEPHITES." The authorities of the Church have been trying for many years to get our people. especially writers, to quit calling the "Reorganites" by the title "Josephites." The members of this spurious organization like to be called "Josephites" and to call us "Brighamites," making a distinction between the Prophet Joseph Smith and Brigham Young, emphasizing their false claim that they are followers of Joseph Smith and we are not. 261.18

FRUITS OF THE "REORGANIZATION"

MISSION OF "REORGANITES": TO ABUSE SAINTS. During the summer of 1906 and continuing until the summer of 1907, a number of "Reorganite" ministers, who were engaged in missionary work in Salt Lake City and Ogden, were greatly encouraged by one or two apostates and the local anti-Mormon press. Their method of proselyting was of the usual nature, a tirade of abuse and false accusation hurled at the authorities of the Church.

Encouraged by the anti-Mormon help, they became extremely vindictive in their references to President Brigham Young and the present Church authorities. Their sermons were so bitter and malignant -- which has been the character of most of their work from the beginning in Utah -- that they raised considerable protest from many respectable citizens. Even non-Mormons declared that in no other community would such vicious attacks be tolerated.

"REORGANITE" PROSELYTING METHODS. It appeared at times that these missionaries were attempting to provoke the Mormon people to some act of violence, that it might be seized upon and published to the world through the anti-Mormon press that they had been mobbed, and thus capital for their cause be made of it. Fortunately they were not molested, to the credit of the people so constantly abused.

One of these meetings was attended by a prominent gentleman from the East who was somewhat acquainted with Utah and her people. He said, in conversation with the writer a few days later, that never in his experience has he witnessed such a thing before. "If that fellow" -- referring to a "Reorganite" who has since been promoted in his church -- "should come to our town and abuse the ministers of our church, calling them murderers, thieves and
 liars, as he did Brigham Young and your churchmen, we would kick him off the streets." 262.19

FALSE "REORGANITE" REVELATIONS. To presume to speak in the name of the Lord is a serious matter, and wo be to the man who speaks in the name of the Lord, when he has not been commanded. It is far better never to receive a revelation than to follow after those who receive "revelations" that the Lord has not given. The "revelations" given by the "Reorganite" president to the "Reorganized" church, need only to be read to convince one of their spurious character. They are weak, puerile, and it takes a very little of the spirit of discernment to know of what source they are. However, if they are acceptable to the "Reorganization," that is their business. We are satisfied.263.20

DESTINY OF "REORGANITE" CHURCH. Without the divine guidance and the constant watchcare of Jehovah over the destinies of the Mormon pioneers, with Brigham Young at their head, the West today would be but a barren wilderness. Under the leadership of Brigham Young the Mormon people prospered, and he left them in a better condition temporally and physically, and spiritually more united and more firmly established in the faith than they ever were before.

Where among the so-called "factions" can you point to one that has accomplished the hundredth part of what the followers of Brigham Young have accomplished? They have all practically disappeared but one -- gone to their destruction. And the one that remains will dissolve and disappear as surely as the sun shines. You cannot fight the work of God and prosper. 263.21

THE "REORGANITES" VS. SALVATION FOR THE DEAD

"REORGANITES" CLAIM CHURCH REJECTED WITH ITS DEAD. The so-called "Reorganized" church, which is so bitter in its antagonism towards the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, has claimed from its beginning to be teaching and practicing the doctrines of the gospel as they were revealed from God through the Prophet Joseph Smith. Its officers declare that they are walking in the footsteps of the martyred Seer, hewing closely to the line, and observing in all things the commandments which were given from God through his instrumentality, without variation, change, or loss of power from all that pertains to the salvation of the human family in this dispensation of the fulness of times.

Their foundation is built upon the absurd and misty claim that the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, which was established April 6, 1830, through the labors of Joseph Smith the Prophet and the will of God, was "rejected with its dead for transgression of its members," and that the "Reorganized" church is a "new organization" 264.22 which God raised up to succeed the original -- but as they would have us believe, "rejected -- Church.

NO TRUE CHURCH WITHOUT SALVATION FOR DEAD. It is not now my purpose to
 discuss the foolish question of the "rejection of the Church," but to examine the "Reorganite" position in regard to salvation for the dead; and to show their lack of harmony with the teachings of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints pertaining to the dead, as those teachings have been revealed through the latter-day Prophet.

It stands to reason that if the Lord rejected his Church with its dead, because of transgression, or any other cause whatever, that he would not raise up a substitute church to carry on his work on earth and still keep the dead -- who could in no wise be held responsible for the rejection -- in suspension: and deny to them the privilege of receiving the ordinances of the gospel by proxy according to the revealed plan of God, as it was ordained from before the foundations of the world were laid, as a means of salvation to those who die without a knowledge of the gospel. To any reasonable mind this truth would need no argument.

Yet the "Reorganized" church declares that the Lord did this very thing! And in the light of the revelations given to the Prophet Joseph, as well as those in the ancient scriptures, which bear on this subject of salvation for the dead, their declaration is fatal to their organization; it stamps it as fraudulent and their officers as impostors. A church without salvation for the dead, according to the revealed will of God to the Prophet Joseph Smith, cannot be the Church of Christ. . . .

"REORGANITES" REJECT SALVATION FOR DEAD. We will now consider the attitude of the "Reorganization" in relation to this grand and eternal principle of the redemption of the dead.

At first the founders of the "Reorganized" church appeared to favor it and declared that when the "Reorganization" was established that this principle would be practiced, for as the "rejection of the church produced an effect on the dead," said they, "as well as on the living. so will the reorganization."265.23

But when the "Reorganization" took place, the change that was promised in regard to the dead was not fulfilled, and since that time to the present day -- over 75 years -- baptism for the dead, and temple building and temple work, have never been, by that organization, practiced or entertained. In fact they have turned about face, and have rejected peremptorily the doctrine of baptism for the dead, and now declare that it is not binding on them.

"REORGANITE" DECLARATIONS ON SALVATION FOR DEAD. In a resolution adopted by that church, April 9, 1886, the following startling declaration was made:

"That as to the alleged 'temple building and ceremonial endowments therein,' that we know of no temple building, except as edifices wherein to worship God, and no endowment except the endowment of the Holy Spirit of the kind experienced by the early saints on Pentecost day.

"'Baptism for the dead' referred to belongs to those local questions of which the body has said by resolution:

"'That the commandments of a local character, given to the first organization of the church are binding on the "Reorganization" only so far as they are either reiterated or referred to as binding by commandment to this church.' And that principle has neither been reiterated nor referred to as a commandment."266.24

In February, 1904, the president of that "organization" declared that baptism for the dead was a "permissive rite," and that it was taken from the church, "and if subsequently it was to be engaged in," said he, "and enjoyed by the same people, it must be restored again by revelation and command, and could not be assumed as being held over by sufferance. We do not know of any revelation or command, authoritatively promulgated, renewing the privilege." 266.25

"YOUNG JOSEPH" ADMITS KEYS OF ELIJAH NOT HELD. His statement is a flat acknowledgment that he does not hold the keys of this work and that they can only be received by revelation. That he does not hold the keys is true. That he did not receive them from his father he admits,266.26 and William Marks, William W. Blair and Zenas H. Gurley, who "ordained" him to his office of president of the "Reorganized" church, never held them. They could only be obtained from the Prophet Joseph Smith, and from him, as has been shown, the Twelve received them in 1844.

"Young Joseph" might truthfully have gone further and declared that if the privilege was taken away, before it could again be practiced with authority and power, that the keys of the priesthood which were held by Elijah would again have to be restored.

His statement is an unqualified admission that the work of Elijah was performed in vain. He challenges the prophet's statement, that the time had "fully come. He acknowledges that, in spite of all the efforts of the "Reorganization" in the attempt to save souls, the whole earth is in danger of being "smitten with a curse," and "utterly wasted" at the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord, which is "near, even at the doors."267.27

"REORGANITES" FLOUNDER IN UNBELIEF AND IGNORANCE. If this statement of the president of the "Reorganized" church is true, then the members of his church stand in jeopardy every hour; darkness covers the face of the earth; there is no salvation for the children of men; the word of the Lord has failed, and destruction awaits the earth and her inhabitants.

In declaring that baptism for the dead was a "permissive rite," he shows a willful lack of understanding pertaining to the great eternal plan of salvation which was revealed through his Prophet father. In declaring that baptism was a local commandment to the saints at

Nauvoo, not binding on the members of the "Reorganization," the members of his church acknowledge that the hand of Jehovah is not guiding them; that they are floundering in the mire of unbelief and ignorance. They make light of one of the "most glorious subjects belonging to the everlasting gospel.

Yes, the authorities of the "Reorganized" church have declared by conference resolution that baptism for the dead is not binding on them because it was a "local commandment," and "has never been reiterated nor referred to as a commandment!"

Judged by the "Reorganite" standards of faith and doctrine, will this statement bear the light of investigation? Baptism a local commandment, not binding on the saints! . . .

REVEALED TRUTHS ABOUT SALVATION FOR DEAD. We learn from the revelations and teachings of the Prophet the following important facts pertaining to the salvation of the dead:

1. Salvation in behalf of the dead is the binding or sealing of the hearts of the fathers and children, the welding link.268.28

2. It is the most glorious subject belonging to the everlasting gospel. 268.29

3. It is the greatest responsibility in this world that God has laid upon us -- to seek alter our dead. 268.30

4. It is obligatory to man.268.31

5. Without it the whole earth and its inhabitants would be smitten with a curse. 268.32

6. It is an eternal doctrine, prepared before the foundation of the world. 268.33

7. It is the burden of the scriptures.268.34

8. If we neglect it, it is at the peril of our own salvation. 268.35

9. Through it we become saviors on Mount Zion, and may save multitudes of our kin. 268.36

10. We, without our dead, and our dead without us, cannot be saved with a perfect salvation. 268.37

11. We cannot lightly pass this doctrine over as pertaining to our salvation. 268.38

12. The time granted to the saints to redeem their dead and gather and seal their living relatives before the earth shall be smitten with a curse, "is none too long." 269.39

AWFUL FATE OF "REORGANITES" FOR REJECTING SALVATION FOR DEAD. Now, my "Reorganite" friends, in the face of this, how dare you presume to circumscribe, limit and profane this doctrine of salvation for the dead? Why do you call this eternal and most glorious principle a "permissive rite," a "local commandment," and declare before God that it is not binding on you?

God has declared it to be ordained before the foundations of the world were laid for the salvation of the dead who die without a knowledge of the gospel -- an eternal principle, the burden of the scriptures, obligatory to man. Are you in harmony with the word of God? Were your leaders inspired to declare, in the face of Jehovah's commands, that this eternal principle was a "local commandment," not given to them as a commandment? Binding only on the saints at Nauvoo?

Do you not fear and tremble for your own salvation in neglecting the salvation of your dead? If the Jews who lived in the days of Christ will have to answer for "all the righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel unto the blood of Zacharias, son of Barachias," because they neglected the salvation of their dead as well as their own salvation, pray tell, what will your punishment be?269.40 Remember that you without your dead cannot be made perfect.

Confronted by this evidence, for you to declare that your leaders are inspired and that yours is the Church of Christ is most preposterous!

SALVATION FOR DEAD AN ETERNAL PRINCIPLE. That the salvation for the dead is a Bible doctrine practiced by the ancient saints, we learn from the writings of Peter, 269.41 and Paul, 269.42 and the Revelator John. 269.43 Isaiah prophesied of it,270.44 and our Redeemer taught it to the Jews,270.45 not as a "local commandment," but as an eternal truth and a principle of the greatest importance to the whole human family. And for that reason, "Christ also hath suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit: By which also he went and preached [not in vain] unto the spirits in prison." 270.46

A PRESIDENT WITHOUT KEYS IS AN IMPOSTOR. The keys of the priesthood belong to the presiding officer of the Church and must be held in order that the ordinances of a perfect salvation may be administered to the saints and in behalf of the dead. The keys of the priesthood could only be received from the one who held them, the Prophet Joseph Smith, who received them from the heavens.

Any man claiming to be president of the high priesthood, without these keys, is an impostor. We have been given a key by which the impostor may be detected, for we have the word of the Lord that: "The great and grand secret of the whole matter, and the summum bonum of the whole subject that is lying before us, consists in obtaining the powers of the Holy

Priesthood. For him to whom these keys are given there is no difficulty in obtaining a knowledge of facts in relation to the salvation of the children of men, both as well for the dead as for the living." 270.47

"REORGANITE" PRESIDENT DOES NOT HOLD KEYS. This declaration from the Lord, through the Prophet Joseph Smith, is most explicit. We may ask: Has the president of the "Reorganized" church obtained this priesthood? No, he has not! Then there is no wonder that he cannot obtain "knowledge of facts in relation to the salvation of the children of men, both as well for the dead as for the living."

If he had obtained the keys, would it be possible for him to lead his people for more than 45 years without a knowledge of this power which the Lord, through the Prophet, declares is not difficult for him who holds the keys and the powers of the holy priesthood to obtain, and which is the "sealing and binding power, and, in one sense of the word the keys of the kingdom, which consist in the keys of knowledge?"271.48

If he held these keys, would it be possible that this grand and glorious principle would have been neglected for so long a time, when his father, the Prophet, declared that in this day there was "not too much time to save and redeem" the dead, and gather the living relatives, that they also may be saved, before the consummation decreed falls upon the world?

Would it be possible, if he held these keys, for him to declare that this doctrine was a "local commandment," a "permissive rite," not binding on the saints? Verily no!

FULNESS OF PRIESTHOOD HAD ONLY IN TEMPLES. The Lord declared in 1842, that he was about to restore to earth many things pertaining to the priesthood, 271.49 and that only in temples could the fulness of the priesthood be restored.271.50 Did the word of the Lord fail? Did the Lord make a mistake? If the contention of the "Reorganized" church is true, he did. But Latter-day Saints know better. On our part we will accept the word of the Lord.

Since the "Reorganized" church does not build temples, and knows of "no temple building except as edifices wherein to worship God and no endowment except the endowment of the Holy Spirit of the kind experienced by the early saints on Pentecost day," it is to be expected that their president should be ignorant of the "fulness of the priesthood" and therefore experience great "difficulty in obtaining knowledge."

ENDOWMENT CEREMONIES REVEALED. If the elders of that church had read in the 107th section of their Doctrine and Covenants they would have discovered that the doctrine of "ceremonial endowments" is there taught most plainly:

"Therefore, verily I say unto you, that your anointings, and your washings, and your baptisms for the dead, and your solemn assemblies, and your memorials for your sacrifices
 by the sons of Levi, and for your oracles in your most holy places wherein you receive conversations, and your statutes and judgments, for the beginning of the revelations and foundation of Zion, and for the glory, honor, and endowment of all her municipals, are ordained by the ordinance of my holy house, which my people are always commanded to build unto my holy name.

"And verily I say unto you, let this house [Nauvoo Temple] be built unto my name, that I may reveal mine ordinances therein unto my people;

"For I deign to reveal unto my church things which have been kept hid from before the foundation of the world, things that pertain to the dispensation of the fulness of times.

"And I will show unto my servant Joseph all things pertaining to this house, and the priesthood thereof."272.51

REPENT O YE "REORGANITES." Now, if all the foregoing passages are true -- and they must be if Joseph Smith was a prophet of God, which he was -- then these things pertaining to the priesthood were revealed to him; and salvation for the dead is just as binding on us and just as important as salvation for the living. One depends upon the other, and they are binding on all the children of men. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints cannot teach one without the other, for they are inseparable. A house divided against itself cannot stand.

Repent, therefore, and receive the gospel; save yourselves with your dead by becoming saviors on Mount Zion, before the Consummation decreed falls upon the earth; and by hearkening to these things, you will not be "smitten with a curse," nor "utterly wasted" when the dreadful day of the Lord does come.273.52

273.53 The "Reorganized" Church vs. Salvation for the Dead, pp. 3-5, 9-12,18-23.
