ETERNAL NATURE OF REVELATION

REVELATION BURSTS UPON AN APOSTATE WORLD. We believe that our Eternal Father is just as ready to converse with those who seek him now as he was in ancient days.

We believe that the Bible does not contain all the revelations given by divine manifestations;
 but that it contains only fragmentary accounts of the dealings of the Lord with his servants the ancient prophets.

We believe that when he was on earth in his ministry, our Savior, Jesus Christ, established his Church upon eternal principles, fundamental to the salvation of mankind.

We believe that following the death of the ancient apostles, these eternal principles were corrupted and became mixed with pagan philosophy.

We believe that the essential ordinances of the gospel were changed and modified by man's will and not by divine instruction, so that the time came when, as Isaiah declared, men were drawing near to the Lord with their mouths, and with their lips honoring him, but that their hearts were far removed from him.274.1

The church had become so corrupted and changed that it became necessary for the opening of the heavens, the coming of heavenly messengers, and a restoration of the primitive faith and divine authority.274.2

REVELATION BEGAN AGAIN WITH JOSEPH SMITH. After the days of the apostles, man refused to heed the Spirit of the Lord, therefore the Spirit was withdrawn and man was left without divine guidance. So the strange belief arose that the Lord no longer communed with man, but had given him in the written word all that was essential for his guidance. This was the universal belief when Joseph Smith announced his vision. As a youth he had been taught that there was no coming of angels, no revelation, or need of additional scripture.

But the Lord gave to Joseph Smith a revelation of the fulness of the gospel, "Proving to the world that the holy scriptures are true, and that God does inspire men and call them to his holy work in this age and generation, as well as in generations of old; Thereby showing that he is the same God yesterday, today, and forever."275.3

PROPHETS FORETOLD LATTER-DAY REVELATION. Why should it be considered strange that the Lord should speak to man in this day, either by his own voice or by the voice of angels? is he less interested in man today? Or has man advanced so far that he has passed beyond the need of divine help?

One ancient prophet said, "Where there is no vision, the people perish," 275.4 and another said, "Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but [i.e. until] he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets." 275.5 Yet another, speaking of the last days, said: "Your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions; And also upon the servants and upon the handmaids in those days will I pour out my spirit. 275.6

Equally positive is the saying of an ancient Nephite prophet: "Have angels ceased to appear unto the children of men? Or has he withheld the power of the Holy Ghost from them? Or
 will he, so long as time shall last, or the earth stand, or there shall be one man upon the face thereof to be saved? Behold I say unto you, Nay; for it is by faith that miracles are wrought; and it is by faith that angels appear and minister unto men; wherefore, if these things have ceased wo be unto the children of men, for it is because of unbelief, and all is vain." 276.7

Yes, it is very strange that the Latter-day Saints stand conspicuously alone in the belief that the Father may and does reveal himself and his truth to man, as proclaimed by ancient prophets that he should do in these latter days.276.8

REVELATION NEEDED TO FULFIL COVENANTS OF LORD. It is very strange, considering what is written in the Bible, that the idea ever should have become fixed in the minds of the people that the canon of scripture is full; that the Lord has no more counsel to give to man, no matter how great the need for further divine direction, and man must depend entirely for solace upon the word spoken to ancient Biblical prophets.

These prophets had no such understanding. They spoke of covenants to be made between God and man in the last days. How could this be done unless there was an opening of the heavens? If the heavens were so opened, would it not be a revelation, yes, even scripture? Voicing the word of the Lord to Israel in the last days, Ezekiel said:

"And they shall dwell in the land that I have given unto Jacob my servant, wherein your fathers dwelt; and they shall dwell therein, even they, and their children, and their children's children, forever. . . . Moreover I will make a covenant of peace with them; it shall be an everlasting covenant with them: and I will place them, and multiply them, and will set my sanctuary in the midst of them for evermore. My tabernacle also shall be with them: yea, I will be their God, and they shall be my people."276.9

EVERLASTING COVENANT REVEALED THROUGH JOSEPH SMITH. Jeremiah also bears this same witness and adds that the people shall not teach "every man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying. Know the Lord: for they shall all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them. saith the Lord: for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more."277.10

Because of this ancient promise it should not be strange that a prophet should come declaring the introduction of the new and everlasting covenant. In this day the Lord said to Joseph Smith: "Wherefore, I the Lord, knowing the calamity which should come upon the inhabitants of the earth, called upon my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., and spake unto him from heaven, and gave him commandments: . . . That mine everlasting covenant might be established: That the fulness of my gospel might be proclaimed by the weak and the simple unto the ends of the world, and before kings and rulers. Behold, I am God and have spoken it." 277.11

REASONABLE TO RECEIVE NEW REVELATION. If a man will permit reason to guide
 him in the path of common sense, he will be forced to conclude that there is no justification for the belief that all scripture is enclosed within the cover of the Holy Bible. Such a doctrine closes the mouth of the Almighty, denying him power to speak. Nor can it be consistently stated that there is no need for further revelation. It is equally inconsistent to say that the Lord did not have interest enough in other peoples, outside of Palestine, to speak to them and guide them by his word.

Alma, a Nephite prophet living before the days of Christ, uttered this truth: "For behold, the Lord doth grant unto all nations, of their own nation and tongue, to teach his word, yea, in wisdom, all that he seeth fit that they should have; therefore we see that the Lord doth counsel in wisdom, according to that which is just and true."277.12

TWO NATIONS STAND AS WITNESSES FOR CHRIST. Nephi, an earlier prophet, by command recorded, "Know ye not that there are more nations than one? Know ye not that I, the Lord your God, have created all men, and that I remember those who are upon the isles of the sea; and that I rule in the heavens above and in the earth beneath; and I bring forth my word unto the children of men, yea, even upon all the nations of the earth?

"Wherefore murmur ye, because that ye shall receive more of my word? Know ye not that the testimony of two nations is a witness unto you that I am God, that I remember one nation like unto another? Wherefore, I speak the same words unto one nation like unto another. And when the two nations shall run together the testimony of the two nations shall run together also." 278.13

This was spoken by prophecy to the gentiles of the present day, It should be remembered also, that the law given to Israel was that "the testimony of two men is true." 278.14 providing they are honorable witnesses. Here the Lord applies the law to nations. Why should it not be so?

If the word of the Lord is to be established by two chosen witnesses, then we may well look for two chosen nations to stand as witnesses for Jesus Christ. One such nation was Israel in Palestine, the other was Israel in America. Judah speaking from the Old World and Joseph from the New. Today these two testimonies for God and his truth have run together. 278.15

LATTER-DAY SCRIPTURE CLARIFIES BIBLE. There is not one principle pertaining to the salvation of men that is so clearly stated in the Bible. as it has come down to us, that men do not stumble over -- not one thing. There is not one principle they can be united on that has been so clearly stated that they do not find their interpretations of it conflicting.

Do you want to know about the resurrection of the dead? Who is going to be saved in the celestial kingdom of God? Then read your Book of Mormon. Read your Doctrine and Covenants. The 76th section of the Doctrine and Covenants, known as the Vision, is the clearest, most concise statement regarding salvation that I know anything about, and I doubt
 if the Lord ever gave to any people, at any time upon the face of the earth, anything clearer than this revelation.

Do the people of the world know where they are going when they die? No. They sing about a beautiful isle of somewhere. They do not know. Can they find out in the Bible? Yes, we can find it. They could find it if they had the right inspiration. But with the added help that we obtain from the records the Lord has given us, we do not stumble over that.

We do not stumble over baptism and how it should he performed and by whom. We have a clear and perfect understanding of the nature of God. Now, I can find that in the Bible; so can you. So can they, if they would search for it in the spirit of faith; but they stumble over it; and yet they are not willing to accept the revelations of the Lord given in the day and dispensation in which they live that would set forth clearly to them all these principles of eternal truth. How greatly are we blessed! 279.16

SEEING THINGS THAT ARE PAST. It is a common known fact in science that the light from the stars has taken thousands of years to reach the earth and we see them as they were thousands of years ago and not as they are today. That being true, if we could get in the right place we could see things as they were at any previous period of time. 279.17

REVELATION IN THE CHURCH TODAY

REVELATION SINCE DAY OF JOSEPH SMITH. The Presidents of the Church from the Prophet Joseph until now have received revelations from the Lord for the guidance of his people. While all these revelations have not been placed in the Doctrine and Covenants, they are none the less true. Not all the revelations given to Joseph the Seer were placed in the Doctrine and Covenants in his day; we have added many of his revelations to that volume since his death.

And there are others that have not been placed in it. Some of them were for the Church and not for the world, and therefore, are given only to the saints. But many revelations have been given to the Church since the death of Joseph Smith. Some of these have been published; some have not. It has been my privilege to read and handle a number of them that are still in the manuscript and have not as yet been given to the world for a wise purpose in the Lord. But they are on file and will be preserved.280.18

CHURCH LED BY REVELATION TODAY. The Church today is led by revelation. Not all of the revelations given to the Prophet are in the Doctrine and Covenants; but everything in it is essential to our salvation. It is not necessary that we add other revelations wherein there is no new doctrine revealed, but such as are merely guidance and counsel, to that volume of scripture.

All of the presidents of the Church have had revelation; some of these by Brigham Young,

280.19 John Taylor, 280.20 Wilford Woodruff, 280.21 and Joseph F. Smith, have been published. You will find one by President Smith in Gospel Doctrine. 280.22

We need not get alarmed, for if we have the spirit of discernment, we will know that the Spirit of the Lord is guiding the authorities of the Church.

Revelation from the Lord is binding upon us whether we receive it or not; and if we reject it, we will be punished.281.23

The Lord has not left us to wander; he has not left us alone in the world to grope in darkness, but the Church which he has founded is guided by the spirit of revelation, and the inspiration of the Lord rests upon those who stand at the head. They are not doing this work in their own name; they are not endeavoring to establish themselves; but to carry out the plan which the Lord has revealed; and to make known unto the children of men the great desire of our Father, that all men may be saved through obedience to the gospel and receive a place and standing in his kingdom. 281.24

REVELATION GIVEN AT GENERAL CONFERENCE. The remark is sometimes made by thoughtless and unobserving persons that the spirit of revelation is not guiding the Latter-day Saints now as in former times. This thought can hardly be entertained by the members who crowded the Tabernacle during the three days of conference. To all who possess the spirit of discernment and the enlightenment of the Holy Spirit, it was very apparent that the Lord was pouring out his Spirit and giving to the members of the Church commandment and direction, which is most timely and needful in these days of increased disobedience and wickedness, which pervade the world. 281.25

REVELATION GIVEN TO THE BRETHREN. The Lord blesses this people through the inspiration that comes to his servants, as they direct, and teach, and expound the scriptures. The statement is often made by the enemies of the people, and we hear it upon the streets of this city, from time to time, that there is no revelation in the Church. I say to you that there is revelation in the Church.

The Lord not only blesses the men who stand at the head and hold the keys of the kingdom, but he also blesses every faithful individual with the spirit of inspiration. He gives his people revelation for their own guidance, wherein they keep his commandments and serve him. That is a blessing promised and within their power to receive.

We are blessed with revelation; the Church is built upon that foundation. All the revelations given do not have to be written. The inspiration may come to the brethren, stating what shall be done, or what shall not be done, as the Lord directs them. It does not have to be printed in a book. We have revelations that have been given, that have been written; some of them have been published; some of them have not.282.26

MORE REVELATIONS NEEDED IN EARLY DAYS OF CHURCH. In the days of the Prophet Joseph Smith the Lord gave revelations to the Church covering every principle which was essential to a proper understanding of gospel principles and Church procedure. As the members had just come out of the world and had been taught in all its religious concepts and traditions, they required guidance on all things. The receiving of revelation for their guidance lessened as the years passed so that in the last four or five years of the Prophet's life, the Lord aid not need to reveal information in regard to fundamental principles.

However, he did say that the saints should be "crowned with blessings from above, yea, and with commandments not a few, and with revelations in their time -- they that are faithful and diligent before me."282.27 This promise and the word of the Lord to the Church in section 10458, has been literally fulfilled and is being fulfilled constantly. It is not necessary for the Lord to require that all of his revelations to the Church be published in a book and given to the people. He speaks to his servants and reveals his will, and then they impart the instruction to the people. 283.28

REVELATIONS LIMITED BY MAN'S CAPACITY TO RECEIVE. Revelation is promised us through our faithfulness; so, also, is knowledge pertaining to the mysteries and government of the Church. The Lord withholds much that he would otherwise reveal if the members of the Church were prepared to receive it. When they will not live in accordance with the revelations he has given. how are they entitled to receive more? The people in the Church are not living in full accord with the commandments the Lord has already required of them.

We find ourselves, therefore, much like the Nephites when Nephi spoke of revelation: "And now, I, Nephi, cannot say more; the Spirit stoppeth mine utterance, and I am left to mourn because of the unbelief, and the wickedness, and the ignorance, and the stiffneckedness of men; for they will not search knowledge, nor understand great knowledge, when it is given unto them in plainness, even as plain as word can be."283.29

Further reasons why the Lord does not give the people more revelations are given by Mormon and Moroni in the Book of Mormon.283.30

We have little occasion to clamor for more revelation when we refuse to heed what the Lord has revealed for our salvation. However, the authorities are directed by revelation, and this is apparent to all who have the spirit of discernment. The Lord has not forsaken his people, although they have not always put their trust in him.283.31

FALSE SPIRITS AND FALSE REVELATIONS

THE PRESIDENT: SOLE SOURCE OF REVELATION FOR CHURCH. There is but one at a time who holds the keys and the right to receive revelation for the Church, and that man is
 the President of the Church. And when the First Presidency is disorganized through the death of the President, then, according to revelation, the Twelve Apostles become the presiding quorum of the Church, and then, if the Lord has any revelations to give to his people they will come through the proper channel -- the President of the Twelve.

If we will keep this in mind, it will be a key to us as the Lord intended that it should be, by which we may gauge and weigh the pretended revelations of men. When we see this man, or that man, or perhaps that woman, or child, giving revelations as was the case in the "Reorganized" church when Jason W. Briggs, Zenas H. Gurley, Henry H. Deam and the daughter of Zenas H. Gurley, received "revelations" bearing on the organization of their cult, we will know assuredly that these things are not of God.

The Lord will never ignore the presiding officer and quorum of the Church, for he respects authority, as he requires us to respect authority. And it will always be a key to us, if we will bear it in mind, that whenever he has a revelation or commandment to give to his people that it will come through the presiding officer of the Church. This is plainly taught in the revelations. 284.32

TEST OF TRUTH OF REVELATIONS. If the Lord has a revelation or a commandment to give to his people, it is going to come from the head, and when someone else comes among the people professing to have revelations and to give commandments we can test that matter very readily. We do not have to go into any details or make an extended examination of the claims. There is no need of any investigation whatever, because the Lord has given us the key as a law to the Church by which we are to be governed.284.33

KEY WHEREBY TRUE REVELATIONS MAY BE KNOWN. We have a key given us by revelation by which false spirits may be known, by which false revelation may be known. There is only one man in this Church, at a time, who has the right to receive revelation for the Church. The Lord has said that his house is a house of order, not a house of confusion, and therefore one is appointed to speak One has the right to receive the word of the Lord and give it to the Church.

We all have the right to receive revelation for our own guidance. A president of a stake has the right of revelation for the guidance of his stake. But no man has the right to receive revelation for this Church, except the one whom the Lord has called.

If he receives a revelation it will be declared without question, if it is intended for the Church, in a manner by which we may all know the source from whence it comes. And when we find people secretly distributing to the Church what are said to be revelations, or visions, or manifestations, that have not come from nor received the approval of the authorities of the Church, we may put it down that such things are not of God.

We do not need to write to ask questions in regard to these things. We do not need to
 question them for a moment, because the Lord is not going to give a revelation to any high priest, any elder, or seventy, for this Church. It will come through the one who is so appointed. And if the Lord is not going to choose those who have standing in the quorums of the priesthood, you may be certainly assured that he is not going to choose someone who does not hold the priesthood at all. So our minds may be at rest in regard to matters of this kind. . . .

FALSE SPIRITS DECEIVE THE UNFAITHFUL. If we will follow the spirit of light, the spirit of truth, the spirit that is set forth in the revelations of the Lord; if we will, through the spirit of prayer and humility, seek for the guidance of the Holy Ghost, the Lord will increase our light and our understanding so that we shall have the spirit of discernment; we shall understand the truth; we shall know falsehood when we see it, and we shall not be deceived.

Who is it that is deceived in this Church? Not the man who has been faithful in the discharge of duty; not the man who has made himself acquainted with the word of the Lord; not the man who has practiced the commandments given in these revelations; but the man who is not acquainted with the truth, the man who is in spiritual darkness, the man who does not comprehend and understand the principles of the gospel. Such a man will be deceived, and when these false spirits come among us, he may not understand or be able to distinguish between light and darkness.

FAITHFUL NOT DECEIVED BY FALSE REVELATIONS. But if we will walk in the light of the revelations of the Lord, if we will hearken to the counsels that are given by those who stand in the councils of the Church, empowered to give the instructions, we will not go astray. . . .

"And whoso treasureth up my word, shall not be deceived." 286.34 Therefore let us go to with our might in the labor of this Church, and in the study and understanding of the principles of the gospel, these principles of light; and as we study them, the Lord will reveal to us further light, until we shall receive the fulness, in due time, of the perfect day; and we shall not be under the necessity of being subject to doubt and seeking for advice when confronted by matters of this kind, because the Spirit of the Lord itself will teach us.

The day is coming, so Jeremiah says, when it will not be necessary for one man to teach his neighbor, saying, "Know the Lord,"286.35 for they all shall know him, from the greatest to the least. And that will come when we, in all full purpose of heart, are willing to serve the Lord and keep his commandments and hearken to the counsels that come to us from those who preside. 286.36

SAINTS ENTITLED TO SPIRIT OF DISCERNMENT. There is no reason in the world why each member of the Church should not have a thorough understanding of the principles of the gospel, of the order of the Church, and the government of the Church, so that none need be led astray by any wind of doctrine, or notion that prevails among the children of men,
 which may come to his attention.

If we are firmly grounded in the faith and built upon the rock, we will know the truth, the truth which will make us free. There is a lying spirit abroad in the land. . . .

If you understand the Church articles and covenants, if you will read the scriptures and become familiar with those things which are recorded in the revelations from the Lord, it will not be necessary for you to ask any questions in regard to the authenticity or otherwise of any purported revelation, vision, or manifestation that proceeds out of darkness, concocted in some corner, surreptitiously presented, and not coming through the proper channels of the Church.

TRUE REVELATIONS WILL BE PUBLICIZED BY CHURCH. Let me add that when a revelation comes for the guidance of this people, you may be sure that it will not be presented in some mysterious manner contrary to the order of the Church. It will go forth in such form that the people will understand that it comes from those who are in authority, for it will be sent either to the presidents of stakes and the bishops of the wards over the signatures of the presiding authorities, or it will be published in some of the regular papers or magazines under the control and direction of the Church, or it will be presented before such a gathering as this at a general conference. It will not spring up in some distant part of the Church and be in the hands of some obscure individual without authority, and thus be circulated among the Latter-day Saints. Now, you may remember this.287.37

MANIFESTATIONS FOR INDIVIDUAL, NOT THE CHURCH. There have been individuals, from time to time, who have been invited to go into the wards, in the sacrament meetings, priesthood classes, Sunday Schools and Mutual Improvement organizations, and at times, for their special benefit, cottage meetings have been held where they might come and relate remarkable visions or revelations claimed by these individuals to have been given to them. All this is wrong. . . .

Now, the Lord will give revelations to this Church; and he will give commandments to this Church from time to time, and as it is necessary; but always in accordance with his own law; and we do not have to run around and invite individuals who are without authority to relate unto us purported visions, or revelations or commandments, for the guidance of this people.

Everything in the Church is done in order. Everything pertaining to the kingdom of God is in order, because it is obedient to law. . . .

If a man comes among the Latter-day Saints, professing to have received a vision or a revelation or a remarkable dream, and the Lord has given him such, he should keep it to himself, It is all out of order, in this Church, for somebody to invite him into a sacrament service to relate that to the Church, because the Lord will give his revelations in the proper way, to the one who is appointed to receive and dispense the word of God to the members of
 the Church. . . .

SAINTS WILL NOT FOLLOW FALSE REVELATIONS. Now, these stories of revelation that are being circulated around are of no consequence, except for rumor and silly talk by persons who have no authority. The fact of the matter is simply this: No man can enter into God's rest until he will absorb the truth, insofar that all error, all falsehood, all misunderstanding and misstatement he will be able to sift thoroughly and dissolve, and know that it is error, and not truth.

When you know God's truth, when you enter into God's rest, you will not be hunting after revelations from Tom, Dick and Harry all over the world. You will not be following the will-o'-the- wisp of the vagaries of men and women who advance nonsense and their own ideas. When you know the truth, you will abide in the truth, and the truth will make you free. It is only the truth that will free you from the errors of men and from the falsehoods and misrepresentations of the evil one, who lies in wait to deceive and to mislead the people of God from the paths of righteousness and truth.289.38
