My family and I live in Annaberg-Buchholz, which, before 1990, was in the Communist-controlled German Democratic Republic (GDR).

In those days, government authorities would not allow LDS magazines into the country, so we could not obtain copies of the German-language Der Stern.

However, Church members living in West Germany were allowed to send books to GDR Latter-day Saints through a Church book club. It was a personal sacrifice for the West German Saints, who had to pay all the costs involved. Each month, my family received a wonderful Church-related book that helped bring us closer to the gospel.

Eventually, thanks to the cooperation developed between the First Presidency and officials of the GDR government, restrictions were lifted, and we could subscribe to Der Stern. That was a time of great joy! My family and I were so grateful to receive this wonderful treasure.

In every issue there is something of value for each family member. The addresses and articles by the Brethren provide us with much spiritual strength and help us in our daily tasks.

I am especially interested in reports of Saints living in other parts of the world. Knowing that Saints everywhere try to walk in the way of the gospel helps me hold to the iron rod.

Monika Miecznikowski
Annaberg-Buchholz Ward, Dresden Germany Stake

Thank you for the Liahona (Spanish). It is a very special publication.

We always base our family home evenings on the articles in the magazine. On many occasions we have used the First Presidency Messages as a basis for talks in church.

Our children are delighted with the children’s pages and keep them on file.

J. Ignacio López Family
Tonalá Ward, Guadalajara Mexico Reforma Stake

For something like seven months, I fell away from activity in the Church.

But then I began to carefully read the Liahona (Spanish) and discovered the counsel of the Brethren to be both powerful and convincing.

Based on my own experience, I invite everyone who is not fully active in the Church to read and study the messages in the magazine and in the scriptures. If they do this with humble hearts, their testimonies will become so strong they will have the desire to return to the Church.

Cristino Rodríguez
Isla Patrulla
Uruguay
