Salvation, Sin & Forgiveness

Salvation, Sin & Forgiveness

Welcome to God’s Family! progress—not perfection—in your desire God promises that he will forgive you. for you to resist temptation (Colossians 1:13) (Colossians 1:13) . . How Do I Pray? How Do I Pray? Welcome to God’s Family! progress—not perfection—in your desire God promises that he will forgive you. for you to resist temptation

Now that you believe in Jesus Christ, you to obey and please Him (Ecclesiastes 7:20; (Ecclesiastes 7:20; If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just Even after deciding to follow Jesus, God wants to have a relationship with Now that you believe in Jesus Christ, you to obey and please Him . For example, before you If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just Even after deciding to follow Jesus, God wants to have a relationship with

are a “child of God” and you belong to a Romans 7:14-25) Romans 7:14-25). For example, before you and will forgive us our sins and purify us people still struggle with temptation and Prayer is simply “staying connected”

are a “child of God” and you belong to a became a Christian you lost your temper and will forgive us our sins and purify us people still struggle with temptation and you! you! Prayer is simply “staying connected”

sometimes give into temptation. The good with your heavenly Father by talking to

new family. The goal of this family is to became a Christian you lost your temper from all unrighteousness(1 John 1:9) (1 John 1:9) . . sometimes give into temptation. The good with your heavenly Father by talking to

new family. The goal of this family is to or lied or hated people and it did not from all unrighteousness serve God and to love people. Some or lied or hated people and it did not Jesus once told a story to his disciples, news is, once you’ve decided to follow him. It doesn’t matter whether you’re

serve God and to love people. Some bother you. Now you have a deep desire Jesus once told a story to his disciples, news is, once you’ve decided to follow him. It doesn’t matter whether you’re people think that Christianity is a set of bother you. Now you have a deep desire warning them that “good people” who think Jesus, you will possess the desire to please happy, puzzled, hurt, or in trouble; you can

people think that Christianity is a set of to change and you regret your failures. warning them that “good people” who think Jesus, you will possess the desire to please happy, puzzled, hurt, or in trouble; you can rules. It is really a relationship between to change and you regret your failures. they are good enough for God are in more God daily, and God will continue to help talk about anything with God. Trust that rules. It is really a relationship between

a loving God and his beloved children Hang in there! Hang in there! When you’re discouraged they are good enough for God are in more God daily, and God will continue to help talk about anything with God. Trust that

you resist temptation

a loving God and his beloved children by doubts and failures, remember that spiritual danger than humble people who When you’re discouraged spiritual danger than humble people who you resist temptation (Romans 7:21-25). (Romans 7:21-25) . God wants the best for you. When you ask God wants the best for you. When you ask

(Romans 5:6-11). (Romans 5:6-11).

by doubts and failures, remember that recognize that they are unworthy and ask All people sin. All people sin. When you do sin, it’s not for things, God may say “yes,” “no,” or When you do sin, it’s not for things, God may say “yes,” “no,” or

Here are some of the most common growth is a process. God has plans for recognize that they are unworthy and ask the end of your relationship with God. “not yet” “not yet”

(Luke 18:9-14) . . Confess your wrongs to God, and he will

Here are some of the most common growth is a process. God has plans for for forgiveness for forgiveness (Luke 18:9-14) the end of your relationship with God.

you, and won’t give up on you—ask for

questions that Christians have . . . you, and won’t give up on you—ask for

questions that Christians have . . . God’s help. God promises to help you Confess your sins and forgive others. Confess your wrongs to God, and he will you when you talk to him. forgive you. Find Christian friends and God cares about you and will listen to

improve God’s help. God promises to help you Confess your sins and forgive others. forgive you. Find Christian friends and God cares about you and will listen to

you when you talk to him.

Though God has forgiven you, you’ll still

anxious about anything, but in everything,

anxious about anything, but in everything,

have struggles. Some consequences and

I’m Saved? How Can I Be Sure that improve (Philippians 1:6). (Philippians 1:6) . Can God Forgive Me? have struggles. Some consequences and by prayer and petition, with thanksgiving,

I’m Saved? How Can I Be Sure that Can God Forgive Me? Though God has forgiven you, you’ll still support one another. support one another. by prayer and petition, with thanksgiving,

scars from your past may remain. If

present your requests to God and the peace

Yes! God can forgive any sin, no matter scars from your past may remain. If

present your requests to God and the peace

The Bible tells us to: Yes! God can forgive any sin, no matter you’ve wronged others, ask for their

of God that passes all understanding will

of God that passes all understanding will

A The Bible tells us to: how terrible—cheating, murder, lying, you’ve wronged others, ask for their

A Admit we have sinned how terrible—cheating, murder, lying, forgiveness and try to make amends (with Admit we have sinned infidelity, gossip, theft, selfishness. All forgiveness and try to make amends (with

guard your hearts and minds in Christ

guard your hearts and minds in Christ

(Romans 3:23; 6:23; 1 John 1:10) people fail and disobey God. No one counsel from mature believers). When

B (Romans 3:23; 6:23; 1 John 1:10) infidelity, gossip, theft, selfishness. All counsel from mature believers). When Jesus Jesus (Philippians 4:6, 7)

Believe in Jesus (John 1:12) measures up. In fact the Bible says that no others wrong you, God asks that you CBBelieve in Jesus (John 1:12) people fail and disobey God. No one others wrong you, God asks that you

CConfess that Jesus is Lord measures up. In fact the Bible says that no forgive them—not because they deserve it,

Confess that Jesus is Lord one can please God by good deeds. Good forgive them—not because they deserve it,

(Romans 10:9; Ephesians 2:8, 9) one can please God by good deeds. Good but out of gratitude for the great gift you . . Where to pray. Where to pray. a secluded quiet place, and pray to God

(Romans 10:9; Ephesians 2:8, 9) deeds aren’t good enough.

received from God but out of gratitude for the great gift you

a secluded quiet place, and pray to God

received from God (Colossians 3:13) (Colossians 3:13)

Sometimes you may feel close to God, deeds aren’t good enough.

(Matthew 6:6) (Matthew 6:6) car, or on a walk...anywhere. Try to set

Sometimes you may feel close to God,

other times you may feel distant from him.

What If I Sin? What If I Sin?

car, or on a walk...anywhere. Try to set

other times you may feel distant from him.

aside a special time each day to talk to God.

Some people feel great joy and freedom

aside a special time each day to talk to God.

Some people feel great joy and freedom

Many people find that early morning is the

from their problems when they first

Don’t be surprised by your struggles.

Many people find that early morning is the

from their problems when they first

best time to pray because there are fewer

believe in Jesus. After a while, this joy

Everyone has them. Don’t be surprised by your struggles. The Bible says The Bible says

best time to pray because there are fewer

believe in Jesus. After a while, this joy

Everyone has them.

may fade. This is normal.

… for all have sinned and fall short of the No matter what happens, God distractions. Start by praying for five to ten

may fade. This is normal.

… for all have sinned and fall short of the No matter what happens, God distractions. Start by praying for five to ten

glory of God, and are justified freely by promises you a way to escape any minutes and then increase the time you

glory of God, and are justified freely by promises you a way to escape any minutes and then increase the time you

Don’t depend on your feelings.

his grace through the redemption that spiritual danger. spiritual danger. No temptation has seized you except what spend with God as your prayer life becomes

The Bible says, Don’t depend on your feelings. “…if you confess with “…if you confess with

came by Christ Jesus his grace through the redemption that (Romans 3:23, 24) . (Romans 3:23, 24) . No temptation has seized you except what spend with God as your prayer life becomes

The Bible says,

came by Christ Jesus

your mouth, “Jesus is Lord,” and believe

your mouth, “Jesus is Lord,” and believe

in your heart that God raised him from

Every follower of Jesus has certain is common to man. And God is faithful; he The Lord’s Prayer. more disciplined. more disciplined. The Lord’s Prayer. disciples how to pray using the Lord’s

in your heart that God raised him from (Romans 10:9) . (Romans 10:9).

Every follower of Jesus has certain is common to man. And God is faithful; he disciples how to pray using the Lord’s

the dead, you will be saved”

vulnerabilities, whether it is losing your will not let you be tempted beyond what Prayer: Prayer: Our Father in heaven, hallowed be your

the dead, you will be saved”

vulnerabilities, whether it is losing your will not let you be tempted beyond what Our Father in heaven, hallowed be your

temper, materialism, envy, gossip, or you can bear. But when you are tempted, name, your kingdom come, your will be

temper, materialism, envy, gossip, or you can bear. But when you are tempted, name, your kingdom come, your will be

Look for evidence of change. God now . God now

pornography. People may persuade you to he will also provide a way out so that you (1 Corinthians 10:13) . done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us

Look for evidence of change

pornography. People may persuade you to he will also provide a way out so that you (1 Corinthians 10:13) . done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us

calls you his child, and has sent his Spirit

disobey God, or you may find yourself in can stand up under it

disobey God, or you may find yourself in can stand up under it

today our daily bread. Forgive us our debts,

to work inside you calls you his child, and has sent his Spirit . As . As

tempting situations. The Bible says that

today our daily bread. Forgive us our debts,

to work inside you (John 1:12; 14:25, 26) (John 1:12; 14:25, 26)

tempting situations. The Bible says that

as we also have forgiven our debtors. And

a follower of Jesus, you should see

before you accept Jesus, it is very difficult

as we also have forgiven our debtors. And

a follower of Jesus, you should see

before you accept Jesus, it is very difficult

This free e-Chart is taken from the pamphlet Following Jesus ISBN 9781596360358. The full-color, glossy, and easy-to-understand pam- © 2012 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies, but do not post on phlet covers important topics for new believers and those who have questions about their faith. Save $5 on your $25 order. Enter coupon the internet or send via email.Your friends may sign up for Free Rose

code: 5EC12 at www.rose-publishing.com.

Bible eCharts & Newsletters at: www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

492X FollowingJesus_CS5.indd 2

492X FollowingJesus_CS5.indd 2

Rose Bible Overview

The Bible is made up of 66 books, written over 1500

years, by about 40 writers. The Rose Bible Overview

will give you a grasp of each book quickly in this full-

color handbook. It’s perfect for personal study or for

the Bible study that wants to hand out overviews for

each book.

Book ................... 9781596365698 ...........$19.99

Reproducible.

The Fruit of the Spirit

How does the Holy Spirit work in the lives of

Christians? The answers are found in this bestselling

pamphlet, The Fruit of the Spirit. Based on Galatians

5: 22 & 23, covers the nine fruits of the Spirit: love, joy,

peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness,

gentleness, and self-control.

Pamphlet............9781890947811............$3.99

Following Jesus

Also available as a PDF, in Spanish, and eBook.

This easy-to-understand guide is perfect for new believers or to use

as a tool during outreach and ministry. Following Jesus is a bestselling

pamphlet that covers important topics for new believers and those who

The Armor of God

have questions about their faith. Five key areas are covered, including

The Armor of God pamphlet helps to bring Apostle

“Salvation, Sin & Forgiveness,” “Prayer, Bible Study & Church,” “Fears,

Paul’s message to the Ephesians (6:10-18) to life.

Doubts & Trust,” “Spiritual Gifts, Giving & Sharing,” and “Reliability of the

In a side-by-side fold-out format, The Armor of

Christian Faith.

God describes each piece of armor, its historical

background, and its application to our spiritual battles

Pamphlet ....................9781596360358 ................$3.99

today.

Also available as a PDF. Quantity discounts available.

Pamphlet ............ 9781596360297 ...........$3.99

Also available as a PDF and eBook.

Sign up now to receive FREE Rose Bible e-Charts at www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

ROSE PUBLISHING/ASPIRE PRESS

www.rose-publishing.com

info@rose-publishing.com

or call (310) 353-2100

Rose Publishing, Inc., publishes full-color, easy-to-use Bible reference materials, including charts, maps, time lines and biblical reference pamphlets for pastors, Bible study leaders, new member classes & small groups.
