Susan Arrington Madsen, Lord Needed a Prophet ( 1990)

Preface and Acknowledgments

Prophets have special meaning to members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. These men are considered to have a holy, important relationship with Heavenly Father. They communicate with him to receive revelations for the Church. The Lord speaks through prophets to inspire, lead, and teach his children on the earth.

In preparing this book, I have realized clearly that the Lord prepared the prophets from their boyhood to be able someday to accept the responsibility of leading the Church. It is exciting to read about how this happened.

As young people, the future prophets "played as little children played," riding horses, taking piano lessons, and chasing girls at school with caterpillars. They also had deeply spiritual experiences that converted them more fully to the gospel and strengthened their testimonies. Each of them learned as young men to work hard, thus preparing themselves for the rigorous work they would do for the Lord. There are dramatic stories of the many times Heavenly Father protected them from physical danger, sparing their lives to accomplish a great work. We also read about their families, their missions, their hobbies, and how these experiences shaped their lives.

Each of these thirteen men had different talents, strengths, and personalities that made them unique. Each prophet made different but important contributions to building the kingdom of God on the earth. Studying their lives has been a thrilling experience for me.

Fine biographies have been written of each of the presidents of the Church, and these are helpful to priesthood groups, Relief Societies, and general readers. This book has been written especially for young people and their teachers. I have gone to great effort to include true stories and experiences with special meaning for young people. I have talked to descendants of many of the presidents of the Church who have given me permission to use stories that have not gone beyond family conversations until now.

For help in preparing this book, I am grateful to several excellent historians, including my father, Leonard J. Arrington, as well as Ronald W. Walker, Maureen Beecher, Paul T. Smith, Scott Kenney, Glen Stubbs, and John Sant. I appreciate the generous help of Jeff Simmonds and Brad Cole at Utah State University Special Collections.

In the final stretch, I benefited greatly from the wisdom and advice of James Jacobs, children's literature specialist at Brigham Young University. Useful editing suggestions were also made by Leslie K. Austin, Allison G. Dunn, Edward L. Kimball, Helen and Brent Goates, Whit and Alice Smith, Margene Thorpe, and my brothers, James and Carl Arrington.

I express special gratitude to my friend and husband, Dean Madsen, for his full support and constant encouragement. He also read the manuscript and made excellent suggestions. Our four daughters, Emily, Rebecca, Sarah, and Rachel, provided a delightful testing ground for the appropriateness of the vocabulary and stories.

When all is said and done, my greatest hope is that this book will help young Latter-day Saints better understand and love the presidents of the Church.

Susan Arrington Madsen

Hyde Park, Utah

6 April 1990
