Susan Arrington Madsen, Lord Needed a Prophet ( 1990)

Joseph Smith, Jr.

A Friend to Everyone

Emma Smith almost dreaded having her husband, Joseph, go Eoutside to work in the family garden. She knew exactly what would happen. No sooner would Joseph begin to weed the first row of carrots than a neighbor would notice him outside and walk over to say hello. Then a few friends passing by the Smith home would hop out of their buggy and join in the conversation. Before long, a whole group of Saints would have surrounded Emma's dear husband, trading stories, asking questions, listening to his wonderful advice and counsel—and trampling Emma's carefully planted garden.

But who could blame them? Certainly Emma didn't. She knew they were hardly thinking of the vegetables growing beneath their feet. Their full attention was focused on Joseph, tall and handsome, leaning against his hoe. The Lord had chosen a friendly, charming, outgoing leader to be the prophet of the Restoration. Joseph loved people, and they loved to be with him. The garden would just have to wait.

The Saints enjoyed hearing Joseph speak—even for hours at a time. They asked him endless questions about the revelations he had received from the Lord. They marveled at his spiritual experiences. Joseph had seen God the Father, the Savior, and other heavenly messengers. His rugged, calloused hands had held the golden plates from which he had translated the Book of Mormon. Joseph was more than the mayor of their bustling community—Nauvoo, Illinois. He was a true prophet of God.

At six feet tall and weighing about two hundred pounds, the Prophet Joseph had an athletic build. He enjoyed hard work and energetic play. Joseph frequently joined the young boys in Nauvoo in outdoor games. He could hit a ball with a bat so great a distance that the other players would call to the boy who was going for the ball to take his dinner while he was at it. Joseph would laugh and go on with the game.

Joseph did everything he could to help the Saints. He gave many of them special blessings to help them with illnesses or problems. He organized log-splitting contests among the men and then gave the wood to families in need. Once, he and some young men were playing ball and began to get tired. He stopped the game, called them together, and said, "Let us build a log cabin." So off they went, Joseph and the young men, to build a log cabin for a widow.

The story of this beloved prophet began in a small cabin in Sharon, Vermont, where Joseph was born on a cold winter day on December 23, 1805. He was the fourth of nine children born to Joseph Smith, Sr., and Lucy Mack Smith.

Joseph's parents learned early-on that their son was an especially brave young man. When Joseph was seven years old, he needed to have a very painful operation to remove a piece of infected bone from his leg. If the operation were not performed, the doctor said, Joseph would soon have to have his whole leg removed.

There was no anesthetic to deaden the pain or put Joseph to sleep while the doctor worked. As they prepared for the surgery, the doctor told Joseph's mother, "Bring some rope. We can tie him down to the bedstead. And bring some brandy or wine; the pain will be almost unbearable." But little Joseph refused the strong drinks and said he would not need to be tied down with rope. "I will have my father sit on the bed and hold me in his arms," he said. Then Joseph asked his worried mother to leave the room and go outside so she wouldn't hear him cry out during the operation. "The Lord will help me," he told her. "I'll get through it."

The surgery was extremely painful, but Joseph held tight to his father. Lucy listened to Joseph's screams from outside, praying constantly that all would go well for her son. Lucy's prayers were answered. The surgery was a success, and Joseph's leg was able to heal, though he walked with a slight limp for the rest of his life.

The Smiths were farmers, and young Joseph enjoyed working out in the fields alongside his brothers and sisters. But farming was difficult in Vermont. The soil was rocky, and sometimes there was a frost every month of the year. As Joseph's father held a few tiny ears of corn from their garden in his hand, frozen from a July snowstorm, he decided to move the family to Palmyra, New York. The future prophet was ten years old.

There, in New York, the whole family worked hard to pay for their new farmland. Joseph, Sr., taught school while his wife Lucy sold painted tablecloths, root beer, bread and pies to neighbors and those passing through town. The Smith children cleared the land for planting, tapped sugar maple trees for syrup, and worked for other farmers.

As young Joseph chopped wood and plowed fields, his muscles hardened, and he grew to be tall for his age. He was strong and healthy, despite his limp. Farmers were eager to hire him because he was an especially hard worker. And, even after a long day of work in the hot sun, Joseph kept his happy disposition. He was known as "a clever, jovial boy."

After chores were done, Joseph loved to participate in home-made sports like wrestling, games with a ball, and horseback riding. One of his favorite games was called "pulling sticks," a contest in which two people sat on the ground facing each other, with the soles of their feet together. They pulled on a large stick they held between them until one person was pulled to an upright position.

But there was more to Joseph's life than working the soil and having fun. The Smith family prayed together each morning and evening, enjoyed singing hymns, and read the Bible together. Religion was important to Joseph. But the churches of his day raised more questions in Joseph's mind than they answered. Preachers from the various churches were trying to win converts. "Come here—we have the truth," one seemed to say. "No, come over here, we have the truth," another would call out. Even the Smith family could not agree on which Church to join. Everyone seemed to have a different opinion. The more young Joseph listened, the more confused he became.

Joseph, now fourteen, turned to the family Bible for help. One verse of scripture caught his attention more than any other: "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally . . . and it shall be given him." (James 1:5.) Could it be that Heavenly Father would help him answer his questions? Joseph decided to find out.

In the spring of 1820, Joseph walked into the countryside near his home to a beautiful grove of trees where he could be alone to pray. He had never prayed aloud before but decided this time he should. He had an especially important question. Joseph knelt and began to pray. Shortly after he began, he received an astonishing answer, which he described:

I saw a pillar of light exactly over my head, above the brightness of the sun, which descended gradually until it fell upon me. . . . When the light rested upon me I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. One of them spake unto me, calling me by name and said, pointing to the other—This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him! (Joseph Smith—History 1:16-17.)

Filled with wonder and awe, Joseph realized that God the Father stood before him, and at his side was his Son Jesus Christ. The Savior spoke to Joseph, saying that his sins had been for-given. In answer to Joseph's question about which church he should join, the Savior instructed Joseph to join none of them, for they had strayed from the gospel; "their hearts are far from me," he said. (Joseph Smith—History 1:19.)

No one knows how long Joseph talked with the Savior, but all too soon the pillar of light began to diminish, and the heavenly beings left. Joseph was filled with peace, joy, and happiness. He returned home physically weak, but his spirit was soaring higher than the birds that flew overhead.

As he entered the house, his mother could tell something was different about her son. "Joseph," she asked, "are you ill?"

"I am well enough," he answered. Then he explained: "I have learned for myself that the true church is not yet on the earth."

Joseph's mother and the rest of the Smith family gathered around and listened intently as he described what had happened in the grove. They knew Joseph was a truthful boy and believed what he told them about the vision he had seen.

But they soon found out that hardly anybody else did. Neighbors teased young Joseph and insisted he had made up the whole story. Ministers laughed, saying it was utter nonsense to think God the Father and Jesus Christ would appear to a fourteen-year-old farm boy. How frustrating this was for Joseph! He wrote: "I had seen a vision; I knew it, and I knew that God knew it, and I could not deny it, neither dared I do it; at least I knew that by so doing I would offend God." (Joseph Smith-History 1:25.)

Joseph's experiences with heavenly beings were only beginning. On the night of September 21, 1823, when Joseph was seventeen, while he was praying to his Heavenly Father, he noticed that a light began to fill his bedroom until it shone brighter than the sun at noonday. An angel appeared in the midst of the light, standing above the floor. Joseph recalled:

"He had on a loose robe of most exquisite whiteness. It was a whiteness beyond anything earthly I had ever seen. . . . His whole person was glorious beyond description, and his countenance truly like lightning." (Joseph Smith-History 1:31-32.)

Joseph watched in wide-eyed wonderment as the personage moved toward him without touching the floor. Then the heavenly visitor spoke, calling Joseph by name, saying he was Moroni, a messenger sent by God. The angel went on to say that Heavenly Father had an important work for Joseph to do. He was to bring forth a book buried in a hill close by, an ancient record engraved upon plates of gold. The plates contained a history of nations that had previously existed on the American continent. The fullness of the everlasting gospel was contained in the book, as given by the Savior to the ancient people in America.

Joseph was spellbound. He listened to the angel tell how, when the right time came, he—a poor farm boy—would be able to translate the ancient writing on the plates of gold. He would have the help of the Lord and two small stones called the Urim and Thummim.

Moroni told Joseph many other marvelous things, but finally the light began to diminish, and Moroni disappeared. He returned to Joseph's bedside two more times during the night, each time repeating the message he had given during the first visit and adding more. Moroni warned Joseph that Satan would tempt him to sell the gold plates for a great amount of money. But the record was sacred and would be withheld from him if he tried to use it for anything except to glorify God and build his kingdom.

Immediately after Moroni left the third time, Joseph heard the rooster crow in the yard. It was morning—the angelic visits had lasted the whole night. Joseph could hardly comprehend what had happened. The Lord had chosen him to be a prophet! Joseph was to play an important role in preparing for the second coming of Christ to the earth.

This was a time of mixed feelings for Joseph. He felt thrilled and in awe of the visions he had seen. He felt humbled to know that Heavenly Father had chosen him for such an important calling. And yet, Joseph also said, "I do not wish to be a great deal better than anybody else." He often reminded himself and others that the Lord had chosen "a weak thing" to accomplish his work on the earth.

In 1827, the angel Moroni gave Joseph permission to take the plates from their hiding place in the hill (today called the Hill Cumorah). Joseph was twenty-two years old and now had a wife. Earlier that year he had married tall, dark-haired Emma Hale.

Emma drove in a horse-drawn wagon to the Hill Cumorah with Joseph the night he obtained the golden plates. Joseph was filled with wonder as he saw by moonlight the glitter of the gold plates inside a box made of stones cemented together. He ran his fingers over the curious markings on the ancient records.

Fearful that somebody might try to steal the plates because of their great monetary worth, Joseph hid them first in an old log in the woods, and later in a specially built cherrywood box that he buried under the hearthstones in his father's home. Joseph was now responsible for the plates, and he was prepared to guard them with his very life, if need be.

And guard them he did. Word soon spread that Joseph had found a "gold bible." Immediately people from the surrounding countryside began to snoop and harass him with questions. Visitors stopped by at all hours to see the golden plates, but Joseph said they could not see them. He had been commanded by an angel not to show them to anyone without permission.Many insisted and offered money and property to see the plates, but Joseph was faithful to his promise to protect the sacred record. For this, he and his family were persecuted and abused.

This trouble caused Joseph and Emma to move to Harmony, Pennsylvania, hiding the plates in a barrel of beans for protection along the way. There, in a more peaceful setting, Joseph began translating the plates. During the next three years, Joseph translated the scriptures by reading them aloud, often from behind a curtain, to a scribe.

By March 1830, the Book of Mormon had been completely translated, delivered to a publisher, and printed, bound and ready for sale. It was a happy day for Joseph! In the coming years, millions of copies of this sacred record would be printed, and future generations of Latter-day Saints would be called upon by their leaders to "flood the earth with the Book of Mormon."

Joseph continued to have sacred experiences. The angel John the Baptist visited him and his close friend Oliver Cowdery on the banks of the Susquehanna River and conferred the Aaronic Priesthood upon them. In a similar manner, a short time later, the ancient apostles Peter, James and John gave the Melchizedek Priesthood to Joseph and Oliver.

On April 6, 1830, the Lord instructed Joseph to organize the Church of Jesus Christ. Several baptisms were performed that day, including those of the Prophet's parents, whom he dearly loved. After baptizing his father, the Prophet Joseph stood upon the shore and, taking his father by the hand, said with tears of joy, "Oh, my God! I have lived to see my own father baptized into the true Church of Jesus Christ!"

The stage was now set for the gospel to go forth to all the world. As the Church grew, Joseph prayed continually that he would be worthy to be the Lord's prophet. Joseph wrote in his diary: "Oh may God grant that I may be directed in all my thoughts," and "O Lord, fill [my] heart with wisdom and understanding."

Joseph was commanded by the Lord to move over one hundred fifty Latter-day Saints to Kirtland, Ohio, in the early spring of 1831. Kirtland was to have a great influence on Joseph and the Church. There he received the Word of Wisdom revelation for the Church. There, at great sacrifice, the Church members built a sacred temple in which the Saints would receive many spiritual blessings. There in the Kirtland Temple Joseph again saw the Savior as well as the ancient prophets Moses, Elias, and Elijah. Those heavenly messengers strengthened Joseph's faith, gave him important priesthood authority, and filled him with courage to face the trials that were soon to come.

The Church grew rapidly, but persecution of the Saints increased and became more brutal. Joseph himself did not escape the violent attacks. On the evening of March 24, 1832, an angry crowd of men broke into the Smith home, dragged Joseph outside, and carried him to a lonely meadow. There they beat him, stripped off his clothes, and covered him with tar and feathers. They tried to force a bottle of poison into his mouth, but Joseph broke the vial with his teeth, chipping a front tooth. Finally they choked him until he was unconscious and left him for dead.

After waking up, Joseph found help at a nearby farmhouse. During the night friends carefully removed the tar. But Joseph did not allow even this awful experience to stop his work. He preached a sermon the very next morning and baptized three converts.

The beatings were painful, but Joseph was most deeply hurt when some of his closest friends turned against him. His friends meant so much to him. Yet he carried his sorrows and burdens with courage and prayed for those who lost their testimonies of the gospel.

It soon became necessary to move again, and the Saints left their homes in Kirtland for Far West, Missouri. There it seemed that their troubles were even worse. Angry mobs, who wanted the Mormons out of their state, destroyed their businesses, burned many homes and crops, whipped and beat many of the leaders, destroyed their livestock and killed men, women, and children.

Joseph, his beloved older brother Hyrum, and several others were arrested and kept in the small, dark, and filthy Liberty Jail. Most of that time their feet were bound together in chains. Joseph was extremely lonesome during this time. He missed his wife and four children terribly. Joseph wrote to Emma:

Oh, that I may have the privilege of seeing once more my lovely family, in the enjoyment of the sweets of liberty and social life. To press them to my bosom and kiss their lovely cheeks would fill my heart with unspeakable gratitude.

He also wrote special messages to his children:

Tell them father loves them with a perfect love and he is doing all he can to get away from the mob to come to them. Tell little Joseph he must be a good boy. Father loves him with a perfect love. He is the eldest and must not hurt those that are smaller than him, but comfort them. Tell little Frederick father loves him with all his heart. He is a lovely boy. Julia is a lovely little girl. Love her also. She is a promising child. Tell her father wants her to remember him and be a good girl.

After nearly six months, with the help of a guard, Joseph and his friends escaped while being moved to another prison. Joseph joined the Saints who had now moved from Missouri to the area around Quincy, Illinois. What a happy reunion Joseph had with his family and friends!

But these were difficult times. The Saints had no homes, no land, no place to settle. Out of poverty and persecution, however, came new growth. Joseph led them to a lovely but swampy place on the banks of the Missouri River, named it Nauvoo, which means "beautiful location," and set them to draining the land and building again. As mayor of the new city, Joseph laid out a city plan that included wide streets and large lots for homes, schoolhouses, businesses, and a magnificent temple.

Joseph continued to build spiritually as well, receiving important revelations from the Lord. Many of these were added to the "Book of Commandments"—later called the Doctrine and Covenants.

This was Joseph's finest hour. His city flourished, the Church grew, and Joseph's human qualities made him a beloved leader. One friend said he was "kind and considerate, taking a personal interest in all people. He considered everyone his equal." Another said he was "very sociable, easy, cheerful, kind and hospitable—in a word, a jolly fellow."

Joseph took a special interest in children. He picked wildflowers for little girls, settled quarrels between schoolchildren, and gathered babies into his arms for a squeeze and a loving word. During the winter, he loved sliding on the ice with his own children and their friends. He took his family to musical concerts, the theater, circus performances, and on boat trips on the Mississippi River.

One pioneer wrote that as thousands of immigrants arrived from the eastern United States and from across the ocean:

Joseph would make his way to as many of the wagons as he well could, and cordially shake the hand of each person. Every child and young babe in the company were especially noticed by him and tenderly taken by the hand, with his kind words and blessings. He loved innocence and purity and seemed to find it in the greatest perfection with the prattling child.

Once, while delivering a sermon at a cottage meeting, a little girl became tired and sleepy and began to cry. Joseph stopped speaking, sat down on a bench behind him, and motioned to her to come to him. He put her on his lap and patted her, and she went off to sleep while he completed his sermon.

No doubt about it. The Lord had chosen a loving, caring man to be the prophet of the Restoration.

The Saints admired these qualities in Joseph. So many of the other religious leaders of this time were long-faced and stern. They frowned upon dancing, playing an instrument, or participating in sports. But the Prophet Joseph Smith could be both serious and playful, spiritual and full of laughter, reverent and also happy. He enjoyed life and taught the Saints to do the same, in spite of their trials and problems.

The Saints lived in peace for a short time in Nauvoo, but soon the old persecutions began to arise again. In June of 1844, following much anti-Mormon violence, Joseph and Hyrum said good-bye to their families and friends and surrendered to the Illinois authorities to answer in court the false charges brought against them.

The governor of Illinois promised Joseph that they would be protected. Joseph wrote a last letter to Emma from a cell in Carthage Jail: "I am resigned to my lot, knowing I am justified, and have done the best that could be done. Give my love to the children and all my friends."

On the afternoon of June 27, a mob made up of members of the Illinois militia blackened their faces and headed for Carthage Jail. The jail guards, who were part of the plot, fired upon the mob only with blanks. The guards only pretended to protect their well-known prisoners. A small group of the mob with loaded guns stormed up the stairs of the jail and burst into the room, firing upon Joseph, Hyrum, John Taylor, and Willard Richards.

Almost instantly, Joseph and Hyrum were killed, and John Taylor was seriously wounded. Crying out, "Oh Lord, my God!" Joseph fell through a window onto the ground below, at the feet of the rest of the mob.

No day in the history of the Church has been sadder. It was as if time stood still and the earth stopped turning. All sound and movement ceased. Joseph the Prophet was dead. Joseph the husband, father, and friend was gone.

The bodies of Joseph and Hyrum were brought back to Nauvoo in a wagon by their brother, Samuel, to their sorrowing families. There, thousands of Saints wept at the death of the Prophet and his brother. The news of their murders hit Nauvoo and the nearby communities of Saints "like a thunderbolt, crushing the people to the earth," one woman wrote. Another said, "How lonely was the feeling! How cold, barren and desolate! [Joseph] had spoken for the last time on earth." For many early pioneers, knowing the Prophet Joseph Smith had been the greatest blessing in their lives.

Joseph and Hyrum were secretly buried in the basement of an unfinished hotel, the Nauvoo House. They were later moved and buried on a lot near Joseph and Emma's first home in Nauvoo, where they rest to this day.

Joseph Smith's life on earth was shorter than any other latter-day prophet—thirty-eight years. But in those few years, the scriptures tell us, he did more for the salvation of men in this world "than any other man who ever lived in it," save Jesus only. (D&C 135:3.) Joseph's work on the earth was mightily finished, and the Lord's work had mightily begun.
