Susan Arrington Madsen, Lord Needed a Prophet ( 1990)

Brigham Young

A Barefoot Boy from Vermont

Thirteen-year-old John Henry Seely was excited after hearing Tthe announcement made in the small meetinghouse in Mt. Pleasant, Utah. "Brothers and Sisters," the bishop began, "I'm pleased to tell you we will soon be having a special visitor to our community. Brother Brigham has sent word that he will arrive here later this week. Let every citizen of Mt. Pleasant do what he or she can to make our town presentable to the prophet of the Lord."

Everyone was thrilled and spent that week in September 1868 tidying up their homes, yards, and farms for a visit from President Brigham Young. The bishop assigned John and his boyhood pals to move away the large rocks from the main road in Mt. Pleasant, making the pathway clear for President Young's caravan. With each large stone he carried to the side of the road, John imagined seeing the famous leader.

Brigham Young, or "Brother Brigham" as the Saints called him, had been president of the Church since 1847—three years after Joseph Smith was murdered. John Seely's parents had crossed the plains in 1847 with Brother Brigham and had learned to love and respect the rugged, hard-working colonizer. Some had even compared him to the ancient prophet Moses, leading his people away from persecution to a promised land where they could worship in peace. The people of Mt. Pleasant could not have been more excited about the prophet's visit if they had been expecting the king of England instead.

On the day of President Young's arrival, the Mount Pleasant Brass Band met him and his party of nearly thirty carriages and escorted the group into town, announcing their triumphal entry with lively marching tunes. The street was lined with Sunday School children dressed in their best. Men waved their hats enthusiastically and others held large banners saying "Lion of the Lord," "Defender of Right," or "Welcome!" It was the biggest event of the year.

Brother Brigham led the procession in a simple but well-built buggy (he didn't care for the frills and fringe that often decorated other carriages). As John Seely saw President Young approaching, he carefully studied the Prophet's appearance. What he saw was a handsome, portly gentleman with thick, wavy, nearly-white hair and a trimmed beard. He had radiant blue eyes, a square set jaw, and a pleasant expression on his face. President Young wore a large green wool cape to keep the dust off his clothes, short pull-on boots, and a straw hat. He seemed grandfatherly, warm and friendly.

Later that night, President Young received visitors in front of a warm crackling fire at the home of one of the local leaders. Still watching the prophet, John noticed that Brother Brigham paid special attention to the children—listening to their questions, hearing their stories, and giving them marbles. The friendly atmosphere reminded one of the president's traveling companions to share a funny story with those in the room. He told of a similar visit to another community when President Young stopped at the home of Anson Call, a pioneer:

Sitting in a circle around the fireplace, Brigham invited Anson's little daughter to sit on his knee. During a lull in the conversation, he reached out and turned her head so he could look her full in the face. He started to tell her how pretty she was when she blurted out, "Your eyes look just like our sow's!" Anson was embarrassed, but Brigham took the child by the hand and headed for the door. "Take me to the pig pen. I want to see this pig that has eyes just like mine."

Brother Brigham enjoyed the retelling of the story as much as anyone and joined in the hearty laughter afterwards. Those who were there would long remember his visit to Mt. Pleasant. Certainly, John Henry Seeley never forgot seeing the Lord's prophet.

Brigham Young is probably the most well-known Latter-day Saint in the history of the Church. But his life did not start out as if he were destined to become one of the greatest colonizers and religious leaders in United States history. In fact, life started out cold and hungry for the future prophet.

Brigham Young was born on June 1, 1801, in Whitingham, Vermont, the ninth of eleven children. His mother, Abigail (Nabby) Howe Young, was ill with tuberculosis during Brigham's infancy, and he was more or less reared by his thirteen-year-old sister, Fanny. "Briggie," as he was called, became so attached to Fanny that she had to carry him on her hip even when she milked the cow.

John Young, Brigham's father, had fought in the Revolutionary War under General George Washington himself. John walked over a hundred miles home when that war ended, carrying a cannonball all the way. He was a stern, strict man who didn't allow his children to dance, listen to the sound of a violin, or walk more than half an hour on Sunday. Brigham quickly decided that this was not the way he wanted to raise his own children. He said:

I shall not subject my little children to such a course of unnatural training, but they shall go to the dance, study music, read novels, and do anything else that will tend to expand their frames, add fire to their spirits, improve their minds and make them feel free and un-trammeled in body and mind.

When Brigham was three years old, the Young family moved to Chenango County, New York. By the time Brigham was eight, he took care of many household chores because his mother's tuberculosis had slowly worsened. He made bread, churned butter, and made most of the family meals. Brigham tenderly cared for his mother as she lay ill in bed. Each morning he carried her from the bed to the table and then to a chair in front of the fireplace before going out to work for the day.

The Young family, which included eleven children, was very poor. Brigham rarely had enough to eat or sufficient clothes to protect himself from the weather. "I had to plow in the midst of roots barefooted and if I had on a pair of pants that would cover me I did pretty well." Brigham owned just one pair of shoes during his boyhood. He used them only for church. Even then, he carried them in his hands until he reached the church lot, taking them off again after the service before he walked home.

During the cold New York winters, Brigham worked with "insufficient food until my stomach would ache." Once, he and his younger brother Lorenzo were left alone at home for two days without any food. Brigham grabbed his father's musket, killed a robin, skinned and cleaned it, and cooked it for an evening stew.

When Brigham was fourteen years old, his mother died. The children were "farmed out" to live with relatives, and Brigham missed being with his brothers and sisters.

Brigham was soon old enough to learn a trade. He wanted to learn how to make things with his hands and became an apprentice to a carpenter in Auburn, New York. He proved to have great talent and went into business for himself making beautiful chairs, beds, and cabinets. He also made brooms, fireplace mantels, and spinning wheels. Brigham became famous in his community as a talented glazier (a person who designs and makes windows). He was known for the beauty of his stairwell decorations, fanlight doorways, and attic windows.

When he was twenty-three, Brigham married Miriam Works and moved to Mendon, New York. There, he built a carpentry shop next to the Cayuga Brook, a large millstream. Waterpower from the stream turned a wooden wheel and gave power to the lathe.

But even now, with a wife he loved and a valuable trade, there was still something missing in Brigham's life. He wanted religion . . . but not just any religion.

Brigham had studied the Bible daily as a young boy and became convinced that the religion he was seeking should make people happy. Brigham still felt uncomfortable about his own stern, strict childhood.

While searching for answers, Brigham attended several different churches and found that most of their members had long, sad faces. He was disgusted to find people who attended church on Sunday and then cheated their neighbors in business dealings the very next day. He was grateful that his parents had taught him to be strictly honest, to return items to neighbors—even as small as a pin.

Brigham also believed in prophets, apostles, baptism by immersion, and free agency. In 1830, when he was twenty-eight years old, he found these principles and much more when he was given his first copy of the Book of Mormon. Brigham was a careful, thoughtful student and for two years studied this new volume of scripture. He did not want to rush into something as important as this. He described his attitudes by saying:

Wait a little while; what is the doctrine of the book, and of the revelations the Lord has given? Let me apply my heart to them; and after I had done this, I consider it to be my right to know for myself, as much as any man on earth.

Brigham became excited about what he was reading, and the spirit of the Holy Ghost burned like a fire within him:

I knew it was true, as well as I knew that I could see with my eyes, or feel by the touch of my fingers. . . . Had not this been the case, I never would have embraced it to this day. . . . I wished [to have enough time] to prove all things for myself.

Brigham was baptized April 14, 1832, in his own mill stream and was ordained an elder the same day while his clothes were still wet. A month later his wife was also baptized. Brigham's excitement and love for the Church and its teachings never wavered even a minute the rest of his life. Brigham had found the truth and he rejoiced!

However, during the same year as his baptism—one of the happiest events of his life—came also a very sad experience: his wife of seven years died, leaving Brigham with two small daughters.

Brigham decided it was time for a big change. After finding a loving couple to temporarily care for his two daughters, Brigham set out to preach the gospel and bear his testimony to others. He called himself on a mission, so to speak. Brigham locked up his carpentry shop and bid his customers good-bye. He was starting a new life—one completely dedicated to the Lord.

Brigham's first order of business was to travel to Kirtland, Ohio, to meet the Prophet Joseph Smith. Brigham found Joseph out chopping wood:

Here my joy was full at the privilege of shaking the hand of the Prophet of God, and receiving the sure testimony, by the spirit of prophecy, that he was all that any man could believe him to be as a true Prophet.

Brigham became one of Joseph Smith's most loyal and trusted friends. He would later say: "I feel like shouting Hallelujah, all the time, when I think that I ever knew Joseph Smith."

In 1835, Brigham moved to Kirtland and was ordained an apostle by Joseph Smith. By now he had married his second wife, Mary Ann Angel, and he was happily reunited with his two daughters.

At this time trouble was brewing within the Church. Many Saints began to lose faith in Joseph and even talked of replacing him with another prophet of their own choosing. But not Brigham. In a tense meeting with many of Joseph's critics, held in the Kirtland Temple, Brigham stood up and defended the Prophet with all his might:

I told them that Joseph was a Prophet, and I knew it, and they might rail and slander him as much as they pleased. [But] they could not destroy the appointment of the Prophet of God. I stood close by Joseph and with all the wisdom and power God bestowed upon me, put forth my utmost energies to unite the quorums of the Church.

As a result of these troubles, nearly eleven thousand Latter-day Saints left Kirtland, Ohio, and settled in various places in Missouri. But it wasn't long before they had to move on again. Angry mobs drove them from Missouri. Joseph Smith had been arrested on false charges and was in jail when the Saints needed to be moved.

Joseph assigned Brigham the difficult task of moving the Saints out of Missouri and across the Mississippi River. The move, which took place in the middle of winter, was difficult and dangerous. Many of the Saints were ill or suffered frostbite. Brigham's own infant daughter was thrown from a wagon and run over. She miraculously survived.

Brigham served a mission to England in 1839. Just getting there turned out to be a powerful, humbling experience. Not only was he very ill when he left home, but his voyage across the Atlantic Ocean also brought him to his knees in sickness, and he spent much of the time in mighty prayer:

I was very sick in my head and stomach. I felt as though I could not endure many such voyages. Were it not for the power of God and his tender mercy I should despair. But the Lord is my strength. When the winds were contrary, the Twelve (Apostles) agreed to ask Him to calm the seas and give us a fair wind. We did so and the wind immediately changed and from that time on it has blown in our favor.

Even under the most difficult circumstances, Brigham's testimony of the gospel never wavered. He knew it was true.

Brigham's service to the Church was just beginning. He later said, "No summer passed over my head but what I was traveling and preaching. And the only thing I ever received from the Church or the Prophet was in 1842, when Brother Joseph gave me the half of a small pig that the brethren had brought to him." But Brigham knew the rewards of serving the Lord were far greater than any money could bring. "I just do the thing that I know to be right and the Lord blesses me."

Brigham was away on another mission in New England when the Prophet Joseph was murdered in Carthage Jail in Illinois on June 27, 1844. When Brigham received word of the Prophet's death, his eyes filled with tears. An angry mob had robbed the world of one of its choicest spirits.

Brigham immediately returned to Nauvoo. He was now deeply concerned about the future of the Church. It wasn't completely clear to the Latter-day Saints who should succeed Joseph as president of the Church. Several men claimed that they should now be in charge.

Brigham knew the priesthood authority to lead the Church rested with the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. Joseph himself had laid his hands on their heads before his death and given them "the keys of the kingdom." As president of the Quorum, Brigham knew he held the keys and powers to now receive direction from the Lord. But how would he convince the people?

When Brigham stood to speak before a large gathering of Saints in Nauvoo on August 8 (forty days after Joseph's death), an event took place that those who saw considered to be a miracle. A young man, Benjamin Johnson, was standing near the front and described what happened:

As soon as Brigham spoke I jumped upon my feet, for in every possible degree it was Joseph's voice, and his person, in look, attitude, dress and appearance; [it] was Joseph himself, personified; and I knew in a moment the spirit and mantle of Joseph was upon him.

Wilford Woodruff, who was also in the audience, wrote: "If I had not seen him with my own eyes, there is no one that could have convinced me that it was not Joseph Smith."

This experience convinced many that Brigham Young was the Lord's choice to be their new prophet.

These were trying times. The Saints continued to suffer persecutions. Anti-Mormon feelings ran high. As life became more difficult and dangerous for the Latter-day Saints, the spirit whispered to Brigham that they should leave Nauvoo as fast as they could.

Now the Lord needed a man to accomplish what seemed to be utterly impossible: to move sixteen thousand Saints out of Nauvoo and across the Mississippi River and get them safely across the plains to a new home somewhere in the West fifteen hundred miles away. Only a leader whom the people would respect and follow, who knew how to organize, inspire, and encourage the Saints could accomplish such a task. That leader would have to be fearless and not easily discouraged. When the Lord needed such a leader, Brigham Young was ready.

What followed was the greatest western migration of settlers in United States history. Brigham called on blacksmiths, carpenters, and mechanics to work day and night making wagons for the long journey. Brigham instructed the Saints to buy teams of horses and oxen and to load their wagons with food, cooking pots and pans, blankets, plows, and tools.

The Saints moved from Nauvoo to Winter Quarters (now Florence), Nebraska, in 1846. Then in 1847, the first small group of pioneers began the one-thousand-mile journey to the Salt Lake Valley—led by their "Moses," Brigham Young. As the first wagon train pulled out, Brigham did not just sit in a comfortable, sheltered wagon whistling happy tunes. A camp historian wrote: "He was out in the rain all day arranging the wagons, pitching tents, chopping wood and so on—until all werecomfortable." At seven o'clock the next morning, Brigham "shouldered his axe and walked to the creek, where he was engaged at chopping and raising a bridge till eleven."

As the journey progressed, Brigham scurried from camp to camp in his buggy attending to hundreds of details each day—settling quarrels, repairing wagon wheels, blessing the sick, and making sure the Saints were having their evening prayers. If the pioneers' cattle began straying off toward a buffalo herd, Brigham was one of the first to jump on a horse and bring them back. If some in the group were, in Brigham's opinion, wasting time by playing cards and dominoes, he didn't hesitate to tell them to repent and use their time more wisely! Above all, Brigham tried to lift their spirits as the Saints tried to get used to the endless walking, little sleep, and the constant dangers of unfriendly Indians and wild animals. One traveler wrote that the wolves "were so bold they would come right into camp and some put their feet on the wagon tongues and sniff in at the end of the wagon."

At the end of a long day, while sitting around the campfire, some of the pioneers would ask Brigham, "How will we know when we arrive at our destination since none of us, including you, have ever been there before?"

Brigham would calmly reply: "Oh, I will know it when I see it. We shall continue to travel the way the Spirit of the Lord directs us. The Lord has reserved for us a good place in the mountains and he will lead us directly to it." He said it with complete confidence, because he knew it was true.

Three-and-a-half months after beginning their trek, the tired but joyful pioneers entered the Salt Lake Valley—on July 24, 1847. Brigham, who had become very ill with Colorado tick fever, sat up from his bed in the back of Wilford Woodruff's wagon and looked out over the valley. He paused for a few minutes as if enwrapped in a vision, and then made his famous statement: "It is enough. This is the right place. Drive on."

For the next thirty years, Brigham worked tirelessly to build up the kingdom of God. He chose a site for a temple, directed the planting of crops, and had the future city surveyed and laid out into ten-acre blocks—each of which was divided into eight building lots. Land was carefully set aside for farms, schools, and parks.

Brigham later returned to the midwest and accompanied other groups of pioneers to the Valley. He started the Perpetual Emigration Fund, which raised money to help bring more than seventy-five thousand converts from other countries to Utah.

With the help of many other devoted, talented members of the Church, President Young presided over the beginnings of the Sunday School, the Primary organization for children, the Retrenchment Society (which later became the Young Women's program), and the reorganizing of the Relief Society, which began in Nauvoo. Hundreds of meetinghouses were built throughout the west, and missionaries were sent to preach the gospel in countries all over the world. The Church grew, and the desert began to "blossom like a rose."

President Young laid the cornerstone of the Salt Lake Temple, dedicated the St. George Temple, had theaters built for the enjoyment of plays and operas, and saw to it that schoolhouses were built to educate the children.

In addition to being the president of the Church, Brigham Young served two four-year terms as governor of the Territory of Utah. He encouraged the settlers to work together to build railroads, dig canals, build fences, and construct roads. Grist mills produced flour from their grain, and cotton and woolen mills hummed continuously. During this time more than three hundred settlements were established throughout the territory. No wonder Utah became known as the "Beehive State"—everyone was busy as bees!

President Young knew recreation made people happy, and his favorite activity was dancing—especially the cotillion, minuet, and square dances. He didn't approve of the waltz. When asked why he liked to dance, he replied, "Besides my own [problems] I have the whole people's burdens, and I get rid of them by kicking them off my toes."

Brigham went to great lengths to provide a happy, healthy home for his family, most of whom lived in the Beehive House and Lion House just east of Temple Square. He had sixteen wives by whom he had fifty-seven children. In the Lion House,he had a children's recreation room built that contained ladders to climb, jumping ropes, roller skates, swings, and wooden swords. Teachers were brought in to teach his children gymnastics, fencing, and dancing.

A large garden and orchard behind the homes provided most of the food for family meals. In autumn the ripened fruit on the trees proved too tempting to the children. A high fence, built to keep children outside and fruit inside, even failed to solve the problem. So President Young got a big, bald eagle who seemed to realize it was his duty to patrol the garden. The eagle proved to be a very effective guard.

Daily chores kept the Young children busy and taught them the value of work. Clarissa Young, one of Brigham's daughters, described one little job she had which she loved:

The family used to eat an early breakfast, but I always waited until ten o'clock when Father had his, so that I might be served with him. In those days he wore quite a long beard, and it was my duty to tie a bib over it in order to protect it from stray crumbs. I suppose one of the reasons why I enjoyed having my breakfast with Father was because he always had the things I liked. There was corn-meal mush and milk, hot doughnuts and syrup, codfish gravy, squabs [young pigeons] from the pigeon house, and some little delicacy from our own garden [such as strawberries or melons].

In the evenings after dinner, a family home evening was held, which included discussion of family problems, singing, and a program of the children reciting poems, playing instruments, and performing skits. At the end of the program, everyone knelt while Brigham offered the evening prayer. After the younger children were put to bed, the wives and older children madepopcorn or molasses candy for a bedtime treat. Brigham often enjoyed a bowl of fresh popped corn with sugar and cream.

So this was Brigham Young—a carpenter, painter, missionary, a trusted friend to Joseph Smith. He was a great colonizer, a tireless missionary, and a doting father. He loved dancing, good food, and the gospel.

Brigham's face could be aflame with anger at someone who dared call Joseph Smith a false prophet, or he could enjoy a hearty laugh after a child said his eyes looked just like a sow's. Brigham was tough enough to wade in icy water up to his chest to get a wagon through a raging river but tender-hearted enough to delight in having a small daughter tie a bib around his neck before breakfast.

When Brigham died on August 29, 1877, in his home in Salt Lake City, the Church as well as the state of Utah suffered a great loss. Several thousand people attended his funeral, then he was buried in a small, peaceful cemetery on First Avenue in Salt Lake City.

For being a barefoot boy from Vermont, Brigham Young had come a long, long way.
