Susan Arrington Madsen, Lord Needed a Prophet ( 1990)

John Taylor

A Proper English Gentleman

The captain and sailors of the British ship were terrified. TThey had left England to sail for America just a few hours earlier and were in the English Channel when they suddenly ran into a dangerous storm. Strong winds blew against the ship, rocking it dangerously from side to side. High waves crashed against the sides, spilling water onto the deck where the crew worked desperately to keep the ship from sinking.

Passing several wrecked ships in the Channel, the crew and passengers became even more frightened as the noise of the surf got louder and they caught glimpses of the dangerous, rocky shoreline. Everyone on board feared for their lives, afraid that at any moment the waves would break the ship apart. Everyone, that is, except one passenger. His name was John Taylor.

John was a relatively young man—twenty-three years old. He was traveling alone and had never been on a ship before. Still, he was calm and unafraid in the midst of this terrible storm.

As John stood on the deck, he was reassured by a still, small voice that whispered, "You must yet go to America and preach the gospel." He later wrote, "As I stood amidst the raging elements, I felt as calm as though I was sitting in a parlor at home. I believed I should reach America and perform my work." John Taylor knew the Lord had something important for him to do in America, and nothing was going to stop him—especially not a ridiculous storm!

Soon, the storm ended, and a few weeks later the ship sailed safely into New York harbor. John Taylor was a man who had great faith and courage—in the face of many kinds of storms. His story begins in England.

John Taylor was born on November 1, 1808, in a small market town called Milnthorpe along the River Kent in northern England. It was a wild and beautiful area with high mountains, waterfalls, and lush green valleys.

John's parents, Agnes and James, saw to it that their ten children studied the Bible each day and attended church regularly. When John was a month old, his parents took him to the nearby Heversham Parish Church where he was christened and blessed to "keep God's holy laws and commandments."

But John was taught to be afraid of Heavenly Father, rather than to feel loved by him. Once, when a mischievous boy pulled down a kite John was flying and tore it up, the future prophet became very angry and said a word he shouldn't have. Suddenly alarmed at what he had done, John left the kite and cried all the way home, fearful that the Lord would never forgive him.

John's father worked for the British government, and the family could afford to send their children to good schools. So John became well-educated, was taught proper manners, and learned to dress like an English gentleman.

The Taylor family lived for a time in Liverpool and later moved to the village of Hale, where young John worked on a family farm they inherited from an uncle. It was John's first experience at plowing, planting seed, and raking hay. His favorite part of farm life was riding horses, even though he was frequently bucked off.

As with the other young people, John needed to learn a trade so he could earn a living. He studied barrel making and later became an apprentice to a woodworker. He was taught how to operate a lathe and make beautiful wooden furniture.

John was a religious young man. He prayed while working out in the fields each day and encouraged his friends to do the same. He grew close to his Heavenly Father during his teenage years and told his parents he sometimes heard the "sweet music of angelic choirs."

John had spiritual experiences that he did not understand at the time but that foretold future events in his life. For instance, while still a small boy, John saw a vision in which "an angel in heaven was holding a trumpet to his mouth, sounding a message to the nations." "What could it mean?" he asked himself.

John joined the Methodist Church in England when he was sixteen and a year later became a traveling minister. But still he felt there was something more God wanted him to do.

Once, while on his way to preach to a small group, John learned more clearly where he should perform his mission. He told a friend, "I have a strong impression on my mind that I have to go to America and preach the gospel." He knew very little about America except for what he had learned in school. John was puzzled as to why he should go there instead of staying in England to preach to his friends and neighbors.

But John's trust in the Lord was great. Six years later (in 1832) he made the voyage—which began so dangerously—to America. He joined his parents and four brothers and sisters who had traveled ahead of him and had settled near Toronto, Canada.

In Canada, John met two people who would change his life. The first was Leonora Cannon, a lovely Englishwoman, who became his wife. The second was a husky, black-haired Mormon missionary named Parley P. Pratt.

When the Taylors met Elder Pratt, he was an apostle of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Even though John was serving as a Methodist preacher, he and his wife felt strongly that their church did not have the complete truth. "This isn't the work the Lord sent me here to do," John said sadly to his wife. Something was still missing.

For three weeks, John followed Elder Pratt from place to place listening to him preach. He was determined to prove Elder Pratt wrong . . . or right. He wrote down his sermons and compared them to the Bible. John and Leonora also studied the Book of Mormon, which Elder Pratt had given them.

To their joy, after a great deal of study and prayer, John and Leonora knew that Elder Pratt was teaching the truth they had been searching for. They were baptized members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in May 1836.

John was not the type to give himself to anything half-heartedly. From this point on, he devoted his entire life to preaching the restored gospel and helping the Church. After being ordained an elder, he joined Elder Pratt, and they taught and baptized a great many people in Canada. His greatest thrill was being able to baptize his own parents, Agnes and James Taylor.

Many things had now become clearer to John. He now knew why the Lord had wanted him to leave England and come to America. He also knew the meaning of the vision he had received as a young boy. The angel had announced a message to the world, and John's heart had been ready to receive it. He was grateful he had listened to the Spirit and trusted in the Lord.

When John first met the Prophet Joseph Smith in Kirtland, Ohio, he felt "a charge like an electrical shock" when he shook his hand. He realized he had met a true prophet of God.

But all was not well in Kirtland. Partly because of the failure of several Church businesses, some of Joseph Smith's former friends turned against him. They criticized him in open meetings and claimed he was a fallen prophet. This angered John Taylor, and he became one of the Prophet's most faithful defenders. He later said:

I testify before God, angels and men, that Joseph Smith is a good, honorable, virtuous man, that his doctrines are good, scriptural, and wholesome. If I did not believe that Joseph Smith is a prophet, I would not be here.

After returning to Canada for a short time, John and

Leonora received word from the Prophet Joseph Smith that he wanted them to join the Saints living in Ohio. "It won't be an easy move," John told his wife. The journey would cover twelve hundred miles, and they had very little money. But John made plans to leave and reassured his worried wife, "God will open out the way." John's faith was rewarded when a man named John Mills said he would travel with the Taylors and share his covered sleigh, wagons, teams, food, and clothing with them.

The Taylors arrived safely in Ohio, where John was called, by a revelation to Joseph Smith, to be an apostle. Upon receiving his call, he said:

When I first entered upon Mormonism, I did it with my eyes open; I counted the cost. I looked upon it as a life-long job and I considered that I was not only enlisted for time, but for eternity and did not wish to shrink now, although I feel my incompetency.

John Taylor and other members of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles were soon called on a mission to Great Britain. This mission was a great sacrifice for the Taylor family. John's wife and children lived in a twenty-foot square room in an abandoned army barracks in Iowa for the two years while he was away.

John became very sick as he left for his mission, but he knew the Lord would help him. On the way to New York, John was so weak from illness that he fainted along the roadside. His companion, Wilford Woodruff, found a doctor to help him, but John insisted that they continue their journey after resting for a few days. In New York City, John found he had only one cent in his pocket. But several people donated money to pay for his passage on the ship to England.

John served an excellent mission. He was proud to be able to preach the gospel in his boyhood town of Liverpool, England. He was the first Mormon missionary to preach in Ireland, and he baptized the family of his wife's brother, George Cannon. He helped organize several hundred Saints who emigrated to the United States, and he set up branches of the Church in every major city in Great Britain.

When John and the other apostles returned from England on July 1, 1841, hundreds of Saints in Nauvoo gathered to welcome them home. Joseph Smith was the first to shake their hands.

John was an excellent writer, and Joseph Smith asked him to be the editor of the Times and Seasons, a newspaper printed by the Church. He also published a weekly newspaper called the Nauvoo Neighbor. In his articles, John continued to defend the Church and the Prophet Joseph Smith against criticism. He was nicknamed the "Defender of the Faith."

On June 27, 1844, tragedy struck, and John Taylor was there. Joseph and Hyrum were unfairly arrested and placed in Carthage Jail. John Taylor and another apostle, Willard Richards, stayed with the Smiths, saying, "We intend to do all we can to protect you."

Inside the small, secluded jail cell, Joseph Smith asked John to sing one of his favorite songs, "A Poor Wayfaring Man of Grief." John had a beautiful voice, and his singing comforted the Prophet.

Although these imprisoned men were promised protection, several dozen men, their faces painted black with axle grease, easily passed the guards at the front of the jailhouse. They raced up the wooden stairs and, firing their guns, burst into the room where the four Church leaders were being held.

The Prophet Joseph and Hyrum were shot and killed. A bullet hit John in the leg, and another hit his chest, striking his silver pocket watch, which was in his vest pocket. The watch saved his life by stopping a bullet that would have struck his heart. After John fell to the floor, three more bullets hit him.

When the mob saw that the Prophet Joseph was dead, they immediately fled. Willard Richards, a huge man weighing over three hundred pounds, was not hurt, and he covered John with a mattress for protection, then went to get help. John was later taken to his home in Nauvoo where he lay ill for many weeks. He had been badly hurt, but the Lord still had work for John to do, and he soon recovered.

Three years later, in 1847, the new president of the Church, Brigham Young, asked John Taylor to lead a group of more than fifteen hundred Saints across the plains. His group included 600 wagons, 124 horses, and 887 cows. They arrived in the Salt Lake Valley October 5, after traveling for more than three months. This was a demanding experience for an English gentleman who was used to having things neat and tidy.

John Taylor had a bright mind and a keen intellect, and the Church made good use of his talents. He served three more missions for the Church, returning again to England and, in 1849, serving in France and Germany. While in France, he directed the translation of the Book of Mormon into French and German. Later he presided over branches of the Church in the Eastern United States.

After John returned from his mission to the East, he remained in the Salt Lake Valley and was able to spend more time with his family. He had seven wives and thirty-five children. He especially enjoyed telling his children stories from Church history, letting them feel the bullet from the day he was nearly killed in Carthage Jail, which was still lodged under the skin of his left leg. The famous watch that saved his life is now in a museum.

John Taylor became the third president of the Church in 1880, after the death of Brigham Young. As president, he was concerned about the Church members who were especially poor. He once arranged for one thousand cows and five thousand sheep to be given to the poorest members who had lost their livestock during a severe winter. At this time, many Saints also owed money to the Church. They had had to borrow it to bring themselves to Utah from foreign countries. President Taylor erased half the debt they owed. It was a happy time for these people.

A careful dresser, President Taylor usually wore a dark suit and highly polished boots, shined to perfection by one of his sons. He wore a red velvet coat on special occasions. He was often called "an English gentleman" because of his noble and courteous manner.

President Taylor's birthdays were always grand occasions for the whole family. An evening party was held, and General Authorities were invited to enjoy the food, music, and dancing. One of his children wrote, "He was the king, and we were his princes and princesses."

President Taylor tended to be rather fussy about having things orderly and straight. Once, before leaving on a trip, he showed his sons how to plant the garden so the plants would be in straight, evenly spaced rows. He took great pride in his garden. After he left, the boys were in such a hurry to go and play with their friends that they planted by the "guess method." When President Taylor returned home a couple of weeks later and saw sprouts coming up in all sorts of odd places, he was silent for a long time. He finally said to them, "Well, we're not very proud of this, are we?" He had them dig it up and start over again.

President Taylor dedicated the Logan Temple, started weekly priesthood meetings, and instructed Church leaders to begin holding stake conferences. He continued using his wonderful writing talent to teach others the gospel by writing articles for newspapers, books, and pamphlets.

When President Taylor was seventy-eight years old, his health began to fail, and he went to live at the home of a friend in Kaysville, Utah. He died there on July 25, 1887. His son, Frederick W. Taylor said:

He was one of the great spirits of this world, spending most of his days in the service of God. When I think of his useful life and noble example I feel like praying that we may follow in his footsteps and prove faithful to ourselves and fellow man. I am sure that his work goes on in the sphere where he is.
