Susan Arrington Madsen, Lord Needed a Prophet ( 1990)

Wilford Woodruff

A Dangerous Young Man to Be Around

Wilford Woodruff was dangerous to be around. Oh, he Wwasn't mean or cranky. He didn't have a bad temper. In fact he was a gentle, hard-working boy whose greatest desire was to someday meet a real prophet of God.

But being around him was still dangerous. Wilford had been in more accidents, it seemed, than any person in the state of Connecticut. He got an early start. When he was three, he fell into a huge pot of boiling water. He was immediately pulled out, but he was burned badly. When he was five, Wilford fell down a flight of stairs and broke his arm.

Once he was feeding pumpkins to his father's cattle in a pasture. A large bull was eating too much, Wilford decided, so he took a pumpkin away from him. The bull was so angry that he charged Wilford—who held the pumpkin in his arms and ran down the hill as fast as he could go! With the bull right on his heels, Wilford tripped, fell to the ground, and the pumpkin rolled out of his arms. He was astonished when the bull leaped over him, ran his horns into the pumpkin, and tore it to pieces!

Wilford also broke his leg while playing at his father's sawmill. He was kicked in the stomach by an ox. He fell from the top of a hay wagon, and the load of hay toppled over on him. Another time a wagon overturned on Wilford and his father, and he once fell out of a tree and landed fifteen feet below flat on his back.

As if those accidents weren't enough, Wilford nearly drowned in the Farmington River, nearly froze to death after falling asleep in a blinding snowstorm, was bitten by a sick dog, and at age seventeen was thrown from a horse—breaking one leg and injuring both ankles. There were many more dangerous and hair-raising experiences, but you get the idea: It was dangerous to be around Wilford Woodruff.

How did he survive so many close calls? How was he able to escape death so many times? Wilford answered that himself:

It seemed to me at times as though some invisible power were watching my footsteps in search of an opportunity to destroy my life. I therefore ascribe my preservation on earth to the watchcare of a merciful Providence, whose hand has been stretched out to rescue me from death when I was in the presence of the most threatening dangers.

Wilford felt sure his life was being spared for a special reason. He often thought of something he was told by a man called "the Old Prophet Mason." Robert Mason, who lived near the Woodruff family in Farmington, Connecticut, was one of the few people in his day who believed in prophets and apostles. He also believed in revelation—that every person was entitled to have his own revelation from God if he prayed sincerely and was worthy to receive it.

Brother Mason visited Wilford in 1830 and told him about a vision he had received thirty years earlier. He had been praying to know the true religion. The Spirit of the Lord told Brother Mason, "My Church is not organized among men in the generation to which you belong; but in the days of your children it shall be made manifest with all the gifts and the blessings enjoyed by the Saints in past ages." Brother Mason then put his hand on Wilford's shoulder and added: "Wilford, I shall never partake of this fruit in the flesh, but you will. And you, my boy, will become a conspicuous actor in the new kingdom."

Wilford didn't understand at first what Brother Mason was trying to tell him. But he tucked it away in his mind and thought of it frequently as he went about doing the two things he liked most: working and fishing.

Wilford's work mostly took place at the flour mill and saw mill that his family owned in Farmington. Both mills were powered by a large paddle wheel turned by a stream that ran past their farm. Wilford's father, Aphek, and his grandfather, Eldad, were very hard workers, and they saw to it that Wilford wasn't just sitting around whittling sticks. Wilford often worked eighteen hours a day.

But when his work was completed, Wilford made a beeline for the stream where he and his brother Azmon loved to fish. The two of them were known as the best fishermen in the area. Wilford was born March 1, 1807, near the banks of this stream, which was full of trout, and some people joked that he began fishing the very next day. He was one of the first in the area to learn how to make artificial flies out of birds' feathers with a hook concealed in each. The fish liked them so well he once caught two fish on one hook!

Wilford discovered an island in the middle of the stream by their farm and claimed it as his own private getaway—a place to which he often went to be alone. When he escaped to this island and lay on his back looking up at the clouds, his thoughts frequently turned to his Heavenly Father. Wilford spent hours, surrounded by wildflowers, praying that he might understand the scriptures he read each day. He wanted to know how he should live. With so many different churches and religions in the area, he wanted to know God's will.

Wilford, unfortunately, had no memory of his mother, Beulah Thompson Woodruff. She died when Wilford was just fifteen months old. She was only twenty-eight when she died of "spotted fever." Within a short time, Wilford's father married Azubah Hart, and she lovingly raised Wilford and his two older brothers, Azmon and Thompson.

In 1833, when Wilford was twenty-six and old enough to be on his own, he decided to move near Richland, New York, where he and Azmon bought a farm. When they weren't farming, they were (of course) fishing. One morning they caught five hundred salmon!

It was there in New York, in late December, that Wilford's life changed in an unexpected way. Azmon's wife, Elizabeth, answered a knock on the door of their home and found two Mormon missionaries standing on the front step. Wilford and Azmon weren't home, so the two elders told Elizabeth to tell the brothers that the missionaries would be preaching at a nearby school house that evening. They would love to have the Woodruffs come and listen to their message about a newly restored church and gospel.

When Wilford arrived home and heard about the missionaries, he remembered Brother Mason's prophecy that he would be a "conspicuous actor in the new kingdom." Without waiting for supper, Wilford raced out to his horse and galloped to the schoolhouse! When he arrived, the room was already packed with people. But Wilford eased his way through the crowd and finally got a seat at a writing desk at the very front. He wanted to see and hear everything.

What Wilford saw and heard that night filled his soul with the Spirit of God. "I felt that I had just heard the first true gospel sermon in my life," he later said. It was exactly what Wilford had been looking for: prophets, apostles, revelation, spiritual gifts. These were things Wilford knew from studying the Bible, and he knew they were important. He was so excited that he jumped to his feet at the end of the sermon, turned to the crowd, and said, "Friends and neighbors, I feel to tell you not to oppose these men. They are true servants of God. They have preached to us the pure gospel of Jesus Christ. I witness to you it is true!"

Two days later, on December 31, Wilford and Azmon were baptized at a nearby lake. Knowing Wilford, however, you may have guessed that he had an accident or two on his way to the baptism. While getting ready for the ride, his horse suddenly kicked the hat right off Wilford's head. Two inches lower and the hoof probably would have killed the future Prophet. Just ten minutes later, while driving this same horse and another hitched to a sled, several loose boards on the floor of the sled gave way, and Wilford suddenly fell to the ground. With Wilford holding onto the harnesses with all his might, the two frightened horses raced downhill, dragging him along. Luckily, the ground was slick with snow, and he stopped the horses without serious injury.

When Wilford finally got to the lake, the ground at the lake's edge was covered with three feet of snow. Chunks of ice were floating in the water. Nevertheless, Wilford eagerly stepped into the water, was baptized by immersion, and came up filled with joy and excitement. He didn't care that the water was icy cold. All he could think about was having found the Lord's church. Wilford made a promise to the Lord that day to do anything, go anywhere, and sacrifice everything, if need be, for his Heavenly Father.

Wilford Woodruff kept that promise. In fact, Wilford was so loyal and dependable that he was called "Wilford the Faithful."

After his baptism, Wilford's youthful dream of meeting a true prophet of God came true. He rode on horseback to Kirtland, Ohio, and there met the Prophet Joseph Smith. Joseph invited Wilford to stay at his home. While there, he helped Joseph tan a wolf-skin to use on his wagon seat. He also met Brigham Young and helped him put a good wooden handle on a butcher knife. He learned that these spiritual, loving men were also hard workers.

With Wilford's strong testimony of the gospel came a desire to become a missionary. He wanted to preach. Wilford went into the woods and prayed that he might be able to go on a mission for the Church. He did not have to wait long. Later that same day, a fellow Church member, Elias Higbee, met him on a road and said that the Lord had revealed to him that Brother Wilford Woodruff should be called on a mission. Wilford smiled and said, "I'm ready." He was given a companion, several copies of the Book of Mormon (which he carried in a small traveling bag strapped on his back), and together he and his companion started out. By the end of his mission, Wilford had walked hundreds of miles through Arkansas, Tennessee, and Kentucky.

It was hard work. They encountered bears, were chased by wolves, and waded through swamps up to their waists in mud and water. They were hungry most of the time, too. Some people were kind and fed them a meal or two. Others slammed doors in their faces and turned them away hungry. But they grew spiritually and baptized many people.

Wilford Woodruff became, in fact, one of the greatest missionaries in the Church. After his marriage to Phoebe Carter, when he was thirty years old, he served another mission—this time to the Fox Islands off the coast of Maine. Two years later, when Wilford was thirty-two, he was ordained an apostle. He then served two missions in England, the second one as president of the mission. While in England, Wilford was responsible for baptizing over eighteen hundred people. Two hundred of the people he baptized had been ministers for other churches.

Some people, however, were angry that the Mormon missionaries were so successful. They were upset because they felt that the elders were taking too many members away from the other churches and were splitting up families. Because of such ill feelings, Wilford had to baptize some of the converts late at night. Once, when he baptized a family at midnight, a mob gathered and began throwing stones from the edge of the pond. One large rock hit Wilford on the head and almost knocked him down, but he completed the baptism.

During this difficult time, the Lord helped Wilford in many ways. Sacred experiences seemed even more plentiful than dangerous accidents. Heavenly messengers visited Wilford. One night, when he felt that Satan was trying to discourage him, he prayed for help. Three personages dressed in white appeared and "healed him." He immediately felt at peace.

Another time, while traveling at night on horseback through a heavy rainstorm, he and his companions were suddenly surrounded by a bright beam of light. It saved them from taking a dangerous trail and lit the way to a friendly house nearby.

Wilford faithfully recorded all these experiences in his journal—which he wrote in every day for sixty-three years! Wilford wrote not only about the most important events of his life, but also he described his everyday activities: buying oranges from a farmer in London, suffering from sea sickness while crossing the ocean, digging for clams, or walking on sore feet. He wrote down many of Joseph Smith's sermons, which are precious to the Church today. He often decorated the journal pages with elaborate drawings and illustrations. Wilford's journals are now very valuable. They tell us a great deal about the history of the Church.

In 1847 Wilford and his family crossed the plains with the first pioneer company and entered the Salt Lake Valley alongside Brigham Young. He continued to serve as an apostle and missionary and was Church historian for more than thirty years.He was also a government and business leader and joined scientific, medical, and gardening societies.

Wilford had a large family. He lived the principle of plural marriage and had five wives and thirty-three children. One of the things Wilford enjoyed doing with his family was working outdoors. Even as an elderly man, he could be seen outside hoeing and planting on his farm alongside his grandchildren.

On one occasion, when he was ninety years old, Wilford was disturbed that one of his grandchildren finished hoeing a patch of vegatables just a little before he did. Wilford wiped his brow and said, "I'm getting old. That's the first time in my life that one of my grandchildren has ever outdone me in hoeing."

Wilford won many ribbons for his farm projects at the territorial fairs. He won first prizes for best fenced and cultivated farm of not less than twenty acres, best acre of sugar cane, best three acres of squash, best six acres of sugar beets, best bush beans, best three cantaloupes, best apples, and best grapes. One year he produced one thousand five hundred gallons of syrup from his three acres of sugar cane. That would cover a lot of Saturday morning flapjacks!

In 1877, Wilford had a marvelous vision while in the St. George Temple. He was visited by the signers of the Declaration of Independence and other important people in history. They told him they wanted to have their temple work done for them. Wilford was then baptized for more than a hundred people, including Thomas Jefferson, Benjamin Franklin, Christopher Columbus, and Napoleon Bonaparte.

After serving as an apostle for fifty years, Wilford Woodruff became the fourth president of the Church in 1889. He was eighty-three years old. At this age, most other people were "taking it easy." President Woodruff, however, was just beginning one of the busiest times of his life. He knew it was going to be a great challenge. After being sustained as prophet of the Church, he said to the Saints:

This is a high and responsible position for any man to occupy and a position that needs great wisdom. God has certainly chosen the weak things of this world to perform [His] work on the earth. May thy servant Wilford be prepared for whatever is required at his hands by the God of Heaven.

President Woodruff did many important things while serving as prophet: he dedicated the Salt Lake Temple, he changed fast day from the first Thursday of each month to the first Sunday of each month, Utah became a state while he was president, and he received "The Manifesto," the revelation in which Heavenly Father told him that the members of the Church should no longer live the law of plural marriage.

Wilford's love of fishing continued throughout his life. When he returned from one of his missions to England, he proudly brought home a new kind of fishing pole that had just been invented: a fly rod. While crossing the plains with Brigham Young, he fished the streams all the way along, providing dinner many times for some of his group. Even after becoming president of the Church, Wilford was often seen out in a boat on a stream or lake, quietly fishing.

President Wilford Woodruff died September 2, 1898, at the age of ninety-two, in San Francisco, California, where he had gone for health reasons. He had kept his promise to go anywhere, do anything, and sacrifice whatever was necessary for the gospel. To the end he remained: "Wilford the Faithful."
