Susan Arrington Madsen, Lord Needed a Prophet ( 1990)

Lorenzo Snow

Soldier for the Lord

Lorenzo Snow dreamed of being a soldier. Both of his grand- Lfathers had served in the American Revolutionary War, and he loved hearing again and again the exciting stories of danger in their service to their country. Lorenzo often sat at the knee of his Grandfather Snow, listening to his military adventures. He remembered vividly one of his Grandfather's most hair-raising experiences:

While fighting for the freedom of our country, [Grandfather Snow] was taken prisoner by the British troops, and confined in a dreary cell. He was so scantily fed that when his fellow-prisoner by his side died from exhaustion, Grandfather reported him to the jailor as sick in bed, in order to obtain the amount of food for both—keeping him covered in their blankets as long as he dared to remain with a decaying body!

Such stories horrified some of the other grandchildren, but they made Lorenzo tingle with excitement. He even talked his sister Eliza into sewing a military uniform for him. He called it his "freedom suit." When she completed it and Lorenzo tried it on, they both agreed it was "beautiful and magnificent." Lorenzo felt proud and imagined himself out on the battlefield leading his troops to victory.

Lorenzo would become a soldier all right, but a very different kind of soldier than the one of his boyhood dreams. He would join the "Lord's army" and be sent forth to countries all over the world to preach the gospel. Lorenzo would celebrate the victory of bringing many wonderful people into the Lord's church. The weapons would not be guns or swords but scripture and truth. But never fear—the danger and excitement would still be there.

Lorenzo was born April 3, 1814, on a farm in Mantua, Portage County, Ohio. He had four older sisters and two younger brothers. His parents, Oliver and Rosetta Pettibone Snow, had met and married in Massachusetts before moving to Ohio to help settle a new area. Oliver was a rugged and hard-working man who served as a county commissioner and a justice of the peace. If anyone broke the law or got into a quarrel that couldn't be settled, Oliver Snow was the man to see.

The Snow family belonged to the Baptist Church, but they welcomed people of all religions to their home. Their farm was some distance from town, and they frequently offered a warm place to sleep and breakfast to any traveler who became lost or stranded in a winter snowstorm.

One such traveler stopped at their home and changed their lives forever. During the winter of 1831-32, a tall, twenty-six-year-old man with sandy-colored hair named Joseph Smith, Jr., knocked on their door.

The Snow family had heard of Joseph Smith two years earlier and were interested in hearing from this man who called himself a "prophet." Eliza was especially fascinated with Joseph. "I scrutinized his face as closely as I could without attracting his attention," she later wrote, "and decided that his was an honest face."

Lorenzo listened with interest, but his mind was distracted by other things. At least for now, he was thinking more about school. Lorenzo had always wanted to be a military officer, and for that he needed a college education. So, when he was twenty-one years old, he saddled his horse and began the twenty-five-mile ride east to Oberlin College. But Lorenzo met a man along the way who would bring him to the restored gospel.

Elder David W. Patten, an apostle of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, was returning home on horseback from a mission to Canada when he and Lorenzo crossed paths. Elder Patten was more than happy to tell young Lorenzo about the gospel as they rode along together. Lorenzo was impressed with his strong testimony. He wrote:

I felt pricked in my heart. The last thing [Elder Patten] said to me after bearing his testimony was that I should go to the Lord before retiring at night and ask him for myself [if the gospel is true]. This I did. It was the turning point of my life.

During his year at college, Lorenzo used his spare time to study "Mormonism" inside and out. He went to Kirtland, Ohio, and listened to the Prophet Joseph Smith speak several times. "As I looked upon him and listened," Lorenzo wrote, "I thought to myself that a man bearing such a wonderful testimony as he did and having such a countenance as he possessed could hardly be a false prophet."

Lorenzo was baptized in June, 1836. Soon afterward, he went into a wooded area to pray:

I had no sooner opened my lips in an effort to pray, than I heard a sound, just above my head, like the rustling of silken robes and immediately the Spirit of God descended upon me, completely enveloping my whole person, filling me, from the crown of my head to the soles of my feet, and O, the joy and happiness I felt. . . . I then received a perfect knowledge that God lives, that Jesus Christ is the son of God, of the restoration of the holy Priesthood, and the fullness of the Gospel.

It was one of the most spiritual experiences of Lorenzo's life. After having such a thrilling witness, he was fully ready to become a "soldier" for the Lord's church.

Lorenzo immediately requested permission to go on a mission. Not only was this request granted, but he would eventually go on six missions for the Church. He taught the gospel in his boyhood state of Ohio, as well as Missouri, Kentucky, Illinois, the southern United States, Italy, Malta, Switzerland, Holland, India, Hawaii, and Great Britain, where he gave Queen Victoria and her husband Prince Albert a copy of the Book of Mormon.

While serving in Ohio, Lorenzo had a dream one night in which he saw an angry mob attacking him in a schoolhouse. The next day, two well-dressed men came to him and asked him to come to a schoolhouse where a crowd was waiting to hear his message. Remembering the dream, Lorenzo refused to come. They tried harder to get him to come, but Lorenzo would not. They finally left, shouting angry words at him. Lorenzo later learned that a mob had been waiting for him at the school. They weren't waiting to hear him preach, however. They were waiting to attack him.

Another time, in Kentucky, Lorenzo was warming himself by a fire at the end of a meeting. A rough character standing beside him, who was part of a gang waiting to attack him, accidentally bumped against Lorenzo and felt his scriptures in a jacket pocket. (The scriptures were a gift from Joseph Smith, Sr.) The man thought the object in Lorenzo's jacket was a gun, and he immediately left without causing a fight.

At the end of his mission in Kentucky, Lorenzo walked five hundred miles back to Ohio in the winter. When he arrived in Ohio at the home of relatives, Lorenzo was so thin and exhausted that they didn't even recognize him at first and refused to let him in their home.

In 1840, by inspiration from the Holy Ghost, Lorenzo was able to put into simple words a new principle, which would become a very important part of the restored gospel. Lorenzo expressed the principle this way: "As man now is, God once was. As God now is, man may become." When Lorenzo talked to the Prophet Joseph Smith about this principle, Joseph told him it was "true doctrine and a revelation from God."

Two of Lorenzo's best friends (believe it or not) were his sisters, Leonora and Eliza. They also joined the Church, and the three of them gave each other much love and support while the Church suffered through difficult times of persecution. Once while they were traveling together in a wagon from Kirtland to Far West, Missouri, Lorenzo got a terrible headache that lasted for days. His sister Eliza kindly held his head in her hands and on her lap during the journey to cushion it from the wagon's rough movements.

In 1846, the Saints were driven out of Nauvoo, Illinois, and a group of pioneers lived for a short time in Pisgah, Iowa. President Brigham Young asked Lorenzo to preside over this group for several months. Lorenzo was an energetic leader. He tried to keep everybody happy and content by organizing activities and gatherings. The people frequently came to Lorenzo's home, a fifteen-by-thirty-foot log cabin with a dirt floor, lit by candles in scooped-out turnips. Their evenings were spent in dancing, singing, trading riddles, giving speeches, telling stories, and (of course) having refreshments. Who knows, maybe they had the turnips for the refreshments.

The following spring in 1848, Lorenzo was called by Brigham Young to lead a large group of pioneers to the Salt Lake Valley. His company included 321 people, 99 wagons, 20 horses, 3 mules, 388 oxen, 188 cows, 38 loose cattle, 139 sheep, 25 pigs, 159 chickens. They also had 10 cats, 26 dogs, and 2 doves.

Soon after his company's safe arrival in the Salt Lake Valley on September 22, 1848, Lorenzo was called to the Council of the Twelve Apostles. He was surprised to receive such an important calling, but he promised to "be inspired by the Holy Ghost" and to help President Brigham Young by doing whatever he was asked to do.

As an apostle, Lorenzo Snow led a very busy life. He served as a counselor in the First Presidency to President Brigham Young, he served in the territorial legislature for thirty years, and he went on short missions for the Church. One of Lorenzo's most enjoyable missions was to the Holy Land to see where the Savior had lived while on the earth.

While serving a mission to Hawaii, Lorenzo nearly drowned in a terrifying accident at sea. While traveling between two islands, Lorenzo was riding in a small boat with several others when they were suddenly caught in a storm. The strong winds sent mountainous waves racing toward their boat "swifter than a race horse." When one especially big wave came by, their boat flipped over, tossing the men in all directions.

When other members of the group finally came up from the churning water, coughing and gasping for air, Lorenzo was nowhere in sight. They searched frantically for several minutes, unable to find him. Then, one of the Hawaiian natives felt Lorenzo's body beneath the water and pulled him up. Lorenzo was not breathing and appeared to be dead.

They hurried Lorenzo to shore, where the Elders administered to him, pleading with Heavenly Father "to spare his life that he might return to his family and home." Working quickly, they placed Lorenzo's body over an empty barrel and rolled him back and forth until the water came out of his lungs . A small crowd had gathered on shore to watch their efforts. They thought that any help was useless—he was already dead.

Then, the elders felt inspired to give him mouth-to-mouth resuscitation, a technique rarely used at that time. Soon they noticed a slight wink in Lorenzo's eyes, and he began to respond. Lorenzo was alive! Nearly an hour had passed since their boat had capsized, but he was going to be all right.

Lorenzo was glad to get home safe and sound after the near-drowning. He had a large family to take care of. Lorenzo Snow had nine wives over a period of many years and forty-one children. He went to great effort to build homes that would be happy places for his children. In one of their houses, Lorenzo added a large room with a stage that the children used as a small theater. They loved putting on plays for their friends and neighbors.

Lorenzo Snow had been living in the Salt Lake Valley only five years when President Young gave him a challenging new assignment: to become the leader of a new community in Box Elder County, Utah, sixty miles north of Salt Lake City. The settlement would later be known as Brigham City. Some settlers were already living in the area, but they needed an energetic leader to organize things and inspire them to work harder.

When Lorenzo first arrived in the settlement with fifty new families, he was discouraged to see the farms and buildings in such poor condition. He complained, "Even the meetinghouse with its dirt floor and earth roof was more fit to be visited by bed bugs than the Saints."

Lorenzo worked hard to improve life in Brigham City. He started a public school system, a theatre company, and businesses of all kinds. Hammering could be heard all day long, and new buildings went up everywhere. During the day a visitor could see settlers making everything from saddles, shoes, and hats to brooms, wagons, cheese, butter, and furniture. Some evenings, the Saints flocked to the social hall to dance to the accompaniment of a violin, cornet, or guitar. They fasted each month to raise money for the poor people and held outdoor band concerts and grand parades on special occasions. Under the leadership of Lorenzo Snow, Brigham City soon became a busy, happy community.

When Lorenzo Snow received his patriarchal blessing from Joseph Smith, Sr., he was promised:

Thou hast a great work to perform in thy day and generation. Thou shalt have faith even like that of the brother of Jared. There shall not be a mightier man on earth than thou. If expedient the dead shall rise and come forth at thy bidding.

This blessing came true for Lorenzo Snow. While conducting a church conference, he was handed a note that said a young girl who lived nearby had died. The note asked him if he would help make arrangements for her funeral. Elder Snow immediately excused himself from the meeting and went to the girl's home where her family was mourning her death.

After praying to the Lord for help, Elder Snow asked the father of the family if he had any consecrated oil in the house. The father was surprised to hear him ask for this since his daughter had already died, but he got Elder Snow the oil. Lorenzo then anointed the girl and blessed her to come back to life and be healed because she had not finished her work here on the earth. Elder Snow then told the parents not to feel sad anymore. Their daughter would soon come back to life.

Within an hour the daughter opened her eyes, sat up in bed, and asked, "Where is he? Where is he?" Her mother said, "Where is who?" The daughter replied, "Where is Brother Snow? He called me back to this earth." Ella Jensen, the girl who was healed, lived a long life and became the mother of eight children.

Lorenzo Snow served five years beginning in 1893 as the first president of the Salt Lake Temple. In fact, he was in that temple when he had his greatest and most humbling spiritual experience. He told his granddaughter Allie Young Pond exactly what happened, and she described it this way:

One evening while I was visiting Grandpa Snow in his room in the Salt Lake Temple, I remained until the doorkeepers had gone and the night-watchmen had not yet come in. Grandpa said he would take me to the main front entrance and let me out that way. He got his bunch of keys from his dresser. After we left his room and while we were still in the large corridor leading into the celestial room, I was walking several steps ahead of grandpa when he stopped me and said: "Wait a moment, Allie, I want to tell you something. It was right here that the Lord Jesus Christ appeared to me at the time of the death of President Woodruff. He instructed me to go right ahead and reorganize the First Presidency of the Church at once and not wait as had been done after the death of the previous presidents. I was to succeed President Woodruff" [as president of the Church].

Then grandpa came a step nearer and held out his left hand and said: "He stood right here, about three feet above the floor. It looked as though He stood on a plate of solid Gold."

Grandpa told me what a glorious personage the Savior is and described His hands, feet, countenance and beautiful white robes, all of which were of such a glory of whiteness and brightness that he could hardly gaze upon Him.

Then he came another step nearer and put his right hand on my head and said: "Now granddaughter, I want you to remember that this is the testimony of your grandfather, that he told you with his own lips that he actually saw the Savior, here in the Temple, and talked with Him face to face."

Lorenzo Snow was eighty-four years old when he became president of the Church in 1898. In spite of his age, President Snow made great and lasting contributions to the Church as its fifth prophet, seer, and revelator.

At this time the Church owed a great deal of money to many businesses and banks and was struggling to pay its bills. Many thought the Church would fail and disappear because of itsmoney problems. Then, while traveling to St. George, Utah, during a severe drought, President Snow felt inspired by the Holy Ghost to tell the Saints at a special conference that they had been "neglecting the law of tithing." If they would begin from that day forth to pay a full tithing, he promised them the rains would come and they would "become a prosperous people."

On his way back to Salt Lake City from St. George, President Snow stopped along the way at sixteen small Utah communities and gave them the same message.

The Saints took his counsel to heart and the amount of tithing paid to the Church grew in leaps and bounds over the next months. Their obedience to this principle helped the Church solve its financial problems. And, as a result of the Saints' obedience, the rains came as President Snow had promised they would.

Lorenzo Snow served as president of the Church for three years and died October 10, 1901, at the age of eighty-seven. The children of the Church paid special tribute to him at his funeral. As the procession moved along the streets of Salt Lake City, over one thousand Primary-aged children who were dressed in their Sunday best lined the streets and formed an "honor guard" for the Lord's soldier. They threw flowers in the path of the procession as it moved toward the Tabernacle. After the services, President Snow was buried in Brigham City, Utah.

A minister once said of President Lorenzo Snow: "His spirit is as gentle as a child. You are introduced to him and you are pleased with him. You converse with him and you like him. You visit with him long and you love him!"
