Susan Arrington Madsen, Lord Needed a Prophet ( 1990)

Joseph F. Smith

An Orphan at the Age of Thirteen

It was late at night, and five-year-old Joseph F. Smith was lying Iin bed. But his eyes were wide open, and he was having trouble getting to sleep. It had rained earlier in the day and then had grown hot and muggy.

Although still very young, Joseph F. was old enough to understand that his father, Hyrum Smith, was in great danger. Three days earlier, Hyrum had left their home in Nauvoo, Illinois, with his younger brother, the Prophet Joseph Smith. They went to a nearby town, Carthage, to answer charges made by people who accused them of wrong-doing. Hyrum and Joseph knew they were in danger because of the destruction of the Nauvoo Expositor press, a paper that printed vicious lies about them and the Church. But they were willing to go and clear up any misunderstandings.

Now, as Joseph F. lay awake, he remembered saying goodbye to his father. He had been standing out by the road in front of their home. Hyrum rode up to him on horseback and said, "Son, we have been ordered to go to Carthage to meet with the governor." Then leaning forward from his saddle, he picked Joseph F. up. "I must leave you now," he said tenderly. "Be a brave boy and help your dear mother all you can." He kissed his young son, gave him a warm hug, and carefully set him back down on the ground.

Hyrum rode away with several other men. Young Joseph F. remembered wondering if he would ever see his father alive again. He knew that many people wanted to see the Church and its leaders destroyed.

Suddenly, Joseph F. sat up in bed as he heard someone knocking loudly on the window downstairs. He heard the words that broke his heart. A man outside the window called out in a trembling voice, "Sister Smith, Sister Smith, we bring you sad news. Your husband has been killed."

Joseph F.'s father, Hyrum, and the Prophet Joseph had been shot by a mob as they were being held at Carthage Jail. The date was June 27, 1844, and Hyrum was forty-four years old. Young Joseph F. would remember it as the saddest day of his life.

Heartbroken and frightened, little Joseph F. lay awake the rest of the night listening to the sobbing of his mother. Now as never before, his life would center around her, his faithful, courageous mother, Mary Fielding Smith.

Hyrum Smith had married Mary Fielding on December 24, 1837, after his first wife, Jerusha, died while giving birth to their fifth child. Mary accepted the responsibility of caring for Hyrum's children, believing it was the will of the Lord.

Joseph F. was born at a time when the Smith family was suffering its greatest trials. Joseph F. (whose full name was Joseph Fielding Smith) was born November 13, 1838, in Far West, Missouri. At the time of his birth, his father had been unfairly put in jail, tried for a variety of crimes, and even sentenced to death. Only the courage of an officer who refused to carry out the order to execute him saved Hyrum's life.

One night, while Hyrum was in prison, several angry men broke into the Smith home, pushing the women and children into a corner of the main room. They began ransacking the house, looking for Hyrum's papers and other valuables. Without knowing it, they threw a mattress on top of little baby Joseph F., who lay sleeping on a nearby bed. The baby was discovered soon after the men rode away. Little Joseph F. could easily have suffocated, but the life of the future prophet was saved.

When Joseph F. was just two months old, he was laid in a wagon bed alongside his mother for a special trip. Together with his Aunt Mercy Fielding Thompson, his cousin Mary Jane, and his Aunt Emma Smith, they traveled forty miles on a rough and bumpy road to visit Hyrum and Joseph in Liberty Jail. The cell where the prisoners were held was crowded and filthy. But even in such a sorry place, Hyrum rejoiced to see for the first time his infant son.

Joseph F.'s father was a handsome man. Over six feet tall, dark and broad-shouldered, Hyrum was a faithful companion to his brother, the Prophet Joseph. He helped Joseph organize the Church in 1830, served as the Church patriarch, and was one of the eight witnesses who saw and held the gold plates from which Joseph Smith translated the Book of Mormon.

Perhaps some evenings Hyrum sat Joseph F. on his knee in front of the fireplace and told him about the golden plates. He may have told of the unusual writing on the plates, which could be translated only with the help of God. Hyrum surely must have described how very heavy they were—about sixty pounds, the weight of a ten-year-old-child.

After the death of Hyrum and Joseph, President Brigham Young told the Saints that they must leave Nauvoo if they were to find peace. Their destination would be a place they believed God had prepared for them. There they hoped to worship God without fear of persecution.

Joseph F., at the age of seven, drove their ox team two hundred miles to Winter Quarters, a temporary stopping place on the west bank of the Missouri River. His five-year-old sister, Martha Ann, often sat by him on the driver's seat. Mary, her children, and stepchildren lived there a year and a half while they prepared for the journey west.

As they traveled, Joseph F. cared for the animals, chopped wood for their cooking fires, and hauled water from nearby streams. He was having to do the work of a man while still a young boy.

In the spring of 1848, Mary Fielding Smith's little caravan joined the rest of a wagon train of other faithful Latter-day Saints and began the thousand-mile journey west to the Salt Lake Valley. In addition to her children and stepchildren, Mary's group included her widowed sister Mercy Thompson and her brother Joseph Fielding. As they began their long journey, the reins of one of Mary's four wagons were in the firm grip of her nine-year-old son, Joseph F. By now Joseph was an excellent driver. He was experienced in yoking and unyoking the oxen and carefully guided the animals over many dangerous trails from his perch on the driver's seat.

As the wagon train moved along, it must have been a sight to behold. One pioneer described the scene as "a train of white wagon sheets many miles in length, looking like an immense serpent dragging his slow lengths along."

During the next three months, Joseph F. would gain an even greater appreciation of his mother's great faith in the Lord. They woke up one morning to find two of their finest oxen missing. Several men looked for a long time without finding the animals. After they gave up, Joseph F. returned to the camp to find his mother on her knees praying for the Lord's help. "Please lead us to the oxen that we might continue our journey in safety," he heard her plead.

As soon as she finished her prayer, she stood up. Joseph F. saw his mother walk straight to a nearby river. One of the men shouted that she was going the wrong way—they had been seen going the other direction! But Mary motioned for Joseph F. to come quickly. There were the oxen, caught in a clump of willows down in a ravine. They were soon hitched to the wagon and on their way again.

In spite of many such difficulties, the journey across the plains must have seemed exciting to Joseph F. With hundreds of families making the trip, there was always something going on. He saw his first herd of buffalo and enjoyed swimming in watering holes near camp. To lift his spirits for the next day's journey, he joined with the others in singing songs at night around the campfire. "Come, Come Ye Saints" was always a favorite. One day each week was also a "rest day." Worship services were held, after which Joseph F. and his friends would pick gooseberries, hike over to an abandoned Indian village, or throw lumps of dirt at garfish in the streams.

The wagon trains were well organized, each with a captain to take charge. Men were assigned each night to stand guard, and they were kept company by the night's bats and croaking frogs. A few incidents with Indians put the guards on special alert. Woe to the guard who fell asleep during his watch!

And there were rules to follow: Do not yell or make any noise at night, so as not to disturb the others; tie up all your hogs and dogs, remember your evening prayers, and be in bed by 9 p.m. And please, be kind to your animals.

Joseph F. was especially kind to his animals and felt sorry for the oxen having to pull such heavy loads day after day. Later in his life, he told his own children:

My team leaders' names were Thom and Joe—we raised them from calves and they were both white. Thom was trim built, active, young and more intelligent than many a man. Many times while traveling sandy or rough roads, [on] long, thirsty drives, my oxen [were] lowing with the heat and fatigue. I would put my arms around Thom's neck, and cry bitter tears! That was all I could do. Thom was my favorite and best and most willing and obedient servant and friend. He was choice!

With the Lord's constant help, the Smiths finally arrived in the Salt Lake Valley on September 23, 1848. But their troubles were far from over. They had to live the first winter in their covered wagon until they were able to build a small adobe home the following spring on Mill Creek.

They were very poor—everyone was. But Mary taught Joseph F. an important lesson by insisting they pay their tithing first, before they used any of the produce from their garden. "The Lord's share must be the best pick of the crop," she would tell Joseph F. as she instructed him to pick out the best potatoes to take to the tithing office.

Joseph F. was still missing his father, Hyrum, when he experienced yet another great sorrow. His mother's health was very bad, and she died just four years after their arrival in the Salt Lake Valley. When his father was killed, Joseph F. was five years old. Now when his mother died, he was thirteen. He was still so young! How would he survive? Who would take care of him? He felt alone and frightened.

But the Lord had plans for Joseph F. Smith. There was a great work for him yet to do. To comfort him, the Lord blessed him with a beautiful dream soon after his mother died. He dreamed that, when his life was over, his beloved mother and father, the Prophet Joseph Smith, and President Brigham Young met him in heaven. They put their arms around him, and he could feel how much they loved him. It made him feel so peaceful inside.

Joseph F. later said, "When I awoke that morning, I was a man. There was not anything in the world that I feared. I promised myself that I would so live that both Mother and Father would be proud of me." Now he had the courage to do whatever the Lord would ask of him.

A year and a half later, the Lord called Joseph F. on a mission to preach the gospel to the people of the Hawaiian Islands. He was fifteen years old, an unusually young age for a missionary.

The mission president, Francis Hammond, gave Joseph F. a blessing, promising him he would become "a mighty man" and that "the spirit of his father Hyrum, the martyr, would rest upon him."

Joseph F. learned the Hawaiian language quickly and became an excellent missionary. He was very poor, however, since he had no family to send him money. Joseph F. ate poi, sweet potatoes, and chili peppers, which the Hawaiian people shared with him. He often went for several days without anything to eat.

After three years in Hawaii, Joseph F. returned home. One morning during his adventurous trip back to Salt Lake City, he and several other companions were sitting around a campfire fixing breakfast. A group of rough Mormon-haters rode up on horses, cursing and firing their guns.

The leader jumped off his horse and shouted, "We will kill anyone who is a Mormon!" The other missionaries fled into the woods, but Joseph F. stood his ground. The man shoved a gun in Joseph's face and asked, "Are you a Mormon?" Joseph F. straightened his shoulders and said, "Yes siree; dyed in the wool; true blue, through and through!"

The man was surprised at his reply. He put the gun away, shook Joseph's hand, and said, "Well, you are the pleasantest man I ever met! I'm glad to see a fellow stand for his convictions." He then jumped back on his horse and rode off with his companions.

For the next sixty-one years, Joseph F. Smith's life was full of service to the church he defended so proudly that morning by the campfire. At age twenty-seven, he was ordained an apostle, and he served as a counselor to four Church presidents: Brigham Young, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, and Lorenzo Snow. Joseph F. served four more missions for the Church, in England, Europe, and twice again in Hawaii. He worked as a clerk in the Historian's Office, supervised work in the Endowment House, and served in the Utah legislature.

After President Snow's death in 1901, Joseph F. Smith was sustained as president of the Church. He was sixty-three years old.

Because of the revelation President Lorenzo Snow had received in 1899 concerning tithing, the Church's money problems continued to improve during the years Joseph F. Smith served as president. By 1906, President Smith was able to free the Church completely from the debt they owed to the government and other businesses. Without this being done, the Church could have lost much of its land, church buildings, and even the temples. Rachel Smith, one of his daughters, remembers the exact day this happened:

Father came home, but no one was there in the house. As I was coming in the side door of the Beehive House, I met him coming down the front stairs. He said to me, "Baby" (he always called us babies), "where is Mother?"

I said, "I don't know." Father asked me several questions for which my answer was "I don't know." Finally Father said, "Well what do you know?" I replied "Not much. I just came from school."

Father said, "I wanted to tell your mother first, but . . . I'll tell you first. Do you see this paper I have in my hand?" I answered yes. "Well, [this note means] the Church is at last out of debt!"

Children all over the world have especially benefited from three important changes President Smith made during his presidency: the Church began publishing the Children's Friend magazine (later called the Friend) in 1902, the seminary program was started in 1912, and the family home evening program began in 1915.

President Smith thought frequently about his boyhood and returned several times to visit the places he had lived during his early years. While visiting Nauvoo, Illinois, his boyhood home until the Saints were driven out, Joseph F. said, "I recognized it as tho I had lived there all my life. There stood our old barn and brick office as they did years ago. I could pick out nearly every spot that I had known in my childhood."

While in Nauvoo, he visited his aunt, Emma Smith, widow of the Prophet Joseph. As soon as he greeted her, she said, "Why, it is Joseph Fielding! I would have known you anywhere, you look so much like your father Hyrum!" This comment pleased Joseph F., and he considered it a great compliment.

But Joseph F. visited other sites that brought back painful memories. Later in his life, he finally gathered the courage to visit Carthage Jail where his father was murdered. While standing inside the jail, he told his friend, "I despise this place. It harrows up my feelings to come here." He stood silently for a while. Then he turned, walked out of the building, and never returned.

President Smith lived the law of plural marriage and had six wives and forty-eight children (five were adopted). Because he had lost his own parents at such an early age, his family meant everything to him. He once said, "The richest of all my earthly joys is in my precious children." A close friend of the family, Charles W. Nibley, who was frequently in President Smith's home, wrote:

I have visited at his home when one of his children was down sick. I have seen him come home from his work at night tired, as he naturally would be, and yet he would walk the floor for hours with that little one in his arms, . . . loving it, encouraging it in every way with such tenderness and such a soul of pity and love as not one [parent] in a thousand would show.

One of his daughters, Marjorie Smith Brown, remembers that, as a little girl, she was very frightened of thunder and lightning:

One day there was a very bad storm. I was crying and whimpering. Father got up, put his robe on, and came in. He had me put my robe and slippers on; then we walked out on the veranda, attached to the second floor of the Beehive House. He held my hand, and that gave me a feeling of security and strength. Still, when the sky would light up, I would tremble. Father explained to me what lightning meant and what made the noise. Then he said, "See it will bring the rain that will make everything so beautiful. You must not be afraid." From that day to this I have never been frightened of a thunderstorm.

Just a few months before he died, President Smith received a beautiful, magnificent vision. In it, he saw Jesus during the time the Savior's body lay in the tomb for three days following his crucifixion. The Savior was visiting the spirits of those who had already died. President Smith saw Jesus organizing many of the righteous spirits to help preach the gospel to those spirits who needed to be taught. Among the "faithful" who were teaching others were his own father Hyrum and the Prophet Joseph Smith. This vision was later published as Section 138 of the Doctrine and Covenants.

President Joseph F. Smith died on November 19, 1918, just six days after his eightieth birthday. The great flu epidemic was raging in Salt Lake City. To prevent this disease from spreading any further, no public funeral was held. But as his funeral procession passed from the Beehive House to the city cemetery, thousands of people stood mourning along the streets with bowed heads.

Joseph F. Smith had many sorrows in his life—the greatest of which was losing both of his parents by age thirteen. But he learned a great lesson: he found that if he prayed to and relied on his Heavenly Father for help and comfort, he would be able to accomplish almost anything. And what this orphan boy accomplished in his life under the Lord's direction was remarkable.
