Susan Arrington Madsen, Lord Needed a Prophet ( 1990)

Heber J. Grant

Baseball Hero

Twelve-year-old Heber J. Grant shook like a leaf as he looked Tout into the audience in the Brigham Young Schoolhouse in Salt Lake City. It certainly wasn't the first time he had stood in front of a group to recite a memorized scripture, story, or talk. But this occasion was different. As Heber forced himself to look again at the audience, he saw President Brigham Young himself sitting on the third row. Heber knew he was just about to speak in front of one of the most famous and experienced orators in the whole Territory of Utah!

The situation proved to be almost too much for young Heber. He walked up to the front and proceeded to stumble badly through a memorized recitation of the Word of Wisdom—a presentation he had given perfectly dozens of times before other groups. At one point he completely stopped his reading, unable to remember the next few lines.

Finally Heber started again from the beginning—this time getting through it with little problem. He took his seat, feeling very disappointed at his performance. But President Young came up to him after the meeting, put his arm around Heber's shoulder, and praised him for the courage he had shown by not quitting. Heber remembered the president saying, "You demonstrated a true spirit of determination to accomplish the task given to you. Your father would have been very proud."

Heber smiled at the thought of making his father proud. Heber Jeddy Grant was born in Salt Lake City on November 22, 1856. Rachel Ivins Grant, his mother, was still in bed recovering from his birth when she was brought the sad news that Jedediah Morgan Grant, her husband and Heber's father, had died of pneumonia. Heber was only nine days old.

Heber's father was a well-known pioneer. Jedediah served as Brigham Young's counselor in the First Presidency of the Church; he was the first mayor of Salt Lake City; and he was a general in the territory's Nauvoo Legion. When he died, the members of the Church were sad to lose such a great man. Brigham Young told the mourners at the funeral to have hope. Some other young man would soon come along and "roar even louder" than Jedediah—whom Brigham called "a great lion." Could it be that Jedediah's own son, Heber, was that young man?

Heber's road to greatness would not be an easy one. He lived the first seven years of his life on Main Street in Salt Lake City. Luckily, his house was right across the street from the Globe Bakery. The family home, which was shared with several other relatives, was one of the finest in town, with a walk-out balcony, an orchard, a large garden, and plenty of room to romp.

Eventually, however, money troubles forced him and his mother to move out of this lovely home into a small adobe cottage on Second East Street. Here their lives were very different. For furniture they had only a bed and a few chairs. They had six plates (two were cracked) and a few cups and saucers. There were many cold and windy winter nights when Heber and his mother had no fire—and certainly not a furnace—to keep them warm. It was hard to be poor after having lived in such a nice house on Main Street.

Since he was an only child, Heber tried especially hard to help his mother. Rachel earned money by sewing for other people. She also made costumes for the nearby Salt Lake Theatre. At first Rachel sewed clothing by hand. Later she bought a "Wheeler and Wilcox" treadle sewing machine. "I sat on the floor at night until midnight many times," Heber remembered, "and pumped the sewing machine to relieve her tired legs."

Rachel seemed to know Heavenly Father would have a special calling for her son when he grew up. She once told him, "Behave yourself, and you will someday be one of the apostles in the Church." She did everything she could to make sure that he learned the gospel of Jesus Christ and got a good education. Heber, on the other hand, adored his mother and wanted to make her proud of him. They made a great team.

With his mother's help and encouragement, Heber became an excellent student. He was especially good at math and memorization, but he had to work extra hard to get good grades in spelling and foreign languages. President Young took a special interest in Heber and invited him to attend the Young family's private school and join with them in their evening prayers.

Heber's desire to be honest at all times sometimes got him into trouble. One time a teacher asked him about another boy's conduct. Heber told the truth and later received a backyard beating from the misbehaving boy.

Sometimes Heber and his school chums were found doing things they shouldn't. A teacher warned the boys "to stop stealing peaches from the neighborhood gardens." Another time they were told to "quit throwing mud from the end of a stick which disfigured buildings that had cost a great deal."

If one word could describe the future prophet, that word would be persistence. When Heber made up his mind that there was something he wanted to learn or some way he wanted to improve himself, nothing could stop him from achieving it. His mother seems to have convinced him that the word can't just didn't exist.

For instance, Heber loved baseball, but he wasn't very strong and couldn't hit or throw the ball far. He was often called "sissy" or "ramrod" on the playground at school. Heber's long arms and legs caused one boy to refer to him as "that grasshopper dude." Determined to improve, Heber told his mother, "I'm going to play on the ball team that will win the state championship!"

Heber shined forty pairs of shoes to earn money to buy his own baseball. Then, every evening for months he practiced throwing the ball at the side of a barn. To improve his catching, he hired the hardest thrower in school to pitch "bullets" at him. After hours of practice, his arm ached, but Heber was now strong enough and good enough for the best team. To the surprise of many, but not his mother, Heber achieved his goal. He played on the Red Stockings team that won the state championship at the end of the season. He became a local hero.

There was another time when Heber showed great determination. Schoolmates teased him for having poor handwriting. "Hentracks!" one boy said. "Lightning has struck the ink bottle" jeered another. Heber vowed to improve. After many hours of practice, he had such beautiful penmanship that people paid him to write holiday and business cards for them. He won a prize for his handwriting and became a professor of penmanship!

Heber and his mother were members of Salt Lake City's Thirteenth Ward, and it was here that his testimony of the gospel was born. Some of the most prominent Church leaders were members of this ward, and Heber loved to hear them speak. He sometimes found himself with tears in his eyes after hearing a humble brother or sister bear testimony of the Prophet Joseph Smith or tell a miraculous missionary experience. However, if a speaker began to go on too long in sacrament meeting, Heber chuckled to see Bishop Edwin D. Wooley reach out and tug the long-winded preacher on the coattails. That was the signal to sit down.

In Sunday School, Heber and the other children were often divided into teams and asked questions taken from the Bible, Book of Mormon, or Church history. Prizes were given for correct answers.

In one such contest, his uncle Anthony C. Ivins set up a competition between fourteen-year-old Heber and Brother Ivins' own son. A pair of beautiful buckskin gloves was promised to the first one to read the entire Book of Mormon. After the first day, Heber's hopes of winning the gloves were dashed. The Ivins boy had stayed up most of the night and read 150 pages. Heber, who wanted to understand and ponder each verse, had read more slowly and completed only twenty-five pages. But Heber later remembered: "When I finished the book, I not only got a testimony of it . . . but the gloves as well!" After a fast start, his cousin never read another page.

Heber's service to the Church began early. When he was only nineteen years old, he served in the presidency of the first Young Men's program in the Church (Young Men's Improvement Association).

Soon after this, Heber was called to be the president of the Tooele Stake. He was only twenty-four years old—the youngest stake president in the Church at that time. He truly wanted to be a good example for the members of his stake. In his first talk to the stake, he promised:

I will ask no man in Tooele to be a more honest tithe payer than I will be; I will ask no man to give more of his means in proportion to what he has than I will

give; I will ask no man to live the Word of Wisdom better than I live it; and I will give the best that is in me for the benefit of the people in this stake of Zion.

In October 1882, Heber J. Grant was called to be a member of the Council of the Twelve Apostles. He was twenty-five years old. Heber wondered why he had been chosen for such an important calling.

To some it was not a surprise, however. Heber remembered meeting Eliza R. Snow, a prominent leader of the women of the Church, when he was a child. She saw Heber playing on the floor with several other children. She prophesied to those present that "when this child grows to manhood he will become an apostle of the Lord."

And yet, when that prophecy came true, Heber spent several months worrying that he was not worthy to accept the call. He even considered asking the prophet to release him.

Then Heber had an experience that told him his calling was no mistake. He was visiting the Navajo and Hopi Indians in Arizona and decided to leave the main group and ride his mule down a trail alone to pray. As he pleaded for help, Heber felt that he was allowed to see a special council in Heaven:

The Savior was there, and the Prophet Joseph Smith and my father, Jedediah Grant. It was given to me that the Prophet Joseph Smith and my father requested that I be called. I sat there and wept for joy. And from that day I have never been bothered with the idea that I was not worthy to stand as an apostle.

Fifteen years after becoming an apostle, Heber was called to serve a full-time mission to Japan. While there, he went to a small hill overlooking Yokohama and dedicated the Japanese islands for missionary work. Heber later said that the dedicatory prayer he offered was "the greatest prayer of my life." His companion recalled that "every word penetrated into my very bones and I could have wept with joy." Another companion thought that the ground shook as Elder Grant spoke.

Heber also presided over the British and European Missions and taught the Yaqui Indians in Mexico. In England, his coworkers found him to be "a dynamo of enthusiasm." Heber loved to preach the gospel. "I must do my best to see that everyone in the entire world hears and has a chance to accept the gospel, for it is the key to eternal happiness."

The missionaries loved him. Heber often joined the elders in a game of tennis behind the mission home. One missionary remembered how President Grant used to "whack them over the netting with the speed of a Colt .45!"

Heber was also a family man. He married three wives—Lucy Stringham, Augusta Winters, and Emily Harris Wells—and was the father of twelve children. He had an especially close relationship with his children and grandchildren. "Whenever he was traveling for pleasure or to preach somewhere," his daughter Lucy wrote, "he took some of us along. We loved to go because in our confidential 'travel' chats we got better acquainted and learned to appreciate more fully his great qualities."

When Heber had to leave his family behind, his children remembered how wonderful it was when he returned. "What a jubilant time we had when he came home!" Lucy wrote. "We would all gather around and listen to his experiences. I can see him now walking around the house with a child on each foot, or tossing the children up on his knee!"

When family members had to be away from home, Heber faithfully wrote them letters. When one of Heber's wives was away in a hospital in California, he showered her with letters. Lucy remembered, "Almost every day a letter reached mother, and if for some reason it was delayed even the nurses would notice it. I remember the head nurse saying to mother that in all her years of nursing she had never had any man treat his wife as considerately as mother was treated."

In November 1918, President Joseph F. Smith was very ill, and he asked to see Heber, who was next in line to become president of the Church. President Smith reached out, took Heber's hand, and said, "The Lord bless you. You have a great responsibility. Always remember that this is the Lord's work, and not man's. He knows whom He wants to lead His Church, and He will bless you." Less than a week later, President Smith died, and Heber Jeddy Grant became the Church's seventh prophet, seer, and revelator.

Early in his presidency, Heber J. Grant dedicated the first temples built in the twentieth century. He dedicated the Hawaiian Temple in 1919, the Alberta Temple in 1923, and the Arizona Temple in 1927.

In the early 1930s, America was stricken with a terrible financial depression. Money was scarce. Many people lost their jobs and property. Some people were nearly starving. Many came to "soup kitchens" to receive a bowl of soup or piece of bread. Even skilled workers could find no one to hire them. Those who could work were paid much less than they had earned before the Great Depression.

President Grant was a wise businessman and saw the need to organize a plan to help the Saints. In 1936, he started a security plan that later became the Church Welfare Program. To help the plan succeed, he donated his large dry farm in western Utah, which was worth more than eighty thousand dollars. President Grant worked with national political leaders and banks to keep important Utah- and Church-owned businesses open. He led both the Church and community through this very difficult time.

After becoming a very successful banker and insurance salesman, President Grant kept a promise he had made to himself years earlier to share with the poor. Remembering his own moth-er's struggles, he took special delight in helping widows.

He came to the aid of many who were behind in their house payments. He helped pay their bills and often enclosed enough additional money for a small personal gift. He gave many young couples money to help pay medical expenses for the birth of a new baby.

President Grant fed the hungry, as the Savior taught; he traveled many miles to help someone in need and gave away thousands of books and pamphlets to friends and business partners. This man, who as a youth was a baseball hero, thus became a hero of an even greater kind.

When asked once if he had any advice to give to young boys and girls, he replied, "Yes, tell them to make others happy and to aid them in carrying their burdens in life. Then they will be sure of happiness, not only in their lives here, but in the life to come."

President Heber J. Grant died on May 15, 1945 at age eighty-eight. He was buried in the Salt Lake Cemetery next to his father, whom he had never known—but who surely was very proud of his son who had become a prophet of the Lord.
