Susan Arrington Madsen, Lord Needed a Prophet ( 1990)

George Albert Smith

A Solemn Promise Not to Be an Enemy to Anyone

Young George Albert Smith was a daredevil. After a snow- Ystorm left a heavy blanket of snow on his hometown, Salt Lake City, George could hardly wait to grab his wooden sled and go "coasting." As far as he was concerned, the steeper the hill and the slicker the ice the better. Once, he coasted down a city street at such breakneck speed (he loved to go fast!) that he lost control of his sled, ran into a tall gas street lamp, and got a gash that scarred his forehead the rest of his life. There were no cars in those days for coasters to worry about, but obviously one had to watch out for gas lamps!

George Albert was a happy boy who loved to make people laugh. He and his buddies Wilby Dougall and Tom Peck staged musical variety shows in back of the Smith barn. For an admission price of a few pennies, neighborhood children and their parents could watch George Albert stroll out in his homemade suit and big cowboy hat. With funny songs and jokes, he sent his audience into fits of laughter. One favorite song was this:

I'm not very handsome, I know that I'm not. I'm as ugly as sin, and ought to be shot. My mouth is a feature that can't be forgot— If you travel east, west, north or south. Chorus: Shut it! Shut it! Don't open it quite so wide. Shut it! Shut it! I don't want to get inside.

Once a lady in his audience laughed so hard after hearing this song she nearly fainted.

The future prophet was also adventurous. While still a small boy, George Albert decided he wanted to see his grandpa and grandma Farr who lived north of Salt Lake City in Ogden. He grabbed a playmate, and together they walked a half mile to the railroad station and climbed aboard a train that was headed north. The problem was . . . they hadn't asked their mothers. Luckily, the train conductor spied them, stopped the train before it left the station, and sent the boys home. Their mothers were not pleased.

George Albert Smith was born April 4, 1870, the second of the eleven children born to John Henry Smith and Sarah Farr. When he wasn't putting on neighborhood variety shows or hopping on trains bound for Ogden, George Albert had work to do. He had horses and cows to feed, wood to haul and chop, crops to plant and harvest, and buggies to wash and grease.

In addition to his chores at home, George Albert began working for ZCMI (a Church-owned department store) when he was thirteen years old. He earned $2.50 a week putting buttons on overalls. He later made packing boxes. George was a hard worker and often raced to see if he could get more work done than his coworkers. He once made one hundred boxes in one day. The most any of the other workers could put together was sixty.

George Albert also went the extra mile to get the attention of the girls in his neighborhood. Actually, he was interested in one girl and one girl only—Lucy Woodruff. She was the granddaughter of Wilford Woodruff, who would become president of the Church when George Albert was nineteen. Because of the death of her mother, Lucy lived with her grandparents just down the street from the Smith family.

George Albert's first attempts to impress Lucy didn't go so smoothly. He decided that the only way to get her attention was to tease her, which he did mercilessly. Once, when Lucy was walking past the Smith home with a pail full of yeast, George dashed out and teased her until she spilled the yeast on the ground. Another time he tied her to a tree with her long brown braids. At school he dipped her braids in an ink well! If George Albert was trying to make friends with Lucy Woodruff, it just wasn't working. It was time for a different approach—and George had an idea.

Most of the other families in the neighborhood were far wealthier than the Smith's and had lush green lawns on which to hold summer dances and parties. With the help of his brothers and sisters, George Albert worked for months putting in a front lawn to make their yard more appealing to the other youngsters in the area—especially to Lucy Woodruff. Besides, since his father was in Europe on a mission, the lawn would be a delightful surprise upon his return.

After more than a year of back-breaking work (raking, earning money for top-quality seed, planting, watering, and tending the first tiny green shoots) a beautiful lawn soon covered the Smith yard. Upon his return, George's father was thrilled. And, more importantly, Lucy Woodruff and her grandparents took notice. They stopped by the Smith home after Sunday School one day, and Lucy was overheard to say, "George, your family has the most beautiful front yard in the entire ward. I should like to sit under your apple tree whenever you will let me." The Woodruffs were invited to stay that afternoon. The adults sat on lawn chairs while the young folks sat on a quilt. George's mother served them all lemon ice cream and sponge cake. George was bursting with pride. The plan had worked!

A few years later, George Albert impressed Lucy in another way. The two of them were sitting on her grandmother's porch in a swing facing Temple Square when a hot air balloon came floating by, dangerously low. George Albert suddenly jumped up and shouted, "I think that balloon is going to hit the Tabernacle!" And indeed it did! The balloon instantly burst into flames, starting a small fire on the roof of the Tabernacle.

George didn't stand around trying to decide what to do. He raced to the nearest telephone and called the fire department. The engines soon arrived, but they couldn't get inside Temple Square. The gate was locked, and the night watchman didn't have a key. George Albert and several other men formed a straight line and charged the gate. It finally burst open when they hit it with all their might. Everyone worked together to put the fire out before the building was seriously damaged. George had acted quickly to help save the Tabernacle from being destroyed by fire. How proud Lucy was of him!

Where did George Albert get all his courage? Where did he learn to work so hard, think so quickly, and get things done?

For one thing, George Albert grew up in a neighborhood full of courageous people—some of them relatives. When George Albert was born, President Brigham Young lived just two blocks away in the Lion House. The streets near the Smith home (at 23 North West Temple) were lined with the homes of apostles of the Church, Relief Society and Primary presidents, great missionaries, and other hearty pioneers.

For example, George's grandfather George A. Smith (whose name he proudly shared) lived next door and was a member of the First Presidency of the Church. This kindly man was a cousin to the Prophet Joseph Smith and one of his closest friends. George A. was a "big grandpa" (weighing over three hundred pounds), and he wore a wig that once blew away during a stiff wind storm. When he removed his wig and false teeth one time in front of a group of Indians, they ran away in terror, thinking he had some sort of magical powers. George's other grandfather Lorin Farr was the first mayor of Ogden and the first stake president in Weber County.

But the two people George Albert admired most were his parents, Sarah Farr and John Henry Smith. His mother was a gentle and deeply spiritual woman who ran a loving, tidy household. John Henry Smith was an apostle and a member of the First Presidency of the Church. George often said he had never known a better or greater man than his father.

George Albert was born and reared right across the street from Temple Square, and he grew up hearing the sounds of the magnificent Temple being built. Work on the Salt Lake Temple was begun long before George was born, and it was not dedicated until he was twenty-three years old. So throughout his youth, he could hear constant hammering, sawing, and stonecutting from across the street. Ox carts—sometimes five hundred at a time—were continually arriving at the Square, bringing stone from the rock quarry in Little Cottonwood Canyon.

When George Albert was a toddler, the Temple walls were just above the ground level. And as the walls grew in height and strength, so did the future prophet's testimony of the gospel. The strength of that testimony blessed his life on many occasions. While still a small child, for example, he came down with typhoid fever. The doctor recommended he be kept in bed and given only coffee to drink. But George Albert had been taught the importance of the Word of Wisdom and refused the doctor's advice. Instead, he asked to be administered to by one of their home teachers. He received a beautiful blessing from this poor but faithful man, and George Albert recovered almost immediately. The doctor was amazed to see him playing outside with his friends the next day.

As the temple walls continued to rise even higher, George Albert's family helped bring him close to his Heavenly Father. He was still a small child when his mother first taught him to pray:

I remember mother took me by the hand, led me up the stairs into the bedroom where my crib was, and sitting by my crib, she had me kneel. She took both my little hands in hers and taught me how to pray. Young as I was, that prayer went through me, and I felt confidence in it. I felt secure.

Having been taught the importance of prayer, George Albert knew just what to do when one day a heavy kitchen cupboard toppled over, knocking his mother to the floor. He couldn't revive her and feared she had been killed. He knelt down and begged his Father in Heaven to save her life. With tears in his eyes, he promised the Lord he would devote his life to preaching the gospel and doing the Lord's will if only his mother would be saved. Sarah Smith was healed, and George kept his promise.

When George Albert was fourteen years old, and the Salt Lake Temple had risen to a magnificent eighty feet, he was given his patriarchal blessing. It included the following promises:

Thy voice shall be as the voice of a trumpet in declaring the words of the Lord to the nobles of the earth, and many shall believe in thy words and embrace the gospel of the Son of God. . . . Thou art called to do a great and mighty work in the great kingdoms of God . . . and thou shalt become a mighty prophet in the midst of the sons of Zion. Thou art destined to become a mighty man before the Lord, for thou shalt become a mighty apostle in the Church and kingdom of God upon the earth, for none of thy father's family shall have more power with God than thou shalt have, for none shall excel thee.

While George Albert's spiritual knowledge was growing, he was also learning his ABCs at school. He first attended the old Brigham Young School on South Temple Street and then the Seventeenth Ward School. In those days most wards had their own school.

But all was not long-faced and serious. George Albert still loved to make people laugh. One day as the teacher was about to leave the classroom, she said to the class, "Don't any of you leave your seats!" As soon as she left, George Albert picked up his chair and paraded around the room. Upon the teacher'sreturn, some of the students complained that George Albert had left his seat. When the teacher asked him if this were true, he replied, "No, indeed, I didn't. I took it with me!"

During his teenage years, George Albert lived with relatives in Provo while he attended the Brigham Young Academy. George did especially well in spelling and grammar, but one teacher said his penmanship "could be improved."

George Albert worked for three years as a traveling salesman for ZCMI. Together with a companion named Jim, he would travel throughout Utah visiting stores in smaller towns, taking orders for merchandise from Salt Lake City. George wanted to be a good salesman and get as many orders as he could.

One day, while in Heber City, George Albert was told by a friend that one of the other salesmen had gotten ahead of him and was already across the mountain in Park City. Those were George's customers! Rather than get in his horse-drawn buggy and go around the mountain the long way, he decided to take a short-cut.

George Albert checked his horse in at a livery stable and rented a bicycle. He pushed his bicycle to the top of the hill that separated the two communities, went over the top, climbed aboard the bicycle, and raced down the other side of the hill as fast as the bicycle would go. Unfortunately, he discovered partway down the hill that the bicycle had no brakes! Looking for a way to stop, he spied a huge clump of thick bushes and decided to steer the bicycle into them. The bushes did, indeed, stop the bicycle. They also tore George Albert's clothing to pieces. He later told a relative: "I was willing to do almost anything to stay ahead of the competition."

George Albert was aspiring to become an officer in the Utah National Guard when an incident of great importance took place. He lost his bid to become an officer, he believed, because a rival spread ugly rumors about him. George felt such anger toward the man that he felt like physically attacking him. He couldn't even bring himself to take the sacrament at church because his heart was filled with so much anger. But George Albert prayed to his Father in Heaven for help. He finally decided to go directly to the man and ask for forgiveness because of the ill feelings he had felt towards him. The rumormonger felt deep regret for his actions, also begged for forgiveness, and the two men shook hands and became lifelong friends.

His desire to love all people became a theme in George Albert's life. He made a solemn promise "not to be an enemy to any living soul." Everyone who knew George Albert agreed that he kept that promise throughout his life.

Eighteen ninety-two, when George Albert was twenty-two years old, proved to be a very important year. In April, the capstone of the Salt Lake Temple was put in place during a special ceremony. The temple was now as tall as it was going to be, and the time had come to finish the interior so the Temple could be dedicated.

By now George Albert had grown to young manhood, and he, too, was as tall as he was going to be. It was time to form his own family. On May 25, George Albert married his childhood sweetheart, Lucy Woodruff, in the Manti Temple. As a wedding gift, Lucy gave her husband a beautiful gold locket set with diamonds. Inside the locket were two pictures of Lucy: one of her as a young girl, and the other as his new bride. George Albert treasured this locket and wore it nearly every day of his life.

Soon after the wedding, George was called to serve a mission to Chattanooga, Tennessee. At first, he served alone, without his new bride. But Lucy missed him terribly and received permission to join him in the mission field a few months later.

On one occasion before Lucy joined him, George Albert and his mission president were sleeping in a house in Alabama when an angry mob surrounded the house. They fired shots through the windows several times, but they aimed too high, and the bullets flew by just above the missionaries' heads! George Albert later told Lucy:

Splinters were flying over our heads in every direction. But I felt absolutely no terror. I was very calm as I lay there, experiencing one of the most horrible events of my life, but I was sure that as long as I was preaching the word of God and following his teachings that the Lord would protect me. And he did.

After the mission, George Albert and Lucy returned to Salt Lake City where he worked for the government and served in many Church callings. He especially loved the scouting program and was awarded scouting's highest honor—the Silver Buffalo Award. Throughout his life George Albert was proud to wear his well-pressed Boy Scout uniform on special occasions.

As a loyal Scout, George Albert believed in treating others with kindness, whether or not he was wearing the Scout uniform. His granddaughter Martha Stewart Hatch tells of how he handled one difficult situation in his neighborhood with great wisdom:

Once on a hot summer day there was some problem happening under the street near Grandfather's home in Salt Lake City, and some workers from the city had come to fix it. It was hot outdoors, the sun shone fiercely, and the job at hand was a pick-and-shovel kind that made the sweat pour off the men's faces and backs as they dug into the roadway. The workers were not careful with their language, or maybe their mothers hadn't taught them any better, but they were swearing and using terrible language. Their words soon became offensive to many of the neighbors whose windows were open to catch any breeze that might help to cool them.

Someone went out and asked the men to stop their foul talk, and in the process pointed out that Brother Smith lived right there—couldn't they show some respect and keep quiet, please? With that the men let loose a new string of bad words. Quietly, Grandfather prepared some lemonade and placing some glasses and the pitcher on a tray he carried it out to the struggling men with, "My friends, you look so hot and tired. Why don't you come and sit under my trees here and have a cool drink?" Their anger gone, the men responded to the kindness with meekness and appreciation. After their pleasant little break they went back to their labor and finished their work carefully and quietly.

When George Albert was thirty-three years old, he got the biggest surprise of his life. On Saturday, October 6, 1903, he couldn't get a seat in the Tabernacle to attend general conference, so he took his two daughters, Edith and Emily, to the state fair—something he had been promising to do for several days. The girls especially wanted to see "the little pink pigs." When they returned home, they found a whole crowd of people standing on their front lawn, hugging and kissing Lucy and congratulating her. George Albert wondered what on earth had happened. "What is this all about?" he asked.

"Don't you know?" a neighbor lady asked, surprised that he hadn't heard. "You were just sustained in conference as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles."

George Albert couldn't believe it! At first he felt unworthy to be an apostle. He wondered if he was ready for such an important calling.r He also did not have good health. He often had to stay at home or rest in bed because he was so tired and weak. Many times he wished his body were stronger so he could accomplish even more. But he loved his Heavenly Father and would gladly do his best to serve him.

The Lord knew George Albert loved all people. He continued to live faithfully by his promise "not to be an enemy to any living soul." As an apostle, George Albert showed special concern for those who were lonely and poor. He often spent Christmas day in the poorest part of town, visiting those everyone else had forgotten. One of his daughters, Emily Smith Stewart, wrote of how they spent Christmas day:

Father always took us with him to make the rounds of the forgotten friends that he habitually visited on Christmas. I was a very little girl and I remember going down a long alley in the middle of a city block where there were some very poor houses. We opened the door of one tiny home and there on the bed lay an old woman, very sad and alone. As we came in, tears ran down her cheeks, and she reached over to take hold of Father's hand as we gave her our little remembrances. "I am grateful to you for coming," she said, "because if you hadn't come I would have no Christmas at all. No one else has remembered me."

Another Christmas years later, his now-married children gave him a new winter coat to replace the worn and tattered one he had been wearing to work at the Church Office Building. A couple of weeks later, on a bitterly cold day, one of his daughters picked him up at his office to bring him home. She noticed he was wearing his old coat again.

"Where's that beautiful new winter coat we gave you for Christmas, Papa?" she asked. At first President Smith refused to answer. Finally he said, "An elderly gentleman visited me in my office today. He had no coat and was so cold he was almost blue. He needed a coat so badly, so I gave him mine."

"But why didn't you give him your old coat?" his daughter asked. President Smith replied, "Oh, he needed that new coat much more than I did."

A great sorrow came to George Albert in 1937 when his loving wife, Lucy, died. He lived fourteen more years after her death but he never remarried, even as he rose to the very helm of the Church.

After serving as an apostle for forty-two years, George Albert Smith became the eighth president of the Church in 1945. He was president only six years, and he still suffered from poor health, but he accomplished very important things in that short time.

World War II ended just six days before George Albert became prophet of the Church. That terrible war left millions of people in Europe without homes, food, or clothing. George Albert wanted to help. He met with the president of the United States, Harry Truman, to ask for the government's help in shipping donated supplies to the people of Europe. President Truman agreed to help but asked, "You mean you're just going to give them the food and clothing for free?" President Smith replied, "Of course we would give it to them! They are our brothers and sisters and are in distress! God has blessed us with a surplus and we will be glad to send it."

As president of the Church, George Albert Smith dedicated the Idaho Falls Temple and in 1947 presided over the celebration of the one hundredth anniversary of the arrival of the pioneers in the Salt Lake Valley. He pulled the rope that unveiled the "This Is the Place Monument." At April Conference in 1950, President Smith rejoiced in announcing that the total Church membership had reached the one million mark.

But most important of all, President Smith pleaded with members of the Church to understand how important the gospel is and encouraged them to love each other and live good lives. Near the end of his life he said:

I can think of nobody who has had a fuller life than I have had, and I don't say that boastfully, but gratefully; and I want to say to you that every happiness and every joy has been the result of keeping the commandments of God and observing his advice and counsel.

President Smith never lost the wonderful sense of humor he had as a boy. Whenever he was having dinner with his grandchildren, for instance, he loved to hide their dessert under the table or on a nearby shelf while they were busy carrying dishes into the kitchen. His impish grin and charming blue eyes wouldtell them their grandfather had been up to some mischief with their food again.

President Smith loved children and had small chairs and toys in his office in the Church Office Building. This gave his small visitors something to do while he talked with their parents. This dignified, neatly groomed man often held a jump rope for the neighborhood children while they played on the sidewalk in front of his home.

In the end it could truly be said that President Smith remained faithful to his creed. He was loved by young and old and had not an enemy in the world.

President Smith died on his eighty-first birthday in 1951. As he died he held in his hand the gold locket Lucy had given him on their wedding day, fifty-nine years earlier.
