Susan Arrington Madsen, Lord Needed a Prophet ( 1990)

David O. McKay

A Boy Who Had Something to Do Besides Play Marbles

Emma Ray Riggs was attending a family reunion when she Eheard that a friend of hers, whom she hadn't seen for two years, would soon be arriving in Salt Lake City. Emma Ray, or "Ray" as everyone called her, wanted to be at the train station to meet him, but the reunion was being held on a cattle ranch on Antelope Island in the middle of the Great Salt Lake. No bridge connected the island with the shore.

The passenger boat that had brought Ray and her cousin Belle to the island would not be returning in time. So the two of them rigged a sail on an old rowboat and took turns pulling on the oars to get to shore and into town to meet this special person.

Ray's friend was a twenty-six-year-old returning missionary, David Oman McKay, who had been in Great Britain preaching the gospel. The handsome, six-foot one-inch Elder was anxious see his family . . . and Ray.

David O. and Ray not only had a happy reunion that August day in 1899, but their friendship soon blossomed into romance. They were married January 2, 1901, and had the honor of being the first couple married in the Salt Lake Temple in the twentieth century.

When they first met, Ray was smitten by David O.'s tall athletic build, his handsome features, and piercing hazel-brown eyes. She would soon discover that he had inner qualities that were even more important. He was courteous, for instance. He insisted on opening all doors for her, he helped her with her coat, and always stood up when she entered the room. He also had a wonderful sense of humor and loved good books.

But there was a lot more to David O. McKay than just a handsome face and a pleasing personality. The eye of the Lord was on David O., and he would have an important work to do. From their wedding day on, and for the next sixty-nine years, Emma Ray Riggs McKay would be at her husband's side helping him accomplish that work.

David Oman McKay was born September 8, 1873, on his family's farm in Huntsville, Utah. He was the third of ten children born to David and Jennette Evans McKay, Latter-day Saint emigrants from Scotland and Wales.

The McKay home was filled with love, but the family suffered their share of sadness and disappointment. Tragedy struck in 1880, when David O.'s two older sisters died the same week and were buried in a common grave. David O. was now the oldest child in the family and his parents would depend on him to help even more at home and with the farm work.

This became especially true a year later when David O.'s father was unexpectedly called on a mission to Scotland. While his father was away, seven-year-old David O. became "the man of the house," milking cows, feeding the livestock, and doing household chores for his mother.

When his father returned two years later, David O. took on a summer job to bring extra income to the family. He became a newspaper boy and carried the Ogden Standard to LaPlata, a nearby mining town. He rode his horse all the way, and the round trip took him from seven in the morning to five o'clock in the evening.

During this time David O. read books, memorized poems and quotes from great literature, and became more familiar with the scriptures. Some of the passages he memorized while riding his horse would be heard years later in sermons he would give in general conference and other Church meetings.

David O. learned early, by experience, to trust in his Heavenly Father. It brought him comfort when he was afraid:

When [I was] a very young child in the home of my youth, I was fearful [one] night. Father was away with the herd or on some mission, [and] I could not sleep. I fancied I heard noises around the house. Mother was away in another room. Thomas E. [his younger brother] by my side was sleeping soundly. I became terribly fearful, and I decided that I would do as my parents had taught me to do—pray. I thought I could not pray without getting out of bed and kneeling, and that was a terrible test.

But I finally did bring myself to get out of bed and kneel and pray to God to protect Mother and the family. And a voice as clear to me as mine is to you said, "Don't be afraid. Nothing will hurt you." Where it came from, what it was, I am not saying. You may judge. To me it was a direct answer, and there came an assurance that I should never be hurt in bed at night.

In 1885, David O. became known as "the bishop's oldest son" when his father was made bishop of their Huntsville Ward. That same year, David O. was ordained a deacon in the Aaronic Priesthood. He helped his quorum with many projects like cleaning the chapel for church meetings and chopping wood for the widows in their ward.

When he was fourteen, David O. received his patriarchal blessing from John Smith, patriarch to the Church. The blessing contained important clues to the young man's future life. Among other things, the patriarch said:

Thou art in thy youth and need instruction, therefore I say unto thee, be taught of thy parents the way of life and salvation, that at an early day you may be prepared for a responsible position. The Lord has a work for thee to do, in which thou shalt see much of the world, assist in gathering scattered Israel and also labor in the ministry. It shall be thy lot to sit in council with thy brethren and preside among the people and exhort the Saints to faithfulness.

When the blessing was finished, the kindly patriarch put his hands on David O.'s already muscular shoulders and said, "My boy, you have something to do besides playing marbles." At first, David O. didn't understand what the patriarch meant by that comment. David O. went into the kitchen where his mother was preparing dinner and said, "If he thinks I'm going to stop playing marbles, he is mistaken!" But his wise mother explained that what he meant was that the things David O. was interested in now—like marbles and other boyhood games—would someday be put aside as he grew to manhood and became involved in much more important tasks.

David O. absolutely loved school. He enjoyed being in the classroom so much, in fact, that he decided he wanted to become a teacher. After completing the eighth grade in Huntsville, he attended the Church-owned Weber Stake Academy in Ogden. He was only twenty years old when he was asked to serve as principal of that school.

But David O. needed more education. He attended the University of Utah where he graduated as valedictorian—an honor given to the best student. David O. was well-liked, and he was voted president of his class. When he wasn't studying, he played left guard on that school's first-ever football team.

Like his father, David O. received a surprise mission call from the Church to the British Isles. It was time to move on to one of those "more important tasks" his mother said would be in his future. David O. walked some of the same paths his father had walked as a missionary in the British Isles some sixteen years earlier.

As a boy, long before he became a missionary, David O. had prayed often for some kind of special manifestation or experience that would tell him the Church was true. For years, he had received no answer to those prayers. He became discouraged and wondered if Heavenly Father was really listening. But he was patient, and his answer finally did come while he was on his mission.

During a special priesthood meeting in Scotland, David O. felt the Holy Ghost so strongly he had tears in his eyes. One missionary stood up and said he felt the presence of angels in the room. The mission president, James L. McMurrin, turned to David O. in the meeting and said, "Let me tell you, Brother David, Satan hath desired you, but God is mindful of you. If you will keep the faith, you will yet sit in the leading councils of the Church."

For David O. the strong spirit present in the room that day was a sign of God's love and concern for him. He felt special gratitude for the missionaries who years earlier had converted his grandparents in Scotland and Wales to the gospel. From that day forward, he fully committed himself to serving his Heavenly Father and his fellow men—no matter how great the sacrifice.

But there was a career to begin and a family to raise before his mission president's prophecy would be fulfilled. After David O. returned home from his mission, he married Ray (whom he had met at the University of Utah), and they made their home in Ogden. There he became a popular school teacher and administrator, serving a second time as principal of the Weber Stake Academy. He was the sort of principal who made sure things got done. He raised money to pay for a new addition on to the school building, started a student newspaper, began a popular lecture series, and organized and directed a school band. The students and townspeople liked him very much.

David O.'s talent as a teacher was valuable to the Church. He wrote lesson material for his ward and stake Sunday School classes. He helped others become better teachers. Many of his suggestions for Sunday Schools in Ogden were later adopted by the whole Church.

David O. and Ray became the parents of seven children who affectionately called them "Mama Ray and Papa Dade." During family times they enjoyed playing games like Rook, Pit, and backgammon, riding in their horse-drawn sleigh with the sound of jingling bells filling the air, and playing musical instruments.

David O. and Ray never spanked their children but certainly expected to be obeyed. Their son David Lawrence remembers how one incident was handled:

We were riding to Huntsville one time in the surrey (a horse-drawn carriage). Llewelyn and I were scuffling in the back seat. This was dangerous because it would have been easy for a youngster to fall out in front of the rear wheel. Father asked us to stop playing. We kept on. The next thing I knew (Father arranged it so that suddenly) I was walking, watching the surrey getting farther and farther away up the hill as I trudged along behind. I started running for Huntsville. Fortunately, Father and the surrey were waiting for me at the top of the hill. Llewelyn and I were quiet the rest of the way.

David O. loved animals—especially horses. He had a favorite riding horse called Sonny Boy. Even during these busy years as a principal in Ogden he would find time to get up early in the morning, drive the thirteen miles to the farm in Huntsville to help break in a new colt, and then be back in Ogden by the time school began.

David O. wanted his children to love animals too and to take good care of their pets. Once the family had started off for a Fourth of July celebration in Huntsville. A mile or two down the road, David O. asked one of his sons if he had fed his pet rabbits that morning. He said no, he had forgotten. They turned around and went back to the farm so the son could take care of that important chore.

When David O. McKay was thirty-two years old, the words of his patriarchal blessing and those of his mission president were fulfilled. He was called to be a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles.

For several years, David O. and Ray remained in their home in Ogden, where David O. continued as principal of the Weber Stake Academy. Since his work as an apostle required him to be in Salt Lake City a few days each week, he spent a lot of time riding the "Bamberger," a train that ran between Salt Lake City and Ogden.

During these years David O. was often away from home. One night when he was home for dinner for the first time in several weeks, David O. complimented his wife on the fine meal. After Ray thanked him, their four-year-old daughter piped up with "Come again sometime!"

As an apostle, David O. served the Lord in many ways. He was general superintendent of the Sunday School, the first Church commissioner of education, and president of the European Mission for three years. After returning to Salt Lake City, David O. served as counselor in the First Presidency to two prophets—Heber J. Grant and George Albert Smith. This service helped prepare him for the calling that lay ahead.

On April 9, 1951, David Oman McKay was sustained as the ninth president of the Church. During the nineteen years he served as prophet, the Church grew by leaps and bounds. The number of Latter-day Saints more than doubled to nearly three million members. The number of missionaries grew from two thousand to eighteen thousand. He dedicated temples in Switzerland, London, Los Angeles, Oakland, and New Zealand. Nearly four thousand Church buildings were constructed. The number of stakes grew from 184 to five hundred.

President McKay traveled over a million miles throughout the world, inspiring the Saints and making friends for the Church among government leaders. This man, who as a boy loved to play with marbles and delivered newspapers on horseback, was now visiting heads of state and royal families. During a visit with the queen of the Netherlands, he showed how he was able to make friends without sacrificing his religious beliefs:

[The queen] had scheduled a half hour for a visit with President and Sister McKay. He carefully watched the time. When the half hour was up, he politely thanked the queen and began to leave. "Mr. McKay," she said, "sit down! I have enjoyed this thirty minutes more than I have enjoyed any thirty minutes in a long time. I just wish you would extend our visit a little longer." After more persuasion from her, he sat down again. At that point a coffee table was wheeled in, and the queen poured three cups of tea, pushing one each to President and Mrs. McKay. When neither of the McKays began to stir their tea, the queen asked, "Won't you have a little tea with the queen?" No, President McKay explained, the Latter-day Saints did not believe in drinking stimulants, and they believed tea to be a stimulant. "I am the queen of the Netherlands," she responded. "Do you mean to tell me you won't have a little drink of tea, even with the queen of the Netherlands?" "Would the Queen of the Netherlands ask the leader of one million, three hundred thousand people to do something that he teaches his people not to do?" he asked in return. "You are a great man, President McKay," she replied. "I wouldn't ask you to do that."

President McKay used two phrases during his presidency that have become mottos for the whole Church: "Every member a missionary" and "No success can compensate for failure in the home." He also encouraged the Saints in other countries to "Stay where you are" and make the Church strong abroad rather than emigrating to Utah.

President McKay will be remembered for these things, but his personal qualities were what caused the people he led to love him dearly. President McKay had a special love for children. One time, at the close of a stake conference in California, he said, "After the closing prayer, I would like all the children to meet me back in the cultural hall so I can shake their hands." True to his promise, the tall, robust, white-haired Prophet spent nearly an hour after the meeting shaking the hands of the children and chatting with them.

Another quality was President McKay's wonderful sense of humor. One day while driving to the Church Office Building, he was stopped by a policeman for speeding. When the officer got up to the car window and saw who the driver was, he said,"Oh President McKay, I can't give you a ticket. Just try and drive a little slower next time so you'll be safe."

But President McKay insisted, "No, I want you to give me that ticket. I want to take it and show to the Brethren on the Council of the Twelve to prove to them I'm not an old fuddy-duddy!" But he did promise to drive more slowly.

Another time, while climbing a hill to inspect a site for a chapel, two local Church officers reached out to help him, one on either arm. Partway up the hill, President McKay stopped and said, "Brethren, I don't mind helping one of you climb this hill, but I can't carry you both."

President McKay died on January 18, 1970, at the age of ninety-six. He had lived longer than any other president of the Church.

The author Robert Louis Stevenson wrote a tribute that very easily could have been written in honor of President David Oman McKay:

He has achieved success who has lived well, laughed often, and loved much, who has gained the respect of intelligent men and the love of little children, who has filled his niche and accomplished his task, who has left the world better than he found it.
