Susan Arrington Madsen, Lord Needed a Prophet ( 1990)

Joseph Fielding Smith

Historian, Author, Pie-maker

Nobody was allowed to call Joseph Fielding Smith, Jr., "Joe." Not his playmates. Not his brothers and sisters. Not his teachers.

Joseph shared his name with four deeply loved ancestors, including his father (Joseph F., sixth president of the Church) and his granduncle (the Prophet Joseph Smith). The name "Joseph" was almost sacred to his family, and no one was permitted to shorten it. So, Joseph it was, and Joseph it stayed.

Julina Lambson Smith, mother of the future prophet, knew from the whisperings of the Holy Ghost that her son would have a high calling in life. She promised the Lord that if she were blessed with a healthy son, she would raise him to be worthy and prepare him to spend his life in service to members of the Church. Her prayers were answered, and Joseph Fielding was born on July 19, 1876, a hot dry day in Salt Lake City. He was born during the tenth year of his parents' marriage and was often called their "tithing child."

From the time Joseph Fielding was old enough to hold something in his hands, he loved to read. "I used to read the books that were prepared for the Primary children and for Sunday School children in those early days," he said. "I usually had a book in my hands when I was home."

If he suddenly disappeared, Joseph Fielding could usually be found in the hayloft or sitting in the shade of the poplar tree in front of the Smith home on Third West. Of course his face was buried in a book. He loved to play baseball with his brothers, but when their games were over, Joseph Fielding soon went back to his books. He read the Book of Mormon twice before he was ordained a deacon.

Perhaps Joseph Fielding would dream under that poplar tree of writing a book himself someday, one that the Saints would love to read. That dream would come true. In fact this bright little bookworm would eventually write twenty-five books.

But Joseph Fielding could not spend all day dreaming of books. There was work to be done. And considering the size of the Smith family, they had more work to do than most. Joseph Fielding's father had five wives and forty-two children, and everyone needed food, clothing, and shelter . . . and love.

His parents saw to it that Joseph Fielding received plenty of love and attention, but the family had to do without many material things that others would call "necessities of life." When he needed new boots, for instance, his father would take him to the general store and trade his old pair for a new pair. Well, they weren't exactly "new"—they were just larger. No doubt, some other child had worn the boots until they pinched his toes. Then that pair was traded in and left at the store for some other youngster to use. Lucky was the child who had brand-new winter boots.

Joseph Fielding's boyhood years were trying times for the Church. The United States government and most people outside the Church did not share the Latter-day Saints' belief in plural marriage. They threatened to take away Church property and the voting rights of the Saints if the Church continued to teach and practice it.

Day and night Federal marshals searched on horseback for men who had more than one wife. They broke into people's homes without permission, questioning children and wives about where the father of the family was. They searched the house for possible hide-outs. If found, the men were arrested and put in jail. Sometimes Joseph Fielding's father had to hide for months at a time to avoid being arrested.

These were often frightening years for young Joseph Fielding. He didn't see his father very much and turned to his mother for comfort and companionship. Julina was a hardworking woman who dressed in simple but attractive clothing and wore her hair pulled back into a bun on the back of her head. She had a friendly, outgoing personality and enjoyed entertaining friends in their home. She is the only woman who was the wife of one president of the Church and the mother of another.

When Joseph Fielding was ten years old, Julina gave him a new responsibility that taught him the importance of serving others. Julina studied medicine and became a midwife—one who delivers babies. As soon as she received word that a baby was on the way, Joseph Fielding became her "right-hand man." He was sent to the stable to get their mare, "Old Meg." He would stand on a box to get the harness on her and the bit in her mouth and then hitch her to the buggy and drive Julina to the home of the expectant mother.

The two of them often traveled on muddy, rutted roads and in rain, sleet, and blowing snow in the open buggy. Julina's brown leather satchel full of medical tools was always tucked safely down by their feet. It seemed to young Joseph Fielding that too many babies decided to come in the middle of the night. Even that inconvenience helped Julina teach Joseph, by example, the importance of service whenever and wherever needed.

Over a period of eighteen years, Julina helped bring nearly a thousand babies safely into the world! Usually she was paid $6.00 for delivering a baby and caring for the mother and child for five or six days. However, many times she served without charge for those who needed her help but couldn't afford to pay. Some who had no money paid Julina with a big sack of potatoes, a bushel of apples, or a few dozen eggs.

Joseph Fielding learned to work hard. At his mother's side, Joseph Fielding learned to bake bread, make pies, and piece together quilts. As they sat together at the kitchen table, peeling peaches or snapping beans, Julina would sing songs to make the time pass more quickly. Whether they were working, singing, or sharing stories, Joseph Fielding loved to be with his mother.

His work outside on the farm was more dangerous than peeling peaches or snapping beans, though. Joseph Fielding once broke his leg after falling off a hay wagon that had been loaded too high. Another time he fell while picking fruit in a tree, and his leg got caught in the fork of two branches. Things got even worse when an angry wasp stung him as he hung, waiting for his father to rescue him.

That wasn't Joseph Fielding's only unpleasant experience with insects. One day while Joseph Fielding and his brother were out herding cows, they got hungry and bought a loaf of bread from a nearby farm woman. But when they sliced the bread, they discovered it was full of flies! They decided they weren't so hungry after all.

The years of hard work at home and on the farm seemed to prepare Joseph Fielding perfectly for his life of service to the Church. He always joked that his first official "church assignment" was when he accompanied his parents to the dedication of the St. George Temple. He was just a babe-in-arms at the time—nine months old.

At the age of twenty-three, Joseph Fielding went out on his own when he was called on a mission to Great Britain. He left not only his parents behind, but a beautiful bride too. Joseph Fielding had met Louie Shurtliff when she came to Salt Lake City to attend school. She was a tall, pretty girl with dark hair and a bright mind. Joseph Fielding said she was the most beautiful girl he had ever seen. It was love at first sight.

They were married in the Salt Lake Temple in 1898, and a year later Joseph Fielding received his mission call. Louie stayedin Utah and taught school while her handsome young husband crossed the ocean to preach the gospel.

The mission was a difficult experience for Joseph Fielding. Many of the people he hoped to teach had heard false and unfair stories about the "Mormons" and refused to listen to his message. Meetings had to be canceled because no one came to listen. Most people slammed their doors in his face. He was unable to baptize a single person while in England. To add to his frustration, he missed his wife. But he wrote home to Louie, "I would rather stay here forever than come home without an honorable record and release."

He received his honorable release two years later, and Joseph Fielding returned home a much stronger Latter-day Saint. He had seen hatred and anger in the eyes of those who rejected him. He now had a greater appreciation for the peace and happiness that come to people who live the gospel. While in England, he had studied the gospel faithfully (he was still a bookworm), and he had learned to defend the truth.

A few months after Joseph Fielding's return in 1901, his father, Joseph F., was sustained as president of the Church. Joseph Fielding worked in the Church Historian's office and helped his father with the huge amount of letter-writing the president had to do. He and his wife Louie were happy to be together again and became the parents of two daughters.

But great sadness came to their home in 1908 when Louie died while expecting their third child. After many sad and lonely months for him and his heartbroken little daughters, Joseph Fielding met and married Ethel G. Reynolds. She was a loving mother to his two little girls, and they accepted her with open arms. Joseph Fielding and Ethel became the parents of nine more children. Theirs was a large and happy family.

Then in 1910, at the age of thirty-three, Joseph Fielding was called to be a new member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. During his travels as an apostle, Joseph Fielding was frequently asked important questions about the gospel. His excellent knowledge of the scriptures enabled him to answer the questions in a way people could easily understand. He wrote five volumes of a book called Answers to Gospel Questions that helped those who were studying or teaching the gospel. Other important books he wrote include Essentials in Church History, Doctrines of Salvation, and Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith.

Joseph Fielding especially loved genealogy and church history. He was a counselor in the presidency of the Salt Lake Temple for sixteen years and was the first editor of the Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine, which started in 1910. He served as Church Historian for forty-nine years—from 1921 to 1970.

As an apostle, Joseph Fielding toured the Church missions in Europe. As the political situation became more dangerous in that area because of World War II, he arranged for all missionaries in Europe to return to the United States. They were sent safely across the Atlantic Ocean on twenty-three ships and assigned to other missions.

To those who didn't know him very well, Joseph Fielding seemed to be a serious, stern man who rarely joked or laughed. But to his family, he was a warm, loving father and husband who wanted more than anything to make his family happy. His second wife, Ethel, once said:

He is the man that lulls to sleep the fretful child, who tells bedtime stories to the little ones, who is never too tired or too busy to sit up late at night or get up early in the morning to help the older children solve perplexing school problems. He gladly welcomes the young people to his home and is never happier than when discussing with them topics of the day—sports or whatever interests them most.

At home Joseph Fielding often put on an apron and spent almost an entire day baking pies! What a treat for his children to be sent off in every direction gathering ingredients for a whole kitchen full of delicious pies: apple, pumpkin, peach, cherry, and mincemeat!

When one of his children did something wrong, he was too tender-hearted to spank them. After talking to them about their misdeed, he would put his hands on their shoulders, look them in the eyes, and say, "I wish my kiddies would be good."

Joseph Fielding loved sports. He was an excellent swimmer and handball player and could win a game of handball with any of his five sons with one hand behind his back. He loved to watch sporting activities, especially if his children or grandchildren were participating.

Even after becoming a grandfather, Joseph Fielding was very adventurous. He loved flying in jet airplanes. He sometimes flew with a friend in the National Guard. Once Joseph Fielding was in the air, he was often allowed to take over the controls. One day as he was flying over Salt Lake City, a friend came looking for him in his office. His secretary told the man that if he looked out the window he could see Joseph Fielding. As the friend leaned out the window, he could see Brother Smith's plane doing loops and dives in the air. This hobby continued until he was in his nineties.

In 1937, Joseph Fielding had the sad experience again of losing his wife. Ethel, who had been such a wonderful mother to their eleven children, died after being sick for a long time.

Again Joseph Fielding needed a companion, and he married Jessie Ella Evans, a well-known singer. "Aunt Jessie," as she was called by the Smith family, was a happy, fun-loving woman who brought much happiness to Joseph Fielding and his family. She enjoyed traveling with him and often shared her musical talent by singing in Church meetings. Many times she and Joseph Fielding sang duets.

Aunt Jessie often did things that surprised those who expected a more serious woman to be married to an apostle. Once the couple were standing on the sidewalk waiting for a friend to pick them up in a car. She saw their friend drive by without seeing them, so she quickly put her fingers in her mouth and whistled very loud! The driver heard her signal and came back to get them.

Joseph Fielding Smith became president of the Church when he was ninety-three years old. Many people whispered to each other that he was much too old to lead the Church. But theLord wanted Joseph Fielding to be the prophet and blessed him with good health and energy. During the two-and-one-half years he served as president, he held special conferences in California, Arizona, Idaho, Missouri, and Hawaii. He returned to the British Isles for an area conference, where he had served as a missionary seventy years earlier.

During his presidency, Joseph Fielding set aside Monday as family home evening night. Above all, he continued to bear his strong testimony that the gospel is true. He said:

If this Church were the work of man, it would fail, but it is the work of the Lord, and he does not fail. If we keep the commandments and are valiant in the testimony of Jesus, the Lord will guide and direct us and his Church in the paths of righteousness.

President Smith died July 2, 1972, while peacefully sitting in his favorite chair at a daughter's home. He was ninety-five years old.
