Susan Arrington Madsen, Lord Needed a Prophet ( 1990)

Harold B. Lee

A Bishop's Son Who Helped the Poor

On March 28, 1899, Clifton, Idaho, had eighty-two families, Oone general store, and a blacksmith shop. It also had a sheriff, a school teacher, two carpet weavers, a one-room Church meetinghouse, a swimming hole called Dudley's Pond, and lots of cows, chickens, and sheep. Everyone had to pick up their mail at the home of Harriett Henderson since the post office had burned down a few years earlier.

A narrow road called "the string" ran through Clifton and then wandered off into the countryside. That road was either dusty, muddy, or snow-covered, depending on the time of year.

On this particular day in March "out on the string, two miles north of the store," there was a small cabin where Clifton's most famous citizen had just been born: Harold Bingham Lee. Of course, nobody knew Harold was Clifton's most famous citizen—that would happen much later. If they had known he was going to become the president of the Church, for instance, they may have given the road some fancy, important name. But as it was, his birthplace was simply "out on the string, two miles north of the store."

The first thing people noticed about little Harold B. Lee was his beautiful, wavy brown hair. His mother liked it so much,in fact, she let it grow out long and trained it into ringlets that fell below his shoulders. Well, this was fine as long as the neighborhood ladies were the only ones to see him. They thought he was absolutely darling dressed up in the frilly suits his mother sewed for him, complete with ruffles and lace-trimmed sleeves. His ringlets provided the crowning touch, they thought.

Unfortunately, when Harold was old enough to go to school, his friends didn't think he was so cute. Instead of admiring his ringlets, they laughed and pulled on them! A few skinned knuckles and black eyes later, Harold decided he had had enough. He raced home, went straight for the kitchen knife, and sawed off one of the ringlets. This, of course, spoiled the whole effect, and his heart-broken mother was forced to cut off the remaining curls. Harold's grandfather, Deputy Warden Bingham of the Idaho State Prison, convinced one of the prisoners to braid the long curls into two watch chains. Harold's mother kept them among her treasures.

Harold's parents, Samuel Marion Lee, Jr., and Louisa Bingham, reared six children on their small farm nestled at the foot of the Wasatch Mountains in Cache Valley. Harold was their second child.

Margaret Lee, Harold's grandmother, had given birth to eleven babies, all of whom died shortly after birth. Then her twelfth child Samuel (Harold's father) was born, but she herself died, leaving him to be reared by his grandparents. He weighed only 3 1/2 pounds and was so small that a wedding ring could be slipped over his arm. After his marriage to Louisa Bingham, Samuel became a school teacher, farmer, store manager, and bishop of the Clifton Ward. He was known as "one of the warmest, friendliest men" in town.

Louisa had grown up having to do household chores at an early age, including cooking, sewing, and laundry, since her mother was often sick and unable to care for the family.

Louisa's ability to run a household came in handy as she reared her own children. She was an excellent homemaker, and the home often smelled of homemade bread and pies. Sometimes the smells were almost unbearably wonderful as the children lay in bed at night. Often their father would finally carry them down to the kitchen for a thick slice of bread smothered in butter and honey.

Farm life taught Harold to work hard and use his time wisely. These lessons were important for a boy who would spend most of his life doing the Lord's work. After a day of milking cows, planting crops, caring for the garden, and mending fences, Harold was ready for bed at night. If he ever considered wandering off to play without doing his chores first, Harold knew his mother would quickly change his mind with a few switches from "the little green willow."

Sunday brought a day of rest for the family and a chance to attend Church meetings. Life on the farm provided tempting distractions for the children on this day of worship. One teacher, for instance, emphasized the importance of the Sabbath by reminding some of Harold's playmates that they "should attend Sunday School instead of riding their horses on the range." But Harold faithfully attended all his meetings.

Along with the other church members, the Lee family donated nickels, butter, and eggs to buy Church materials and keep up the meetinghouse. When Harold was a deacon, part of his responsibility was to help take care of the church house. He washed the chimney, filled coal-oil lamps, swept the floor, and chopped wood for the stove.

During the years his father served as bishop of their ward, Harold often helped his father load sacks of grain or bundles of clothing into the back of their pony cart. Then after sunset, so as to protect the privacy of those he would visit, Harold's father would take the load to distribute to the poor and needy in his ward. This made a lasting impression on young Harold, and he would remember his father's kindness many years later when he was called to organize a welfare program for the entire Church.

Harold took piano lessons and played for Church meetings and for the enjoyment of his family and friends. One day when Harold and his brother Perry were in bed with scarlet fever, their father came through the front door, smiling, with two new shiny instruments: a cornet in one hand and a baritone horn in the other. The boys instantly fell in love with their brassy sounds. They practiced faithfully until they became skillful enough to join the Silver Cornet Band of Clifton. They performed in parades and outdoor concerts on special occasions like the Fourth of July.

Harold's life was saved many times by his mother's expert skill as a nurse. She sat by his bedside many a night bringing down the temperature of a fever or tending to his illnesses with homemade remedies. Harold came down with a dangerous case of pneumonia one night, but Louisa seemed to know just what to do:

She hurried to the back porch and opened a large sack of onions, filled her apron, and went into the kitchen. After slicing a large panful of onions she dumped them into an empty flour sack and covered her son's chest with the wet, juicy sack. Then she prayed and waited for a miracle. By morning his breathing was improved and his life was out of danger. When the family praised Louisa for saving his life, she merely said, "Oh, I didn't save his life. The Lord did. He just expects us to do everything we can do to help."

The hand of the Lord seemed to guide Louisa at other times when she saved Harold's life through her quick thinking. She once pushed him away from the open front door of their house during a thunderstorm just seconds before a lightning bolt came down the chimney of the kitchen stove, jumped out through the open doorway, and split a huge gash in a large tree in their front yard.

Another time a huge tub of poisonous lye (used for making soap) slipped out of Louisa's hands and came down off a shelf on top of Harold—covering his head, face, and arms. Quick as could be, Louisa kicked off the lid of a jar of pickled beets, dipped out the reddened pickle vinegar with her cupped hands, and poured it over her son's skin to stop the lye from causing dangerous burns. The liquid soothed the pain, and Harold recovered completely with no scars.

Harold and his brothers and sisters rode to school in a two-wheeled cart pulled by a pony driven by their mother. Harold loved school and did well in his studies. After completing at age thirteen the elementary grades at the local Clifton School, he attended the Oneida Stake Academy in Preston, fifteen miles from home, for his high school education. One of his classmates was another future prophet—Ezra Taft Benson.

Harold decided early on he wanted to become a teacher. He got along well with people and had an outgoing personality. He went to the Albion State Normal School to earn his teaching certificate and passed the final exams with high scores. He must have studied hard, though. He lost twenty pounds while preparing for the tests!

Harold was only seventeen years old when he got his first teaching job at the Silver Star School, a one-room school near Weston, Idaho. Some of the students were older than he was. The school had a pot-bellied stove in the middle of the room to keep them warm. This stove had a long pipe that had a habitof falling down, scattering black soot everywhere, and filling the room with smoke.

A year later Harold was hired as the principal of the nearby Oxford School. Some of his students were rather rough and mischievous, and Harold had his hands full keeping the classroom in order. They once hid his horse while he was visiting with someone, and he had to walk several miles home. But he soon made friends with the students by playing basketball with them during their lunch break.

After teaching school for four years, Harold was called by President Heber J. Grant to the Western States Mission, headquartered in Denver, Colorado. This experience was crucial for the future prophet. Elder Lee improved his speaking ability, learned to use the scriptures, blessed the sick, comforted those who were sad and lonely, and taught the gospel. He baptized forty-five converts. Harold also learned to accept disappointment when things didn't go the way he wanted them to. They often went for days without being invited into someone's home to share the gospel.

Harold and a missionary companion named Willis J. Woodbury used an unusual approach with some of the people they taught. Elder Woodbury carried a cello with him when they went out knocking on doors. When they were invited into a home, Elder Woodbury would play the cello while Elder Lee accompanied on the piano. They played sacred music, which made their listeners better prepared to listen to a gospel message.

Harold enjoyed missionary work so much, in fact, he was disappointed when the time came for him to be released after serving for more than two years. That disappointment didn't last long, however, once he got home. After a short stay in Clifton with his family, Harold moved to Salt Lake City with the idea of dating Fern Tanner, a young lady he had met in the mission field. They fell in love and were married in the Salt Lake Temple in 1923. They became the parents of two daughters: Maurine and Helen.

During the early years of their marriage, Harold completed his education and worked hard to support his little family. He was the principal first of the Whittier School and then of the Woodrow Wilson School in the Granite School District. He also sold meat for Swift and Company, inspected Salt Lake City street department equipment, and was a watchman for Union Pacific Railroad Company.

Harold loved his wife and two children very much. Together they enjoyed hiking in the canyons, going out to a local drive-in for ice cold root beer, and cooking hamburgers at home out on the back patio. Harold especially loved playing the piano for his family. His daughters' absolute favorite piece was called the "Midnight Fire Alarm." Helen described the scene at home when he started playing this lively tune:

Maurine and I would dance and prance around the room as Daddy was playing this exciting, loud music. He played with such enthusiasm that the entire house seemed to vibrate, and we loved it! Once he finished a real work out performance with such flourish that he could see he had thoroughly delighted us, as well as some of our little friends who were with us. He felt especially pleased when he overheard Maurine's friend say "Gee, that was really good, wasn't it?" Maurine answered, "Uh, huh, and the best part about it is watching the piano shake!"

Helen also tells of how he could settle an argument at the dinner table and still leave her and her sister feeling good about themselves:

Daddy used to sit at the end of the table and Mother sat on his right. My sister and I would contend about who was going to sit on his left. Both of us wanted the honor of sitting closest to Daddy, on the other side of him. Maurine had chosen first to sit by Daddy at this particular meal and I said, "Oh, but you sat there last time and now it's my turn." She countered, "But I chose first."

Then the master teacher resolved the argument. Turning to me he said, "Now Helen, I need you to sit across the table from me for a very special reason. You know I have a terrible time with this soup and sometimes I spill it on my tie or on my shirt. Now, if you sit right there across from me you can watch Daddy and make certain I don't spill anything on this nice new tie." After that I was perfectly happy with my place of honor, sitting facing him, contented with the responsibility of watching him and making certain he didn't get any spots on his tie.

Harold had two very sad experiences with his family. In 1962, his wife, Fern, died. They had been married thirty-nine years, and her death brought him much sorrow and loneliness. He was grateful to find another companion, Freda Joan Jensen, whom he married in 1963.

The second sad experience came just three years later, in 1966, when his daughter Maurine died unexpectedly. He was deeply saddened by this experience and felt especially sorry for her husband and the four small children she left behind. After these experiences he told a group:

Death of a loved one is the most severe test that you will ever face, and if you can rise above your griefs and if you will trust in God, then you will be able to surmount any other difficulty with which you may be faced.

From 1930 to 1937, Harold served as president of the Pioneer Stake in Salt Lake City. He was thirty-one years old when he was called to this position, making him the youngest stake president in the Church at that time.

The first Christmas after Harold had been made a stake president, he learned a great lesson. He found a family nearby who had no Christmas gifts because their father was out of work. President Lee felt very sad about this. That night he knelt down and prayed to his Heavenly Father:

God grant that I will never let another year pass but

that I, as a leader, will truly know my people. I will know their needs, I will be conscious of those who most need my leadership, and I will help them.

Remembering the example of his father in Clifton, Idaho, Harold B. Lee immediately went to work setting up a program in his stake to help the needy. He called together all the ward and stake leaders to set up a "stake welfare program." Members of the stake donated money, fruit bottles, clothing, and furniture to be stored and distributed to those found in need by their ward bishops.

Stake members who were without jobs could work by sewing, repairing furniture, working on Church construction projects, or by helping farmers with their crops. They were then paid by receiving a portion of the crop in return or by receiving goods from the stake warehouse.

Under President Lee's direction, a stake gymnasium was built at great sacrifice to provide the members with a place to enjoy themselves and socialize with other Church members. Warmth and food was available to anyone who came. Many meals were provided for families who would otherwise have gone hungry.

The plan worked beautifully. Church president Heber J. Grant soon called Harold B. Lee into his office and asked him to be the director of a welfare program for the whole Church. President Lee was very humbled and a bit scared to receive such an important assignment. He was only thirty-six years old and knew he would need help from his Heavenly Father to accomplish this assignment. "With his help I cannot fail," he later said. "Without it I cannot succeed."

On April 10, 1941, when Harold B. Lee was forty-two years old, he was called to be a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. He was at least twenty years younger than any other member of the quorum and sometimes felt like "a seedling among redwood trees."

Elder Lee's talents and abilities made it possible for him to serve the Church in many different ways. His love of music helped him in his assignment as chairman of the Church Music Committee. He loved children and was the advisor to the Primary general board. He was a good speaker and gave a series of Sunday evening radio talks called "Youth and the Church." He loved people of all nationalities and bore his strong testimony of the gospel in countries all over the world.

Elder Lee served as an apostle for thirty-one years before becoming president of the Church on July 7, 1972, after the death of President Joseph Fielding Smith. In a special quiet, holy room of the Salt Lake Temple, each member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles stood in a circle around Harold Bingham Lee, laid their hands on his head, and ordained him to this "high and incomparable calling."

Now, more than ever before, President Lee needed the help of the Lord. He told a story in the April 1973 general conference of how close his Heavenly Father was to him during this time:

I was suffering from an ulcer condition that was becoming worse and worse. We had been touring a mission; my wife, Joan, and I were impressed the next morning that we should get home as quickly as possible, although we had planned to stay for some other meetings.

He called me to come to the telephone and he asked me how I was; and I said, 'Well, I am very tired. I think I will be all right.'

But soon after, there came massive bleeding which, had it occurred in flight, I wouldn't be here today talking about it. I know that there are powers divine that reach out when all other help is not available. Yes, I know that there are such powers.

Harold Bingham Lee served as prophet, seer, and revelator of the Church from July 7, 1972 to December 26, 1973—seventeen months. He was seventy-four years old when he died in a Salt Lake hospital from heart and lung failure.

Dr. Norman Vincent Peale, a famous author and pastor of a church in New York City, said after President Lee's death: "I admired him tremendously. He was one of the most enlightened and creative religious leaders in the world. A giant has fallen."

President Lee's life had traveled a long road to the highest calling in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints—a life that began in Clifton, Idaho, "out on the string, two miles north of the store."
