Susan Arrington Madsen, Lord Needed a Prophet ( 1990)

Spencer W. Kimball

"I Sit Tall But Stand Short"

When three-year-old Spencer Woolley Kimball climbed on boarda train in Salt Lake City with his family in 1898, he hadn't thefaintest idea where they were going. He kept hearing everyone talk insoft voices about "Arizona" but he did not know where it was or howlong they would stay. He noticed everyone seemed very sad. Spencer wondered if someone had died.

His parents, Andrew and Olive Woolley Kimball, had received acall from President Wilford Woodruff, a Prophet of God, to move tothe Gila (pronounced Hee' la) Valley in the desert of southeasternArizona where Spencer's father would serve as Stake President.

Friends who returned to Salt Lake City from this place calledArizona described it as "a desert wasteland," "hot and dry," and"infested with spiders and flies." One settler said of the plants andanimals there: "If you touch it, it stings you; if you pet it, it bitesyou; and if you eat it, it kills you!"

Arizona didn't sound very inviting to the Kimball family, butthey faithfully accepted the call which they believed came from theLord. In the rain, Spencer huddled under an umbrella while his mothertearfully kissed her friends good-bye, saving the last hug forSpencer's Grandmother Woolley just before the train pulled away.

Spencer would soon forget Salt Lake City. The small town ofThatcher, Arizona, would quickly become his home. And he would love it.

Spencer Woolley Kimball was born March 28, 1895, in a smallbrick home in Salt Lake City. Upon hearing the news of his arrival,Clare, his ten-year-old sister, had a crying spell because she had beenhoping for little sister. Spencer was the sixth of the eleven Kimballchildren.

It soon became clear that he would be very bright, happy and . . .short.r"I sit tall but stand short," he often said. Spencer inheritedhis stature from his mother, Olive, who stood just five feet tall. Shewas a very kind and spiritual woman with a round pretty face, blue eyes and reddish hair. Spencer's father, Andrew, was six feet tall andslender. Spencer got his dark eyes and black hair from his father.

What Spencer lacked in height he made up in energy and physical strength. "I could outwrestle almost any boy that was near my size,"he once said. "I was tough and strong. . . and pretty husky."

Like most children, Spencer loved to romp and play and tease. His brothers called him a "busy-body." At the Thatcher school heattended after their move to Arizona, the fifteen minutes of recesswere precious. Marbles, pop-the-whip, pom-pom-pull-away, and leapfrog were all favorite games. Spencer once chased a girl around theschool yard with a fat caterpillar just to hear her scream. Anothertime he doused Ella Tyler with a bucket of water. She later said, "Theonly reason Spencer Kimball lived to become a General Authority isthat I am a slow runner."

Spencer was a happy boy but his laughter in the classroom oftengot him into trouble. More than once he had to come up and sit by theteacher's desk because he and Agnes Chlarson couldn't stop giggling. "I got serious finally," he remembered.

Spencer's father made sure his children had little time formischief. When Spencer wasn't in school he was busy on the familyfarm pitching hay, mixing paint, beating carpets and trimming trees. There was no loafing. Spencer always had weeds to chop, a garden totend and fences to build. By the end of the day, Spencer was so tiredhe often fell asleep at the supper table.

Along with the day's work, Spencer always found ways to amusehimself. When they butchered a hog for the family's supply of meat,Spencer asked for the pig's bladder. Washed, the fat cleaned off, andblown up, it became a ball.

To fight boredom as he pumped water or milked cows, Spencerwould say his ABC's forward and backward, recite the Articles ofFaith and memorize scriptures. One day Spencer's father overheardhim singing church hymns while milking. He said to a neighbor whowas standing nearby "That Spencer is a good boy. I have dedicated himto the Lord, and someday he will become a mighty man in theChurch."

Spencer loved the gospel and enjoyed going to Primary, whichwas then held during the week in the afternoon. His brothers,however, sometimes thought he dashed off to the cool chapel just toget out of hauling hay in the sweltering Arizona heat.

Thatcher was a farming community and had a population of 800people which included a few odd characters. There was the mailman,for instance, with one ear missing. And Ernest Jones' horse whichSpencer called Napoleon Bonaparte because he had such "bony parts." Then there was the neighbor whose hair was so long and bushy thateach time the Kimball boys lost a pair of scissors, or a tool, a pair ofshoes, or one of the cows, they would joke: "Maybe it is lost inBrother Sessions' hair!"

On Spencer's eighth birthday, his father baptized him in a bigmetal vat that they sometimes used as a bathtub.rBut four yearslater someone suggested the baptism might not be quite right becausehis father wasn't standing in the water with him. So, Spencer wasbaptized again in the Union Canal where the boys often wentswimming.

Spencer's father was often away from home working at variousoccupations: selling Bibles, insurance, suits and medicines, servingin the state legislature and representing the railroad company. SoSpencer's world revolved around his dear mother. He wrote:

My mother was faultless. She was a saint. Who could even imagine one virtue that she did not possess? She seemed especially angelic when the light shined through her light red hair and made a halo. I liked being with my Ma."

Olive Kimball taught her children religion. As she and thechildren sat on the fourth row of the Thatcher meetinghouse, Spenceroften laid his head in his mother's lap. The Kimball family alwaysknelt for prayer before meals, their chairs turned back from the tableand their dinner plates upside down. Spencer said his prayers eachnight at his mother's knee.

Spencer's happy boyhood seemed to come to an end when he waseleven years old. That was when his mother died. She had been veryill while expecting their twelfth child and died in a hospital in SaltLake City. Their bishop in Thatcher called the Kimball children out ofschool and told them as gently as he could, "Your Ma is dead." Theterrible news hit Spencer like a thunderbolt. He ran outside to bealone and cried until he thought his heart would burst.

Five days later Spencer's father returned to Thatcher, bringingOlive's body in a coffin. After the sad funeral, sixty-five carriagesfollowed her coffin to the cemetery. Spencer was heartbroken. "Lifecouldn't go on for us," he cried.

But the Lord blessed young Spencer and helped him find thecourage to live a good life without his mother near. He watched whileother boys stole watermelons from a neighbor's patch but he refusedto participate. He thought it was unfair to the farmers who hadworked so hard to grow the melons. Other times, his friends wouldkill birds while testing their slingshots. Spencer remembered a songhe had learned in Sunday School, "Don't Kill The Little Birds." Hisparents had taught him to treat all animals kindly.

About the time Spencer was ordained a deacon, he heard BrighamYoung's daughter Susa Young Gates speak in Stake Conference. Whenshe asked who in the congregation had read the whole Bible, Spencersaw only a few hands go up. He decided to accept the challenge. Assoon as he got home, he lit the coal-oil lamp and went up into theattic and started to read from the Book of Genesis. A year later,Spencer had finished reading through the whole Bible. Although he didnot understand everything he had read, he was proud of accomplishingthis goal.

After graduating from grade school, Spencer attended the GilaAcademy, which was like a combined junior high and high school. Hewas a good student, had lots of friends and served as class presidenteach year. He especially loved playing basketball. In fact, he lovedplaying it so much that he was often scolded for staying after schooltoo long to play ball. After all, the neighbors were waiting to buymilk from the cows he was late in milking.

At Spencer's high school graduation his father announced to theaudience that Spencer would be going on a mission for the Church atthe end of the summer! This was a complete surprise to him butSpencer was happy and willing to go.

Spencer would have to pay most of his own way, so he needed toearn some money. The first thing he did was sell his spirited blackhorse. That brought enough money to keep him in the mission field sixmonths.

Spencer then got a summer job working at a dairy in a nearbytown for $62.50 a month plus his meals and a bed to sleep in at night. He fed and milked cows, washed bottles, cared for the calves andcleaned up the barn. Sometimes his fingers would be so dry andtender from the work that they would swell up, crack and bleed.rButeven so, Spencer remained a faithful, dependable worker. Thatpleased his boss at the dairy and at the end of the summer, when itwas time for Spencer to leave on his mission, his boss had a farewellparty for him and presented him with a beautiful gold watch.

Spencer was nineteen years old when he left to serve a missionin the Central States. He learned quickly that missionary work wouldnot be easy. Shortly after he arrived in Missouri, Spencer and hiscompanion were assigned to start knocking on doors in the countryoutside Jefferson City. As it got later in the evening, they beganasking for a place to sleep that night. They were turned down timeafter time. Finally, near midnight, a grouchy man invited them in andsaid they could sleep on an extra bed he had up in his attic. The nextmorning, Spencer and his companion found themselves bitten all overby bed bugs. Their bed was spotted with blood from the bites. Still,they were grateful for the man's hospitality.

Spencer's father knew he would have some difficult days, so hewrote words of encouragement:

You will make good, Spencer. You are small in stature--so was your sweet mother--but big natured and whole souled. Your hard experiences will enable you to know just a little of what it costs to be a Latter-day Saint and something of what your father and grandfather waded through. Keep up a good courageous spirit, but don't get to think it is too much for you to bear. It will all come out well and you will have something to tell your posterity.

Soon after Spencer returned home from his mission in 1917, hemet and married Camilla Eyring who was an attractive new teacher atthe Gila Academy. On their wedding day, November 16, 1917, Spencerwas hurrying to get ready for the wedding ceremony. He was soexcited he undressed and stepped into the metal tub before herealized he had forgotten to fill it with water! He called for hisstepmother, Josie, to bring him buckets of hot water and hand them tohim around the partially open door.

During the first year of their marriage, Camilla continued toteach at the Academy and Spencer worked on farms in the area andthen got a job at a local bank. With some of the first money heearned, Spencer bought Camilla a wedding ring for seven dollars.

After saving every penny they could for seven months, Spencerand Camilla had enough money to travel to Salt Lake City to be sealedin the Temple for time and all eternity.

They became the parents of four children, Spencer LeVan, OliveBeth, Andrew Eyring and Edward Lawrence. These years were busyones for Spencer and Camilla. They devoted much of their time torearing their family, contributing to the community and serving in theChurch.

Camilla helped organize the PTA at their children's school andhelped get a public library started in Safford, the neighboring town towhich they had moved. She kept a clean house, baked cinnamon rollsand bread, bottled fruit and scrubbed clothes on a washboard untilsweat dripped off her nose. She taught her children to love books andwork hard on their school studies. All four of the Kimball childrenwere excellent students and each later graduated with collegedegrees.

Spencer continued working as a bank teller. He earned extramoney playing piano in a dance band and serving as a stake clerk forthe Church-- which at that time was a paid part-time job. He and apartner later went into business together selling insurance and realestate. Their advertising sign read: "See us before you buy, burn ordie."

A new stake, Mt. Graham, was created in 1938 and SpencerKimball was called to be the Stake President. After accepting thecalling, he made a point to visit and apologize to those he had haddisagreements with so he could serve "with a free conscience."

Spencer drove great distances throughout his stake visiting thesick, performing weddings, giving counsel to those who were troubledand giving talks. The Saints loved him. Sometimes he was so busy,news had trouble catching up with him. On one such trip, he had beeninvited to speak at a funeral and was shocked to see the man whosefuneral he thought it was walk in and take a seat on the front row. Itturned out that the funeral was for the man's brother.

In 1942, Spencer and Camilla built their "dream house" andcelebrated their twenty-fifth wedding anniversary. They invited oversix hundred friends to come to their home and help celebrate withfood and visiting. They were very happy and felt sure they would stayin their new home the rest of their lives. They assumed they wouldhave a quiet, relaxing retirement years down the road.

But big changes were in store for Spencer and Camilla Kimball. In July, 1943, Spencer received a phone call from Salt Lake Citysaying he had been chosen as a member of the Quorum of the TwelveApostles. Spencer was so shocked he slowly sat down, missed achair, and sank to the floor!

This calling would mean a great sacrifice for the Kimballfamily. They would have to give up their business in Arizona whichSpencer had worked for many years to build; they would have to moveto Salt Lake City, leaving behind lifelong friends; and he would begiven Church responsibilities he didn't feel capable of performing. Spencer began to weep and could not stop. Camilla took him in herarms and comforted him. "You can do it," she reassured. "You can doanything the Lord asks of you."

Spencer prayed almost constantly for six days and nights for theLord to give him the strength and courage he needed to meet this newchallenge. While visiting his son in Colorado soon after his call,Spencer went hiking in the mountains early one morning. Hestruggled, agonizing, praying for confirmation that the call he hadreceived was from God. Finally the reassurance came. It came likethe calm of the dying wind, the quieting wave after a storm is over. His soul felt a beautiful peace that brought him closer to his HeavenlyFather that morning than ever before in his life. At forty-eight yearsof age, Spencer started a new life. He was sustained at the October,1943 General Conference as an Apostle.

Spencer worked hard in service to the Lord. He traveledthousands of miles to visit the Saints, call new leaders and speak atfiresides. While attending stake conferences, Spencer usually stayedin stake leaders' homes. He would play the piano for the children,singing Primary songs for them. "They'll forget my sermons," he said,"but they'll never forget our singing." He also helped with the chores. If a stake president's farm had cows he did a share of the milking.

After serving as an Apostle several years, Spencer was visitedby a group of Primary children. When the teacher asked the class ifthey knew who this man was, there was silence. Finally one smallboy looked at the Apostle, trying to remember, and answered, "I knowI've seen that mug somewhere!" It was a "mug" which millions ofSaints all over the world would learn to love.

Spencer had a special love for the Lamanite people and visitedthe reservations, meeting and teaching, blessing the sick andencouraging them to live the gospel. He helped the Indian people getbetter schools and better roads in order to solve some of theirproblems. He helped start the Indian Student Placement Programwhich made it possible for thousands of children each year to live inLatter-day Saint homes while attending school.

Spencer accomplished so much during these years, it's hard tobelieve that he was suffering from many serious health problems. Asa boy, he suffered from typhoid and Bell's palsy, which paralyzed hisface. As a young adult he had smallpox. He had painful boils overmuch of his body for long periods of time. He had heart attacks. Hehad to have most of his vocal cords removed in 1957 because ofcancer and had to learn to speak all over again. In 1972, he had open-heart surgery and in 1979 and 1981 he had brain surgery. Whensomeone once called him a "modern miracle" he replied, "Haven't youread in the scriptures that men will be strengthened even to therenewing of their bodies, if they are doing the work of the Lord?"

Spencer Woolley Kimball became President of the Church ofJesus Christ of Latter-day Saints on December 30, 1973, upon thedeath of President Harold B. Lee. Spencer had been an Apostle forthirty years and was seventy-eight years old. Most people knew hehad many health problems and they did not expect him to live muchlonger. They thought President Kimball wouldn't have the energy toaccomplish much and that his administration would be short. Onelittle boy, brought into his office to shake his hand, said "I wanted tosee you before you died."

But President Kimball served as Prophet, Seer and Revelator fornearly 12 years and that time was full of exciting changes andaccomplishments. He announced the building of dozens of new smallertemples all over the world. He held area conferences in manycountries and inspired the Saints with his inspirational messages. In1978, after much prayer and pleading with the Lord in the Salt LakeTemple, President Kimball received a revelation that the priesthoodwould now be available to every worthy male member of the Church,regardless of race or color. This was perhaps the most exciting eventof all.

"Lengthen our stride" and "Do it" became President Kimball'sadvice to the Saints as he encouraged them to do more missionarywork, attend the Temple more often, and perform their Churchcallings more diligently.

President Kimball continued to be considerate and thoughtful ofthose around him. He and Camilla once had a buffet meal in theirhome after General Conference. Because of threats that had beenmade against the Church and the President, the city had posted apoliceman outside their home for safety. During the meal, Spencerfilled a plate with food and slipped out of the house to take it to thepoliceman on duty in the patrol car.

Another time, on New Year's Day, four teenage boys rang thedoorbell at President Kimball's home. He invited them in, chattedpleasantly and posed with them for pictures. He found out they hadn'teaten so Camilla fixed them each a plate of food. When they left, amember of his family asked "Was all of that really necessary?" President Kimball replied, "I belong to all the people, not just myfamily."

President Kimball was a faithful journal keeper most of his life. He had a whole shelf of binders filled with typewritten entries. Hisjournal included photographs and pictures cut out of magazines andnewspapers. He also wrote books. His book /ital/The Miracle ofForgiveness/roman/ helped thousands of people understand theimportance of repentance.

President Kimball was very sick the last few years of his lifebut continued to attend weekly meetings in the Salt Lake Temple anddiscuss Church business with his counselors in the First Presidency.

As his life came to a close, there was hardly anything shortabout Spencer W. Kimball, except his height. His life was long, hislist of accomplishments in the Church was long, and the impact he hadon the lives of the Saints of his day would last forever.

President Kimball died on November 5, 1985, at the age ofninety. He once said, "My life is like my shoes, to be worn out inservice." When he died, it was true that his shoes were well-wornand his life was well-lived in the service of God and his fellowman.

A Life Like His Shoes, to Be Worn Out in Service

When three-year-old Spencer Woolley Kimball climbed on Wboard a train in Salt Lake City with his family in 1898, he hadn't the faintest idea where they were going. He kept hearing everyone talk in soft voices about "Arizona," but he didn't know where it was or how long they would stay. He noticed everyone seemed very sad. Spencer wondered if someone had died.

His parents, Andrew and Olive Woolley Kimball, had received a call from President Wilford Woodruff, a prophet of God, to move to the Gila (pronounced Hee la) Valley in the desert of southeastern Arizona where Spencer's father would serve as stake president.

Friends who returned to Salt Lake City from this place in Arizona described it as "a desert wasteland," "hot and dry," and "infested with spiders and flies." One settler said of the plants and animals there: "If you touch it, it stings you; if you pet it, it bites you; and if you eat it, it kills you!"

Arizona didn't sound very inviting to the Kimball family, but they faithfully accepted the call because they believed it came from the Lord. In the rain, Spencer huddled under an umbrella while his mother tearfully kissed her friends good-bye, saving the last hug for Spencer's Grandmother Woolley just before the train pulled away.

Spencer would soon forget Salt Lake City. The small town of Thatcher, Arizona, would quickly become his home. And he would love it.

Spencer Woolley Kimball was born March 28, 1895, in a small brick home in Salt Lake City. Upon hearing the news of his arrival, Clare, his ten-year-old sister, had a crying spell because she had been hoping for a little sister. Spencer was the sixth of the eleven Kimball children.

It soon became clear that he would be very bright, happy, and . . . short. "I sit tall but stand short," he often said. Spencer inherited his stature from his mother, Olive, who stood just five feet tall. She was a very kind and spiritual woman with a round pretty face, blue eyes, and reddish hair. Spencer's father, Andrew, was six feet tall and slender. Spencer got his dark eyes and black hair from his father.

What Spencer lacked in height, he made up in energy and physical strength. "I could outwrestle almost any boy that was near my size," he once said. "I was tough and strong . . . and pretty husky."

Like most children, Spencer loved to romp and play and tease. His brothers called him a "busy-body." At the Thatcher school he attended after their move to Arizona, the fifteen minutes of recess were precious. Marbles, pop-the-whip, pom-pom-pull-away, and leap frog were all favorite games. Spencer once chased a girl around the school yard with a fat caterpillar just to hear her scream. Another time he doused Ella Tyler with a bucket of water. She later said, "The only reason Spencer Kimball lived to become a General Authority is that I am a slow runner."

Spencer was a happy boy, but his laughter in the classroom often got him into trouble. More than once he had to come up and sit by the teacher's desk because he and Agnes Chlarson couldn't stop giggling. "I got serious finally," he remembered.

Spencer's father made sure his children had little time for mischief. When Spencer wasn't in school, he was busy on the family farm pitching hay, mixing paint, beating carpets, and trimming trees. There was no loafing. Spencer always had weeds to chop, a garden to tend, and fences to build. By the end of the day, Spencer was so tired he often fell asleep at the supper table.

Along with the day's work, Spencer always found ways to amuse himself. When they butchered a hog for the family's supply of meat, Spencer asked for the pig's bladder. He cleaned the fat off, washed it, and blew it up into a ball. To fight boredom as he pumped water or milked cows, Spencer would say his ABCs forward and backward, recite the Articles of Faith, and memorize scriptures. One day Spencer's father overheard him singing church hymns while milking. He said to a neighbor who was standing nearby, "That Spencer is a good boy. I have dedicated him to the Lord, and someday he will become a mighty man in the Church."

Spencer loved the gospel and enjoyed going to Primary, which was then held during the week in the afternoon. His brothers, however, sometimes thought he dashed off to the cool chapel just to get out of hauling hay in the sweltering Arizona heat.

Thatcher was a farming community and had a population of eight hundred people, including a few odd characters. There was the mailman, for instance, with one ear missing. And Ernest Jones' horse, which Spencer called Napoleon Bonaparte because he had such "bony parts." Then there was the neighbor whose hair was so long and bushy that each time the Kimball boys lost a pair of scissors, or a tool, a pair of shoes, or one of the cows, they would joke: "Maybe it is lost in Brother Sessions' hair!"

On Spencer's eighth birthday, his father baptized him in a big metal vat that they sometimes used as a bathtub. But four years later someone suggested the baptism might not be quite right because his father wasn't standing in the water with him. So Spencer was baptized again in the Union Canal where the boys often went swimming.

Spencer's father was often away from home working at various occupations: selling Bibles, insurance, suits, and medicines; serving in the state legislature; and representing the railroad company. Much of Spencer's world thus revolved around his dear mother. He wrote:

My mother was faultless. She was a saint. Who could even imagine one virtue that she did not possess? She seemed especially angelic when the light shined through her light red hair and made a halo. I liked being with my Ma.

Olive Kimball taught her children religion. As she and the children sat on the fourth row of the Thatcher meetinghouse, Spencer often laid his head in his mother's lap. The Kimball family always knelt for prayer before meals, their chairs turned back from the table and their dinner plates upside down. Spencer said his prayers each night at his mother's knees.

Spencer's happy boyhood seemed to come to an end when he was eleven years old. That was when his mother died. She had been very ill while expecting her twelfth child and died in a hospital in Salt Lake City. Their bishop in Thatcher called the Kimball children out of school and told them as gently as he could, "Your Ma is dead." The terrible news hit Spencer like a thunderbolt. He ran outside to be alone and cried until he thought his heart would burst.

Five days later Spencer's father returned to Thatcher, bringing Olive's body in a coffin. After the sad funeral, sixty-five carriages followed her coffin to the cemetery. Spencer was heartbroken. "Life couldn't go on for us," he cried.

But the Lord blessed young Spencer and helped him find the courage to live a good life without his mother near. He watched while other boys stole watermelons from a neighbor's patch, but he refused to participate. He thought it was unfair to the farmers who had worked so hard to grow the melons. Other times, his friends would kill birds while testing their slingshots. Spencer remembered a song he had learned in Sunday School, "Don't Kill the Little Birds." His parents had taught him to treat all animals kindly.

About the time Spencer was ordained a deacon, he heard Brigham Young's daughter Susa Young Gates speak in stake conference. When she asked who in the congregation had read the whole Bible, Spencer saw only a few hands go up. He decided to accept the challenge. As soon as he got home, he lit the coal-oil lamp, went up into the attic, and started to read from the book of Genesis. A year later, Spencer had finished reading through the whole Bible. Although he did not understand everything he had read, he was proud of accomplishing this goal.

After graduating from grade school, Spencer attended the Gila Academy, which was like a combined junior high and high school. He was a good student, had lots of friends, and served as class president each year. He especially loved playing basketball. In fact, he loved playing it so much that he was often scolded for staying after school too long to play ball. After all, the neighbors were waiting to buy milk from the cows he was late in milking.

At Spencer's high school graduation, his father announced to the audience that Spencer would be going on a mission for the Church at the end of the summer! This was a complete surprise to him, but Spencer was happy and willing to go. Spencer would have to pay most of his own way, so he needed to earn some money. The first thing he did was sell his spirited black horse. That brought enough money to keep him in the mission field six months.

Spencer then got a summer job working at a dairy in a nearby town for $62.50 a month plus his meals and a bed to sleep in at night. He fed and milked cows, washed bottles, cared for the calves, and cleaned up the barn. Sometimes his fingers would be so dry and tender from the work that they would swell up, crack, and bleed. But even so, Spencer remained a faithful, dependable worker. That pleased his boss at the dairy, and at the end of the summer, when it was time for Spencer to leave on his mission, his boss held a farewell party for him and presented him with a beautiful gold watch.

Spencer was nineteen years old when he left to serve a mis-sion in the Central States. He learned quickly that

missionary work would not be easy. Shortly after he arrived in Missouri, Spencer and his companion were assigned to start knocking on doors in the country outside Jefferson City. As it got later in the evening, they began asking for a place to sleep that night. They were turned down time after time. Finally, near midnight, a grouchy man invited them in and said that they could sleep on an extra bed he had up in his attic. The next morning, Spencer and his companion found themselves bitten all over by bed bugs. Their bed was spotted with blood from the bites. Still, they were grateful for the man's hospitality.

Spencer's father knew he would have some difficult days, so he wrote words of encouragement:

You will make good, Spencer. You are small in stature—so was your sweet mother—but big natured and whole souled. Your hard experiences will enable you to know just a little of what it costs to be a Latter-day Saint and something of what your father and grandfather waded through. Keep up a good courageous spirit, but don't get to think it is too much for you to bear. It will all come out well and you will have something to tell your posterity.

Soon after Spencer returned home from his mission in 1917, he met and married Camilla Eyring, an attractive new teacher at the Gila Academy. On their wedding day, November 16, 1917, Spencer was hurrying to get ready for the wedding ceremony. He was so excited that he undressed and stepped into the metal tub before he realized he had forgotten to fill it with water! He called for his stepmother, Josie, to bring him buckets of hot water and hand them to him around the partially open door.

During the first year of their marriage, Camilla continued to teach at the academy, and Spencer worked on farms in the area and then got a job at a local bank. With some of the first money he earned, Spencer bought Camilla a wedding ring for seven dollars.

After saving every penny they could for seven months, Spencer and Camilla had enough money to travel to Salt Lake City to be sealed in the temple for time and all eternity.

They became the parents of four children, Spencer LeVan, Olive Beth, Andrew Eyring, and Edward Lawrence. These years were busy ones for Spencer and Camilla. They devoted much of their time to rearing their family, contributing to the community, and serving in the Church.

Camilla helped to organize the PTA at their children's school and to get a public library started in Safford, the neighboring town to which they had moved. She kept a clean house, baked cinnamon rolls and bread, bottled fruit, and scrubbed clothes on a washboard until sweat dripped off her nose. She taught her children to love books and work hard on their school studies. All four of the Kimball children were excellent students, and each later graduated with college degrees.

Spencer continued working as a bank teller. He earned extra money playing piano in a dance band and serving as a stake clerk for the Church—which at that time was a paid part-time job. He and a partner later went into business together selling insurance and real estate. Their advertising sign read: "See us before you buy, burn, or die."

A new stake, Mt. Graham, was created in 1938, and Spencer Kimball was called to be the stake president. After accepting the calling, he made a point of visiting and apologizing to those he had had disagreements with so he could serve "with a free conscience."

Spencer drove great distances throughout his stake visiting the sick, performing weddings, giving counsel to those who were troubled, and giving talks. The Saints loved him. Sometimes he was so busy that news had trouble catching up with him. On one such trip, he had been invited to speak at a funeral and was shocked to see the man whose funeral he thought it was walk in and take a seat on the front row. It turned out that the funeral was for the man's brother.

In 1942, Spencer and Camilla built their "dream house" and celebrated their twenty-fifth wedding anniversary. They invited over six hundred friends to come to their home and help celebrate with food and visiting. They were very happy and felt sure they would stay in their new home the rest of their lives. They assumed they would have a quiet, relaxing retirement years down the road.

But big changes were in store for Spencer and Camilla Kimball. In July 1943, Spencer received a phone call from Salt Lake City saying he had been chosen as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. Spencer was so shocked he slowly sat down, missed a chair, and sank to the floor!

This calling would mean a great sacrifice for the Kimball family. They would have to give up their business in Arizona, which Spencer had worked for many years to build; they would have to move to Salt Lake City, leaving behind lifelong friends; and he would be given Church responsibilities he didn't feel capable of performing. Spencer began to weep and could not stop. Camilla took him in her arms and comforted him. "You can do it," she reassured. "You can do anything the Lord asks of you."

Spencer prayed almost constantly for six days and nights for the Lord to give him the strength and courage he needed to meet this new challenge. While visiting his son in Colorado soon after his call, Spencer went hiking in the mountains early one morning. He struggled, agonizing, praying for confirmation that the call he had received was from God. Finally the reassurance came. It came like the calm of the dying wind, the quieting wave after a storm is over. That morning his soul felt a beautiful peace that brought him closer to his Heavenly Father than ever before in his life. At forty-eight years of age, Spencer started a new life. He was sustained as an apostle at the October 1943 Semiannual General Conference.

Spencer worked hard in service to the Lord. He traveled thousands of miles to visit the Saints, call new leaders, and speak at firesides. While attending stake conferences, Spencer usually stayed in stake leaders' homes. He would play the piano for the children, singing Primary songs for them. "They'll forget my sermons," he said, "but they'll never forget our singing." He also helped with the chores. If a stake president's farm had cows he did a share of the milking.

After serving as an apostle several years, Spencer was visited by a group of Primary children. When the teacher asked the class if they knew who this man was, there was silence. Finally one small boy looked at the apostle, trying to remember, and answered, "I know I've seen that mug somewhere!" It was a "mug" that millions of Saints all over the world would learn to love.

Spencer had a special love for the Lamanite people and visited the reservations, meeting members, teaching and encouraging them to live the gospel, and blessing the sick. He helped the Indian people get better schools and better roads in order to solve some of their problems. He helped start the Indian Student Placement Program, which made it possible for thousands of children each year to live in Latter-day Saint homes while attending school.

Spencer accomplished so much during those years, it's hard to believe that he was suffering from many serious health problems. As a boy, he suffered from typhoid and Bell's palsy, which paralyzed his face. As a young adult he had smallpox. He had painful boils over much of his body for long periods of time. He had heart attacks. He had to have most of his vocal cords removed in 1957 because of cancer and had to learn to speak all over again. In 1972, he had open-heart surgery, and in 1979 and 1981 he had brain surgery. When someone once called him a "modern miracle," he replied, "Haven't you read in the scrip-tures that men will be strengthened even to the renewing of their bodies, if they are doing the work of the Lord?"

Spencer Woolley Kimball became president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints on December 30, 1973, upon the death of President Harold B. Lee. Spencer had been an apostle for thirty years and was seventy-eight years old. Most people knew he had many health problems, and they did not expect him to live much longer. They thought that President Kimball wouldn't have the energy to accomplish much and that his administration would be short. One little boy, brought into his office to shake his hand, said "I wanted to see you before you died."

But President Kimball served as prophet, seer, and revelator for nearly twelve years, and that time was full of exciting changes and accomplishments. He announced the building of dozens of new smaller temples all over the world. He held area conferences in many countries and inspired the Saints with his messages. In 1978, after much prayer and pleading with the Lord in the Salt Lake Temple, President Kimball received a revelation that the priesthood would now be available to every worthy male member of the Church, regardless of race or color. This was perhaps the most exciting event of all.

"Lengthen your stride" and "Do it" became President Kimball's advice to the Saints as he encouraged them to do more missionary work, attend the temple more often, and perform their Church callings more diligently.

President Kimball continued to be considerate and thoughtful of those around him. He and Camilla once had a buffet meal in their home after general conference. Because of threats that had been made against the Church and the president, the city had posted a policeman outside their home for safety. During the meal, Spencer filled a plate with food and slipped out of

the house to take it to the policeman on duty in the patrol car.

Another time, on New Year's Day, four teenage boys rang the doorbell at President Kimball's home. He invited them in, chatted pleasantly, and posed with them for pictures. He found out that they hadn't eaten, so Camilla fixed them each a plate of food. When they left, a member of his family asked, "Was all of that really necessary?" President Kimball replied, "I belong to all the people, not just my family."

President Kimball was a faithful journal keeper most of his life. He had a whole shelf of binders filled with typewritten entries. His journal included photographs and pictures cut out of magazines and newspapers. He also wrote books. His book The Miracle of Forgiveness has helped thousands of people understand the importance of repentance.

President Kimball was very sick the last few years of his life but continued to attend weekly meetings in the Salt Lake Temple and discuss Church business with his counselors in the First Presidency. As his life came to a close, there was hardly anything short about Spencer W. Kimball, except his height. His life was long, his list of accomplishments in the Church was long, and the impact he had on the lives of the Saints of his day would last forever.

President Kimball died on November 5, 1985, at the age of ninety. He once said, "My life is like my shoes, to be worn out in service." When he died, it was true that his shoes were well-worn and his life was well-lived in the service of God and his fellow men.
