Susan Arrington Madsen, Lord Needed a Prophet ( 1990)

Ezra Taft Benson

A Scout Who Served God and His Country

It was 1918, and a large crowd filled the Tabernacle in Logan, IUtah. The benches on the main floor overflowed with over a hundred young Boy Scouts, all dressed in crisp uniforms dotted with the merit badges they had worked hard to earn. Each Scout had a yellow kerchief tied smartly around his neck. The balcony seats and window sills were packed with anxious parents and friends. But this was neither a court of honor nor a Scout jamboree. It was a boys' choir contest. Each member of the audience was pulling for their ward scout troop to bring home the honor of best young men's choir in the Cache Valley region.

At the start of the competition, lots were drawn for placement on the program, and the honor of singing last fell to the troop from Whitney, Idaho. This group of twenty-four lively young boys had a special reason for wanting to win: Ezra Taft Benson, their assistant Scoutmaster and choir director, had promised to take them on a thirty-five-mile hike from Cache Valley across the mountains to Bear Lake . . . if they came out on top.

When their turn on the program finally came, the boys from Whitney marched confidently up the aisle as the pianist played "Stars and Stripes Forever." Once in place, the eyes of every boy focused on Brother Benson, who had squeezed between two benches to direct the performance. The scouts sang their hearts out and soon heard their troop's name called out as the first place winner.

In an instant, the happy boys crowded around Brother Benson to remind him of the hike he had promised them. Of course he would take them. With approval from the parents, a prehike planning meeting was held. Food, camping gear, and clothing were planned, and the dates for the hike were set. Then one twelve-year-old Scout raised his hand: "Mr. Scoutmaster, I'd like to make a motion. Just to make it easier, we should all clip our hair off so we will not be bothered with combs and brushes on the trip." Everyone agreed, laughing to think what they all would look like with shaved heads.

Just before the hike, the troop paid a visit to the barber shop. When Brother Benson sat in the chair to get a trim, the barber spoke up. "If you'll let me shave your head, I'll cut the hair of the rest of your boys for nothing." The boys roared their approval. Brother Benson grinned and finally agreed.

Two days later, a bald Scoutmaster, with his bald assistants, led twenty-four hairless Scouts on an unforgettable ten-day hike to Bear Lake. The trip was glorious, filled with fishing, camping, hiking, swimming, and brotherhood.

Who could forget a Scouting experience like that! Certainly not Ezra Taft Benson. It brought together many things Ezra loved: the Church, young people, Scouting, the singing of patriotic music, the outdoors, and good clean fun. It remained one of Ezra's happiest leadership memories. The experience also taught Ezra that the Lord had blessed him with a special ability to inspire others to try harder, to reach higher, and to be their best. A future leader for the United States government and the Lord's church was in the making.

Ezra Taft Benson was born August 4, 1899, in the small Mormon settlement of Whitney, Idaho. He was the first of eleven children born to George T. Benson, Jr., and Sarah Dunkley. Ezra's birth was a frightening experience. The doctor was unable to get the eleven-pound baby boy to breathe. He set the baby on the bed and announced sadly, "There's no hope for this child to live, but I believe we can save the mother." While the doctor worked to help the mother, Ezra's two grandmothers fell to their knees and asked the Lord to help them save their precious grandson.

They quickly got two pans of water, one cool and one warm, and began dipping the baby first in one pan and then in the other until finally he let out a loud cry. The women wept for joy when they were sure that the baby would live and that his mother was also out of danger.

Ezra, or "T" as he was called in his youth, was proud of his ancestors. Some of his forefathers had fought in the American Revolution. His great-grandfather Ezra Taft Benson, for whom he was named, was an apostle and a close and trusted friend of Joseph Smith and Brigham Young. Ezra's grandparents, equally faithful, had been among the first settlers in Franklin County in southeastern Idaho and had lived the first winters there in wagon boxes until log homes could be built.

Ezra's father was of the same hardworking stock. He wasted no time teaching his children how to run the eighty-acre farm where Ezra was reared. Each morning George Benson would call to the upstairs bedroom, "Ezra! Time to get chores done," and he'd give the heavy wood stove directly beneath the children's room a hard rattle. That was the sign that Ezra and his brothers and sisters had better get up.

At age four, Ezra, standing up as tall and straight as he could, would take hold of the leather reins and drive a team of horses pulling a plow. He milked several of the family's seventeen Holstein cows twice each day. At age seven, he was digging potatoes, thinning sugar beets, and caring for the Benson's eight work horses. He grew to love the land and the farming life, a trait that would someday help him become the country's most important farm leader.

Ezra was also taught to show respect for others. Shortly after he learned how to talk, Ezra's mother once spent an afternoon teaching him to greet people with a polite "How do you do?" That evening, as the family and a few visiting relatives sat around the dinner table, Ezra looked down from his high chair at a bowlful of boiled eggs and said, "How do you do, eggs?"

As Ezra grew up, he witnessed the arrival of many modern conveniences. He never forgot the tears of joy his mother shed the day she turned a tap in the kitchen and water came out. Until that day the family's water had to be pumped (and pumped and pumped . . . ) from a well outside. When he was a teenager, Ezra went with his father to the forest to cut down trees for telephone poles and haul them to the farmhouse. With the help of a technician, he and his father strung the wires and installed their first telephone. Country life seemed much easier with these new inventions.

Ezra's parents knew very well that farm work had to be mixed with fun. After a week of daily farm chores, the family often went to Bear Lake for a day of fishing and swimming, or took a picnic of fried chicken, salads, and homemade ice cream to the canyon. The children also enjoyed footraces, playing with newborn puppies or calves, playing basketball with their father, and sleigh riding in the wintertime. Ezra occasionally tied a long rope around the saddle horn and skied behind his horse. He loved playing marbles and was a local champ. One summer he started out with ten marbles and won well over a thousand.

Even when the Benson children were ill, there were ways of cheering them up. When they all came down with the chicken pox, Ezra's Scottish grandmother, Margaret Dunkley, danced the Highland Fling outside on the lawn to entertain the children. They watched through the front window, squealing with delight.

Halloween brought out the mischief in Ezra. He soon grew to be a tall, husky, robust boy, and he and his pals daringly moved outhouses from where they belonged, scared other Whitney children with sheets over their heads, and once left a farmer's buggy on top of a nearby hill. Ezra seemed to know how to have fun without losing the respect of others. A boyhood friend remembered:

Ezra T. was always a fellow who liked to have a good time. He always had a lot of fun in everything he did. And at a social he just had a way of mixing in with people, and they'd all have a good time. I think most of the boys in Whitney that were younger looked up to him and felt that he was a real good fellow and would give them good advice.

Fun was fun, but on Sundays, when all work ceased on the Benson farm, a different kind of fun was in order. The family attended Church in the one-room, rock meetinghouse in Whitney. Preparations for the Sabbath began Saturday night when shoes were shined and the children's clothing was laid out. With eleven children to get ready, there was no time to search for socks or shoes Sunday morning. George Benson was determined to be to Church on time and often pulled the buggy out of the yard as a child or two came racing out of the house with shoes or coat in hand.

Ezra's parents were devoted members of the Church and taught their children the principles of the gospel. Ezra came in from the fields one day to find his mother bent over the ironing board with perspiration on her forehead. He asked what she was ironing. "These are my temple clothes, Son." She put her iron down, sat by her son, and took time to explain the importance of the temple and its ordinances. This experience with his mother became a sweet memory for him.

Ezra was baptized and confirmed a member of the Church on August 4, 1907, on his eighth birthday. Five years later his life was again changed when his father was called on a mission to the Northern States. Ezra would now have to take on extra chores and responsibilities to help his mother, who was expecting her eighth child.

While George Benson was on his mission, Ezra helped his brothers and sisters with their schoolwork. He traded milk and eggs at the store in Whitney for other groceries for the family. Meals were kept simple to save money to send to their father. The family often sat down to an evening meal of bread and milk topped with green onions. This meal became one of Ezra's lifelong favorite snacks, and he often declared, "You know, the onion is the world's most neglected vegetable."

Ezra later said, "Those days on the farm when Father was away [on his mission] were a real test for the family. But there came into our home a spirit of missionary work that never left it." Indeed, the children loved to sit around the kitchen table while their mother read letters she had received from their father. Through his letters, they heard him bear his testimony and tell of his spiritual experiences. In time, all eleven of the Benson children would serve missions; some more than one.

The future prophet attended elementary school in Whitney and later attended high school at the Oneida Stake Academy in Preston, Idaho. Being tall and athletic, Ezra was a valuable member of the school basketball team, which played against other teams from schools in the Snake River Valley. Games were sometimes played in makeshift locations. In Shelley, Idaho, for example, where there was no basketball court, they drained the swimming pool and attached temporary backboards on either end. One advantage was that the ball couldn't go out of bounds. By participating in sports, "I learned to play fair," Ezra later said. "Father always said 'It's better to lose than lose your temper.' "

Ezra had several ways of earning extra spending money. He would set muskrat traps on his way to school, checking them on the way home and skinning any muskrats he caught. He dried the pelts and sold them to a fur house in Chicago. He also "hired out" to thin sugar beets for other farmers. He once thinned a whole acre of beets in one day. The farmer was so delighted that he paid Ezra two five-dollar gold pieces and two silver dollars. He went home feeling like the richest man in town.

Ezra continued his education by attending the Utah State Agricultural College in Logan (now Utah State University) for one year. There he first caught sight of Flora Amussen as she zoomed by on Main Street in a Ford convertible. He decided right then and there he wanted to date her, but his cousin said, "Like heck you will. She's too popular for a farm boy."

Flora was indeed a "city girl," the daughter of a Danish-immigrant jeweler and watchmaker. She and her widowed mother lived in a large home where Flora had been brought up to be cultured and refined. On campus she was studentbody vice-president, Girls' Athletic Club president, and a tennis champion. This made Ezra, or "Taft" as he was now called, even more interested. He asked her out for a date, and she accepted. It was the beginning of a courtship that lasted seven years.

During that time, Ezra was ordained an elder and served an honorable mission for the Church in Great Britain from 1921 to 1923. Upon his return, he decided that Flora was the one he wanted to marry. But before he could officially propose to her, Flora made an announcement—she was going on a mission to the Hawaiian Islands! Ezra was shocked. "I was ready to settle down on the farm. It was really tough. She was the light of my life."

Ezra waited. While Flora was away, he busied himself by attending Brigham Young University in Provo, where he was voted Most Popular Man during his senior year. He worked on the farm in Whitney during the summers, where he devised a slogan for the bottles of milk he and his brother sold from their dairy: "You can whip our cream but you can't beat our milk."

With so much to do, the time passed quickly, and soon Flora was home. They were married September 10, 1926, in the Salt Lake Temple. Ezra wrote: "The wedding ceremony was too beautiful for words. Everything went off so quiet and peaceful. It all made us so thankful for the Restored Gospel and all that it holds out to us. Surely we had never been happier."

Together at last, Ezra and Flora began adventures that would take them across the country and all over the world. It would have been impossible for them to know at that time the remarkable experiences awaiting them.

After their marriage, Ezra and Flora traveled in a Model T Ford truck to attend school at Iowa State College, where Ezra graduated with a master's degree. Returning to Whitney, Ezra farmed and worked as an agricultural agent. He taught farmers how to get better crops by using good seed and getting rid of weeds, insects, and annoying rodents. He taught them how to keep careful records of their expenses and to take better care of their machinery and livestock.

In 1929, they moved to Boise, the Idaho state capital, where Ezra was head of the new Department of Agricultural Economics and Marketing. He traveled all over Idaho "helping farmers solve a hundred and one problems." Ezra was soon in demand, giving hundreds of speeches and demonstrations and giving farmers encouragement. He also served as an LDS stake president in Boise, which allowed him to contribute in spiritual ways to the community.

Word was spreading about this energetic young agent who was so skilled in working with people and finding solutions to their farming problems. In 1939, Ezra was appointed executive-secretary of the National Council of Farmers Cooperatives, an organization representing over two million farmers throughout the country. This new job meant moving to the nation's capital, Washington, D.C. While working for the government there, he was again called to serve as a stake president.

Ezra and Flora became the parents of six children, four daughters, and two sons. Their family was very close. "Some of the sweetest experiences of my life are associated with home and family ties," he said many times. Ezra frequently played ball with his two sons, worked with his children in their vegetable garden, and often took one or more of them with him on a business trip. "How fun it was to be with Dad, just him and me," one son said after a trip to Salt Lake City. "We stayed in a hotel and ate in a restaurant together. We talked about anything I wanted to talk about. I knew Dad loved me because he was with me."

Ezra Taft Benson, the man who loved his family, the land, his country, his Church, and the Lord was called to be an apostle in 1943. Church President Heber J. Grant was very old and feeble at this time. He sat in a chair while Ezra knelt down in front of him on the floor to be ordained by the prophet to this new important calling.

In 1946, as an apostle, Ezra became president of the European Mission, headquartered in London. He reopened missions that had been closed during World War II. He organized the shipment of food, clothing, and medicine to the Saints in Europe who were still suffering from the terrible destruction of that war. Many places where Church members had held their meetings had been destroyed or needed major repairs. Ezra found that theSaints needed scriptures and other Church literature, and he arranged for them to be printed or sent. Ezra was often moved to tears when he saw how badly these dear members needed help.

After Ezra returned to the United States, U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower appointed him to be Secretary of Agriculture, and Ezra became a member of the president's Cabinet. For eight years he continued on a national scale the work he had begun in Idaho, helping the United States to lead the way as the major producer of food in the world. Ezra was grateful for this opportunity to serve his country. One evening as he strolled along the streets of Washington, D.C., he felt very happy:

As I walked, I reviewed in my own mind the history of this, the greatest nation under heaven. I presume that never in my life has there come to my heart such a feeling of gratitude and thanksgiving for my citizenship in this land, choice above all others.

It wasn't easy. There was always someone who disagreed with some decision or policy. But Ezra remained strong and true to his convictions, and he was greatly admired for that. One of his assistants once urged him to "remember always that many of your friends feel that a great source of your personal strength is that you walk beside God, whereas most of us only report to him."

The Benson family returned to Salt Lake City in 1961, and Ezra took up again his full-time service as an apostle. Upon the death of Spencer W. Kimball, Ezra Taft Benson was ordained and set apart as the thirteenth president of the Church on November 10, 1985. He was then eighty-six years old. At a press conference, President Benson had a special message for the world: "I love all our Father's children of every color, creed, and political persuasion. My only desire is to serve as the Lord would have me do." This was, and always had been, President Benson's greatest desire—to serve the Lord and do his will.

The members of the Church welcomed their new prophet with open arms and felt the spirit and power of this great man. One missionary wrote of the time he and his companion met President Benson after a sacrament meeting:

As President Benson approached us, my heart burned. His glowing, happy face filled our hearts with peace and love. He was so happy to see us! He took our hands in his and held them tight. . . . Never have I felt such penetrating power from a man. Not since my conversion [to the gospel] have I felt so drained by the Spirit. I will never forget it.

"Read the Book of Mormon" became a theme of President Benson's years as a prophet, seer, and revelator. He felt inspired by the Lord to challenge Latter-day Saints of all ages to read the Book of Mormon each day and live by its teachings. "There is a power in the book which will begin to flow into your lives the moment you begin a serious study of the book," he promised.

Throughout his life President Benson traveled many thousands of miles and visited dozens of countries. But the land that once was the Benson family farm in Whitney, Idaho, remained one of his favorite places in all the world, for it was there that he learned as a boy to love his God and his country.
