Hyrum L. Andrus, Joseph Smith, the Man and the Seer ( 1960)

I

Joseph Smith the Man

"I feel like shouting hallelujah, all the time, when I think that I ever knew Joseph Smith, the Prophet," declared Brigham Young. [^1] Other associates of the Mormon Prophet were equally enthusiastic in their praise of him. Such a remarkable character comes rarely on the scene of history; and, after making his appearance, seldom does he leave such an indelible imprint upon the lives of others as did the Prophet Joseph Smith.

The man Joseph was a commanding figure with a magnetic personality. He possessed a "distinguishing mark," a "noble grandeur," that set him apart from other men. [^2] A United States Artillery Officer wrote in 1842: "Joseph . . . is a noble looking fellow, a Mahomet every inch of him. Who will say that the Mormon Prophet is not among the great spirits of the age?" [^3]

Josiah Quincy, Jr., son of the president of Harvard and himself later mayor of Boston, visited Nauvoo with his friend, the Hon. Charles Francis Adams, in May, 1844. Neither was a friend of Joseph Smith nor of the cause he espoused. In his diary, Adams referred to Mormonism as a "delusion" and to the Prophet as "its mountebank apostle." [^4] Quincy spoke of the "monstrous claims" of Mormonism and termed the Prophet's discussion of the restored gospel as "wild talk" wherein he "supported his views by the glib recitation of a number of texts." But despite his sarcasm Quincy confessed that he stood "helpless before the puzzle." One thing he could understand—that somehow this "man of commanding appearance" had touched the lives of thousands and was indeed a force to be reckoned with in the earth. Quincy's respect for this obvious fact caused him to open his account of his visit to Nauvoo with the following words:

It is by no means improbable that some future text-book, for the use of generations yet unborn, will contain a question something like this: What historical American of the nineteenth century has exerted the most powerful influence upon the destinies of his countrymen? And it is by no means impossible that the answer to that interrogatory may be thus written: Joseph Smith, the Mormon Prophet. And the reply, absurd as it doubtless seems to most men now living, may be an obvious commonplace to their descendants. . . . The man who established a religion in this age of free debate, who was and is today accepted by hundreds of thousands as a direct emissary from the Most High,—such a rare human being is not to be disposed of by pelting his memory with unsavory epithets. [^5]

Less than a year earlier, a non-Mormon editor spoke of Joseph Smith as "one of the most remarkable men of the present, or in fact of any other age." While asserting that he was in no way a believer "in Mormonism, or in our friend Joseph the Prophet, as a divine Teacher," the editor compared him with Mahomet, and the revolution the Prophet was effecting with that which Mahomet had initiated centuries before. But Mahomet "appeared at an age when darkness, idolatry and superstition cast upon the world the shadows of mental stupor and moral death," he observed.

How different stands the case with Joseph Smith, the Prophet, and Apostle of Mormon. He appears in the middle of the nineteenth century. The full glory of brightness and revelation is in the very zenith of the Christian firmament, and in a country too, most distinguished for enlightenment, and the least prejudiced of bigotry and fanaticism, ancient manners, and inherited forms of religion. Still his success is no less remarkable, although in an age so much less susceptible to the wicked designs of Priestcraft, and the designing schemes of ambitious men. [^6]

Those who knew Joseph Smith personally were particularly impressed by his greatness. James Leech and Bathsheba W. Smith spoke of him as being "different from any other man" they had ever seen. [^7] To the latter, he was "an extraordinary man," who "looked the soul and honor of integrity." [^8] Joseph Taylor, Sr., expressed the belief that the Prophet was "one of God's noblemen," [^9] while Wiley Payne Allred wrote that he was "the most noble man" he had ever seen. [^10] Jesse N. Smith declared the Mormon leader to be "incomparably the most God-like man I ever saw." [^11] And John M. Chidester reported that, as he met the Prophet and shook hands with him, he was impressed that he "stood face to face with the greatest man on earth." [^12] Josiah Smith gave a more detailed account:

When he grasped my hand in that cordial way (known to those who have met him in the honest simplicity of truth), I felt as one of old in the presence of the Lord, my strength seemed to be gone, so that it required an effort on my part to stand on my feet; but in all this there was no fear, but the serenity and peace of heaven pervaded my soul, and the still small voice of the spirit whispered its living testimony in the depths of my soul, where it has ever remained, that he was a Man of God. [^13]

Such sentiments were widespread and of lasting significance among the Prophet's acquaintances. As James B. Bracken recalled Joseph's conduct during a trying experience in Missouri, he observed, "I never saw a nobler looking or acting man than Joseph Smith appeared on that occasion." [^14] Said Daniel D. McArthur, "To me he seemed to possess more power and force of character than any ordinary man. I would look upon him when he was with hundreds of other men, then, he would appear greater than ever." [^15]

According to Angus M. Cannon:

He was one of the grandest samples of manhood that I ever saw walk or ride at the head of a legion of men. In listening to him as he has addressed the Saints his words have so affected me that I would rise upon my feet in the agitation that would take hold of my mind. [^16]

Of the Prophet's appearance as a Lieutenant General at the head of the Nauvoo Legion, Lyman L. Woods recalled, "I have seen him on a white horse wearing the uniform of a general. . . . He was leading a parade of the Legion and looked like a god." [^17] Mary Ann Winters also related:

I saw him on parade at the head of the Nauvoo Legion, looking noble and grand as a leader could do. His commanding presence could be discerned above all others, and all eyes were centered on him, as he rode back and forth giving the commands of his office. [^18]

Even those previously prejudiced against the Prophet because of the tide of hatred and persecution that was raised against him were impressed when they had the opportunity personally to meet and speak with him. Many of the officials who would have taken his life, during the Missouri difficulties, "turned in his favor on forming his acquaintance." [^19] While a prisoner in Missouri, Joseph Smith was delivered into the custody of his bitter enemy, General Moses Wilson. Later General Wilson said of him, "He was a very remarkable man. I carried him into my house, a prisoner in chains, and in less than two hours my wife loved him better than she did me." Some years later, when the Wilsons had moved to Texas, the General was engaged in raising a mob against some Mormon elders in that area. Upon hearing of these plans, Mrs. Wilson, although an aged lady, mounted her horse and rode thirty miles to warn the elders. No doubt her esteem for the Prophet largely motivated her in this action. [^20]

Shortly after the family of Joseph Smith, Sr., moved to Far West, Missouri, in the summer of 1838, difficulties arose between the Saints and the mob element in that area. It started at an election held at Gallatin, the county seat of Daviess County, Missouri, when a group of non-Mormons attempted to prevent certain of the brethren from voting. The Prophet was not present at the time. A struggle occurred in which several non-Mormons were hurt, and the report was afterward circulated that Joseph Smith had himself killed seven men and intended to organize the Saints and exterminate all who were not of the Mormon faith.

A few days thereafter, Joseph was at the home of his parents, writing a letter, when a large body of armed men came to the door. Eight of their officers dismounted and entered the house, stating that they had come "to kill Joe Smith and all the 'Mormons.' " When Mother Smith informed them that her son had not been in Daviess County, one of the officers rejoined, "There is no doubt that the report is perfectly correct; it came straight to us, and I believe it: and we were sent to kill the Prophet and all who believe in him, and I'll be d— —d if I don't execute my orders." After some further comments, Joseph arose from his writing table and was introduced by his mother. As they stared at him, "he smiled, and stepping towards them, gave each of them his hand, in a manner which convinced them that he was neither a guilty criminal nor yet a hypocrite." He then sat down and explained to them the attitude of the Saints and what their course had been amid the difficulties that had been heaped upon them. After talking to them for some time, he turned and said, "Mother, I believe I will go home now—Emma will be expecting me." At this, two of the officers sprang to their feet and suggested that he should not go alone and that they would attend him in order to protect him. As the three men left the house, Mother Smith overheard the following conversation among the officers who remained at the door:

1st Officer. "Did you not feel strangely when Smith took you by the hand? I never felt so in my life."

2nd Officer. "I could not move. I would not harm a hair of that man's head for the whole world."

3rd Officer. "This is the last time you will catch me coming to kill Joe Smith, or the 'Mormons' either."

1st Officer. "I guess this is about my last expedition against this place. I never saw a more harmless, innocent-appearing man than the 'Mormon' Prophet."

2nd Officer. "That story about his killing those men is all a d— —d lie— there is no doubt of it; and we have had all this trouble for nothing; but they will never fool me in this way again; I'll warrant them." [^21]

Because of the Prophet's striking figure and personality, many people immediately recognized him upon seeing him, without an introduction. Andrew Workman and Jane Snyder Richards later wrote that they "recognized him at first sight." [^22] As a young man, George Q. Cannon was with a group of immigrants who traveled up the Mississippi River by boat to Nauvoo. As a large concourse of people gathered to meet them, young Cannon identified the Prophet immediately, "He would have known him among ten thousand," Cannon later wrote in his biography of the Mormon leader, "There was that about him which to the author's eyes, distinguished him from all the men he had ever seen." [^23] Mary Alice Lambert also said:

I knew him the instant my eyes rested upon him, and at that moment I received my testimony that he was a Prophet of God, for I never had such a feeling for mortal man as thrilled my being when my eyes first rested upon Joseph Smith. He was not pointed out to me. I knew him from all the other men, and, child that I was (I was only fourteen) I knew that I saw a Prophet of God. [^24]

Emmeline B. Wells, who became a noted figure among Mormon women, gave a similar testimony. Though she "had not formed any idea" of the Prophet's appearance before meeting him, she wrote:

At last the boat reached the upper landing, and a crowd of people were coming toward the bank of the river. As we stepped ashore the crowd advanced, and I could see one person who towered away and above all the others around him: in fact I did not see distinctly any others. His majestic bearing, so entirely different from anyone I had ever seen (and I had seen many superior men) was more than a surprise. It was as if I beheld a vision; I seemed to be lifted off my feet, to be as it were walking in the air, and paying no heed whatever to those around me. I made my way through the crowd, then I saw this man whom I had noticed, because of his lofty appearance, shaking hands with all the people, men, women, and children. Before I was aware of it he came to me, and when he took my hand, I was simply electrified—thrilled through and through to the tips of my fingers, and every part of my body, as if some magic elixir had given me new life and vitality. I am sure that for a few minutes I was not conscious of motion. I think I stood still, I did not want to speak, or be spoken to. I was overwhelmed with indefinable emotion. . . .

I was in reality too full for utterance. I think had I been formally presented to the Prophet, I should have fallen down at his feet, I was in such a state of ecstasy. The one thought that filled my soul was I have seen the Prophet of God, he has taken me by the hand, and this testimony has never left me in all the "perils by the way." It is as vivid today as ever it was. For many years I felt it too sacred an experience even to mention. [^25]

George Miller, later a prominent bishop in the Church, also recognized the Prophet upon sight without an introduction. Miller had befriended some of the Saints when they were driven from Missouri. As a prominent farmer in Illinois, he fed some and gave work to others. Among the latter were Samuel and Don Carlos Smith, the Prophet's brothers, from whom Miller later learned that the Prophet had made his escape from Missouri. Shortly thereafter the future bishop, who had not yet heard a sermon by a Latter-day Saint elder, met the Mormon leader. The successful farmer spoke of his feelings upon meeting the penniless Prophet, in the following words:

As I was in the habit of riding out every fair day, on a bland, bright morning I prevailed on my wife to indulge in the luxury of a ride on horseback to visit our tenants on the farm. On our return home, as we were leisurely riding along, I perceived a carriage containing a number of persons meeting us, and as we neared it, the appearance of a large man, sitting in front driving, seemed familiar to me, as if I had always known him, and suddenly the thought burst into my mind that it was none other than the Prophet Joseph Smith. Indeed my whole frame was in a tremor at the thought, and my heart seemed as if it were coming up into my mouth. Getting in speaking distance, he suddenly reined up his horses, as if making ready to speak. I was much agitated as the words came from his mouth. "Sir, can you tell me the way to the farm of a Mr. Miller, living somewhere in the direction I am going?" Instead of answering him directly, my reply was, "I presume, sir, that you are Joseph Smith, Jr., the Mormon Prophet." "I am, sir," he replied, adding, "I also presume that you are the Mr. Miller whose farm I inquired for." "I am, sir." He then introduced me to his wife and family, and thus a formal (or rather informal) introduction passed between us and our families. [^26]

Many people spoke of Joseph Smith as being strikingly handsome. Josiah Quincy observed, "A fine looking-man is what the passer-by would instinctively have murmured upon meeting the remarkable individual who had fashioned the mould which was to shape the feelings of so many thousands of his fellow mortals." [^27] A visitor at Nauvoo agreed; [^28] and from Washington a member of Congress wrote to his wife, after seeing the Prophet, "He is . . . what you ladies would call a very good-looking man." [^29]

Lydia Bailey described Joseph Smith as possessing "a tall, well-built form, with the carriage of an Apollo, brown hair, handsome blue eyes, which seemed to dive down to the innermost thoughts with their sharp, penetrating gaze, a striking countenance, and with manners at once majestic yet gentile, dignified yet exceedingly pleasant." [^30] Wandle Mace gave a similar description:

He was a fine-looking man, tall and well-proportioned, strong and active, light complexion, blue eyes, and light hair, and very little beard. He had a free and easy manner, not the least affectation yet bold and independent, and very interesting and eloquent in speech. [^31]

Others gave more detailed descriptions of Joseph Smith. A correspondent of the New York Herald, after visiting Nauvoo in 1842, spoke of him as "one of the most accomplished and powerful chiefs of the age." He then gave what Helen Mar Whitney, an intimate friend of the Prophet, termed a "truthful description" [^32] of the Mormon leader, in the following words:

Joseph Smith, the president of the church, prophet, seer, and revelator, is thirty-six years of age, six feet high in pumps, weighing two hundred and twelve pounds. He is a man of the highest order of talent and great independence of character—firm in his integrity—and devoted to his religion; . . . as a public speaker he is bold, powerful, and convincing; . . . as a leader, wise and prudent, yet fearless as a military commander; brave and determined as a citizen, worthy, affable, and kind; bland in his manners, and of noble bearing. [^33]

The Weeky Gazette of St, Louis, Missouri. published a rather detailed description of Joseph Smith in May 1844. His chest and shoulders were said to be "broad and muscular," while his hands were "small for his proportions." His feet, however, were large. Continued the Gazette:

The shape of his head is a very oblong oval, the coronal region high, denoting a resolved will, the basal and occipital full, indicating powerful impulses, and the frontal retreating, although the region devoted by phrenologists to the organization of the perceptive powers is unusually prominent. His forehead is white, without a furrow, and notwithstanding the small facial angle, somewhat symmetrical. His hair is quite light and fine, complexion pale, cheeks full, temperament evidently sanguine, lips thin, rather than thick.

But the Prophet's most remarkable feature is his eye. Not that it is very large, or very bright, very thoughtful or very restless, or even very deep in its expression or location: for it is usually neither of them. The hue is light hazel, and it is shaded, and, at times, almost veiled by the longest, thickest light lashes you ever saw belonging to a man. The brows are also light and thick indeed, precisely of that description called beetle-brow.

His voice is low and soft, and his smile, which is frequent, is agreeable.

The Prophet's wife is reported to have said of him, "No painting of him could catch his expression, for his countenance was always changing to match his thoughts and feelings." [^34]

Parley P. Pratt left perhaps the best picture of the Prophet's person and character. This description from his gifted pen was written shortly after the martyrdom:

President Joseph Smith was in person tall and well built, strong and active; of light complexion, light hair, blue eyes, very little beard, and of an expression peculiar to himself, on which the eye naturally rested with interest, and was never weary of beholding. His countenance was ever mild, affable, beaming with intelligence and benevolence; mingled with a look of interest and an unconscious smile, or cheerfulness, and entirely free from all restraint or affectation of gravity; and there was something connected with the serene and steady penetrating glance of his eye, as if he would penetrate the deepest abyss of the human heart, gaze into eternity, penetrate the heaven and comprehend all worlds.

He possessed a noble boldness and independence of character; his manner was easy and familiar; his rebuke terrible as the lion; his benevolence unbounded as the ocean; his intelligence universal, and his language abounding in original eloquence peculiar to himself—not polished—not studied— not smoothed and softened by education and refined by art; but flowing forth in its own native simplicity, and profusely abounding in variety of subject and manner. He interested and edified, while, at the same time, he amused and entertained his audience; and none listened to him who were ever weary with his discourse. I have even known him to retain a congregation of willing and anxious listeners for many hours together, in the midst of cold or sunshine, rain or wind, while they were laughing at one moment and weeping the next. Even his most bitter enemies were generally overcome, if he could once get their ears. . . .

In short, in him the character of a Daniel and a Cyrus were wonderfully blended. The gifts, wisdom and devotion of a Daniel were united with the boldness, courage, temperance, perseverance and generosity of a Cyrus. And had he been spared a martyr's fate till mature manhood and age, he was certainly endowed with powers and ability to have revolutionized the world in many respects, and to have transmitted to posterity a name associated with more brilliant and glorious acts than has yet fallen to the lot of mortal. [^35]

Physically, the Prophet was a powerful man. "He was as quick as a squirrel and as strong as a mountain lion," said Lyman L. Woods, "but he was as gentle as a lamb." [^36] Said another, "He was about six feet tall, sound bodied, very strong and quick—no breakage about his body." [^37]

On the frontier, where Joseph spent much of his life, the measure of a man was largely determined by his strength and agility. Wrestling was a common sport, and on many occasions the Prophet engaged in it either for sport or to meet the challenges forced upon him. While visiting Ramus, Illinois, he wrote in his Journal, "I wrestled with William Wall, the most expert wrestler in Ramus, and threw him." [^38] Another such instance was related by Major Joseph McGee of Gallatin, Missouri, who said, "I saw Joseph Smith throw John Brassfield, the champion wrestler of the country the first two falls out of a match of three. He was a powerful man." [^39] Those who knew the Prophet gave similar reports. Said Enoch E. Dodge, "I have seen him run, jump, wrestle and pull sticks many times, and he was always winner." [^40] Again from another, "I've seen the Prophet wrestle, and run, and jump, but have never seen him beaten. In all that he did he was manly and almost godlike." [^41]

While the Prophet and others were imprisoned in Missouri, they were sent to Daviess County under guard and turned over to a group of the strongest and roughest men in that county. The reputed champion wrestler of Daviess County challenged the Prophet to a wrestling match, which Joseph at first declined to engage in because he was a prisoner and felt that he could not participate in such activities under the circumstances. But, after being encouraged by the guards and after the man had promised not to get angry if he should be thrown, the Prophet consented. The Daviess County wrestler sought to use all the trickery known to him in his effort to throw the Prophet, but he failed. Finally, Joseph made his first real attempt and threw his antagonist flat on his back in a puddle of water. This made the Missourian angry, even though he had agreed to restrain himself, but his associates interfered and thereafter subjected him to much ridicule over the matter. [^42]

Pulling sticks was another sport in which the Prophet often engaged. The contestants would sit upon the floor facing each other, with a sturdy stick between them, and then see which one could pull the other up from his seated position. But in such tests of strength, said Benjamin F. Johnson, "he never found his match." [^43] Joseph recorded one such example in his Journal, "In the evening, when pulling sticks, I pulled up Justice A. Morse, the strongest man in Ramus, with one hand." [^44] On another occasion, the Prophet was traveling away from Nauvoo when an attempt was made to kidnap him and to carry him to Missouri, to be turned over to his former persecutors. But the Prophet's enemies were frustrated when certain brethren intercepted the kidnapping party and issued legal procedures against them, whereupon the two hostile bands found it necessary to travel together to Nauvoo. Upon his return the Prophet spoke to the Saints, declaring:

I am well—I am hearty. . . . I feel as strong as a giant. I pulled sticks with the men coming along, and I pulled up with one hand the strongest man that could be found. Then two men tried, but they could not pull me up. [^45]

The Prophet often applied his physical exercises and sports toward the accomplishment of wholesome purposes. While studying Greek and Latin, he would interrupt his work to play with the children in their games and to give himself exercise, and when sufficiently relaxed he would return to his studies. [^46] While preaching one day,

He said it tried some of the pious folks to see him play ball with the boys. He then related a story of a certain prophet who was sitting under the shade of a tree amusing himself in some way, when a hunter came along with his bow and arrow, and reproved him. The prophet asked him if he kept his bow strung up all the time. The hunter answered that he did not. The prophet asked why, and he said it would lose its elasticity if he did. The prophet said it was just so with his mind, he did not want it strung up all the time. [^47]

The development of another worthy goal sought by the Prophet through the use of sports. When his brother Hyrum reproved him for playing a game of ball with some young men in Nauvoo, stating that such conduct was not becoming to a Prophet of the Lord, Joseph replied, "Brother Hyrum, my mingling with the boys in a harmless sport like this does not injure me in any way, but on the other hand it makes them happy and draws their hearts nearer to mine; and who knows but there may be young men among them who may sometime lay down their lives for me!" [^48]

Strength of body was combined in the Prophet with an indomitable will and a supreme courage in doing right. He and his brother Hyrum were said to be "as brave as lions." [^49] A non-Mormon reporter stated that the Mormon leader possessed that degree of "concentrated moral and spiritual energy [that] fears no combat, and although we cannot say it exactly courts danger, it never flies from the post of duty on its approach." [^50] In a letter to James Arlington Bennett, Joseph himself wrote, "I never knew what it was, as yet, to fear the face of clay, or the influence of man." [^51]

The Prophet's reputation was founded in deeds of courage. It is common knowledge that as a boy he had typhus fever, which caused among its aftereffects, a severe pain in his shoulder that subsequently "shot like lightning" down his side into the bone of his leg. After efforts to relieve the pain by making incisions in his leg had failed, his doctors decided to amputate it at the knee. But his mother prevailed upon them to try once more to save the leg, and it was decided to cut away the infected parts of the bone. Since anaesthetics were not known in those days, the doctors ordered cords to be brought to bind Joseph fast to a bedstead, but to this he objected. Next it was proposed that he be given brandy or wine to deaden the pain, but again Joseph refused. Said he, "No, I will not touch one particle of liquor, neither will I be tied down; but I will tell you what I will do—I will have my father sit on the bed and hold me in his arms, and then I will do whatever is necessary in order to have the bone taken out."

After his mother had been sent from the room, "the surgeons commenced operating by boring into the bone of his leg, first on one side of the bone where it was affected, then on the other side, after which they broke the infected parts off with a pair of forceps or pincers." Several pieces were removed. The operation left young Joseph pale, weak, and perspiring; but it was successful in checking the malady, and he soon began to recover. [^52]

While he was en route to Washington, in 1839, the coachman of the stage in which he and others were riding stepped into a public house to take his grog. Somehow the horses took fright and ran down a steep hill at full speed. The passengers were immediately panic-stricken, some of them to the point of hysteria. One woman endeavored to throw her baby out of the window but was restrained from doing so by the Prophet. Some men attempted to jump out. Coaches in those days were great, cumbersome things: high decked-over tops, with railings, where mail sacks and trunks were carried, and sometimes passengers rode up there. The seat for the driver was in front, so high that the top of the coach formed but little support for his back. After quieting the passengers somewhat, the Prophet opened the door, secured a hold on the side of the speeding coach, and succeeded in getting into the driver's seat. After the racing horses had carried their frightened cargo some two or three miles, he was able to rein them up.

Joseph's actions were spoken of in the highest terms of commendation as "One of the most daring hero deeds. and no language could express the gratitude of the passengers." There were members of Congress present who even proposed mentioning the incident to that body with the intention of rewarding "such conduct by some public act." But when they inquired concerning their rescuer's name and were informed that he was Joseph Smith the Mormon Prophet, their praise subsided, and Joseph heard no more of their proposals [^53]

In the effort to kidnap Joseph Smith which was mentioned before, he again demonstrated his courage and fearlessness. His enemies thrust loaded pistols into his side with the oath, "G—d— you, if you say another word I will shoot you, by G—." But the Prophet calmly replied, "Shoot away; I am not afraid of your pistols." [^54] By his courage he strengthened his brethren and carried them through trials and difficulties that might otherwise have been insurmountable. When a mob force of some 3,500 was approaching Far West, shortly before the Saints were driven from Missouri, Lieutenant Colonel George M. Hinkle, commander of the Mormon forces, ordered a retreat. "Retreat!" exclaimed Joseph Smith. "Why, where in the name of God shall we go?" Then turning to the men around him he said, "Boys, follow me!" A band of about two hundred men went with him out on the open prairie to face the force of 3,500. While they prepared for a showdown, the Prophet sent word to the enemy by one of their messengers, saying, "Go tell your general for me that if he does not immediately withdraw his men, I will send them to hell!" The mob charged only to retreat in disorder and confusion before reaching the Mormon lines. [^55] At another time the threat was reversed, and a mob threatened to send the Saints to hell. But the Prophet rejoined, "If they do we will turn the devils out and make a heaven out of it." [^56] His advice to George A. Smith is classic, "Never be discouraged" said he to his cousin, "if I were sunk in the lowest pit of Nova Scotia, with the Rocky Mountains piled on me, I would hang on, exercise faith keep up good courage, and I would come out on top." [^57]

Warren Waste, reputedly the strongest man in the Western Reserve, witnessed a test of the Prophet's strength, will, and courage. As one of a mob that dragged Joseph from his bed in the middle of the night, Waste had boasted that he alone could take the Prophet out of the house. But as he and others were undertaking their fiendish designs. Waste had hold of one foot when the Prophet gave him a kick that sent him sprawling off the steps. The imprint made in the ground by his head and shoulders could still be seen the next morning. With his boastful spirit cooled, Waste recovered himself and cried, "Do not let him touch the ground, or he will run over the whole of us." He afterwards said that the Prophet was "the most powerful man" he had ever had hold of in his life.

The Prophet was then beaten and choked into insensibility by the combined strength of the mob; he recovered to find himself being taken some forty rods from the house toward a meadow. There the mob tore off his night clothes, stretched him upon a board, and tantalized him in the most insulting and brutal manner. [^58] He was beaten, scratched, and finally covered with tar and feathers. One mobocrat fell upon him and, while kicking and clawing his body, cried, "D— you, this is the way the Holy Ghost falls upon you." Another tried to force a tar paddle into his mouth and another a phial said to contain nitric acid, but it was broken against his teeth. One of his front teeth was also broken, thereafter causing a slight whistle when he spoke. So powerful was this acid that the grass was killed where it spilled upon the ground.

Despite this treatment and the fact that he spent the remaining part of the night cleaning tar and feathers from his body and treating his wounds, the Prophet fulfilled a preaching engagement the next morning. Among the listeners were some who had so cruelly assaulted him a few hours before. [^59]

A few years later, as the Saints were being driven from Missouri and the Prophet was imprisoned at Richmond, William E. McLellin went to the sheriff and asked permission to flog the prisoner. McLellin, a large and active man, was an apostate who had once been a member of the Quorum of the Twelve. Permission was granted on condition that Joseph would fight. To this the Prophet agreed on condition that his irons were to be taken off. McLellin then refused to fight unless he could have a club, to which Joseph consented; but the sheriff would not allow them to fight on such unequal terms. [^60]

The Prophet's sense of security amid turmoil and persecution was founded largely in his faith in God and in his awareness of the divine mission to which he had been called. Shortly after he and others were taken captive in Missouri, he arose one morning and whispered cheerfully and confidently to his fellow prisoners, "Be of good cheer, brethren; the word of the Lord came to me last night that our lives should be given us, and that whatever we may suffer during our captivity, not one of our lives should be taken." [^61] This assurance buoyed up the brethren throughout the ordeals of their captivity. When Parley P. Pratt found an opportunity to escape which, while allowing him his freedom, would have jeopardized the lives of the other prisoners, he thought of the Prophet's promise and returned to his imprisoned brethren. [^62]

Some time after his escape from Missouri, Joseph Smith was forced into hiding by enemies who sought his life. His companion in exile, William Taylor, inquired, "Brother Joseph, don't you get frightened when all those hungry wolves are after you?" The Prophet's reply again revealed the source of the security he manifested throughout his life. Said he, "No, I am not afraid; the Lord said he would protect me, and I have full confidence in His word." [^63]

The Prophet's courage was combined with supreme integrity. Lorenzo Snow said, "There never was a man that possessed a higher degree of integrity and more devotedness to the interests of mankind than the Prophet Joseph Smith." [^64] When Zion's Camp made the arduous journey from Kirtland to Missouri, in 1834, Joseph Smith demonstrated on many occasions what L. O. Littlefield termed as his "natural and inspired characteristic" of integrity. Littlefield said of him, "It is due his memory for me to here place on record the fact that I never, in that camp or during the trials of his later life, saw Joseph Smith the Prophet falter or shrink from the performance of any duty or undertaking that the Lord had commanded or inaugurated." [^65] Moses Martin wrote in his Journal, "The road was so bad that we twice during the day had to unhitch our teams from our wagons and draw them by hand. Here I saw the Prophet wade in mud over the tops of his boot legs and help draw the wagons out." [^66] Another member of the camp noted other similar experiences and bore a like testimony, stating, "Zion's Camp, in passing through the State of Indiana, had to cross very bad swamps, consequently we had to attach ropes to the wagons to help them through, and the Prophet was the first man at the rope in his bare feet. This was characteristic of him in all times of difficulty." [^67] George A. Smith also wrote concerning that journey:

The Prophet Joseph took a full share of the fatigues of the entire journey. In addition to the care of providing for the Camp and presiding over it, he walked most of the time and had a full proportion of blistered, bloody and sore feet, which was the natural result of walking from 25 to 40 miles a day in a hot season of the year. But during the entire trip he never uttered a murmur or complaint, while most of the men in the Camp complained to him of sore toes, blistered feet, long drives, scanty supply of provisions, poor quality of bread, bad corn dodger, frouzey butter, strong honey, maggotty bacon and cheese, etc., even a dog could not bark at some men without their murmuring at Joseph. If they had to camp with bad water it would nearly cause rebellion, yet we were the Camp of Zion, and many of us were prayerless, thoughtless, careless, heedless, foolish or devilish and yet we did not know it. Joseph had to bear with us and tutor us, like children. There were many, however, in the Camp who never murmured and who were always ready and willing to do as our leaders desired. [^68]

Said George Q. Cannon with reference to the Prophet's integrity, as manifested throughout his life of tribulation and persecution:

Think of what he passed through! Think of his afflictions, and think of his dauntless character! Did any one ever see him falter? Did any one ever see him flinch? Did any one ever see any lack in him of the power necessary to enable him to stand with dignity in the midst of his enemies, or lacking in dignity in the performance of his duties as a servant of the living God? God gave him peculiar power in this respect. He was filled with integrity to God; with such integrity as was not known among men. He was like an angel of God among them. Notwithstanding all that he had to endure, and the peculiar circumstances in which he was so often placed, and the great responsibility that weighed constantly upon him, he never faltered; the feeling of fear or trembling never crossed him—at least he never exhibited it in his feelings or actions. God sustained him to the very last, and was with him, and bore him off triumphant even in his death. [^69]

Men with such a rare blend of admirable qualities as Joseph Smith possessed seldom appear on the scene of history. His physical appearance was commanding and inviting to look upon. His personality was charming and magnetic. While he possessed the strength of a giant, he had the agility of a chipmunk. Yet he was gentle and easy to approach, even by those in lowly stations. His keen penetrating eye was ever alert and discerning; and when truth was revealed, his courage and integrity in following its course knew no bounds. Such traits of character, with others yet to be discussed, caused Joseph Smith to stand out as a man among men and contributed to his stature as a Latter-day prophet of God.

Footnotes

Tears came to Sister Allen's eyes when she recalls his looks, while speaking to the Saints, and also how majestic he looked when he rode on his great black horse at the head of the Nauvoo Legion.

She says the only words that express his looks and actions are: "Surely he was a man of God."-Young Woman's Journal, XVIII, p. 538.

The Prophet was a handsome man,-splendid looking, a large man, tall and fair and his hair was light. He had a very nice complexion, his eyes were blue, and his hair a golden brown and pretty. Young Woman's Journal, XVI, p. 549.

---
Notas:
[^1] Quincy, op cit., pp. 277-279, 381.
[^2] Idem.
[^3] Idem.
[^4] Ibid., pp. 391-392.
[^5] Ibid., pp. 392-393.
[^6] Journal History, September, 1830.
[^7] Ibid., May 3, 1839.
[^8] Whitney, op. cit., XI, p. 58.
[^9] Columbus Advocate, Columbus, Ohio. Reprinted in Millennial Star, III (June. 1842), p. 25; History of the Church, IV, p. 566.
[^10] The Historical Record, op. cit., p. 476.
[^11] Orson Spencer, Letters Exhibiting the Most Prominent Doctrines of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 6th ed. (Salt Lake City, 1891), p. 26. See Millennial Star (August 31, 1861), pp. 560-578, for a similar statement by William Clayton, another close associate of the Prophet.
[^12] Statement by Emmeline B. Wells, Young Woman's Journal, XVI, pp. 555-556.
[^13] Journal History, January 16, 1834.
[^14] Ibid., March 28, 1834.
[^15] Ibid., March 29, 1834.
[^16] "The Life Story of Mosiah Lyman Hancock," typewritten copy, Brigham Young University Library, p. 24.
[^17] Statement by Jane Snyder Richards, Young Woman's Journal. XVI, p. 550.
[^18] Journal History, January 16, 1834.
[^19] Young Woman's Journal, XVI, p. 557.
[^20] Juvenile Instructor, XXVII, p. 641.
[^21] Whitney, op. cit.
[^22] Young Woman's Journal, XVII, p. 538.
[^23] Johnson, op. cit., p. 4.
[^24] History of the Church, VI, pp. 165-166.
[^25] Ibid., V. p. 286.
[^26] Statement by Jane Snyder Richards, Young Woman's Journal, XVI, p. 550.
[^27] "The Life Story of Mosiah Hancock," p. 3.
[^28] Statement by L. O. Littlefield, Juvenile Instructor, XXVII, pp. 56-57.
[^29] History of the Church, V, p. 432.
[^30] Young Woman's Journal. XVII, p. 548. Said Wandle Mace of the Prophet's playful nature:
[^31] Juvenile Instructor, XXVII, p. 255.
[^32] Benjamin F. Johnson, My Lifes Review (Independence, Mo., 1947), pp. 92-93.
[^33] Johnson, "An Interesting Letter," p. 4.
[^34] Cannon, op. cit., p. xxvi.
[^35] Young Woman's Journal, XVI, pp. 555-556.
[^36] Jesse William Knight, The Jesse Knight Family: Jesse Knight, His Forebears and Family (Salt Lake City, 1940), pp. 9-10.
[^37] Whitney, op. cit., p. 146.
[^38] The Improvement Era, XXI (December, 1917), p. 167. See also Anderson, op. cit.
[^39] "A Biographical Sketch of the Life of Mary Jane Lytle Little," in Mormon Diaries, XVI, p. 90.
[^40] Juvenile Instructor, XXVII, p. 109.
[^41] Idem.
[^42] "The Life Story of Mosiah Lyman Hancock," p. 3.
[^43] The Improvement Era. XXI (December, 1917), p. 167.
[^44] Statement by Louisa Y. Littlefield, Juvenile Instructor, XXVII, p. 24.
[^45] Juvenile Instructor, XXVII, p. 302.
[^46] J. D., VII, p. 101.
[^47] History of the Church, V, p. 517.
[^48] Ibid.
[^49] Ibid., VI, pp. 205-206.
[^50] Ibid., p. 208.
[^51] Ibid., V, p. 498.
[^52] Millennial Star, August 1, 1842.
[^53] Journal History, August, 1830.
[^54] "Diary of George Laub, 1814-1880," typewritten copy in Brigham Young University Library, I, p. 17. The writer has corrected misspelled words and added punctuation in this quote.
[^55] Juvenile Instructor, XXVII, p. 66. In December, 1842, Phineas H. Young wrote from Tiffin, Seneca County, Ohio, to Willard Richards, In Nauvoo:
[^56] Young Woman's Journal, XVII, p. 544. William Taylor added:
[^57] Ibid., XVI, p. 550.
[^58] Ibid., p. 554.
[^59] George A. Smith's Journal, under 1843. No other date given. Church Historian's Office, Salt Lake City, Utah.
[^60] Journal History, May 3, 1839.
[^61] J. D., XIII p .216.
[^62] See Daryl Chase, Joseph the Prophet (Salt Lake City, 1944), p. 22.
[^63] Evans, op. cit., pp. 136-137.
[^64] History of the Church, VI. p. 549.
[^65] Ibid., Said the Prophet: I discover hundreds and thousands of my brethren ready to sacrifice their lives for me."-Ibid., p. 516.
[^66] Ibid., VI, p. 616.
[^67] Ibid.,V, p. 411.
[^68] The Historical Record, op. cit., p .489.
[^69] Related in Stories about Joseph Smith the Prophet, pp. 17-18.
