Hyrum L. Andrus, Joseph Smith, the Man and the Seer ( 1960)

III

Education and Early Experiences

Joseph Smith had little opportunity to acquire a formal education, for the Smith family's financial circumstances during his youth made it almost impossible. Furthermore, it is generally agreed by authorities on America's social and cultural history during the first quarter of the nineteenth century that existing educational facilities, particularly on the common-school level, were in a deplorable condition. In New York the planned state-wide progrmn of education was allowed to lag; and by 1830 there was still no general provision for universal education. Even in New England the state of affairs was shocking, particularly in the rural or district schools. There, New England's once praised common schools were grossly neglected and offered possible even less opportunity for education than they had done a century earlier. [^1]

Noah Webster's "speller" and Emerson's history text were not yet available when Joseph Smith went to school. S. G. Goodrich, writing under the name of "Peter Parley," waited until 1827 to popularize geography by presenting this discipline in the form of the supposed travels of a boy visiting various countries of the world. And Rev. C. A. Goodrich's works in American history came some years after Joseph Smith's opportunity for formal education. The country had not yet awakened to the need of education for the masses. It was after 1830 that Horace Mann and his associates began slowly to elevate the level of public schools in New England and adjacent areas. [^2]

The Prophet Joseph Smith from an early newspaper illustration.

For the above reasons Joseph Smith had little opportunity to acquire more than the meager essentials of formal learning. John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, and Charles C. Rich referred to him as an "illiterate and unlearned boy." [^3] His cousin, George A. Smith, spoke of him as "a ploughboy, . . . one who cultivated the earth, and had scarcely education enough to read his Bible." [^4] And Orson Pratt stated that he "was scarcely in possession of an ordinary common school education." [^5] Again, Pratt wrote:

His advantages for acquiring scientific knowledge were exceedingly small, being limited to a slight acquaintance with two or three of the common branches of learning. He could read without much difficulty, and write a very imperfect hand; and had a very limited understanding of the elementary rules of arithmetic. These were his highest and only attainments; while the rest of those branches, so universally taught in the common schools throughout the United States, were entirely unknown to him. [^6]

Joseph Smith referred at times to his deficiencies in formal education. Said he, "I am a rough stone. The sound of the hammer and chisel was never heard on me until the Lord took me in hand. I desire the learning of heaven alone." [^7] Again, he spoke of his experiences in the School of Hard Knocks:

I am like a huge, rough stone rolling down from a high mountain; and the only polishing I get is when some corner gets rubbed off by coming in contact with something else, striking with accelerated force against religious bigotry, priest-craft, lawyer-craft, doctor-craft, lying editors, suborned judges and jurors, and the authority of perjured executives, backed by mobs, blasphemers, licentious and corrupt men and women—all hell knocking off a corner here and a corner there. Thus I will become a smooth and polished shaft in the quiver of the Almighty, who will give me dominion over all and every one of them, when their refuge of lies shall fail, and their hiding place shall be destroyed. while these smooth polished stones with which I come in contact become marred. [^8]

But while the Prophet lacked formal education he had an unquenchable thirst for truth, and he absorbed ideas like a sponge. He possessed that superior intelligence that enables one to go to the heart of things, discern that which is relevant, and see it in its true relationship to related facts and circumstances. In his later studies of Hebrew and Greek he outstripped his fellows, including Sidney Rigdon and Orson Pratt. When asked how the Prophet had progressed in his study of English grammar, one of his teachers replied, "Joseph was the calf that sucked three cows. He acquired knowledge very rapidly." [^9]

With his power to assimilate truth, Joseph Smith possessed great natural ability. An acquaintance observed that he was "a man of great penetration." [^10] Said another, "I considered him an uncommon man in ability." [^11] While Zion's Camp was journeying toward Missouri in June, 1834, the brethren held a Sunday service, which was attended by two or three hundred people from the surrounding area. The Prophet, posing as Squire Cook, took the stand professing to be a liberal freethinker. Said George A. Smith, "He spoke to the people very freely about one hour on his particular views; his manner and style were very unassuming and affable, and he was listened to with great attention; and those present remarked that he was one of the greatest reasoners they ever heard." [^12]

Aside from his natural capacities, it was Joseph's superior insight into spiritual truth that baffled the sectarians of Palmyra. Some years after the Smiths had moved from that area, E. L. and William H. Kelley, who resided in Michigan, visited Palmyra and interviewed several people who were formerly acquainted with the Prophet.

"Smith was always ready to exchange views with the best men they had," remarked one acquaintance.

"Why didn't they like Smith?" the Kelleys inquired.

"To tell the truth," came the significant reply, "there was something about him they could not understand; some-way he knew more than they did, and it made them mad." [^13]

In a letter to E. D. Howe, written from Canadaigua, New York, January 15, 1831, William W. Phelps gave a report that corroborated the above statement. He said, after asserting that he was "acquainted with a number of the persons concerned in the publication" of the Book of Mormon, "Joseph Smith is a person of very limited abilities in common learning, but his knowledge of divine things, since the appearance of his book, has astonished many." [^14]

The Prophet's insight into spiritual truth drew others to him and transformed them into zealous disciples. To Brigham Young the contemporary sectarians "were as blind as Egyptian darkness," without correct information "about heaven, hell, God, angels, or devils." But, said he, "When I saw Joseph Smith, he took heaven, figuratively speaking, and brought it down to earth; and he took the earth, brought it up, and opened up, in plainness and simplicity, the things of God; and that is the beauty of his mission." [^15] Orson Spencer also wrote, "At his touch the ancient prophets spring into life, and the beauty and power of their revelations are made to commend themselves with thrilling interest to all that hear." [^16] Said the sober-minded, thoughtful Daniel H. Wells of his observations:

Though I did not at first believe that he was inspired or that he was more than a man of great natural ability, I soon learned that he knew more about religion and the things of God and eternity than any man I had ever heard talk. . . . It seemed to me that he advanced principles that neither he nor any other man could have obtained except from the source of all wisdom—the Lord himself. I soon discovered that he was not what the world termed a well-read or an educated man; then where could he have got this knowledge and understanding, that so far surpassed all I had ever witnessed, unless it had come from Heaven? [^17]

Others bore a similar testimony of the intelligence, power, and inspiration of Joseph's teachings. Parley P. Pratt reported his travels with the Prophet, "As we journeyed day after day, and generally lodged together, we had much sweet communion concerning the things of God and the mysteries of His kingdom, and I received many admonitions and instructions which I shall never forget." [^18] Erastus Snow spoke of his association with the Prophet during the winter and spring of 1844, when the higher ordinances of the gospel and the more complete vision of the kingdom of God, which includes a political order as well as a Church, were taught to the brethren. Though he had been in the Church for some time and had been a keen student of spiritual and secular truth for many years, he wrote in his Journal In my experience I never did let an opportunity pass of getting with the Prophet Joseph and of hearing him speak in public or in private, so that I might draw understanding from the fountain from which he spoke, that I might have it and bring it forth when it was needed. . . .

In the days of the Prophet Joseph, such moments were more precious to me than all the wealth of the world. No matter how great my poverty— if I had to borrow meal to feed my wife and children, I never let an opportunity pass of learning what the Prophet had to impart. This is the secret of success of your humble servant. [^19]

The principal source of the Prophet's appeal was the intelligence and power which he possessed in spiritual things. Even as a lad of fourteen he displayed power by faith to penetrate the spiritual veil and stand in the presence of God. The great manifestations which he experienced came not without intense effort on his part. Before he communed with Moroni that evening in September, 1823, he retired to his room in what his mother later described as a "serious and contemplative state of mind." [^20] There, with unwavering faith, he sought the favor of God, for, said he, "I had full confidence in obtaining a divine manifestation, as I previously had done." [^21] While absorbed in the concentration of faith his mind was "settled upon a determined basis not to be decoyed or driven from its purpose," Oliver Cowdery later wrote of this incident. "In this situation hours passed unnumbered—how many or how few I know not, neither is he able to inform me; but supposes it must have been eleven or twelve and perhaps later, as the noise and bustle of the family, in retiring, had long since ceased." [^22]

Here was a young man so intent upon concentrating his energies and applying his desires toward communion with God that he lost all sense of time. He had but one ambition, and that was to come into the presence of his Maker.

In a theological school held in Kirtland during the winter of 1834-5, Heber C. Kimball related a story of simple faith that touched a responsive cord in the Prophet's heart and revealed the quality of faith which he possessed. Kimball's little daughter had broken a saucer and for the act was promised a whipping, to be administered by her mother when she returned from a visit on which she was just starting. While her mother was away, the girl went out under an apple tree and prayed that her mother's heart might be softened so that the promised punishment might not be administered. Mrs. Kimball was very careful to fulfill her promises to her children, but upon returning she had no disposition to chastise her child. Later the child told her mother that she had prayed to God that she might not receive the whipping. "Joseph wept like a child on hearing this simple narrative and its application," Kimball reported. [^23]

In the Prophet's reaction may be found a key to his nature. He, too, knew the power of childlike faith. Hence the narration of that simple incident deeply touched him. At another time he sat down to eat a scanty meal of corn bread, and prayed, "Lord, we thank Thee for this johnny cake, and ask Thee to send us something better. Amen." Before the bread had been eaten, a man came to the door and asked if Joseph were home, and upon being informed that he was, said, "I have brought you some flour and a ham." After thanking the man and blessing him for the gift, the Prophet turned to his wife and said, "I knew the Lord would answer my prayer." [^24] On another occasion when the Prophet's enemies were threatening him with violence, he was told that quite a number of little children were then gathered together, praying for his safety. To this he commented, "Then I need have no fear; I am safe." [^25]

Newel Knight wrote of the second conference of the Church, held September 26, 1830, that the powers of God were markedly manifested through the Prophet's faith. Shortly before the conference, Hiram Page had obtained a certain stone through which he professed to receive revelations concerning church government, the location of the New Jerusalem, etc. "He had quite a roll of papers full of these revelations, and many in the Church were led astray by them," Knight reported. "Even Oliver Cowdery and the Whitmer family had given heed to them, although they were in contradiction to the New Testament and the revelations of these last days." When Knight arrived on the scene of the conference, he found Joseph in great distress of mind; he "was perplexed and scarcely knew how to meet this new exigency." As may be expected, Joseph turned to God in prayer and supplication. A brief but meaningful insight into the Prophet's character was given when Knight reported, "That night I occupied the same room that he did and the greater part of the night was spent in prayer and supplication." [^26]

The following day a revelation was given through the Prophet, by which those in error were reproved and corrected, and peace was restored within the Church. Wrote Newel Knight of that conference:

During this time we had much of the power of God manifested among us and it was wonderful to witness the wisdom that Joseph displayed on this occasion, for truly God gave unto him great wisdom and power, and it seems to me, even now, that none who saw him administer righteousness under such trying circumstances, could doubt that the Lord was with him, as he acted—not with the wisdom of man, but with the wisdom of God. The Holy Ghost came upon us and filled our hearts with unspeakable joy. [^27]

Later as Joseph was endeavoring to build the Kirtland Temple, several of the brethren rebelled against him, including his brother William. Daniel Tyler reported attending a meeting that the Prophet called to consider the matter. Upon entering the place of the meeting and looking at Joseph, said Tyler,

I perceived sadness in his countenance and tears trickling down his cheeks. . . . A few moments later a hymn was sung and he opened the meeting by prayer. Instead, however, of facing the audience, he turned his back and bowed upon his knees, facing the wall . . . to hide his sorrow and tears.

I had heard men and women pray—especially the former—from the most ignorant, both as to letters and intellect, to the most learned and eloquent, but never until then had I heard a man address his Maker as though He was present listening as a kind father would listen to the sorrows of a dutiful child. Joseph was at that time unlearned, but that prayer, which was to a considerable extent in behalf of those who accused him of having gone astray and fallen into sin, that the Lord would forgive them and open their eyes that they might see aright—that prayer, I say, to my humble mind, partook of the learning and eloquence of heaven. There was no ostentation, no raising of the voice as by enthusiasm, but a plain conversational tone, as a man would address a present friend. It appeared to me as though, in case the veil were taken away, I could see the Lord standing facing His humblest of all servants I had ever seen. Whether this was really the case I cannot say; but one thing I can say, it was the crowning . . . of all the prayers I ever heard. [^28]

In the early months of 1837, when apostasy was spreading throughout the Church, the Prophet's spiritual strength again aided him to cope with dissension among the brethren. He had been away from Kirtland for a short period and returned to find that many were disaffected. Said Wilford Woodruff, "Though he had not been away half as long as Moses was in the Mount, yet many were against him as the Israelites were against Moses; but when he arose in the power of God in the midst of them, they were put to silence; for the murmurers saw that he stood in the power of a Prophet of the Lord God." [^29]

Reports by others corroborate the above accounts of the spiritual powers associated with the Prophet's administrations. In his Journal, Jared Carter gave the following report of the conference held June 3, 1831:

On this occasion Brother Joseph, notwithstanding he was not naturally a talented speaker, was filled with the power of the Holy Ghost, and spoke as I never heard man speak for God before. Surely the Holy Ghost spoke through him and marvelous, indeed, was the display of the power of the Spirit among the Elders present. [^30]

Said Wilford Woodruff of a conference held in April, 1837:

The Prophet Joseph then arose and addressed the congregation for the space of three hours, clothed with the power, spirit and image of God. He presented many things of vast importance to the Elders of Israel. O! that the record could be written as with an iron pen of the light, principles and virtue that came forth out of the mouth and heart of the Prophet Joseph whose soul like Enoch's seems wide as eternity. That day showed strikingly that he is in very deed a Prophet of God raised up for the deliverance of Israel. [^31]

Again, from the report of Wilford Woodruff of a later meeting:

Joseph then arose and like the lion of the Tribe of Judah poured out his soul in the midst of the congregation of Saints. While listening I thought, Who can find language to write his words and teachings as with an iron pen in a rock, that they might stand for future generations to look upon!" He seemed a fountain of knowledge from whose mouth streams of eternal wisdom flowed; and as he stood before the people he showed that the authority of God was upon him. [^32]

While Joseph Smith was denied the privilege of a formal education in his youth, his natural endowments and simple but superior faith opened unto him a world of truth and power that commanded for him a hearing among men. Above all, his faith was his most valuable credential as a Prophet of God.

Joseph Smith's insight into spiritual truth came largely as a by-product of the things he saw in vision. In the spring of 1820, when he was a lad of fourteen, there was a religious awakening in certain parts of the country, particularly in the state of New York; and in common with others, young Joseph was stimulated to inquire into religious topics. In central-western New York and adjacent areas, a great number of people became sympathetic toward the established churches, but at first only few were actually enrolled as members. Quite naturally the goal was to bring those who were interested into actual membership. Consequently, when a revival gained momentum in a given place, preachers from outside areas would flock into the agitated neighborhood, for the desire of each denomination was to build up its membership from the available interested persons. To stimulate religious interest generally, the several ministers would co-operate in the beginning stages of the revival season, for the interests of all were served by their aiding in the development of enthusiasm. But when the question of which church to join was considered, the struggle for converts followed. Joseph Smith later wrote of these circumstances, stating:

Some time in the second year after our removal to Manchester, there was in the place where we lived an unusual excitement, on the subject of religion. It commenced with the Methodists, but soon became general among all the sects in that region of country. Indeed, the whole district of country seemed affected by it, and great multitudes united themselves to the different religious parties, which created no small stir and division amongst the people, some crying, "Lo here!" and others, "Lo there!" Some were contending for the Methodist faith, some for the Presbyterian, and some for the Baptist. For, notwithstanding the great love which the converts to these different faiths expressed at the time of their conversion, and the great zeal manifested by the respective clergy, who were active in getting up and promoting this extraordinary scene of religious feeling, in order to have everyone converted, as they were pleased to call it, let them join what sect they pleased; yet when the converts began to file off, some to one party and some to another, it was seen that the seemingly good feelings of both the priests and the converts were more pretended than real; for a scene of great confusion and bad feeling ensued— priest contending against priest, and convert against convert; so that all their good feelings one for another, if they ever had any, were entirely lost in a strife of words and a contest about opinons.

The Methodists held their annual meeting of the Genesee Conference July 1-8, 1819 at Vienna (now Phelps), about ten miles from where the Smiths lived. Though characterized by contention, Abner Chase (a minister at the conference) states that it "was followed by a glorious revival." During the winter of 1819-20, revivals also occurred in other nearby towns. [^33]

The prevailing contention caused Joseph to inquire, "Who of all these parties are right?" While pondering the issue, he read James, chapter one, verse five: "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him." [^34] He said:

Never did any passage of scripture come with more power to the heart of man than this did at this time to mine. It seemed to enter with great force into every feeling of my heart. I reflected on it again and again, knowing that if any person needed wisdom from God, I did; for how to act I did not know, and unless I could get more wisdom than I then had, I would never know; for the teachers of religion of the different sects understood the same passages of scripture so differently as to destroy all confidence in settling the question by an appeal to the Bible. At length I came to the conclusion that I must either remain in darkness and confusion, or else I must do as James directs, that is, ask of God. I at length came to the determination to "ask of God," concluding that if he gave wisdom to them that lacked wisdom, and would give liberally, and not upbraid, I might venture. [^35]

On a beautiful, clear day, early in the spring of 1820, Joseph retired to pray in a wooded area near his home. He had scarcely commenced when he was "seized upon by some power" which entirely overcame him and had such influence over him as to bind his tongue so that he could not speak. As thick darkness gathered around him, he exerted all his strength to call upon God to deliver him from the power of his unseen enemy. [^36]

At that moment he saw a brilliant light at a considerable distance in the heavens above. When it appeared, the enemy fled. Joseph continued to pray as the light gradually descended towards him, "and as it drew near, it increased in brightness and magnitude, so that by the time that it reached the tops of the trees, the whole wilderness, for some distance around, was illuminated in a most glorious and brilliant manner." He saw that it did not consume the boughs of the trees and he was encouraged with the hopes of being able to endure its presence. As the light rested upon him, "it produced a peculiar sensation throughout his whole system; and immediately, his mind was caught away from the natural objects with which he was surrounded, and he was enwrapped in a heavenly vision." [^37] Said the Prophet later:

When the light rested upon me I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. One of them spake unto me, calling me by name and said, pointing to the other—This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him! [^38]

When Joseph left the grove that spring morning, he possessed the essential spiritual truths upon which to launch the new dispensation of the gospel. The first person to whom he related his vision, outside of the Smith family, was a minister who was active in the revival. Joseph said: "He treated my communication not only lightly, but with great contempt, saying it was all of the devil, that there were no such things as visions or revelations in these days; that all such things had ceased with the apostles. [^39] Others were later told of the incident. In the fall of 1824, Joseph Smith, Sr., and the Prophet's brother Hyrum were employed to work for Martin Harris. "On the occasion Mr. Harris showed an unusual interest in Joseph's vision in the Grove, stating that he was much interested in it." Because of his sincere interest, the Prophet's father "confided in him and explained more of the particulars concerning Joseph's experiences." [^40] Thereafter the story of the Prophet's First Vision became common knowledge to those acquainted with Mormonism. On February 14, 1831, the Palmyra Reflector reported on the testimony of early missionaries, stating: "Smith (they affirmed) had seen God frequently and personally." [^41] John P. Greene wrote from Upper Canada, in 1834, stating that he had given the people "the testimony of the New and Everlasting Covenant, as established in these last days: being confirmed by many infallible proofs, both human and divine—the Lord himself speaking from the heavens unto men who were now living." [^42] About that time Oliver Cowdery was accosted by a man who immediately commenced a tirade against the Mormon Prophet. Said Cowdery, "He said that the Savior had not been seen since his ascension, and that any man contradicting this was a deceiver." [^43]

The Prophet himself bore testimony of his vision in public as well as in private. Edward Stevenson said of his missionary activities in Pontiac, Michigan, and vicinity:

In that same year, 1834, in the midst of many large congregations, the Prophet testified with great power concerning the visit of the Father and the Son, and the conversation he had with them. Never before did I feel such power as was manifested on these occasions. [^44]

As a youth of seventeen, Joseph began a further schooling to equip him for the work of establishing the foundations of this last dispensation; and from then until his death he continued to be taught from on high. Therein he received the most unique and thorough education in spiritual matters ever given to man, with the exception of that which the Son of God received while in mortality. Oliver Cowdery later said of the appearance of Moroni, in September, 1823:

While continuing in prayer for a manifestation in some way that his sins were forgiven, endeavoring to exercise faith in the scriptures, on a sudden a light like that of day, only of a purer and far more glorious appearance and brightness, burst into the room. Indeed, to use his own description, the first sight was as though the house filled with consuming and unquenchable fire. This sudden appearance of a light so bright, as must naturally be expected, occasioned a shock or sensation, visible to the extremities of the body. It was, however, followed with a calmness and serenity of mind, and an overwhelming rapture of joy that surpassed understanding, and in a moment a personage stood before him.

Notwithstanding the room was previously filled with light above the brightness of the sun, . . . yet there seemed to be an additional glory surrounding or accompanying this personage, which shone with an increased degree of brilliancy, of which he was in the midst; and though his countenance was as lightning, yet it was of a pleasing, innocent and glorious appearance, so much so, that every fear was banished from the heart, and nothing but calmness pervaded the soul. [^45]

The heavenly messenger called Joseph by name and introduced himself as one sent from the presence of God. The Prophet was informed that "there was a book deposited, written upon gold plates, giving an account of the former inhabitants of this continent, and the source from whence they sprang." This record also contained the "fulness of the everlasting Gospel," as revealed by Christ to those ancient inhabitants. With it were a Urim and Thummim and certain other valuable articles. The Prophet later wrote, "While he was conversing with me about the plates, the vision was opened to my mind that I could see the place where the plates were deposited, and that so clearly and distinctly that I knew the place again when I visited it. [^46]

Repeatedly during his communions with Moroni this celestial means of instruction was employed. Oliver Cowdery later explained:

When God manifests to his servants those things that are to come, or those which have been, he does it by unfolding them by the power of that Spirit which comprehends all things, always; and so much may be shown and made perfectly plain to the understanding in a short time, that the world, who are occupied all their life to learn a little, look at the relation of it, and are disposed to call it false. You will understand then, by this, that while those glorious things were being rehearsed, the vision was also opened, so that our brother was permitted to see and understand much more fully and perfectly than I am able to communicate in writing. [^47]

To illustrate his point, Cowdery cited the visions given to Moses, to the brother of Jared, and to others, as examples of the way in which Joseph Smith was taught by Moroni. [^48] While enveloped in the powers of God's Spirit, Moses beheld "the earth, yea, even all of it; and there was not a particle of it which he did not behold, discerning it by the Spirit of God." By the same means he also beheld "the inhabitants thereof, and there was not a soul which he beheld not." [^49] By means of those same powers, God "showed unto the brother of Jared all the inhabitants of the earth which had been, and also all that would be; and he withheld them not from his sight, even unto the ends of the earth." [^50] In this manner also was Joseph taught.

John Taylor referred to this divine means of instruction, as employed in teaching the Prophet, in a letter to a clergyman in England. After stating that he had "conversed with three who . . . have communion with angels," Taylor wrote, "One of these observed that it was easy for him to conceive of how the Lord could teach a man more in five minutes than volumes would contain." [^51] Wrote the Prophet concerning the visitation of Moroni, in his noted "Wentworth Letter": "I was informed concerning the aboriginal inhabitants of this country and shown who they were, and from whence they came; a brief sketch of their origin, progress, civilization, laws, governments, of their righteousness and iniquity, and the blessings of God being finally withdrawn from them as a people, was made known unto me." [^52]

Joseph's mother gave corroborating evidence to support the Prophet's statement when she reported that after Moroni's initial visitations the Smith family often met together in the evening and gave the "most profound attention" to the third son, as he related the things he had heard and seen while in communion with the angel. Said she:

During our evening conversations, Joseph would occasionally give us some of the most amusing recitals that could be imagined. He would describe the ancient inhabitants of this continent, their dress, mode of traveling, and the animals upon which they rode; their cities, their buildings, with every particular; their mode of warfare; and also their religious worship. This he would do with as much ease, seemingly, as if he had spent his whole life among them. [^53]

Wandle Mace, who became acquainted with the Prophet's parents shortly after they were driven from Missouri, frequently visited them and heard them relate the incidents pertaining to the early rise of the Church. Of the period commencing immediately after Moroni's initial visitations, he reported that Mother Smith said:

During the day our sons would endeavor to get through their work as early as possible, and say, "Mother, have supper early so we can have a long evening to listen to Joseph." Sometimes Joseph would describe the appearance of the Nephites, their mode of dress and warfare, their implements of husbandry, etc., and many things he had seen in vision. [^54]

The period between 1823 and 1827 were years of instruction and correction for Joseph Smith. Oliver Cowdery explained that without being "favored with a certain round of experiences" his mind might have been "turned from correct principles." But, "While young, untraditioned, and untaught in the systems of the world, he was in a situation to be led into the great work of God, and be qualified to perform it in due time." [^55]

One of these instructive experiences occurred the day after his initial interview with Moroni, as he went to the Hill Cumorah to view the plates. He had been admonished that in obtaining the record he must have an eye single to the glory of God. But instead, his thoughts were largely upon the prospects of worldly wealth that the gold plates could bring to him and his family. But, said Cowdery,

On attempting to take possession of the record, a shock was produced upon his system, by an invisible power, which deprived him, in a measure of his natural strength. He desisted for an instant, and then made another attempt, but was more sensibly shocked than before. What was the occasion of this he knew not—there was a pure unsullied record, as has been described—he had heard of the powers of enchantment, and a thousand like stories, which held the hidden treasures of the earth, and supposed that physical exertion and personal strength was only necessary to enable him to yet obtain the object of his wish. He therefore made a third attempt with an increased exertion, when his strength failed him more than at either of the former times, and without premeditating he exclaimed, "Why can I not obtain this book?" "Because you have not kept the commandments of the Lord," answered a voice, within a seeming short distance. He looked and to his astonishment there stood the angel who had previously given him the directions concerning this matter. In an instant, all the former instructions, the great intelligence concerning Israel and the last days were brought to his mind; he thought of the time when his heart was fervently engaged in prayer to the Lord, when his spirit was contrite, and when this holy messenger from the skies unfolded the wonderful things connected with this record, . . . but he had failed to remember the great end for which they had been kept, and in consequence could not have power to take them into his possession and bear them away. [^56]

This chastisement was followed by another great lesson, in which divine powers were again used to instruct the young Prophet. In remorse and humility he looked to the Lord in prayer. And as he did,

. . . the heavens were opened and the glory of the Lord shone around about and rested upon him. While thus he stood gazing and admiring, the angel said, "Look!" and as he thus spake he beheld the prince of darkness, surrounded by his innumerable train of associates. All this passed before him, and the heavenly messenger said, "All this is shown, the good and the evil, the holy and the impure, the glory of God, the power of darkness, that ye may know hereafter the two powers and never be influenced or overcome by that wicked one. Behold, whatever entices and leads to good and to do good, is of God, and whatever does not is of that wicked one . . . and you may learn from henceforth, that his ways are to destruction, but the way of holiness is peace and rest." [^57]

Other great truths were taught to the Prophet on this occasion, and many future events were unfolded to his view. Said the angel:

When they [the records] are interpreted, the Lord will give the Holy Priesthood to some, and they shall begin to proclaim the gospel and baptize by water, and after that they shall have power to give the Holy Ghost by the laying on of their hands. Then will persecution rage more and more, for the iniquities of men shall be revealed, and those who are not built upon the rock will seek to overthrow this Church; but it will increase the more opposed, and spread farther and farther, increasing in knowledge till they shall be sanctified and receive an inheritance where the glory of God shall rest upon them; and when this takes place, and all things are prepared, the ten tribes of Israel will be revealed in the north country, whither they have been for a long season; and when this is fulfilled will be brought to pass that saying of the prophet—"And the Redeemer shall come to Zion, and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob, saith the Lord." [^58]

Along with other admonitions, Moroni gave Joseph the promise that in due time God would again give him "a commandment to come and take" the plates. Following this interview, the youthful prophet "continued to receive instructions concerning the coming forth of the fulness of the gospel, from the mouth of a heavenly messenger, until he was directed to visit again the place where the records were deposited." [^59] As he visited the sacred repository again, in September, 1824, he went fully expecting to get the plates at that time. He supposed that the only requirement necessary to obtain them was to "keep the requirements of God." This he felt he could do. Among those requirements was a strict injunction not to lay the plates down or put them out of his hands until he could deposit them in a safe place. But as he took the plates and turned away, he thought perhaps he should return and cover the box, and also check to see if perchance he had left anything therein. After laying the plates down upon the ground, he returned. And as he turned again to pick up the record, it was gone. In a state of great alarm he commenced to pray, whereupon the angel appeared unto him and chastised him for his neglect. He was then permitted again to raise the stone that covered the repository, and therein he beheld the plates. According to his mother's account,

He immediately reached forth his hand to take them, but instead of getting them as he anticipated, he was hurled back upon the ground with great violence. When he recovered, the angel was gone, and he arose and returned to the house, weeping for grief and disappointment. [^60]

The Prophet's mother relates another incident that indicates that the years between 1823 and 1827 were preparatory years, and that Joseph Smith learned much to equip him for his later mission in life. A few months before the Prophet finally received the ancient records, his father sent him on an errand to Manchester, a short distance from the Smith home. He was to be back before 6 p.m., but it was sometime thereafter before he arrived. As he entered the house, his father began questioning him as to where he had been, whereupon Joseph said, "I have taken the severest chastisement that I have ever had in my life." When his father then begin to interrogate him as to who had a right to find fault in him, the Prophet answered,

"Stop, Father, stop, it was the angel of the Lord. As I passed by the hill of Cumorah, where the plates are, the angel met me and said that I had not been engaged enough in the work of the Lord; that the time had come for the record to be brought forth; and that I must be up and doing and set myself about the things which God had commanded me to do. But, Father, give yourself no uneasiness concerning the reprimand which I have received, for I now know the course that I am to pursue, so all will be well." [^61]

It was also made known unto Joseph at this interview "that he should make another effort to obtain the plates, on the twenty-second of the following September." [^62] This time he was successful in obtaining the Nephite record. By then he had been sufficiently instructed and disciplined to the point where he could be entrusted with the care of the plates and the task of translating them for the benefit of mankind. The period between 1823 and 1827 was indeed an important time in Joseph Smith's life.

Footnotes

Almost as soon as the Father and Mother of the Prophet Joseph Smith their feet upon the hospitable shore of Illinois, I became acquainted with them. I frequently visited them and listened with intense interest as they related the history of the rise of the Church in every detail.

With tears they could not withhold, they narrated the story of the persecution of their boy Joseph, which commenced when he was about fourteen years old; or from the time the angel first visited him and informed him of the great things the Lord was about to bring to pass . . . and the glorious vision he beheld, as he saw the Father and the Son descend to earth, when the Father said to the youth, "Joseph," pointing to His companion, "This is my beloved Son, hear Him."-Mace, op. cit., pp. 45-46. The writer has corrected certain marks of punctuation in this quote.

---
Notas:
[^1] Moroni 7:31-32.
[^2] Doctrine and Covenants 5:15-16. See also Alma 12:28-30; 13:22-26.
[^3] 1 Nephi 11:11-14.
[^4] 2 Nephi 6:8-9. See also 1 Nephi 7:13-14.
[^5] 2 Nephi 10:3.
[^6] Mosiah 3.
[^7] Mosiah 27; Alma 8:14, Alma 36:8.
[^8] Alma 40:11-24.
[^9] Alma 8:20; 10:7-9; 11:31.
[^10] Helaman 5.
[^11] Ibid., 14:9, 26,28.
[^12] Ibid., 16:14.
[^13] 3 Nephi 7:15-18.
[^14] Ibid., 17:24; 19:14
[^15] J. D., XXIII. p. 362.
[^16] History of the Church, IV, p. 537. (Italics by the writer.)
[^17] J. D., XVII. p. 374.
[^18] Ibid., XXI. p. 161.
[^19] Ibid., XV. p. 185. (Italics by the writer.) See also XIII, p. 66
[^20] Ibid., XIII. p. 47.
[^21] To Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery.
[^22] History of the Church, I, pp. 39-4l.
[^23] Times and Seasons, II, p. 201.
[^24] History of the Church, I, pp. 39-41.
[^25] Doctrine and Covenants 20:2-3.
[^26] Ibid., 27:12-13. See also 5:6; 21:10-11; 43:7; 113:5-6; 124:57-58.
[^27] Ibid., 18:9. Brigham Young referred to Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer as being apostles. See J. D., VI, p. 320.
[^28] Doctnine and Covenants 128:20.
[^29] Published in Deseret News, April 13, 1859. In a letter written from Cambridge Port, U.S.A., December 26, 1848, to Orson Pratt in England, Wilford Woodruff reported that Orson Hyde was present when Cowdery made this address and that Hyde had subsequently written to him [Woodruff] concerning it. Pratt published Woodruff's letter in the Millennial Star, XI (February 1, 1849), p. 43. George A. Smith who was also present at Council Bluffs wrote to Orson Pratt, October 31, 1848, stating: "He [Cowdery] bore testimony in the most positive terms of the truth of the Book of Mormon-the restoration of the Priesthood to the earth, and the mission of Joseph Smith as the Prophet of the last days." This letter was also published in the Millennial Star, XI (January 1, 1849), p. 14.
[^30] Letter written by Oliver Cowdery. March 23, 1846, Tiffin, Seneca County, Ohio, to Phineas Young. Original in Church Historian's Office, Salt Lake City, Utah.
[^31] Pomeroy Tucker, Origin, Rise and Progress of Mormonism (New York, 1867), p. 29.
[^32] Painesville Telegraph, November 16, 1830.
[^33] Palmyra Reflector, February 14, 1831.
[^34] Minutes of the School of the Prophets, held at Provo, Utah, May 18, 1868. Brigham Young University Library; J. D., IX. p. 376; Whitney, op. cit., IX, p. 130. During a conference held June 3, 1831, Joseph Smith declared "that John the Revelator was then among the ten tribes of Israel who had been led away by Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, to prepare them for their return from that long dispersion."-Joseph Fielding Smith, Essentials in Church History, (Salt Lake City, 1947), p. 126.
[^35] "The Reed Peck Manuscript," handwritten account of incidents during the Missouri era of Mormon history, dated September 18, 1839. Taken from a photostat of the original, Brigham Young University Library, pp. 25, 26, 54-55.
[^36] Doctrine and Covenants 38:32.
[^37] Ibid., 39:15.
[^38] Ibid., 43:16.
[^39] Ibid., 95:8-9.
[^40] History of the Church, II, p. 197.
[^41] Ibid., p. 218.
[^42] Ibid., p. 287.
[^43] Ibid., p. 300.
[^44] Journal History, December 18, 1835.
[^45] Ibid., January 17, 1836.
[^46] History of the Church, II, p. 380.
[^47] Ibid., p. 381.
[^48] Journal History, January 24, 1836.
[^49] Doctrine and Covenants 109:35-37.
[^50] History of the Church, II, p. 427; Whitney, op. cit., IX, p. 130.
[^51] History of the Church, II, p. 428. Accounts by others present agree with the above. Heber C. Kimball wrote: "March 27, 1836 . . . I received many manifestations of the power of God, and participated in all the blessings and ordinances of endowment, which were then administered."-Journal History, under date. George A. Smith declared that "hundreds of brethren" had participated in "a greater manifestation of the power of God than that described by Luke on the day of Pentecost."-J. D., II, p. 215. On another occasion he described the event, stating that "there came a shock on the house like a sound of a mighty rushing wind."-J. D., II, p. 10. John Tanner wrote that he was present and "took part in the 'solemn assembly' and the glorious gifts and manifestations of that memorial occasion." Scraps of Biography:Tenth Book, ed. A. H. Cannon (Salt Lake City, 1883), p. 14. Jedediah M. Grant "participated . . . in the great manifestations of the power and glory of God, which characterized" these events. -The Contributor, IV, p. 242. And Milo Andrus wrote: "I was in Kirtland at the dedication of the Temple and the endowment of the Elders. . . . I saw fire descend and rest on the heads of the Elders, and they spoke with tongues, and prophesied."-"Autobiographical Sketch," published by the Andrus family under title of Milo Andrus Genealogy, p. 4.
[^52] Doctrine and Covenants 110:11-16.
[^53] J. D., XVIII, p. 326.
[^54] History of the Church, V, p. 347.
[^55] Statement made in presence of Dimick Huntington, "Diary of Oliver B. Huntington, 1847-1900." Part II, p. 207. Brigham Young University Library.
[^56] As related by Coltrin to Huntington, ibid., p. 244.
[^57] Related by Daniel Tyler, Juvenile Instructor, XXVII, p. 93. Tyler's mother was the woman who received the manifestation.
[^58] See History of the Church, IV, pp. 207-212, 383-392.
[^59] Doctrine and Covenants 107:53-57; History of the Church, III, p. 388. The Prophet probably received this vision December 18, 1833 when he, as the first patriarch in this dispensation, bestowed a blessing upon the head of his father, "while the visions of the Almighty were open to his view."-See Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation (Salt Lake City, 1953), I, pp. 473-474.
[^60] Doctrine and Covenants 128:20-21.
[^61] See Ibid., 116.
[^62] History of the Church, III, pp. 386-387.
