Mark E. Petersen, Abraham: Friend of God ( 1979)

BROTHER AGAINST BROTHER

Feuds between brothers are the most bitter of all, and when they extend over generations of time, the scars run deep, seeming never to heal.

Are Jews and Arabs really brothers? Is enmity within that relationship at the seat of their present troubles? Can family strife never end?

Today's conflict in Palestine runs back to a celebration held nearly four thousand years ago in the tents of Abraham, the Friend of God. His favorite son, Isaac, was being weaned; and in accordance with the prevailing custom, the fatted calf was killed and the family held a feast.

Little Isaac and his mother were the center of attention, of course. The boy was a child of divine promise. Nearly half a century before his birth, Abraham and his wife Sarah were told that they would have a son. But Sarah was barren, and through many years they seemed to wait in vain.

When at last Isaac was born, it was indeed a stroke of divine beneficence, for Sarah was now ninety years old and Abraham was a hundred. God had ended her long sterility by a miracle that ignored her time of life. She now had her boy. Her reproach at being childless, a thing dreaded by women of that time and place, was at last removed. With Abraham, she adored her young son.

But all was not well in the family. There was jealousy and anger. To all present at this feast, it was made known that the new babe was Abraham's heir, preferred above the patriarch's only other son, Ishmael, who by now was fourteen years old.

Hagar, the bondwoman, was Ishmael's mother and the second wife of Abraham. She is often referred to as a concubine because of her status as a slave or servant in the house. As preference in favor of Isaac was announced to all at the feast, she was filled with resentment. Already she hated Sarah, but this feeling was now greatly magnified.

Her attitude was reflected in the behavior of Ishmael, who mocked Isaac. Sarah saw what he did and was deeply troubled. Enraged by Ishmael's insult, "she said unto Abraham, Cast out this bondwoman and her son: for the son of this bondwoman shall not be heir with my son, even with Isaac. And the thing was very grievous in Abraham's sight." (Gen. 21:10-11.)

Thus began the conflict that still rages today. Will the Arabs and the Jews never make peace? Is there nothing that can settle their dispute and leave both parties satisfied?

Palestine—the holy land of promise—is the bone of their present contention. Both peoples lay claim to it since both regard Abraham as their eminent progenitor.

The Jews insist that the land is theirs through divine covenant, given by God to their great forefather. But the Arabs do the same, and insist that they are as much blood descendants of Abraham as the Jews. In addition, they claim their right to the land by actual possession. They took it over when the Jews left.

Israel, scattered and hated, allowed centuries to pass by without making so much as an isolated claim to their homeland. So the Arabs moved in, feeling fully justified. Hadn't the Lord made great promises to Ishmael and told him that he as well as Isaac would become a great people, even with royalty arising in his lineage?

The Almighty certainly said that both Isaac and Ishmael would sire nations, princes, and kings. Many nations were to come from Abraham, not Israel alone. Would God discriminate against any one of them, and if so, why?

The Arabs remind the Jews, and none too gently, that Ishmael was the firstborn of Abraham's children, with Isaac second. They ask in all confidence: Do not firstborn sons always enjoy prior rights over others in the family? Is not the firstborn the legal heir?

The Jews rely on scripture to sustain their position. But so do the Arabs—on their own scriptures, which declare Ishmael to be the Lord's prophet and Abraham the founder of the Islamic religion. So again there is a standoff.

Ever since that feast day four thousand years ago, Ishmael has been the enemy of Isaac, and he still is. The bitterness handed down through the centuries may yet engulf the entire world in war. Will it be Armageddon, involving all nations? It is no wonder that western powers bend every effort to make peace in the Holy Land and avoid further open conflict.

Both sides are fully armed. Both are buying more weapons. And the great nations, including our own, continue to sell every modern instrument of war to the belligerents on both sides. Where will it end?
