Mark E. Petersen, Abraham: Friend of God ( 1979)

THE RISING TIDES

The Arab and Jewish conflict, steadily becoming more complex, is of tremendous concern to the nations of the world.

Both sides have armed themselves heavily, with billions of dollars of aid from the United States and from Russia. Is there any place on earth where there is a greater concentration of fighting gear than in the Middle East?

It seems incredible that so much has been given to so few. Some of the smallest nations in the world are now among the most heavily armed, and they possess the most modern weapons of warfare. Many billions of dollars worth! Both sides are determined to give as little, but to take as much, as possible. Concessions seem to drift further and further from serious consideration.

A remarkable thing has taken place among the Arabs. Their oil money has made a new world for them. The Arab nations have been developing rapidly in industry and agriculture, building schools, educating more of their people, giving more liberty to women, and arming more of their men.

Strangely enough, the modernization movement is running head-on into Islamic religious beliefs that hold to the old traditions, ways, and customs of centuries ago. U.S. News and World Report said of this cultural conflict:

"Even in nations where old ways still reign, devout Moslems are trying to counter social change caused by the oil boom and industrialization.

"One instance: In the United Arab Emirates, rising crime and immorality prompted the drafting of a law prohibiting alcohol and decreeing 40 lashes for any Moslem convicted of consuming it. A gambling casino was also closed down. So were bookshops accused of displaying `material offensive to Moslems.'

"Modernization in the Middle East gets backing from liberal politicians, businessmen and intellectuals who feel that Islam's rigid theology is too committed to the past, not to the rapidly changing present. One Egyptian scholar calls it `an economic, social and political code for another period.'

"Whatever its problems, Islam is a global faith embracing more than 900 million human beings—including perhaps 3 million, mostly blacks, in the United States.

"Five times daily, the Moslem faithful all over the world kneel to pray, facing Mecca, where the Prophet Mohammed first divulged the new faith. Each year, millions come to Mecca to reaffirm it: `There is no god but God, and Mohammed is His Prophet.' That creed, as austere and unyielding as the desert that gave it birth, is woven into the fabric of nations where Moslems are in a commanding majority.

"The Sharia, or Koranic law, is still enforced by five governments: Saudi Arabia, Yemen-Sana, Qatar, Libya and the United Arab Emirates state of Abu Dhabi.

"In some of those places, the punishment for theft can be the loss of a hand. Murder, rape and adultery are usually punished by public execution, generally by the sword, but sometimes by stoning or firing squad. Gambling and consumption of alcoholic beverages are forbidden by Koranic law and sometimes punished by flogging.

"Now, however, shock waves—political and social as well as religious—are rolling out from education, travel and an economic revolution.

"Foreigners are introducing pleasures denied to true believers: public displays of affection between the sexes and portrayal of the human image in films and publications."

The most influential Arab state is Saudi Arabia, large in territory and most wealthy of all. That small nation controls a fourth of the world's total supply of oil and is exploring for more. Geologists are confident that more will be found there. Time magazine, in an issue largely devoted to the Arabs, said this about the Saudis:

"Its cities are dominated by the roar of bulldozers and the rattle of jackhammers. The hard hat of the construction worker rivals the checkered ghutra as the national headdress.

"In the bustling commercial and financial port city of Jidda, on the Red Sea, bulldozers tear into the graceful old houses of the Ottoman era with their latticework balconies and harem windows. In the capital city of Riyadh, rows of mud houses topped with crenelated roofs are smashed to dust to make way for superhighways or high-rise buildings of chrome, glass and soaring reinforced concrete.

"Passenger jets land and depart from some of the Middle East's busiest airports, shattering the silence of the desert. . . ."

Saudi Arabia has nearly eight million population. Its international monetary reserves amount to more than $40 billion, equal to those of West Germany, and twice those of Great Britain and the United States. Its foreign assets amount to more than $70 billion and are going up at the rate of a billion per month.

The country is building large electric generating plants and providing raw materials for the construction of more homes, better roads, and a number of the elements of a welfare state. The government plans to provide free medical care and now subsidizes food prices to assure a better diet even for the poorest persons. Most of the country's food products are imported. With pupil enrollment increasing, there is a great need for school lunches. Hence the government flies in two hundred thousand meals a day from Paris.

The Saudis are spending more than $6 billion to improve their seaports. They have brought in about a million migrant workers to help with their projects. When contractors come in to build apartment buildings, roads, or electric plants, they must bring in their own crews of workmen, because of the severe labor shortage in that land.

Education has really blossomed in Saudi Arabia. Some 30,000 young Saudis now attend universities, with 20,000 of them studying abroad.

The women of the country are being liberated too, on a large scale. They may now go to school, and many, having been educated, already have entered a variety of businesses. Some also go into medicine. It is estimated that 250,000 Saudi girls are presently in public school, and 11,000 are attending universities, half of whom are studying abroad. Women may not drive cars, however, nor may they travel alone. Polygamy is still a way of life there.

Because the Saudis are so few in number and have the largest area of Arabia to defend, they feel the need of modern fighting gear, and for this reason they are seeking to build a strong air force.

The Arabs are only doing what the Jews have done for a generation or more. Just as the prophets have said, the Holy Land is blossoming as the rose, at least that section controlled by the Jews.

There are many poverty-ridden Arabs inside of Israel. Their lot certainly does not approach that of the Jews. But they are given their freedom, even to vote, and most of them are far better off than their countrymen in the Palestinian-controlled areas.

The Jews have worked miracles in their part of the Holy Land. They possess every modern device. They have the best in schools and some of the best in manufacture. Certainly they excel in agriculture, making crops and trees grow where it seemed impossible before.

One of the remarkable things is the manner in which they have replanted the mountains with cedars. The little seedlings are kept in hothouses at first, then are transplanted with care, sometimes into solid rock with little soil, and there they are made to grow. Millions of trees have been set out successfully in this way. Orchards, groves, and vineyards may be seen in all parts of the land. Even the valley of Armageddon is fertile and productive.

The Israelis own and operate fleets of merchant ships that carry citrus and other foods to various parts of the world, even as far away as Great Britain, which consumes a large part of Israel's farm products.

Women there, of course, work right along with men. There is little difference, even in the tasks allotted to them. They work, they play, they go to war, all on an equal basis.

These are the rising tides that complicate the Middle East picture. These are the elements that make the search for peace increasingly more difficult.
