Mark E. Petersen, Abraham: Friend of God ( 1979)

THE DEATH OF ENMITY

The conflict between the Arabs and the Jews began with Hagar's marriage to Abraham. From the beginning that marriage was a problem. The union of an Egyptian slave woman and a free Semite man seemed to be incongruous from the start.

Actually, it was an outgrowth of Sarah's disbelief in God's promise that she herself would have a son. She had laughed at the Lord when the promise was given to Abraham, as she hid herself in the family tent. She was old and past the childbearing age and she knew it. And she knew that God knew it.

Abraham's willingness to accept Hagar on the conditions mentioned by Sarah shows his own impatience in waiting for posterity through his first wife as the Lord had promised. As a matter of fact, he had to wait for about fifty years for the promise to be fulfilled. Could he and Sarah be blamed for being impatient?

The hatred that developed in Hagar's heart is understandable since she, as a slave, was called upon to produce children to the name of sterile Sarah.

When Isaac was finally born, Sarah found it unthinkable to consider the son of a bondwoman as an heir of Abraham, a joint heir with her own son. She demanded that Ishmael be barred from any inheritance. Consequently, she banished both him and his mother.

The problem of priority has descended from that day to the present. Were Isaac's progeny to be some kind of super-race? Were Ishmael's descendants to be only second class?

Hagar and Ishmael were faced with this frustration even after the Lord promised Ishmael that he would be the head of a great nation, and that kings and princes would be born of him. They were depressed by the thought that God's covenant was with Isaac and that they were left out of it.

In later years the source of their respective religions also became a bone of contention. The Jews claim that the Islamic religion had its origin in Judaism, which, they charge, the Arabs have corrupted. This the Arabs deny, saying that their religion came by revelation to Mohammed. When the Jews refused to accept Mohammed as a prophet, the Arabs were furious.

Jewish authorities look down upon Mohammed as an interloper. They say that he could not so much as read and write when he began his work. They call him an illiterate camel driver and add that he was laughed out of Mecca when he first claimed to be a prophet. He fled to Medina.

They recount that since many Jews lived in Medina, Mohammed went to them and won their friendship at first by hiding his claims to prophecy. He listened to their Talmud tales and readings from the Torah. He witnessed many of their ceremonies and professed much interest.

They say further that Mohammed hoped to rally the Jews about him, persecuted as they were, when he announced his claim to prophecy. In this he was sadly disappointed. The Jews were a close-knit group, and quickly discerned that Mohammed sought to change their doctrines by placing upon them his own private interpretations. They say he did this to support his claim to a divine call as the founder of Islam. The name Islam, it is said, means "submission to the will of God."

When Mohammed announced that he himself was a prophet, newly raised up by Allah, the Almighty, even his friends among the Jews turned against him. They branded his interpretation of the Torah as "ignorant fraudulent twaddle." Bitterly smarting under this Jewish rejection, "the Prophet of Allah turned furiously against them with the passionate vehemence of a rejected suitor," as Nathan Ausubel explains in the Book of Jewish Knowledge. (New York: Crown Publishers, Inc., 1964, p. 224.)

Ausubel then adds: "In the end, Mohammed declared a holy war—a jihad—against the Jews. He avenged himself upon them with fire and sword for the ridicule they had heaped upon him. . . . thousands of Jews [were forced] to dig their own graves in long trenches, where they were decapitated and mutilated." (Ibid.)

He continues: "The Koran makes constant use of Biblical materials, incidents, legends, and personalities. The stories of the Pentateuch and the legends about the Prophets, as retold in the Midrash, furnished Mohammed with the necessary springboards for the projection of his own religious views and moral values. He dwells on the story of Creation, Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden and their Fall, Cain and the murder of Abel, the Flood, Noah and the Ark, Abraham and the idols, the destruction of Sodom, Ishmael and the Angel, and Joseph and his brothers, etc. (Ibid., p. 225.)

In the Book of Jewish Knowledge we also read: "Mohammed also believed in the imminence of the Day of Judgment (in Hebrew: Yom ha-Din; he called it [in Arabic] Yaum al-Din). He believed in Paradise and in its fleshly rewards, in Gehinnom (Gehenna) and in its fiery pits. Like the Providence of God over Israel, the Providence of Allah was ever spread out protectingly over the Mohammedan." (Ibid., pp. 224-25.)

The Jews accuse the Arabs of reworking many parts of Old Testament history and leaving them in a jumble. They claim that the Koran "hopelessly confuses Moses with Jacob," and say the Arabs believe that Pharaoh commanded the Hebrews to make bricks to build a tower "so as to become acquainted with the God of Moses."

It is notable that despite the antagonism that has existed between Arabs and Jews, the Arabic language later became vitally important to the Jews.

Following the return to Jerusalem at the close of the Babylonian captivity, the Jews found that they would have to learn the Aramaic language, which was literally forced upon them. It was the common language of the Middle East by now, and had become the chief tongue also of Palestine, which was occupied by many non-Jews during and after the captivity.

However, author Nathan Ausubel explains that following the final dispersion in A.D. 70, Arabic—and not Aramaic—became the spoken language of many of the Jews of the area. Arabic became the literary language in which many Jewish scholars, philosophers, poets, and scientists composed their works. Hebrew remained the sacred language, however.

Subsequently there developed what has been called the Arabic-Jewish Golden Age in North Africa, Babylonia, and Southern Spain. This occurred during the ninth to fourteenth centuries as Arabic culture supplanted the Greek in that area and the Jews accepted it. Both Jews and Arabs of that region retained their separate religious ideas, but cooperated in nearly every other cultural activity. During this period, according to Ausubel, the ranks of Jewish scholars, scientists, and poets swelled "to the proportion of a small army." (Ibid., pp. 10-11.)

Due to the dispersion, of course, the Jews had scattered to nearly all parts of the world, with but few still remaining in the Palestine area.

Following World War I, with the signing of the Balfour treaty and with the cooperation of Britain and the United States, the Jews began returning to their homeland. This naturally enraged the Arabs, for large numbers of them were thereby dispossessed of their lands, giving rise to the present Palestinian problem. As displaced persons, they had to move out of what for centuries had been their own homeland.

Any happy relationships that existed during the Middle Ages were quickly turned to animosity, which seems to grow now, day by day, with each new confrontation.

Are the Jews entitled to Palestine? Are the Arabs?

Displaced Jews and displaced Palestinians both demand a homeland in the same little bit of ground. Their hatred seems to preclude their living together. They appear to have little mutual tolerance.

Can Isaac and Ishmael never be brothers indeed?
