Mark E. Petersen, Abraham: Friend of God ( 1979)

WHO ARE "OF ABRAHAM"?

The Lord said to Abraham: "I will make thee exceeding fruitful, and I will make nations of thee, and kings shall come out of thee." (Gen. 17:6.)

When he spoke to Abraham concerning Sarah, he said: "I will bless her, and she shall be a mother of nations; kings of people shall be of her." (Gen. 17:16.)

And to Hagar the divine promise came: "I will make him [Ishmael] a great nation." (Gen. 21:18.)

The Lord previously had said to Abraham: "Also of the son of the bondwoman will I make a nation, because he is thy seed." (Gen. 21:13.)

Again the Lord said to Abraham: "As for Ishmael, I have heard thee: Behold, I have blessed him, and will make him fruitful, and will multiply him exceedingly; twelve princes shall he beget, and I will make him a great nation." However, the Lord added, "But my covenant will I establish with Isaac, which Sarah shall bear unto thee." (Gen. 17:20-21.) At this point the Lord narrowed the chosen lineage.

Nations, kings, princes, and multitudes were to come from Abraham through both Isaac and Ishmael—but the Lord's covenant would be with Isaac.

This was confirmed when the Lord spoke further to Abraham as he grieved over the dispute between Sarah and Hagar, and the future of his son Ishmael. The Lord said: "Let it not be grievous in thy sight because of the lad [Ishmael], and because of thy bondwoman; in all that Sarah hath said unto thee, hearken unto her voice; for in Isaac shall thy seed be called." (Gen. 21:12.)

There was no misunderstanding that language. Ishmael would be greatly blessed, but the covenant was to be with Isaac. The Lord was obviously selecting a particular parentage for his chosen people, and Ishmael's descendants were not included.

This principle was repeated in the selection of Jacob over Esau. Again the covenant was only with Jacob. Esau too was to become a great people, but as the Lord had said to Abraham, "In Isaac thy seed shall be called," even so now it was in Jacob that "thy seed shall be called." (Gen. 27.) Only in Isaac! Only in Jacob!

There was a definite narrowing of the "the seed." The lineage of Abraham, though accounting for many nations, had but one select line in which the special blessings were promised.

Why were some thus favored over others? Was not the Lord always just? The scriptures make it clear that he is no respecter of persons. What is the explanation?

President Joseph Fielding Smith, in his book The Way to Perfection, says: "Our place among the tribes and nations evidently was assigned to us by the Lord. That there was an assignment of this kind before earth-life began, is a declaration in the scriptures. Certain spirits were chosen to come through the lineage of Abraham, and this choice was made in the beginning. Other selections were also made and the nations determined upon by the councils in the heavens."

Then President Smith quotes Paul's speech on Mars' Hill wherein the ancient apostle said that the Almighty "hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth, and hath determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation." (Acts 17:26.)

President Smith continues: "If the Lord appointed unto the nations the bounds of their habitations, then there must have been a selection of spirits to form these nations. In greater clearness Moses has declared the same thing."

Then he quotes the following words of Moses:

"Remember the days of old, consider the years of many generations: ask thy father, and he will shew thee; thy elders, and they will tell thee.

"When the most High divided to the nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the people according to the number of the children of Israel.

"For the Lord's portion is his people; Jacob is the lot of his inheritance." (Deut. 32:7-9.)

With further explanation President Smith says: "If bounds were set according to the number of the children of Israel, and they were the Lord's portion (i.e., those with whom he made covenant), when the Lord divided the sons of Adam, it must have been done before this earth-life began. For in these days of old when this division was made, the nation of Israel had not been brought into existence on earth."

President Smith then goes on to explain that our preexistent behavior most likely determined which spirits would be born through Isaac and Jacob. He says: "However, we must not be unmindful of the fact, that these world conditions have also been brought about in large degree by rebellion and disregard of the laws of God in this life. Retrogression has come upon mankind because they have rejected the counsels and commandments of the Almighty. Advancement has come largely because men have been willing to walk, in part at least, in the light of divine inspiration. Moreover, notwithstanding the fact that the Lord chose a certain nation as his "portion" and that Jacob became the "lot of his inheritance," the Almighty also was kind to other nations and leavened them by scattering the blood of Israel among them. In this and other ways the nations became blessed as the seed of Abraham." (The Way to Perfection, Genealogical Society of Utah, 1949, pp. 46-48.)

President Harold B. Lee spoke in similar vein:

". . . many were chosen, as was Abraham, before they were born, as the Lord told Moses and also Jeremiah. This was made still more meaningful by the latter-day prophet, Joseph Smith, who declared that `every person who is called to do an important work in the kingdom of God, was called to that work and foreordained to that work before the world was.' Then he added, `I believe that I was foreordained to the work that I am called to do.' (See History of the Church 6:364.)

"But now there is a warning: Despite that calling which is spoken of in the scriptures as `foreordination,' we have another inspired declaration: `Behold, there are many called, but few are chosen.' (D&C 121:34.)

"This suggests that even though we have our free agency here, there are many who were foreordained before the world was, to a greater state than they have prepared themselves for here. Even though they might have been among the noble and great, from among whom the Father declared he would make his chosen leaders, they may fail of that calling here in mortality. Then the Lord poses this question: `And why are they not chosen?' (D&C 121:34.)

"Two answers were given: First, `Because their hearts are set so much upon the things of this world. . . .' And second, they `. . . aspire to the honors of men.' (D&C 121:35.)

"Now then, to summarize, may I ask each of you again the question, `Who are you?' You are all the sons and daughters of God. Your spirits were created and lived as organized intelligences before the world was. You have been blessed to have a physical body because of your obedience to certain commandments in that premortal state. You are now born into a family to which you have come, into the nations through which you have come, as a reward for the kind of lives you lived before you came here and at a time in the world's history, as the Apostle Paul taught the men of Athens and as the Lord revealed to Moses, determined by the faithfulness of each of those who lived before this world was created."

President Lee quotes Deut. 32:8, as referred to by Paul on Mars' Hill and then says: "Now, mind you, this was said to the children of Israel before they had arrived in the Promised Land, which was to be the land of their inheritance.

"Then note this next verse: `For the Lord's portion is his people; Jacob is the lot of his inheritance.' (Deut. 32:9.)

"It would seem very clear, then, that those born to the lineage of Jacob, who was later to be called Israel, and his posterity, who were known as the children of Israel, were born into the most illustrious lineage of any of those who came upon the earth as mortal beings.

"All these rewards were seemingly promised, or foreordained, before the world was. Surely these matters must have been determined by the kind of lives we had lived in that premortal spirit world. Some may question these assumptions, but at the same time they will accept without any question the belief that each one of us will be judged when we leave this earth according to his or her deeds during our lives here in mortality. Isn't it just as reasonable to believe that what we have received here in this earth life was given to each of us according to the merits of our conduct before we came here?" (Stand Ye in Holy Places, Deseret Book, 1975, pp. 9-11.)

President Joseph Fielding Smith continued his explanation as follows:

"In the parable of the talents the Lord makes use of this very significant expression: `For the kingdom of heaven is as a man traveling into a far country, who called his own servants, and delivered unto them his goods. And unto one he gave five talents, to another two and to another one; to every man according to his several ability.' Without doubt, these characteristics were born with us. In other words, we developed certain traits of character in the world of spirits before this earth-life began. In that life some were more diligent in the performance of duty. Some were more obedient and faithful in keeping the commandments. Some were more intellectual, and others manifested stronger traits of leadership than others. Some showed greater faith and willingness to serve the Lord, and from among these the leaders were chosen.

"Because of this condition the Lord said to Abraham:

" `These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits, and he saw that they were good; and he said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born.' (Abr. 3:23.)

"There must be leaders, presiding officers, and those who are worthy and able to take command. During the ages in which we dwelt in the pre-mortal state we not only developed our various characteristics and showed our worthiness and ability, or the lack of it, but we were also where such progress could be observed. It is reasonable to believe that there was a Church organization there. The heavenly beings were living in a perfectly arranged society. Every person knew his place. Priesthood, without any question, had been conferred and the leaders were chosen to officiate. Ordinances pertaining to that preexistence were required and the love of God prevailed. Under such conditions it was natural for our Father to discern and choose those who were most worthy and evaluate the talents of each individual. He knew not only what each of us could do, but also what each of us would do when put to the test and when responsibility was given us. Then, when the time came for our habitation on mortal earth, all things were prepared and the servants of the Lord chosen and ordained to their respective missions.

"Paul said to the Ephesian Saints:

"`Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ:

"`According as he hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love.' (Eph. 1:3-4.)

It was because the Father understood these characteristics, and the abilities of the spirits before him, that he was able to choose his rulers as `he stood in the midst of them' before the earth was born." (The Way to Perfection, pp. 50-51.)

President Smith refers to the "wonderful compliment" the Lord paid to Abraham in these words:

"For I know him, that he will command his children and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment; that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he hath spoken of him. (Gen. 18:19.)

"This could be said of Abraham because he was known as `faithful' as he stood in the midst of the intelligences before the world was, for it was there that he was chosen as one of the great ones to be a ruler on the earth." (Ibid., p. 53.)
