Mark E. Petersen, Abraham: Friend of God ( 1979)

ISLAM AND ABRAHAM

Descent from Abraham is quite as sacred to the Arabs as it is to the Jews. This is made abundantly clear in the Koran and the other teachings of Mohammed.

Mohammed, or Muhammed as the Koran spells the name, said:

"O People of the Scripture! Why will ye argue about Abraham, when the Torah and the Gospel were not revealed till after him? Have ye then no sense?

"Lo! ye are those who argue about that whereof ye have some knowledge: Why then argue ye concerning that whereof ye have no knowledge? Allah knoweth. Ye know not.

"Abraham was not a Jew, nor yet a Christian; but he was an upright man who had surrendered to Allah, and he was not of the idolaters.

"Lo! those of mankind who have the best claim to Abraham are those who followed him, and this Prophet [Mohammed] and those who believe with him; and Allah is the Protecting Friend of the believers." (Koran, Surah III:65-68.)

Mohammed claims that Abraham was the founder of Islam and that he actually built the sacred Islamic sanctuary at Mecca. So we quote:

"And remember when his Lord tried Abraham with His commands, and he fulfilled them, He said: Lo! I have appointed thee a leader for mankind. Abraham said, And of my offspring will there be leaders? He said, My covenant includeth not wrongdoers.

"And when We made the House at Mecca a resort for mankind and a sanctuary, saying: Take as your place of worship where Abraham stood to pray. And We imposed a duty upon Abraham and Ishmael, saying: Purify My house for those who go around and those who meditate therein and those who bow down and prostrate themselves in worship.

"And when Abraham prayed: My Lord! Make this [Mecca] a region of security and bestow upon its people fruits, such as them as believe in Allah and the Last Day, He answered: As for him who disbelieveth, I shall leave him in contentment for a while, then I shall compel him to the doom of fire—a hapless journey's end!

"And when Abraham and Ishmael were raising the foundations of the House, Abraham prayed: Our Lord, Accept from us this duty. Lo, Thou, only Thou, art the Hearer, the Knower." (Surah II:124-127.)

At another time the Koran says: "We shall worship thy God, the God of thy fathers Abraham and Ishmael and Isaac, One God, and unto him we have surrendered." (Surah II:133.)

We also read this:

"Say O Muslims: We believe in Allah and that which is revealed unto us and that which was revealed unto Abraham, and Ishmael, and Isaac, and Jacob, and the tribes, and that which Moses and Jesus received, and that which the Prophets received from their Lord. We make no distinction between any of them and unto Him have we surrendered." (Surah II:136. Italics added.)

As further evidence that Arabs believe that their religion traces back to Abraham, we read: "Who is better in religion than he who surrendereth his purposes to Allah while doing good to men and followeth the tradition of Abraham, the upright? Allah Himself chose Abraham for friend." (Surah IV:125.)

In Surah IV:163 we read that Allah inspired Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, and Jacob. At various times the text indicates that there is no distinction drawn between them.

Surah V:76-84 declares that Allah showed Abraham the stars of the heavens in the nighttime and discussed with him the greater ones.

Another interesting passage written by Mohammed, as though quoting Abraham, is this: "Praise be to Allah, who hath given me, in my old age, Ishmael and Isaac! Lo! my Lord is indeed the Hearer of Prayer." (Surah XIV:39.)

Not only do they regard themselves as descendants of Ishmael and place him equal with Isaac, but the Arabs also believe Ishmael was one of Allah's prophets:

"And make mention in the Scripture of Ishmael. Lo! he was the keeper of his promise, and he was a messenger of Allah, a Prophet. He enjoined upon his people worship and almsgiving, and was acceptable in the sight of his Lord." (Surah XIX:54-55.)

In Smith's Bible Dictionary (2:978) we are told that "in Mohammedan tradition, Hagar is represented as the wife [not the concubine] of Abraham." This is as might be expected, when we remember that Ishmael is the head of the Arab nation and the reputed ancestor of Mohammed. They refuse to put Hagar in a secondary position.

Among the legends of the Muslims, God is said to have commanded Abraham to go to Mecca with Ishmael to build a temple there. It is said also that the angel Gabriel was sent to give Abraham and Ishmael instructions regarding the sanctuary and the conduct of pilgrimages to it.

The Times and Seasons, an early Latter-day Saint publication edited by Parley P. Pratt and his brother Orson, carried an article on the Arabs and their relationship to Ishmael under date of August 15, 1845, of which the following is an excerpt:

"The history of the Arabs, so opposite in many respects to that of the Jews, but as singular as theirs, was concisely and clearly foretold.—It was prophesied concerning Ishmael:—`He will be a wild man; his hand will be against every man, and every man's hand against him; and he shall dwell in the presence of all his brethren. I will make him fruitful, and will multiply him exceedingly; and I will make him a great nation.' (Gen. 16:12; 17:20.)

"The fate of Ishmael is here identified with that of his descendants; and the same character is common to them both. The historical evidence of the fact, the universal tradition, and constant boast of the Arabs themselves, their language, and preservation for many ages of an original rite, derived from him as their primogenitor, confirm the truth of their descent from Ishmael. The fulfillment of the prediction is obvious. . . .

"The independence of the Arabs was proverbial in ancient as well as in modern times; and the present existence, as a free and independent nation, of a people who derive their descent from so high antiquity, demonstrates that they have never been wholly subdued, as all the nations around them have unquestionably been; and that they have ever dwelt in the presence of their brethren.

"They not only subsist unconquered to this day, but the prophesied and primitive wildness of their race, and their hostility to all, remains unsubdued and unaltered. `They are a wild people; their hand is against every man; and every man's hand is against them.'

"In the words of Gibbon, which strikingly assimilate with those of the prophecy, they are `armed against mankind.' . . .

"Their alliance is never courted, and can never be obtained; and all that the Turks, or Persians, or any of their neighbors, can stipulate for from them, is a partial and purchased forbearance.

"Even the British, who have established a residence in almost every country, have entered the territories of the descendants of Ishmael to accomplish only the premeditated destruction of a fort and to retire. It cannot be alleged with truth, that their peculiar character and manner, and its interrupted permanency, are the necessary results of the nature of their country. . . .

"The greatest part of the temperate zone was included within the limits of the Arabian conquests; and their empire extended from the confines of India to the shores of the Atlantic, and embrace a wider range of territory than ever was passed by the Romans, those boasted masters of the world.—

"The period of their conquest and dominion was sufficient, under such circumstances, to have changed the manners of any people: but, whether in the land of Shinah, or in the valleys of Spain, on the banks of the Tigris, or the Tagus, in Arabia the blessed, or Arabia, the barren, the posterity of Ishmael have ever maintained their prophetic character. . . .

"The natural reflection of a recent traveler, on examining the peculiarities of an Arab tribe, of which he was an eye-witness, may suffice, without any art of controversy, for the illustration of this prophecy: `On the smallest computation, such must have been the manners of those people for more than three thousand years: thus in all things verifying the prediction given of Ishmael at his birth. . . .

"And that an acute and active people, surrounded for ages by polished and luxurious nations, should from their earliest to their latest times, be still found a wild people, dwelling in the presence of all their brethren, (as we may call those nations,) unsubdued and unchangeable, is indeed a standing miracle; one of those mysterious facts which establish the truth of prophecy."

According to Mohammed, Abraham was one of the early advocates of monotheism and fully recognized Allah as the creator.

The Arabs have perpetuated certain myths about Abraham, admitting, however, that the stories are mere legends. One legend concerned Nimrod, the "god-king" of Babylonia, who had been warned through astrology that a child would be born in Ur to dethrone him. That infant was Abraham. The king there-upon decreed that all infants of the realm were to be killed. However, Abraham was hidden in a cave and was nursed there by the angel Gabriel. He was said to have been such a precocious child that within a few days of his birth he was able to both walk and talk.

Another Arabian story relates that Abraham in his youth studied under Shem, son of Noah; that together they created a person out of earth and water; and that the figure was made to live and speak.

Islam reveres one tradition especially, for it shows Abraham as a sincere worshipper of the true God despite all opposition, and states that he willingly submitted to persecution rather than to give up his faith.
