Mark E. Petersen, Abraham: Friend of God ( 1979)

JEHOVAH AND ALLAH

Jehovah is the God of the Jews. Allah is worshipped by the Arabs. Are they one and the same? What did this Almighty Being teach, war or peace?

Were his instructions of one kind to the Jews and of another to the Arabs? Was there not some common ground in the divine teachings on which the two brother nations could find peace and do so even now? Or do they believe their respective religions sufficiently to apply the sacred precepts?

Allah taught the brotherhood of man. "Allah is forgiving; Allah is merciful," he said. He taught his believers to be kind and considerate.

Actually the Koran reads: "Righteous is he who believeth in Allah and the Last Day and the angels and the scripture and the Prophets; and giveth his wealth for love of Him to kinsfolk and to orphans and the needy and the wayfarer and to those who ask, and to set slaves free; and observeth proper worship and payeth the poor due." (Surah II: 177.)

He taught mankind to love one another "with a love like that which is due to Allah only." (Surah II: 165.)

In directing all worshippers to face toward Mecca as they pray, he taught them the value of justice. He said: "Whencesoever thou comest forth turn thy face toward the Inviolable Place of Worship and wheresoever ye may be, O Muslims, turn your faces toward it when ye pray so that men may have no argument against you save such of them as do injustice—Fear not them, but fear me." (Surah II: 150.)

So the deity of the Arabs teaches brotherly love, justice, charity, generosity, and kindness.

What of Jehovah of the Jews?

He it was who taught the Golden Rule and love of neighbor as of self. He it was who taught charity, mercy, and forgiveness.

His principles were firm and direct:

"Ye shall not steal, neither deal falsely, neither lie one to another.

"And ye shall not swear by my name falsely, neither shalt thou profane the name of thy God: I am the Lord.

"Thou shalt not defraud thy neighbor, neither rob him: the wages of him that is hired shall not abide with thee all night until the morning.

"Thou shalt not curse the deaf, nor put a stumblingblock before the blind, but shalt fear thy God: I am the Lord.

"Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment: thou shalt not respect the person of the poor, nor honour the person of the mighty: but in righteousness shalt thou judge thy neighbour.

"Thou shalt not go up and down as a talebearer among thy people: neither shalt thou stand against the blood of thy neighbour: I am the Lord.

"Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thine heart: thou shalt in any wise rebuke thy neighbour, and not suffer sin upon him.

"Thou shalt not avenge, nor bear any grudge against the children of thy people, but thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself: I am the Lord." (Lev. 19:11-18.)

Not only that, but the great Jehovah, God of the Old Testament, further declared: "He that killeth any man shall surely be put to death." (Lev. 24:17.)

Are not these teachings of both Jehovah and Allah the necessary common ground?

And what of Abraham, the progenitor of both races? Did he teach war, or was he a peaceful man, willing to hold out the olive branch on any sound basis?

Abraham was the Friend of God, acknowledged so by both Koran and Bible, by both Arabs and Jews. The Friend of God! Would he be an enemy to the divine law? Was not Abraham a believer in all the virtues that both sets of scriptures set forth? What did he say?

"I sought for the blessings of the fathers . . .; having been myself a follower of righteousness, desiring also . . . to keep the commandments of God, I became a rightful heir, a High Priest, holding the right belonging to the fathers." (Abr. 1:2.)

He taught repentance to his family and neighbors who had turned "unto the worshiping of the gods of the heathen" although they "utterly refused to hearken to my voice." (Abr. 1:5.) Why do not the Jews and Arabs accept his word? But they will not so far as their interrelationships are concerned.

Even if Abraham were to come back from the dead today, would anyone believe him? Would they put down their arms and make peace on the grounds of their own respective religious teachings?

A sinner once cried out to Father Abraham in heaven seeking mercy. The story goes like this:

"There was a certain rich man, which was clothed in purple and fine linen, and fared sumptuously every day:

"And there was a certain beggar named Lazarus, which was laid at his gate, full of sores,

"And desiring to be fed with the crumbs which fell from the rich man's table: moreover the dogs came and licked his sores.

"And it came to pass, that the beggar died, and was carried by the angels into Abraham's bosom: the rich man also died, and was buried;

"And in hell he lift up his eyes, being in torments, and seeth Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom.

"And he cried and said, Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue; for I am tormented in this flame.

"But Abraham said, Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things: but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented.

"And beside all this, between us and you there is a great gulf fixed: so that they which would pass from hence to you cannot; neither can they pass to us, that would come from thence.

"Then he said, I pray thee therefore, father, that thou wouldest send him to my father's house:

"For I have five brethren; that he may testify unto them, lest they also come into this place of torment.

"Abraham saith unto him, They have Moses and the prophets; let them hear them.

"And he said, Nay, father Abraham: but if one went unto them from the dead, they will repent.

"And he said unto him, If they hear not Moses and the prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead." (Luke 16:19-31.)

Who is Jehovah? Who is Allah? Both are worshipped by millions. Are they one and the same, but with different names? Both are spoken of by their followers as the One God, the Creator of the worlds. Both are reported to have walked and talked with Abraham. Both made him "friend." The One God means all of that to both sides.

Both are said to have inspired the prophets, giving revelations for the good of man. Only faith in the true God can solve their problem. But where is such faith? Where are people who are willing to accept their religions as a true way of life, and not something to be set aside for political considerations?

Christians cannot be left out of it either, for Christ taught the Golden Rule. He taught us to love our neighbors as ourselves, to be kind, merciful, and forgiving.

And who is Christ? He is the Almighty, the Creator of heaven and earth. He is Jehovah of the Old Testament, and if the Arabs only knew and would accept it, he is their God and their Creator too. There is no salvation in any other!

Jesus the Christ is the God of love. He is the Prince of Peace. But is anyone humble enough to live the divine principles of peace?

In the Middle East today we have had Christians fighting Jews, both of them fighting Arabs, and Arabs shooting Christians and Jews. Religion does not enter the picture. It is allowed no quarter, no area of refuge nor room for sane discussion. Political expediency is all that seems to matter. Selfishness is the controlling factor.

It was very much like that in the beginning with Abraham's first children. Which of the two boys endeavored to love his neighbor or his brother as himself? Which of them held to the Golden Rule? Which of them showed any filial affection?

And we have never been willing to learn the divine lessons since. What does that say for the faith of humanity in their Creator and their God?
