Mark E. Petersen, Abraham: Friend of God ( 1979)

THE MELTING POT

The Arab-Jewish conflict even reaches the United States because America is a melting pot. People from all nations have come to America for a better life. They have obtained great opportunities for individual advancement, which are fruits of the precious liberty of this land.

In America people from many countries have learned to live together in peace and harmony. Former national lines have disappeared; people have given up their past allegiance and have become Americans, fellow citizens in this land of the free.

This one factor has in it the full possibility of making world peace. In America it is proven that different nationalities can live together in harmony, that they can put away their prejudices and accept a common ground.

This is a lesson that all the world might learn from America if they will. It is a lesson that even today the Jews and the Arabs might study.

Millions of Jews and Arabs live in America. They do so without interracial strife. Their differences are seldom mentioned and never expressed in violence. They have learned to become Americans, to put their Americanism first.

With so many Arabs and Jews residing in America, could they not become a leaven in the lump for helping to bring peace to their homelands? But this has not been done thus far. Quite the opposite. Melting-pot-Americanism has been forgotten to a great extent among those of both sides now in the U.S. Their former native patriotism, with all its strong prejudices and demands, has surfaced once again. But even so, there is no physical violence between them in this land.

It is said that there are more Jews in New York than in any other city in the world. Altogether there are nearly six million in the United States. According to a recent U.S. census report, 3,050,000 were in New York and the Middle Atlantic states; 908,000 in the South; 763,000 in the West; 720,000 in the Midwest; and 405,000 in New England.

But what of the Arabs? Have they come to America in any number?

With all their "oil money" they are not only in the U.S., but they are also investing heavily in American business. There are about two million Arabs in the United States with the largest concentration in Detroit, which is sometimes called the mother city of Arab-Americans. Other concentrations of Arabs are in Los Angeles, Houston, Chicago, and New York, where there are also many Jews.

While the Arabs have not lobbied a great deal in American political circles, the Jews have been very active in this regard. With several Jews in the U.S. Senate, and about three dozen separate lobbying groups, each with an office in Washington, the Jews in America wield considerable clout. The Arabs and their friends are learning from other lobbying groups, however, and are beginning to make their influence felt. They pay huge sums to public relations firms to shape American public opinion in their favor. But they avoid violence. As a result, some Congressmen have begun to advocate the Arab side and are beginning to reexamine their former support of the Israeli cause.

There is no doubt but that the oil interests in the Arab nations have changed much of the thinking in America, as have the arms sales to both Israelis and Arabs.

So in the United States as in the Near East itself, the conflict between the two groups goes bitterly on. But still they do not attack each other physically in this land. They have found some common ground in America for peaceful coexistence.

The big difficulty with peace between Jews and Arabs, whether in America or in Palestine, is that the problem is constantly kept on a selfish political basis. Why don't both sides try to practice their respective religions, and make peace as sincere believers in one God who teaches love and brotherhood? Religious belief is supposed to be controlling in the lives of both. Then let it be!

The Koran commands brotherly love as much as does the Bible. Mohammed taught it as earnestly as the Jewish prophets. Why do not both sides put their religion to work?

In the spirit of the Golden Rule any conflict can be settled, but when believers in God refuse to apply their own religious teachings in dealing with other peoples, then their faith seems not to run very deep. Is there never a thought of turning the other cheek? Must reprisals and revenge be the controlling factors forever?

Allah is the God of the Arabs. Jehovah is the God of the Jews. Do not the teachings of both provide the common ground they need for a peaceful settlement?

But Arabs and Jews are quite like many Christians in this regard. They don't let their religion interfere with their daily lives. Some of the world's worst wars have been fought between the Christians themselves. In the last two world wars, Christians fought each other to the death. Sometimes fathers were pitted against their own sons, all being Christians, all fighting for their political rights, all praying to the same God for victory.

The wars of the past have not been different in their motives. Will anyone forget when Christian slaughtered Christian as the unfortunate Huguenots of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries were wiped out in France?

Can any Christian be proud of the Thirty-Year War, or of the repeated conflicts between Christian France and Christian England, for example?

After all is said, when wars are thrust upon the populace, religion seems to be very thin indeed. This is especially true of those who love and make and promote wars that bring untold misery upon millions of helpless victims. No one wins a war. All suffer. Yet mankind never learns its lesson.

There is peace to be obtained if we will be willing to pay for it, but lasting peace is not paid for in money or territory or prestige. Its price is living our religion, loving our neighbors as ourselves, and doing to them as we would be done by.

This principle was ignored by Hagar and Sarah, by Ishmael and Isaac, and by their descendants down through the many generations. Does either side think of it today?
