Mark E. Petersen, Abraham: Friend of God ( 1979)

THE JEWS AND ABRAHAM

To the Jews, Abraham is indeed the father of the faithful, and particularly is he the father of Israel. He was the friend of God and is regarded as the greatest of their ancestors.

The sacrifice of Isaac is considered to be his greatest test and is accepted by the Jews as a fact, not a myth. They hold it up as an ideal example for all to follow in mind and heart, although no one else may ever be called upon to go to the length that Abraham did.

The Talmud and the Torah sustain the tradition of Abraham as the founder of the Jewish race. They perpetuate the promises made repeatedly by the Almighty during the years Abraham was in Mesopotamia and later in Palestine.

The Jews give little credence to the Arab claims to the Holy Land since it was a fact, they say, that Abraham willed only gifts to the children of his concubines and then sent them away. (Gen. 25:5-6.) They say that such children could in no way be heirs to the promise because they were without status. Therefore, they have no legitimate claim to the land. Isaac, they insist, was the only one given a legacy.

It is acknowledged that the Arabs possessed Palestine for centuries after the Jewish dispersion, but the Jews point out that they were compelled to leave and were not allowed to exercise any option. They were scattered by force and had no opportunity to recover their land until after World War I, when the British under General Edmund Allenby took it from the Turks.

To the Jews Abraham achieved the highest level in prophecy, although some add "with the possible exception of Moses." They credit Abraham with having been the first to promote the idea of a special creation of the world by a single God as contrasted with the views of polytheism.

One of the great Jewish philosophers, Maimonides, however, says that Abraham proved the existence of God only by the power of reasoning, and that the patriarch accepted the existence of divinity largely because of the order he observed in the planetary movements and the fixed position of the stars.

The Jews have venerated Abraham both in literature and in music. Many paintings of Israel, as well as those of Islam, show him in the pose of sacrificing Isaac, while others also follow Islam in depicting Abraham being saved from the fiery furnace of King Nimrod. It seems that among certain Jews this legend is accepted equally with the Arabs.

Several musical compositions by Jews are based on the life of Abraham, some appearing as early as the seventeenth century. One of them, Scarlatti's Agar et Ismaeli Esiliati, was written in 1683. It tells the story of Hagar and Ishmael, as the title indicates. One of Schubert's first songs, written in 1811, was "Hagar's Klage." In 1806 Etienne Nicolas Mehul wrote an opera on the theme Agar au Desert.

Abraham's youth formed the theme for a work by Michael Gnessin, written during a visit to Israel in 1922. Various other Jewish musical compositions have appeared during the past forty years.

The Encyclopedia Britannica says this about Abraham:

"In rabbinic tradition Abraham occupies a position of eminence. His faith atones for the sins of Israel, and he was even the rock upon which God built and established the world. In the New Testament, allusions are made to this role of Abraham; e.g., in Matt. viii, 11 and Luke xiii, 28-29, where Abraham is an eschatological figure, represented as the host at the heavenly banquet (cf. Luke xvi, 22). The promises to Abraham are recognized as giving the Jews a special prerogative (Rom. ix, 8; xi, 1 ff.). Yet, being children of Abraham has a spiritual, rather than a national, meaning (Rom. ix, 7 ff.; cf. Gal. iii, 9).

"The true children of Abraham are `children of the promise' (Rom. ix, 8), and that promise is fulfilled in Christ (Gal. iii, 14). Thus Abraham becomes a precursor of Christ. In Him the promises to Abraham are fulfilled (Gal. iii, 25-29; cf. Heb. vii), and Christians, even the gentile ones, partake in the blessing in Abraham (Gal. iii, 8 ff.; cf. Gen. xii, 3).

"Paul seizes upon Abraham's righteousness by faith (Gen. xv, 6) in order to expound his central thesis that righteousness is granted through faith rather than through works (Rom. iv, 1 ff.; Gal. iii, 6 ff.). In the epistle to the Hebrews, Abraham is an example of the faith that receives God's promise and responds to it in obedience (Heb. xi, 8 ff.)." (Encyclopaedia Britannica, Chicago: Wm. Benton, 1966, 1:45.)

This publication relegates much of the tradition about Abraham to the field of "less than history," or folklore. It goes on to say:

"How much can be stated about Abraham as a historical person? Abraham and the other patriarchs have sometimes been considered to be personifications of clans or even figures of myth. This opinion has been proved erroneous.

"To be sure, the story of Abraham in the Bible is not a biography in the modern sense of the word. The ancients told stories of persons in order to illuminate the meaning of the clan's or the nation's life. Yet, there can be no doubt that Abraham existed. On the other hand, it is not possible to be specific either about when he lived or about the details of his life.

"Excavations at Mari on the Euphrates, at Nuzi and elsewhere have yielded texts which illuminate customs, names and tribal history in the first half of the 2nd millennium B.C.; it has become evident that the narratives about Abraham in the Bible authentically reflect that age (perhaps the 18th-17th centuries B.C.).

"Abraham was a seminomad who belonged perhaps to a social stratum called Habiru (cf. the word `Hebrew,' possibly from the same root, in Gen. xiv, 13)."

All of this, of course, merely emphasizes the value of the modern revelations possessed by the Latter-day Saints concerning Abraham, which make of him a real person, a great prophet, and actually a "friend of God."
