Mark E. Petersen, Abraham: Friend of God ( 1979)

TRULY, WHO WAS ABRAHAM?

Was Abraham, so surrounded by mythology, really a person? Did he live and breathe and walk and talk with God? Or has he been plucked out of the legendary recesses of antiquity to help mold unity into an afflicted and persecuted people of today?

Is he now being brought into modern prominence merely to help settle a present-day argument over territorial possessions?

When it comes to basic proof of his identity, the Latter-day Saints have the only solid facts in the matter, and what they have has been received by revelation as the sheer word of God.

Revelation—modern revelation in particular—is the key to solving what scholars regard as the "mystery of Abraham." Some archaeological findings are pointed to, but even they are not conclusive. More and more the researchers are admitting that the patriarch existed. But they say there is so little either in history or solid research that no concrete story of his life may be assembled.

But not so with the Latter-day Saints. By revelation through the Prophet Joseph Smith, we know that Abraham lived and ministered here on earth. He was a potent factor in the Lord's plans for Israel, for us as modern children of Abraham, and for the world at large who yet will be blessed through him and his seed.

By revelation we know that indeed Abraham was the friend of God, and that he was divinely chosen to occupy his important position on earth even before he was born into mortality.

Not only was he a friend of God in earth life, but he also was a friend of God in premortal life, for as the scripture says, he was one of the great ones there. "These I will make my rulers," the Almighty had said, adding, "Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born." (Abr. 3:23.)

Just as Jeremiah was chosen before he was born, so was Abraham. The scripture referring to Jeremiah is most interesting, showing that not only was he chosen before his birth, but that he was also ordained a prophet in that primeval period: "Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee; and before thou camest forth out of the womb I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee a prophet unto the nations." (Jer. 1:5.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith said this concerning such ordinations: "Every man who has a calling to minister to the inhabitants of the world was ordained to that very purpose in the Grand Council of heaven before this world was. I suppose that I was ordained to this very office in that Grand Council." (HC 6:364.)

To Latter-day Saints, then, Abraham was just as real a person as was Joseph Smith. He was loved of the Lord in the premortal life, as was Joseph Smith, and he was chosen there for his mortal career, just as was our modern prophet.

The scriptures reveal that before the world was made, there was a war in heaven:

"And there was war in heaven: Michael and his angels fought against the dragon; and the dragon fought and his angels,

"And prevailed not; neither was their place found any more in heaven.

"And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world: he was cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him." (Rev. 12:7-9.)

John further wrote of this Satan: "And it was given unto him to make war with the saints, and to overcome them: and power was given him over all kindreds, and tongues, and nations. And all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him, whose names are not written in the book of life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world. If any man have an ear, let him hear." (Rev. 13:7-9.)

Satan was able to sway a third of the hosts of heaven who were willing to join his rebellion.

It seems reasonable to believe that there must have been many spirits who were less valiant. But for the faithful in that pristine period, a notable reward was in store. They were to be born in a lineage on earth with a divine promise and great opportunities. The Lord would provide for them a special progenitor, a man of God, and through his lineage they would receive the "believing blood" to help them accept the truth once they arrived in mortality.

Abraham—the friend of God even in the premortal life, one of the great ones, one of the leaders in the host of righteous spirits—was selected to be that progenitor. Through his posterity would all the peoples of the earth be blessed.

Although the Lord gave a special status to the preexistent faithful, he was not showing any unearned favoritism, for he is fair and just to all. Notably, he is no respecter of persons.

Abraham, by his faithfulness in the premortal life, earned the right to be the progenitor of the faithful spirits who themselves had earned the right to be born in that lineage.

They would not only be born in the "believing blood" line, but they would also become the ministers of the Lord in the mortal world. They would hold his priesthood; they would lead his church when it was established.

So the Lord was planning far ahead for us and for priesthood leaders to direct us. Neither birth nor death is a barrier to his work. He sees the overall from the eternal point of view and makes his plans accordingly.

But he did more than plan for his primeval faithful and their welfare when they arrived in mortality. He also was merciful to those who were not so faithful. He held out to them the opportunity to become believers. Here on earth they could acquire the necessary faith, if they would obey, and they could then return to the good graces of the Lord.

If they would accept his gospel on earth and would live it all the days of their lives, they would become heirs of the same blessings promised to those born in the line of faithful Abraham. Although they would be born of other lineage, they could still be blessed with faithful Abraham if only they would obey the Lord.

Says President Joseph Fielding Smith in his book The Way to Perfection (pp. 89-90):

"No person can receive the Gospel without becoming of the seed of Abraham. If they are not of his blood by descent they becomes so by adoption. . . . Moreover, the Lord revealed to Joseph Smith that all who receive the two Priesthoods become sons of Moses and of Aaron, and `the seed of Abraham, and the church and kingdom, and the elect of God.' (D&C 84:33-48.) This is done by virtue of the covenant made with Abraham, which was renewed with Jacob and the tribes of Israel."

President Smith further said:

"The covenant the Lord made with Abraham was of threefold nature as a blessing to mankind to the latest generations. We do not fully comprehend its significance even now. Perhaps we will not until we enter celestial glory. The priesthood and its powers were to descend through Abraham's posterity. It was through him that Christ was to come, and thus prove a blessing to all nations. Moreover, the promise was made that in addition to Abraham's direct descendants, all who should receive the Gospel from that time forth, should also become of Abraham's seed by adoption, and his blood should be mixed among the nations to leaven them with the privileges of the Gospel." (Ibid., pp. 87-88.)

What a great testimony to the mercy of Almighty God!

Even those who were casual, even those who were careless in premortal life, will receive opportunity here on earth to receive the gospel and be saved if they will hearken fully to the word of God. Though they may be born in the lineage of other peoples, and not of Abraham, they may nevertheless still "join with Abraham" and be counted with his children.

Then who was Abraham? Can anyone properly measure his stature and his acceptance before God? He was indeed God's friend, his faithful servant, and now would become the fountainhead through whom all the nations of the earth would be blessed.

But more than that. Abraham was also chosen to become the mortal progenitor of the line in which Jesus the Christ would come to earth. It would be through Abraham's lineage that Jesus would be born at Bethlehem!

Was not he a chosen vessel? Was not God his friend?
