Mark E. Petersen, Abraham: Friend of God ( 1979)

UR OF THE CHALDEES

Abraham, or Abram, as he was first called, was born in Ur of the Chaldees, one of the most important of the ancient cities in southern Mesopotamia. He was the tenth generation from Noah.

Ur was a city of about a half million population in the time of Abraham, according to archaeologists. It was given over to wickedness and idolatry. Yet it had beautiful buildings, good schools, and extensive business dealings by sea as well as on land. The remains of some of the docks are still discernible in the harbor.

The site has been excavated for years by archaeologists. It is located 140 miles south of Babylon, about ten miles from the present bed of the Euphrates. In all likelihood the city was built originally on the banks of that river.

About a mile and a half from the excavation site is a modern junction of the Baghdad Railway in southern Iraq, known as the Ur Junction.

The main excavations were made shortly after the end of World War I through the joint sponsorship of the British Museum of London and the Department of Archaeology at the University of Pennsylvania. Most of the work was done under Sir Leonard Woolley between 1922 and 1934. Extensive finds were made there, illustrating almost every period of the city's history.

It is believed that Ur was founded some time in the fourth millennium B.C. Excavators say that their evidence indicates that it was wiped out by the flood of Noah's day, but that following the deluge, the city was rebuilt.

Ur became the capital of the entire Mesopotamian valley under the reign of the Sumerian kings (2700 B.C.). Cemetery excavations have produced "almost incredible treasures in gold, silver, bronze and semi-precious stones," indicating not only wealth but also a high degree of civilization. Some inscriptions corroborate the existence of the fabled Sargon of Akkad (2400 B.C.).

In the period beginning with 2100 B.C., stepped pyramids were built there for the worship of the moon god. Sumerian architects, as early as 2600 B.C., were familiar with the arch, the column, the vault, the dome, and other basic forms of architecture.

There is evidence of extensive commerce by ocean-going vessels between Ur and the Far East, with traffic in gold, silver, ivory, and hard wood. Many clay tablets were found that reveal these facts.

Homes were generally of the two-story type, much like the Arab houses in Baghdad. The well-to-do had homes large enough to provide guest rooms, servants' quarters, and lounging areas, yet with adequate privacy.

Little chapels or shrines to the moon god were built at the rear of most houses of the wealthy class; these were used also for numerous family gods and other minor deities. The dead in the families were usually buried under the floors of either these chapels or the private homes.

An irrigation system was developed at Ur, as well as in nearby areas, for in this arid country farming depended almost entirely on the Euphrates River. This source of irrigation water was abundant and brought great productivity to the area. In about 400 B.C., for some reason the river changed its course and reduced that entire area to a desert, since the irrigation system could no longer function.

In the New Catholic Encyclopedia we read:

"The archaeological evidence shows that Ur was first occupied by settlers (perhaps pre-Sumerians) who, during the Chalcolithic Age (c. 4000-3000), adapted the so-called Obeidian culture of c. 3700 (named after Obeid, a site near Ur), which is found also at Uruk, Lagash, Eridu, and other places. By the Warka (c. 3200) and Jemdet Nasr (c. 3000) Periods, Ur was certainly inhabited by Sumerians.

"Apparently from the Early Dynastic Period I (c. 2900-2700) come the famous so-called Royal Tombs of Ur with their wealth of jewelry and magnificent works of art. In the tomb of the lady Shub-ad, 74 of her courtiers or servants (68 of them women) were buried with her—the only know occurrence of such mass burials in ancient Mesopotamia. . . .

". . . the city reached the zenith of its glory in the Third Dynasty of Ur (c. 2060-1950), when, under its Kings Urnammu, Shulgi, and their three successors, immense temples were built, and the closely packed dwellings, which must have housed more than one-half million people, covered an area of about 4 square miles." (New York: McGraw Hill, 1967, 14:476.)

In the excavations, not only are items of monetary value found, but also evidence of the culture of the city. Among the discoveries are clay tablets bearing mathematical square and cube-root computations, word lists in Sumerian, temple receipts for tithes and taxes, and business records demonstrating the extensive nature of Ur's commerce.

The Biblical World, a dictionary of biblical archaeology, says the following:

"Many other discoveries related directly to the burial practices of the early Sumerians. There was much evidence of servants and attendants being buried alive with the rulers. In one tomb at least sixty-eight court women and six other servants joined their ruler in death. The quiet repose of the attendants suggests that they were either drugged before being placed in the tomb or voluntarily took sleeping potions. Soldiers with spears, musicians with costly harps, and servants with the royal ox cart paid the supreme price." (Charles F. Pfeiffer, ed., New York: Bonanza Books, 1966, pp. 601-2.)

This same authority raises some question about the actual location of Ur, as to whether it was in southern Mesopotamia or in the north, near Haran.

C. H. Gordon, renowned archaeologist and scholar, also raises the same question. It is thought by some that Urfa, a town twenty miles northwest of Haran, might possibly have been Ur. Gordon prefers to regard Ur as the town of Ura, a Hittite city, north and east of Haran.

In any case, whether in the north or in the south, the site was nevertheless in Mesopotamia. It was still "Ur of the Chaldees," as Abraham called his original home.

J. O. Kinnaman (A.B., A.M., Ph.D., D.D.), in his book Diggers for Facts, says that in the time of Abraham, Ur had ceased to be of major political importance but had become a center of pagan religion and culture. It had city museums, libraries, good schools "and all the refinements known to human society."

Dr. Kinnaman claims that Ur was a city before the flood, and was rebuilt after Noah's time. He says further that "the art of writing is as old as the [human] race. It came into the world with them, and has never been lost since. This art was very old when Abraham went to school. In fact, it was so old that the Sumerian, at the time of Abraham, was a dead language just as Latin and Classical Greek are today." He also says that "there was absolutely no illiteracy in Ur in the time of Abraham." (Haverhill, Mass.: Destiny Publishers, 1940, pp. 64, 67.)

Hammurabi was the ruler of the area in Abraham's day, it is said, and he was a patron of schools, learning, and the arts.

Dr. Kinnaman speaks of business contracts written in cuneiform being found on clay tablets. He writes of one such: "The name signed by the party of the first part is the same as that scratched on the wall beside the door casing of the house—ABRAM. . . . Let me say that of the hundreds upon hundreds of thousands of tablets discovered and translated, this is the only one with the name, ABRAM." (Ibid., p. 71.) This account is not confirmed by other archaeologists.
