Mark E. Petersen, Abraham: Friend of God ( 1979)

ABRAHAM'S EARLY LIFE

If the conflict between Isaac and Ishmael, Hagar and Sarah, caused Abraham concern, it was not the first time that family strife had invaded his home.

In his early life in Ur, there was even more serious trouble than that which arose over Ishmael. Abraham apparently grew up in a home that at first consisted of believers in the true God. Later, apostasy invaded the family, and this brought on the conflict.

Abraham was obviously a well-educated man. His family was small, but is considered by archaeologists to have been fairly well off. He lived with his father, Terah, who vacillated between idolatry and true religion.

Terah had three sons, Abram, Nahor, and Haran. Haran had two daughters who are mentioned in the Bible. One was Iscah, about whom nothing more is said. The other was Milcah, who became the wife of Nahor, Abraham's brother. Haran also had a son named Lot, with whom Abraham had many dealings.

The record says that "Terah lived seventy years and begat Abram, Nahor and Haran."

Abraham must have been taught the true gospel in his youth, even though his father and other members of the family later apostatized. When his home became an open invitation for him to adopt idolatry, he did not yield. He remained true and faithful to the gospel teachings.

It is not known how he obtained the record of his fathers, but that record certainly provided him with information concerning the priesthood and its many blessings, instilling in him a strong desire to be ordained to that priesthood.

Because of Abraham's great faithfulness, the Lord gave him the Urim and Thummim. It was a source of many revelations, which further established him in the faith by teaching him concerning the true God, as contrasted with the gods of wood and stone worshipped by his father. His possession of that instrument and his own desire to live the gospel apparently prompted him to try to reconvert his family and bring them back to the true faith. But they resisted completely.

In those days Mesopotamia was engulfed in idolatry. It was the popular thing. Those who opposed it were condemned as human sacrifices on the altars of the heathen gods. Religions of the nearby nations apparently were mixed with those of the natives of Ur. Abraham spoke of several gods as he described the heathen loyalties of his family and said:

"My fathers having turned from their righteousness, and from the holy commandments which the Lord their God had given unto them, unto the worshiping of the gods of the heathen, utterly refused to hearken to my voice;

"For their hearts were set to do evil, and were wholly turned to the god of Elkenah, and the god of Libnah, and the god of Mahmackrah, and the god of Korash, and the god of Pharaoh, king of Egypt;

"Therefore they turned their hearts to the sacrifice of the heathen in offering up their children unto their dumb idols, and hearkened not unto my voice, but endeavored to take away my life by the hand of the priest of Elkenah. The priest of Elkenah was also the priest of Pharaoh." (Abr. 1:5-7.)

He explained further that these deities required human sacrifices. Particularly was this true of the religion evidently imported from Egypt. Of it he said:

"Now, at this time it was the custom of the priest of Pharaoh, the king of Egypt, to offer up upon the altar which was built in the land of Chaldea, for the offering unto these strange gods, men, women, and children.

"And it came to pass that the priest made an offering unto the god of Pharaoh, and also unto the god of Shagreel, even after the manner of the Egyptians. Now the god of Shagreel was the sun.

"Even the thank-offering of a child did the priest of Pharaoh offer upon the altar which stood by the hill called Potiphar's Hill, at the head of the plain of Olishem." (Abr. 1:8-10.)

Abraham here not only spoke of the local gods of Ur, but also of the Egyptian gods. He mentions that the priest of Elkenah was also the priest of Pharaoh. The altar was obviously specially built for human sacrifice.

How did this Egyptian infusion reach into Mesopotamia? What was the priest of Pharaoh doing in Ur?

At this time Egyptian influence was felt throughout the Fertile Crescent. Much of the advanced learning of the people of the Nile was exported abroad, including some of their religious customs. For example, a powerful bow that would shoot an arrow straight for a distance of 1,000 to 1,400 feet was invented in Egypt, and it became a major weapon used by the entire region.

Furthermore, even prior to 3000 B.C. the Egyptians had developed an alphabet, the earliest known to historians. This was borrowed by other nations, together with writing materials. The Egyptians found that they could make an excellent ink by mixing water with a little vegetable gum and then stirring it in soot from their blackened pots. A pointed reed, dipped into the mixture, made a usable pen. This too was adopted in nearby nations.

The Egyptians developed the use of papyrus, which was made from river reed. The papyrus was cut into strips and glued together, thus making paper of whatever size was desired. This stimulated writing and greatly facilitated record keeping in neighboring countries. It was far more convenient than the use of clay tablets.

In the same manner the religions of the Egyptians were also exported to nearby peoples. Hence there were priests of Pharaoh in Ur.

But as a young man, Abraham loved the Lord. "I sought for mine appointment unto the Priesthood according to the appointment of God unto the fathers," he wrote. He added: "Finding there was greater happiness and peace and rest for me, I sought for the blessings of the fathers, and the right whereunto I should be ordained to administer the same." (Abr. 1:4, 2.)

It was this desire and his innate righteousness that led to his decision to leave Ur. But God also commanded it, and Abraham obeyed. "In the land of the Chaldeans, at the residence of my father, I, Abraham, saw that it was needful for me to obtain another place of residence." (Abr. 1:1.)

It would be interesting to know how a knowledge of the fathers reached Ur originally, and how Abraham obtained their records, but concerning this, both history and scripture are silent. It is revealed, as has been said, that he had the Urim and Thummim.

The fact that Abraham had the records of the fathers is most interesting though. Of this he wrote: "But the records of the fathers, even the patriarchs, concerning the right of Priesthood, the Lord my God preserved in mine own hands; therefore a knowledge of the beginning of the creation, and also of the planets, and of the stars, as they were made known unto the fathers, have I kept even unto this day, and I shall endeavor to write some of these things upon this record, for the benefit of my posterity that shall come after me." (Abr. 1:31.)

It is notable that these records contained information about the stars and the planets. What an insight this gives concerning the "fathers"! How had they learned astronomy? Did God teach them in the days of their righteousness as he later taught both Abraham and Moses? In further revelations Abraham personally obtained additional knowledge about the structure of the heavens and details concerning the creation of this earth.

Had there been a strong branch of the church in Mesopotamia, and had its membership later been swallowed up in the idolatry of their neighbors, leaving Abraham alone in the faith?

His father at one time was a believer. Were his grandfather, and possibly his great-grandfather also believers? The little that we do know seems to indicate that the knowledge of God—and the priesthood—had been handed down through the generations. But how did those generations get over into Ur?

Of course, the tendency in those days, as it is today, was for the people to travel to various parts of the country. It began with the tower of Babel. It is not at all unreasonable to suppose that some of the faithful drifted over to Mesopotamia. Certainly there is much evidence that early civilizations developed and thrived in that area. Some historians call Mesopotamia the cradle of civilization.

A branch of "the fathers" could have developed there and left their records undisturbed when they apostatized. Through his faithfulness, Abraham understood the value of those records, appreciated them, and sought to obtain the blessings that the gospel had offered to the fathers.

The Prophet Joseph Smith made this interesting comment:

"It will be noticed that, according to Paul, (see Gal. iii:8) the Gospel was preached to Abraham. We would like to be informed in what name the Gospel was then preached, whether it was in the name of Christ or some other name. If in any other name, was it the Gospel? And if it was the Gospel, and that preached in the name of Christ, had it any ordinances? If not, was it the Gospel? And if it had ordinances what were they?

"Our friends may say, perhaps, that there were never any ordinances except those of offering sacrifices before the coming of Christ, and that it could not be possible for the Gospel to have been administered while the law of sacrifices of blood was in force.

"But we will recollect that Abraham offered sacrifice, and notwithstanding this, had the Gospel preached to him. That the offering of sacrifice was only to point the mind forward to Christ, we infer from these remarkable words of Jesus to the Jews: `Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day: and he saw it, and was glad' (John viii:56).

"So, then, because the ancients offered sacrifice it did not hinder their hearing the Gospel; but served, as we said before, to open their eyes, and enable them to look forward to the time of the coming of the Savior, and rejoice in His redemption.

"We find also, that when the Israelites came out of Egypt they had the Gospel preached to them, according to Paul in his letter to the Hebrews, which says: `For unto us was the gospel preached, as well as unto them: but the word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that heard it.' (See Heb. iv:2).

"It is said again, in Gal. iii:19, that the law (of Moses, or the Levitical law) was `added' because of transgression. What, we ask, was this law added to, if it was not added to the Gospel? It must be plain that it was added to the Gospel, since we learn that they had the Gospel preached to them.

"From these few facts, we conclude that whenever the Lord revealed Himself to men in ancient days, and commanded them to offer sacrifice to Him, that it was done that they might look forward in faith to the time of His coming, and rely upon the power of that atonement for a remission of their sins.

"And this they have done, thousands who have gone before us, whose garments are spotless, and who are, like Job, waiting with an assurance like his, that they will see Him in the latter day upon the earth, even in their flesh." (HC 2:17.)

As an illustration of the fact that the church was well-established in Abraham's day, we quote the following from Helaman in the Book of Mormon:

"And now behold, Moses did not only testify of these things, but also all the holy prophets, from his days even to the days of Abraham.

"Yea, and behold I say unto you, that Abraham not only knew of these things, but there were many before the days of Abraham who were called by the order of God; yea, even after the order of his Son; and this that it should be shown unto the people, a great many thousand years before his coming, that even redemption should come unto them." (Hel. 8:16, 18.)

Prior to the birth of Christ the Nephites had both the gospel and the law of Moses, and they observed both.
