Mark E. Petersen, Abraham: Friend of God ( 1979)

ABRAHAM ATTACKED

Abraham's intense loyalty to the true God and his efforts to help his relatives to repent of their idolatry brought on a severe family feud. Particularly was Terah, his father, disturbed. His concern went to the point where he sought the death of Abraham. Why would this be? Why would a father seek to destroy his own son?

It would seem that Terah was so distressed over Abraham's opposition to idolatry; he was so desirous that Abraham be forgiven of his attitude by the pagan god that he sought some kind of appeasement on behalf of his son.

Terah was a devotee of a religion that demanded human sacrifice as appeasement. He was a sun worshipper. The priest of the cult of the "god of Pharaoh" was also the priest of the sun god Shagreel. (Abr. 1:9.)

Abraham's father and others of his relatives "endeavored to take away my life by the hand of the priest of Elkenah," said Abraham in his own account. (Abr. 1:7.) That could mean only one thing: The family intended to have Abraham sacrificed on the altar to appease the sun god. In Abr. 1:30 Abraham again speaks of Terah's desire to take away his life.

Did Terah believe so much in the sun god that he would seek to placate that deity by sacrificing Abraham to him? The heathen priest already had sacrificed three young women on this same altar because they would not yield their virtue and refused to "bow down to worship gods of wood or of stone, therefore they were killed upon this altar, and it was done after the manner of the Egyptians." (Abr. 1:11.)

It seemed to be Terah's intention to provide the same treatment for his son. It does not appear that there was any desire on his part to murder Abraham in a fit of anger because of a family quarrel. It seems more likely that it was a sacrifice of atonement that Terah sought, probably out of his fatherly love for his son. He may have thought that this extreme method should be used to save Abraham's soul. That at least is the charitable point of view, and most likely the correct one.

In the legends of both Jews and Arabs is a story that says that Abraham destroyed his father's images, and that this so infuriated the "god-king" Nimrod that he had Abraham thrown into a fiery furnace, only to be rescued immediately by the angel Gabriel.

That Abraham strongly fought idolatry is an accepted fact. That his attitude gave his father great concern is also beyond question.

Other parents offered their little children and sometimes their older children, or even grown men and women, as peace offerings to these gods. Why not Terah? Would Abraham's death appease Shagreel? In any case, "it came to pass that the priests laid violence upon me, that they might slay me also, as they did those virgins upon this altar." (Abr. 1:12.)

Abraham must have resisted this attack, but he was overpowered. However, he wrote, as the priests "lifted up their hands upon me, that they might offer me up and take away my life, behold, I lifted up my voice unto the Lord my God, and the Lord hearkened and heard, and he filled me with the vision of the Almighty, and the angel of his presence stood by me, and immediately unloosed my bands;

"And his voice was unto me: Abraham, Abraham, behold, my name is Jehovah, and I have heard thee, and have come down to deliver thee, and to take thee away from thy father's house, and from all thy kins-folk, into a strange land which thou knowest not of;

"And this because they have turned their hearts away from me, to worship the god of Elkenah, and the god of Libnah, and the god of Mahmackrah, and the god of Korash, and the god of Pharaoh, king of Egypt; therefore I have come down to visit them, and to destroy him who hath lifted up his hand against thee, Abraham, my son, to take away thy life." (Abr. 1:15-17.)

The Lord broke down the altars of Elkenah and the other gods and smote the priest "that he died."

When the scripture says that the Lord broke down the altars of the gods of the land, it must have had broad repercussions because it brought great mourning in Chaldea "and also in the court of Pharaoh." Pharaoh and his court were in Egypt. Only a most unusual event could have caused such extensive and distant reactions.

Abraham's brief account obviously does not tell the whole story. Abraham wrote that this attack took place on Potiphar's Hill in the land of Ur of Chaldea. The record also says that Potiphar's Hill was at the head of the plain of Olishem. (V. 10.)

The hill in Ur called after Potiphar reminds us of Joseph who was sold into Egypt, where he became the servant of Potiphar, a captain of the Egyptian guard. (Gen. 39:1.) The Bible dictionary says that the name Potiphar signifies "belonging to the sun." Hence it was related to sun worship.

But what of the name Olishem? Could it be divided into OliShem, and did it refer in some way to Shem, the righteous son of Noah?

We next read this:

"Now, after the priest of Elkenah was smitten that he died, there came a fulfilment of those things which were said unto me concerning the land of Chaldea, that there should be a famine in the land.

"Accordingly a famine prevailed throughout all the land of Chaldea, and my father was sorely tormented because of the famine, and he repented of the evil which he had determined against me, to take away my life." (Abr. 1:29-30.)

So severe was the famine that Haran, the brother of Abraham, died there in Ur. Terah "was sorely tormented because of the famine" (v. 30), and no doubt when Haran died, Terah was even further softened in his heart, helping to bring about repentance.

The time for Abraham's removal from Ur had now arrived. "Now the Lord had said unto me: Abraham, get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy father's house, unto a land that I will show thee." (Abr. 2:3.)

Abraham prepared to go. First he married Sarah. Nahor, his brother, married Milcah, daughter of Haran.

Nahor did not leave Ur with Abraham, but seems to have moved to Haran later on. Nothing is said about any other relatives but Abraham's nephew Lot.

Except for Sarah, Lot, and Terah, who "followed along" somewhat repentant, Abraham was alone. And so we read: "Therefore I left the land of Ur, of the Chaldees, to go into the land of Canaan; and I took Lot, my brother's son, and his wife, and Sarai my wife; and also my father followed after me, unto the land which we denominated Haran." (Abr. 2:4.)

On the way to Canaan they rested in northern Mesopotamia in a place that they named Haran, after the dead brother of Abraham. There the famine abated. With the return of prosperity, Terah went back to his idolatry. Not wishing to continue with Abraham to the promised land, he remained in Haran and subsequently died at the age of 205 years. (Gen. 11:32.) This was approximately 1921 B.C.

The region of Haran has other interests also. Bible dictionaries say that Nahor, who did not accompany Abraham on his journey north, afterward went to Haran to live, no doubt to be with his father and any other relatives who may have gathered there.

Nahor's son Bethuel became the father of Rebeccah, who married Isaac, Abraham's son. Bethuel also had a son named Laban, who had two daughters, Rachel and Leah. They became the wives of Jacob, Abraham's grandson.

Haran is in the area that later was known as Paddan-aram. Aram is an alternate name for Syria. Haran was located north and east of Palestine.
