Mark E. Petersen, Abraham: Friend of God ( 1979)

THE DIVINE CALL

The altar of Elkenah was more than a heathen shrine to Abraham, and far more than the place where he nearly lost his life. It was where he received his divine call!

While the priests of Pharoah "lifted up their hands" to take his life, he prayed earnestly to the Lord for deliverance. "And the Lord hearkened and heard, and he filled me with the vision of the Almighty, and the angel of his presence stood by me, and immediately unloosed my bands." That was the first step in the miracle.

Next came the voice of the Lord, saying, "Abraham, Abraham, behold, my name is Jehovah, and I have heard thee, and have come down to deliver thee, and to take thee away from thy father's house, and from all thy kins-folk, into a strange land which thou knowest not of." (Abr. 1:15-16.)

Note the reference to the relatives of Abraham: "all thy kins-folk." What a tragedy that the whole family fell away from the faith, making it necessary for the Lord to uproot Abraham, take him away entirely, and lead him to a strange land "which thou knowest not of."

That last expression is interesting, too. He was to go to Palestine. Apparently that land was not known to him personally. Communication in those days, of course, was limited. But there was frequent contact between Egypt and Mesopotamia otherwise, and the travel route went through Palestine. Obviously Abraham had never been there or learned of it, or the Lord would not have spoken as he did.

There must have been at least two sections of the Lord's church in those days. One in Ur ended in apostasy, with Abraham leaving to seek a better land. The other was certainly in Palestine, for there we know Melchizedek lived. He was the great high priest, and to him Abraham paid tithes. He also was the king of the city of Salem, believed to be ancient Jerusalem.

It is firmly stated that some of the fathers lived in Ur, for they apparently prepared or possessed the record that fell into Abraham's hands. Those fathers very likely held the priesthood, giving Abraham a desire for the same blessing.

How these fathers got over into Mesopotamia can only be surmised. People moved about in those days as they do today. At the tower of Babel they were scattered far and wide. Archaeologists tell us that Mesopotamia cradled the first civilization.

But the church must have been a going concern in those days, especially since it had such a great high priest as Melchizedek. His greatness must be measured by the fact that the priesthood after the order of the Son of God was named after him to avoid the too frequent use of the name of Deity. What other man ever received such an honor?

Paul knew that the church existed then, for he told the Galatians (3:8) that the gospel was preached "before unto Abraham."

The Book of Mormon clearly says that Melchizedek lived in Salem, where he was king.

Peloubet's Bible Dictionary (p. 577) says of Salem's location: "No satisfactory identification of it is perhaps possible. Two main opinions have been current from the earliest ages of interpretation: (a) That of the Jewish commentators, who affirm that Salem is Jerusalem, on the ground that Jerusalem is so called in Ps. 76:2. Nearly all Jewish commentators hold this opinion, and also the majority of the best modern scholars. (b) Jerome, however, states that the Salem of Melchizedek [is identified] with Salim, near Aenon, where John baptized."

The psalm referred to reads: "In Judah is God known: his name is great in Israel. In Salem also is his tabernacle, and his dwelling place in Zion." (Ps. 76:1-2.)

Regardless of which is correct, Salem in any case was in Palestine, and there King Melchizedek reigned. He and Abraham were contemporaries.

No doubt a knowledge of the church in Palestine at that time was kept from Abraham in Ur by his immediate fathers, since they had turned to wickedness. They apparently shut out of their minds and lives everything pertaining to the true faith.

Since Abraham's fathers had been in possession of the records that later fell into his hands, surely they must have had more knowledge than they had imparted to Abraham about the "strange land which thou knowest not of."

While Abraham was lying on the sacrificial altar, an angel came and saved him from the knife of Pharoah's priest. And there Abraham received his call.

"Behold," said the Lord at this dreadful moment, as he killed the priest and destroyed the altar, "I will lead thee by the hand, and I will take thee, to put upon thee my name, even the Priesthood of thy father, and my power shall be over thee.

"As it was with Noah so shall it be with thee; but through thy ministry my name shall be known in the earth forever, for I am thy God." (Abr. 1:18-19.)

These are interesting scriptures. It was later that Abraham was told of his great posterity, but here he was called to take upon himself the ministry and the name of Jehovah, who is Jesus Christ. At the heathen altar also he was promised the priesthood and was told, "my power shall be with thee."

Here too he was told the name of Jehovah, who said: "I am thy God."

We often speculate about the extent of the Lord's subsequent promise of a vast posterity, but here is a promise that is seldom mentioned: "Through thy ministry my name shall be known in the earth forever." (Abr. 1:19.)

This mighty prophet of God would not be left merely to propagate a great posterity. A ministry was given him! It must have included the preaching of the word. But to what congregations? The record is silent on this point. We do know that he taught the Egyptians astronomy. Could he have used that as a means of proclaiming the name of Christ in that spiritually benighted land?

And surely if there were sufficient members of the Church in Palestine to justify having a "great high priest," there would have been congregations for Abraham to address. It is remembered that when Melchizedek preached repentance to his own people, he converted his entire city. (Alma 13:7-18.) Since he and Abraham were contemporaries and both were called of God, would they not have been associated together in the ministry?

One means by which Abraham declares the name of Jehovah to all the world is through the generations of the Jews themselves. Believing Jews are loyal to Abraham and to their heritage through him. They cherish Jehovah's name. Inasmuch as they were scattered among all nations, they took the name of Jehovah and the memory of Abraham with them, universally.

But Jehovah is also Jesus Christ, and with his name true Christians also carry the name of Abraham worldwide in their ministry. Latter-day Saints in particular do so. They are now in seventy nations, and as they preach Christ they also carry with them the name of Abraham, in whose lineage Jesus was born.

After his escape from the priest of Pharaoh, Abraham was commanded to leave Ur. It was at this point that the Lord said: "Abraham, get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy father's house, unto a land that I will show thee." (Abr. 2:3.)

So he left Ur and went to Haran. There, he says, "the Lord appeared unto me, and said unto me: Arise, and take Lot with thee; for I have purposed to take thee away out of Haran, and to make of thee a minister to bear my name in a strange land which I will give unto thy seed after thee for an everlasting possession, when they hearken to my voice.

"For I am the Lord thy God; I dwell in heaven; the earth is my footstool; I stretch my hand over the sea, and it obeys my voice; I cause the wind and the fire to be my chariot; I say to the mountains—Depart hence—and behold, they are taken away by a whirlwind, in an instant, suddenly.

"My name is Jehovah, and I know the end from the beginning; therefore my hand shall be over thee.

"And I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee above measure, and make thy name great among all nations, and thou shalt be a blessing unto thy seed after thee, that in their hands they shall bear this ministry and Priesthood unto all nations;

"And I will bless them through thy name; for as many as receive this Gospel shall be called after thy name, and shall be accounted thy seed, and shall rise up and bless thee, as their father;

"And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee; and in thee (that is, in thy Priesthood) and in thy seed (that is, thy Priesthood), for I give unto thee a promise that this right shall continue in thee, and in thy seed after thee (that is to say, the literal seed, or the seed of the body) shall all the families of the earth be blessed, even with the blessings of the Gospel, which are the blessings of salvation, even of life eternal." (Abr. 2:6-11.)

This was the call of Abraham. This was his blessing. And his work was indeed a ministry!
