Mark E. Petersen, Abraham: Friend of God ( 1979)

THE HEAVENLY PROMISE

The promise of the Lord to Abraham, that through his lineage all the nations of the earth would be blessed, is most significant.

It will be remembered that Abraham was shown in vision the premortal spirits, the mighty ones. He was told by the Lord that "these I will make my rulers; . . . Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born." (Abr. 3:22-23.)

He was chosen in that pristine period for the blessing that the Lord now pronounced upon him. In the spirit world were many chosen and loyal spirits who were blessed to come into mortality through the loins of Abraham, who also was blessed in being chosen as their progenitor. The Lord thus was to send his most loyal spirits to be born in a lineage that would encourage the worship of Jehovah and help to prepare them to receive and minister in the holy priesthood.

The promise is usually spoken of as being twofold:

President Joseph Fielding Smith explained it this way:

"How were the nations benefited by the covenant made with Abraham?

"First let us take a view of conditions before the flood. The Lord taught Adam the gospel after he was driven out of the Garden of Eden, and the Lord commanded him to teach his children.

"This Adam did, but we read that Satan came among them saying: `I am also a son of God; and he commanded them, saying: Believe it not; and they believed it not, and they loved Satan more than God. And men began from that time forth to be carnal, sensual, and devilish.' [Moses 5:13.

"Therefore in the course of about sixteen hundred years the world had become corrupt and the Lord brought upon it the flood and cleansed it from its iniquity. With Noah and his family a new start was made, and the same commandments were given, and the people began to multiply and spread out over the earth.

"Like the antediluvians they too soon forgot the commandments of the Lord and turned to wickedness and idolatry. Therefore the Lord chose Abraham and commanded him to leave his native land and made a covenant with him that through his seed he would bless the world with the gospel. . . .

"It was to be by scattering the children of Israel among the nations of the earth that the Lord would bless them and make them entitled to the blessings of the gospel. The Lord took measures for this scattering soon after the Israelites entered the land of Palestine and had received their inheritances. . . . Evidence of the mixing of the seed of Israel among the gentile nations is shown at the time of the feast of Pentecost when Peter and the apostles addressed the assembly of Hebrews who had come to that feast, `devout men, out of every nation under heaven.' [Acts 2:5.

"These people evidently had been born in these foreign lands for they could not speak the language of the apostles and were astonished that each heard them in his own tongue. . . .

"One of the most interesting and significant parables ever written is that revealed to Zenos and recorded in the fifth chapter of Jacob in the Book of Mormon. It is a parable of the scattering of Israel. If we had the full key to the interpretation, then we would have in detail how Israel was transplanted in all parts of the earth.

"Thus through this scattering the Lord has caused Israel to mix with the nations and bring the gentiles within the blessings of the seed of Abraham. We are preaching the gospel now in all parts of the world, and for what purpose? To gather out from the gentile nations the lost sheep of the house of Israel. It is by this scattering that the gentile nations have been blessed, and if they will truly repent they are entitled to all the blessings promised to Israel, `which are the blessings of salvation, even of life eternal.' " (Improvement Era, February 1958, pp. 81, 116.)

Elder Orson F. Whitney of the Council of the Twelve, writing in the Liahona (Elder's Journal) June 17, 1924, spoke of it in this way:

"What was the purpose of Abraham's call? Why was he taken out of his own country and from his father's house and promised that he should become a great nation? It was because Mesopotamia was steeped in idolatry, and the time had arrived for the founding of a pure lineage through which the Lord Jesus Christ, the Savior, would come into the world. Abraham was required to separate himself from his idolatrous surroundings, that he might establish such a lineage. The strict laws given to Israel, Abraham's descendants, had as their object the preservation in purity of the lineage of our Lord, the `Lamb without spot or blemish.' Isaiah, in the prophecy quoted, is exhorting latter-day Israel, scattered among all nations, but now being gathered out from all nations, to look unto Abraham, to remember the lineage from which they have sprung, and to prepare themselves for the great things that the Lord has in store for his people. . . .

"How was this great promise fulfilled? It was fulfilled in the coming of the Christ through the lineage of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, to die for the redemption of a fallen world. It was also fulfilled in the fate that befell the House of Israel, who were dispersed among all nations for a wise purpose. . . .

"The Lord punished his people for their sins, just as he had punished Adam and Eve for their transgressions. But even as that was converted into a blessing—for the fall produced the human race—gave them bodies in the flesh—so the scattering of Israel, though a punishment upon the Lord's people for their disobedience was overruled to bring to pass in part the promise made to Abraham, that in his seed should all the nations of the earth be blessed.

"Prophecies of Israel's dispersion were made as early as the time of Moses, fifteen centuries before the birth of Christ. The great leader told his people, before they entered the Promised Land, that if they would serve Jehovah and keep his commandments, He would make of them a mighty nation, an independent nation; but if they forsook Jehovah and served other gods, He would scatter them from one end of the earth unto the other. Well, Israel did forsake Jehovah; they served other gods and polluted their noble lineage, by worshiping idols, by practicing the vices of the surrounding nations, making themselves temporarily unfit for the great mission unto which they had been called. And they had to be punished in order to be purified."

Elder Whitney then referred to predictions that in the last days Israel would be gathered again. He asked: "But why this gathering? What is it all about? What is the object in view? The house of Israel must be gathered because it is the God of Israel who is coming, and his people are the only people who have the right to prepare the way before him and meet him when he appears.

"It was the God of Israel who died to redeem the fallen human race, and it was the house of Israel, by its prophets and the Apostles, which prepared the way before Him and carried on the work that He began. God works through Israel in giving blessings to mankind. `In thee (Abraham) and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed.'

"We Latter-day Saints are Gentiles in part, but we have enough of the blood of Israel in our veins to recognize and appreciate the message that has come, and are not ashamed to stoop and pick up the diamond from the dust; for a diamond is a diamond, whether it sparkle in the dust at your feet or glitter in the diadem of a queen.

"God is coming to reign over the earth, to sanctify it and prepare it for eternal glory; for after it has passed away as by fire, it will be restored and converted into a celestial sphere. That is the destiny of our mother planet. It keeps the celestial law, wherefore it shall be sanctified and eventually glorified, as the abode of celestial beings. The King will come to Zion, a city to be built upon the North American continent, and then he will appear at Jerusalem, in the land of Palestine. . . .

"The work of gathering Ephraim and the other tribes will continue until it is complete. The kingdom of God throughout the Millennium will have two capital cities, Zion in America, Jerusalem in Palestine, and these words of Isaiah the prophet will then be fulfilled: `Out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.'"

Genealogies show Abraham to be directly related to various of the Eastern peoples. The New Catholic Encyclopedia (1:32-34) reports that through his brother Nehor, he is related to the Aramaeans, and that through his son Ishmael he is related to the Ishmaelites and to some branches of the Arab lines. He is related, of course, to Israel through Isaac and Jacob, and to the Edomites through Esau. Through his wife Keturah he is related to various Arabic tribes, and through his nephew Lot, to the Moabites and Ammonites.

Smith's Bible Dictionary (1:16) also mentions the Midianites as his relatives, and adds that his name was revered throughout Asia.
