Mark E. Petersen, Abraham: Friend of God ( 1979)

ABRAHAM AND JOSEPH SMITH

The blessings and promises of Abraham were also conferred upon the Prophet Joseph Smith.

This was in harmony with the prediction of Peter that before the coming of the Savior there would be a restitution of all things whatsoever God had spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets from the beginning of the world. (Acts 3:21.)

The Lord told the Prophet Joseph of an ancient personage named Esaias who received the priesthood under the hand of God. Where he resided is not mentioned. This Esaias lived in the days of Abraham "and was blessed of him." (D&C 84:12-13.)

This scripture established a definite relationship. A man who was so respected of the Lord that God himself would ordain him to the priesthood was associated with Abraham, who himself was the "friend of God." A friendship like that which existed between these two prophets, then, would seem to be most natural.

The revelation makes it clear that "Abraham received the priesthood from Melchizedek, who received it through the lineage of his fathers, even till Noah." (D&C 84:14.)

There can be no doubt in anyone's mind that the church was a progressive and ongoing institution at that time in Palestine. Further, the Lord appointed a "dispensation of the gospel" unto Abraham, and in it labored true prophets of Almighty God.

One of those prophets, Elias, had the keys of authority for that dispensation. As part of the restitution of all things spoken of by the apostle Peter, Elias came to Joseph Smith in the Kirtland Temple on April 3, 1836, and committed the keys of Abraham's dispensation to the modern restorer. In describing this event, Joseph and Oliver Cowdery said that "in us and our seed all generations after us should be blessed." (D&C 110:12.)

Remarkable, isn't it? This modern reconfirmation of the promise of Abraham was now bestowed upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, who were together in the temple at the time.

Naturally, of course, these keys and promises, like those bestowed through the coming of Moses and Elijah, related to the work of the entire church in these latter days, and were to be used by it.

This was part of the dispensation of the fulness of times, the rolling into one of all former dispensations, or a restoration of all things. Hence the coming of Elias to bestow the keys of Abraham's dispensation upon Joseph Smith. And hence the modern pronouncement of the Lord's promise to Abraham, this time extended to Joseph Smith and the Latter-day Saints.

When the Lord gave D&C 132 of the Doctrine and Covenants, he spoke of his covenant with Abraham and its relationship to Joseph Smith, the modern restorer of all things. Said he:

"I am the Lord thy God, and will give unto thee the law of my Holy Priesthood, as was ordained by me and my Father before the world was.

"Abraham received all things, whatsoever he received, by revelation and commandment, by my word, saith the Lord, and hath entered into his exaltation and sitteth upon his throne.

"Abraham received promises concerning his seed, and of the fruit of his loins—from whose loins ye are, namely, my servant Joseph—which were to continue so long as they were in the world; and as touching Abraham and his seed, out of the world they should continue; both in the world and out of the world should they continue as innumerable as the stars; or, if ye were to count the sand upon the seashore ye could not number them."

But then the Lord said: "This promise is yours also, because ye are of Abraham, and the promise was made unto Abraham; and by this law is the continuation of the works of my Father." (D&C 132:28-31. Italics added.)

When the construction of the Nauvoo House was under consideration, the Lord made this principle even more clear. Speaking of the Prophet Joseph Smith, the Lord said, "This anointing have I put upon his head, that his blessing shall also be put upon the head of his posterity after him.

"And as I said unto Abraham concerning the kindreds of the earth, even so I say unto my servant Joseph: In thee and in thy seed shall the kindred of the earth be blessed.

"Therefore, let my servant Joseph and his seed after him have place in that house, from generation to generation, forever and ever, saith the Lord.

"And let the name of that house be called Nauvoo House; and let it be a delightful habitation for man, and a resting-place for the weary traveler, that he may contemplate the glory of Zion, and the glory of this, the corner-stone thereof." (D&C 124:57-60.)

Thus, with the restoration of the gospel, the promises and blessings of Abraham were conferred as a part of the "restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began." (Acts 3:21. See also Matt. 25:31; 24:30; Eph. 1:9; Rev. 14:6-7.)

Obviously there are great promises to Joseph Smith's posterity. If they will sustain the true church and be faithful, it appears that they will be heirs to the promises thus made to the Prophet and his seed.

This promise is also made to all Latter-day Saints, for we hold the priesthood with Joseph; we preach it abroad as he did and as he commanded. As children of Abraham and co-members of the Church with Joseph Smith, we bear Abraham's name abroad; we bear the Savior's name abroad, and gather in his—and Abraham's—people into the kingdom of God.

Abraham had the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ and not some primitive belief. The gospel of salvation is what he had, and at this early time the destiny of his descendants to carry it abroad by the power of the priesthood was foretold. The promise mentioned no time limit, so was not that an early prediction of the work that we do today? Was there a time in the past—ever—when the gospel and the priesthood actually went to all nations? Was that work reserved for our day?

The Savior ministered only in Palestine. He commanded his disciples to go into all the world and preach the gospel to every nation, baptizing them in the name of the Lord. (Mark 16:15-16.)

But did they reach all nations? Little is known of their ministry, except that of Paul. But this we do know: As the early centuries passed, apostasy swept over the world, and what "all nations" eventually received was not the gospel of Christ, but a manmade version of it. And today, though so-called Christianity is worldwide, it is merely an apostate form of that gospel, with its many creeds and ordinances, and sometimes without any ordinances at all.

The scriptures indicate that it was to be in the latter days, through the restoration of the gospel, that the good word would be taken abroad universally as a warning before the second coming of the Lord. (Rev. 14:6-7; Acts 3:21.)

So we today, as Latter-day Saints, are even now helping to fulfill the promise made to Abraham that through him and his seed, both the gospel of salvation and the Holy Priesthood would be taken to all nations.
