Mark E. Petersen, Abraham: Friend of God ( 1979)

GOD APPEARS IN PERSON

The personality of God is made clear through the repeated appearances of the Almighty to Abraham, who saw that the Lord was a person. Abraham talked with him face to face, as Moses did, or as do any two persons who commune together.

When Abraham was rescued from the pagan altar in Ur, the Lord spoke to him personally and said, "I . . . have come down to deliver thee." (Abr. 1:16.) The record does not say that he saw the Lord at this time.

But in Haran he did. "The Lord appeared to me," he said as the Lord commanded Abraham to leave Haran. "My name is Jehovah," the Lord continued in that conversation. And here he repeated his promise to Abraham. Then the patriarch writes: "Now, after the Lord had withdrawn from speaking to me, and withdrawn his face from me . . . ." (Abr. 2:12. Italics added.)

On the plains of Moreh when he offered sacrifices and prayed, he writes, "the Lord appeared unto me in answer to my prayers." (Abr. 2:19.) How close their relationship was! Truly Abraham was the Friend of God.

When he came near Egypt, the Lord directly addressed him again: "The Lord said unto me: Behold, Sarai, thy wife, is a very fair woman to look upon." (Abr. 2:22.)

It was direct communication—direct revelation!

When Abraham was shown the heavens by the use of the Urim and Thummim, he not only received revelations through that instrument, but he "talked with the Lord, face to face, as one man talketh with another; and he told me of the works which his hands had made.

"And he said unto me: My son, my son (and his hand was stretched out), behold I will show you all these." (Abr. 3:11-12. Italics added.)

Was not stretching out his hand a visual proof of the personality of God and of his being an individual, a person?

"He put his hand upon mine eyes," Abraham wrote. (Abr. 3:12.)

The revelation concerning astronomy included a personal visit and individual conversation between Abraham and the Lord—as "one man talketh to another." (Abr. 3:18-28.) What an experience to be thus taught of the Lord, and in his very presence!

The Lord spoke to Abraham in vision at other times. Then "when Abram was ninety years old and nine, the Lord appeared to Abram, and said unto him, I am the Almighty God; walk before me, and be thou perfect. And Abram fell on his face: and God talked with him." (Gen. 17:1, 3. See also Gen. 1:15.)

"And he left off talking with him, and God went up from Abraham." (Gen. 17:22.) "And the Lord appeared unto him in the plains of Mamre." (Gen. 18:1.)

When the angels visited with Abraham prior to the destruction of Sodom, the Lord was there too, for we read: "And the men turned their faces from thence, and went toward Sodom: but Abraham stood yet before the Lord." (Gen. 18:22.)

It was then that Abraham bargained with the Lord, evidently face to face, for the Lord had not yet left. He bargained for the righteous in the wicked cities of the plains. When the conversation was over we read that "the Lord went his way, as soon as he had left communing with Abraham: and Abraham returned unto his place." (Gen. 18:33.)

Such personal communications were the means by which the Friend of God visited with the Almighty.

There was no doubt in Abraham's mind that God is a person. There was no doubt in his mind that God is reasonable and can be approached, even talked with, face to face. There was no doubt about God's promises, and his fidelity, and his remembering his children and their needs.

God was a great reality to Abraham, and this fact Abraham taught to his children. So real was God to Isaac, for example, and so great was his faith that the Almighty also appeared to him.

It was this kind of association with God that set the foundation for the great religion that the patriarch passed on down to his descendants. In the house of Israel, there was full faith in a personal God.

Aside from the house of Israel, even among the illiterate and the savage, there always has been a certain conviction that God lives. In every human being there is an innate feeling that a Higher Power does indeed exist. It is on this spark of faith that they may build as they hear the true word of God, and learn the facts about both Abraham and God, but especially of themselves and their relationship with the Almighty.

God is a person! He is our eternal Father! He does live! We have the testimony of Abraham. We have the testimony of Christ. And in these latter days, it is reaffirmed through the Prophet Joseph Smith.

God does live!
