Mark E. Petersen, Abraham: Friend of God ( 1979)

SARAH "THY SISTER"

The Lord would not allow Abraham to remain in Haran, even though his father stayed there and despite the fact that prosperity had come to him in that place. "So I, Abraham, departed as the Lord had said unto me, and Lot with me; and I, Abraham, was sixty and two years old when I departed out of Haran." (Abr. 2:14.)

They journeyed to Jershon where he made an altar and prayed to the Lord, asking that the famine might be turned "away from my father's house, that they might not perish."

As they reached the borders of Canaan, Abraham writes, "I offered sacrifice there in the plains of Moreh, and called on the Lord devoutly, because we had already come into the land of this idolatrous nation." Here again the Lord appeared to him, and again the Lord said—now in Canaan—"Unto thy seed will I give this land." (Abr. 2:17-19.)

Abraham continued to travel south. Canaan at that time was in famine also, and this persuaded him to go on to Egypt.

"And it came to pass when I was come near to enter into Egypt, the Lord said unto me: Behold, Sarai, thy wife, is a very fair woman to look upon;

"Therefore it shall come to pass, when the Egyptians shall see her, they will say—She is his wife; and they will kill you, but they will save her alive; therefore see that ye do on this wise:

"Let her say unto the Egyptians, she is thy sister, and thy soul shall live.

"And it came to pass that I, Abraham, told Sarai, my wife, all that the Lord had said unto me—Therefore say unto them, I pray thee, thou art my sister, that it may be well with me for thy sake, and my soul shall live because of thee." (Abr. 2:22-25.)

There was good reason for this. It was customary for the kings and rulers to take to themselves any of the beautiful women their eyes fell upon. They had harems, of course, and did not mind adding to them.

Both the Bible and the Pearl of Great Price say that Sarah was a beauty. As she and Abraham came into Egypt, "the Egyptians beheld the woman that she was very fair. The princes also of Pharoah saw her, and commended her before Pharaoh." (Gen. 12:14-15.)

Pharaoh needed very little persuasion, and Sarah was soon taken into the king's house.

To protect himself, Abraham had told Pharaoh that Sarah was his sister, which of course she was. Had he divulged that she was his wife, he might have been slain. But as his sister, Pharaoh was willing to buy her at a good price. He offered Abraham "sheep, and oxen, and he asses, and menservants, and maidservants, and she asses, and camels." (Gen. 12:16.) All of this was the price he was willing to pay for Sarah.

The scripture does not mention the response of Abraham. Naturally he must have refused the offer because he was a man of God. In any case, it appears from the record that Sarah was detained in the king's house. This displeased the Lord, who knew that he would have to rescue her. He thereupon "plagued Pharaoh and his house with great plagues because of Sarai Abram's wife."

Through the plagues, the king apparently discovered the true relationship of Abraham and Sarah. As he wanted no more plagues on his house, he immediately lost all desire for Sarah. No woman was worth such a price.

He therefore called Abraham and said, "What is this that thou hast done unto me? why didst thou not tell me that she was thy wife? Why saidst thou, She is my sister? so I might have taken her to me to wife: now therefore behold thy wife, take her, and go thy way.

"And Pharaoh commanded his men concerning him: and they sent him away, and his wife, and all that he had." (Gen. 12:17-20.)

This, of course, was the result the Lord and Abraham both desired. They left in peace. The ruse succeeded, and Abraham was not slain by a Pharaoh lusting for just one more woman.

Abraham and Sarah had a second experience like this. When they journeyed to "the south country, and dwelled between Kadesh and Shur, and sojourned to Gerar," Abraham again said concerning Sarah, "She is my sister: and Abimelech king of Gerar sent, and took Sarah.

"But God came to Abimelech in a dream by night, and said to him, Behold, thou art but a dead man, for the woman which thou hast taken; for she is a man's wife.

"But Abimelech had not come near her: and he said, Lord, wilt thou slay also a righteous nation?

"Said he not unto me, She is my sister? and she, even she herself said, He is my brother: in the integrity of my heart and innocency of my hands have I done this.

"And God said unto him in a dream, Yea, I know that thou didst this in the integrity of thy heart; for I also withheld thee from sinning against me: therefore suffered I thee not to touch her.

"Now therefore restore the man his wife; for he is a prophet, and he shall pray for thee, and thou shalt live: and if thou restore her not, know thou that thou shalt surely die, thou, and all that are thine.

"Therefore Abimelech rose early in the morning, and called all his servants, and told all these things in their ears: and the men were sore afraid.

"Then Abimelech called Abraham, and said unto him, What hast thou done unto us? and what have I offended thee, that thou hast brought on me and on my kingdom a great sin? thou hast done deeds unto me that ought not to be done.

"And Abimelech said unto Abraham, What sawest thou, that thou hast done this thing?

"And Abraham said, Because I thought, Surely the fear of God is not in this place; and they will slay me for my wife's sake.

"And yet indeed she is my sister; she is the daughter of my father, but not the daughter of my mother; and she became my wife.

"And it came to pass, when God caused me to wander from my father's house, that I said unto her, This is thy kindness which thou shalt shew unto me; at every place whither we shall come, say of me, He is my brother.

"And Abimelech took sheep, and oxen, and menservants, and womenservants, and gave them unto Abraham, and restored him Sarah his wife.

"And Abimelech said, Behold, my land is before thee: dwell where it pleaseth thee.

"And unto Sarah he said, Behold, I have given thy brother a thousand pieces of silver: behold, he is to thee a covering of the eyes, unto all that are with thee, and with all other: thus she was reproved.

"So Abraham prayed unto God: and God healed Abimelech, and his wife, and his maidservants; and they bare children.

"For the Lord had fast closed up all the wombs of the house of Abimelech, because of Sarah Abraham's wife." (Gen. 20:1-18.)

In both instances, the life of Abraham, as a husband to Sarah, was spared from lustful men. Sarah likewise was saved unhurt and untouched, and eventually she would achieve her own great destiny as the wife of Abraham. With him, she too would have progeny as numerous as the sands and the stars. And through her would be born even Jesus Christ, the Savior of all mankind.
