Mark E. Petersen, Abraham: Friend of God ( 1979)

ABRAHAM WAS VERY RICH

No one really knows the economic condition of Abraham while he was in Ur as a young man. Archaeologists believe that he must have been well off and that most certainly he was well educated.

Nothing is said about his possessions as he moved to Haran. He evidently went with little of this world's goods. But in Haran he prospered. He says that in leaving Haran, he took his wife and nephew "and all our substance that we had gathered, and the souls that we had won in Haran." (Abr. 2:15.) The scriptures say that he obtained many servants. Actually at one time he had in his retinue three hundred armed and trained fighting men. (Gen. 14:14.) Another paragraph says: "There were many flocks in Haran." (Abr. 2:5.)

Subsequent writings show that both Abraham and Lot had many herds, so many, in fact, that they found it necessary to part company to get more grazing land. Lot and his herds would go one way and Abraham with his would go another. Where did they obtain their herds?

There were several reasons why Abraham became rich. One must have been that he was a highly intelligent man, well educated in Ur, and trained no doubt in business as well as ranching. His business skill could have accounted for much of his successes, as it does with others. But there was a more important reason: He served the Lord!

When he said, "I will do well to hearken unto thy voice," he gave expression to a great lesson he had learned. This lesson was known also to the people of Lehi who came to America. They too were told that if they would serve God, they would be prospered in the land. This holds true of anyone, for the Lord is not a respecter of persons.

But learning to hearken unto the voice of the Lord included a great principle then, as it does now: the principle of tithing.

Abraham paid tithes of all he had to Melchizedek the great high priest. (Gen. 14:20.) Centuries later, when Malachi ministered for the Lord, he taught tithing with a great promise: "Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse," he said. "Prove me now herewith, saith the Lord of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of heaven and pour you out a blessing that there shall not be room enough to receive it." (Mal. 3:8-10.)

Since Abraham had the gospel of Christ, he was, of course, taught this law. He certainly observed it. It is not supposed that paying tithing will make everyone rich, for other factors enter into it, but in any case the Lord does bless the faithful tithe payer.

As Abraham and Lot came up from Egypt, following the famine in Canaan and Haran, the record reads: "And Abram was very rich in cattle, in silver, and in gold. . . . And Lot also, which went [out of Egypt] with Abram had flocks and herds, and tents."

So it was that the land "was not able to bear them, that they might dwell together: for their substance was great, so that they could not dwell together.

"And there was a strife between the herdmen of Abram's cattle and the herdmen of Lot's cattle: and the Canaanite and the Perizzite dwelled then in the land.

"And Abram said unto Lot, Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between me and thee, and between my herdmen and thy herdmen; for we be brethren.

"Is not the whole land before thee? separate thyself, I pray thee, from me: if thou wilt take the left hand, then I will go to the right; or if thou depart to the right hand, then I will go to the left.

"And Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the plain of Jordan, that it was well watered every where, before the Lord destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah, even as the garden of the Lord, like the land of Egypt, as thou comest unto Zoar.

"Then Lot chose him all the plain of Jordan; and Lot journeyed east: and they separated themselves the one from the other.

"Abram dwelled in the land of Canaan, and Lot dwelled in the cities of the plain, and pitched his tent toward Sodom.

"But the men of Sodom were wicked and sinners before the Lord exceedingly." (Gen. 13:2, 5-13.)

Why Lot went in the direction of Sodom is a question. It must have been his desire for more wealth. He took the land that he felt was most desirable, but it reached one of the most wicked places on earth—Sodom, where the people were "wicked and sinners before the Lord exceedingly." Though Lot must have known this, nevertheless he made his home among them. This is emphasized in the incident preceding the destruction of "the cities of the plains." (Gen. 19:1-11.)

But it was different with Abraham. He was generous and fair with Lot, allowing him first choice in the division of the land.

It is more than interesting that as he left Haran to go to Egypt, he said to the Lord: "I will do well to hearken unto thy voice." (Abr. 2:13.) What a lesson that was! What a lesson for all mankind!

And this is what he did. Each time the Lord told him to move, he hearkened unto his voice. When the Lord told him to save his life by presenting Sarah as his sister, he did so, and his life was spared.

It is remarkable how frequently in his travels Abraham built altars and offered sacrifices to the Lord.

Giving up the land that Lot took must not have been easy for Abraham, for "all the plains of Jordan [which Lot chose]. . . was well watered every where . . . even as the garden of the Lord, like the land of Egypt." (Gen. 13:10.) Indeed, it was a land flowing with milk and honey. But what a contrast later, when famine came and water was no longer available!

Lot went his way, toward wicked Sodom; but the Lord was with Abraham, and once again he renewed his promise to this "father of the faithful."

"And the Lord said unto Abram, after that Lot was separated from him, Lift up now thine eyes, and look from the place where thou art northward, and southward, and eastward, and westward:

"For all the land which thou seest, to thee will I give it, and thy seed for ever.

"And I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth: so that if a man can number the dust of the earth, then shall thy seed also be numbered.

"Arise, walk through the land in the length of it and in the breadth of it; for I will give it unto thee.

"Then Abram removed his tent, and came and dwelt in the plain of Mamre, which is in Hebron, and built there an altar unto the Lord." (Gen. 13:14-18.)
