Mark E. Petersen, Abraham: Friend of God ( 1979)

HAGAR AND SARAH

The promises made to Abraham that he and Sarah would yet have a vast posterity seemed ironic in the face of her sterility. The Lord had told them that great nations would come of them, but they had to wait some fifty years for the birth of their son, Isaac.

Sarah did not at any time feel certain that the Lord would keep his word. She had laughed when the promise was made, realizing that she was beyond the usual childbearing period.

In her impatience, as she waited for a child of her own, and not too sure that she would ever have one, she began to feel that posterity would have to come in another way. She felt disgraced in not having become a mother. It was customary in those days when a wife was sterile that she might give her husband a servant woman to serve as her proxy in bearing children to be credited to herself. Hagar was such a servant. The scripture reads:

"Now Sarai Abram's wife bare him no children: and she had an handmaid, an Egyptian, whose name was Hagar.

"And Sarai said unto Abram, Behold now, the Lord hath restrained me from bearing: I pray thee, go in unto my maid; it may be that I may obtain children by her. And Abram hearkened to the voice of Sarai.

"And Sarai Abram's wife took Hagar her maid the Egyptian, after Abram had dwelt ten years in the land of Canaan, and gave her to her husband Abram to be his wife." (Gen. 16:1-3.)

But trouble immediately followed. As soon as Hagar became pregnant and realized that she was called upon to produce children to the name of her sterile mistress, herself being merely used for this purpose, she began to hate Sarah deeply.

Sarah immediately repented of what she had done, and said to Abraham: "My wrong be upon thee: I have given my maid into thy bosom; and when she saw that she had conceived, I was despised in her eyes: the Lord judge between me and thee.

"But Abram said unto Sarai, Behold, thy maid is in thy hand; do to her as it pleaseth thee. And when Sarai dealt hardly with her, she fled from her face.

"And the angel of the Lord found her by a fountain of water in the wilderness, by the fountain in the way in Shur.

"And he said, Hagar, Sarai's maid, whence camest thou? and whither wilt thou go? And she said, I flee from the face of my mistress Sarai.

"And the angel of the Lord said unto her, Return to thy mistress, and submit thyself under her hands.

"And the angel of the Lord said unto her, I will multiply thy seed exceedingly, that it shall not be numbered for multitude.

"And the angel of the Lord said unto her, Behold, thou art with child, and shalt bear a son, and shalt call his name Ishmael; because the Lord hath heard thy affliction.

"And he will be a wild man; his hand will be against every man, and every man's hand against him; and he shall dwell in the presence of all his brethren.

"And she called the name of the Lord that spake unto her, Thou God seest me: for she said, Have I also here looked after him that seeth me?

"Wherefore the well was called Beerlahairoi; behold, it is between Kadesh and Bered.

"And Hagar bare Abram a son: and Abram called his son's name, which Hagar bare, Ishmael.

"And Abram was fourscore and six years old, when Hagar bore Ishmael to Abram." (Gen. 16:5-16.)

Slavery was common throughout the Middle East in those days, and for years before and afterward. Human beings were sold as property, just as in the pre-Civil War days in the United States. There was international slave trade between the various countries.

As the scripture indicates, Hagar was an Egyptian. However, how Abraham came to possess her is not mentioned.

Slavery was common in Egypt. The Israelites later were in bondage there. But it was also allowed in the time of Moses among the Lord's own people. Certain of the Mosaic laws prescribed the manner of dealing with such servants. The scripture indicates that it began with Canaan, the son of Ham. It came as a curse from Noah, his grandfather. And indeed slavery is a curse. Not all slaves were descendants of Canaan, however, for war prisoners were usually made slaves if they were not killed.

The curse of Canaan came about in this way:

"And Noah began to be an husbandman, and he planted a vineyard:

"And he drank of the wine, and was drunken; and he was uncovered within his tent.

"And Ham, the father of Canaan, saw the nakedness of his father, and told his two brethren without.

"And Shem and Japheth took a garment, and laid it upon both their shoulders, and went backward, and covered the nakedness of their father; and their faces were backward, and they saw not their father's nakedness.

"And Noah awoke from his wine, and knew what his younger son had done unto him.

"And he said, Cursed be Canaan; a servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren.

"And he said, Blessed be the Lord God of Shem; and Canaan shall be his servant.

"God shall enlarge Japheth, and he shall dwell in the tents of Shem; and Canaan shall be his servant." (Gen. 9:20-27.)

When the law of circumcision was given, it included slaves, as we read in Gen. 17:13: "He that is born in thy house, and he that is bought with thy money, must needs be circumcised: and my covenant shall be in your flesh for an everlasting covenant." Note the words "He that is bought with thy money," showing that the transaction in slavery was a purchase arrangement.

Examples of this in the days of Moses are shown in these passages:

"If thou buy an Hebrew servant, six years he shall serve: and in the seventh he shall go out free for nothing.

"If he came in by himself, he shall go out by himself: if he were married, then his wife shall go out with him.

"If his master have given him a wife, and she have born him sons or daughters; the wife and her children shall be her master's, and he shall go out by himself.

"And if the servant shall plainly say, I love my master, my wife, and my children; I will not go out free:

"Then his master shall bring him unto the judges; he shall also bring him to the door, or unto the door post; and his master shall bore his ear through with an aul; and he shall serve him for ever.

"And if a man sell his daughter to be a maidservant, she shall not go out as the menservants do.

"If she please not her master, who hath betrothed her to himself, then shall he let her be redeemed: to sell her unto a strange nation he shall have no power, seeing he hath dealt deceitfully with her.

"And if he have betrothed her unto his son, he shall deal with her after the manner of daughters.

"If he take him another wife; her food, her raiment, and her duty of marriage, shall he not diminish.

"And if he do not these three unto her, then shall she go out free without money." (Ex. 21:2-11.)

And we have this from Deuteronomy:

"And if thy brother, an Hebrew man, or an Hebrew woman, be sold unto thee, and serve thee six years; then in the seventh year thou shalt let him go free from thee.

"And when thou sendest him out free from thee, thou shalt not let him go away empty:

"Thou shalt furnish him liberally out of thy flock, and out of thy floor, and out of thy winepress: of that wherewith the Lord thy God hath blessed thee thou shalt give unto him.

"And thou shalt remember that thou was a bondman in the land of Egypt, and the Lord thy God redeemed thee: therefore I command thee this thing to day.

"And it shall be, if he say unto thee, I will not go away from thee; because he loveth thee and thine house, because he is well with thee;

"Then thou shalt take an aul, and thrust it through his ear unto the door, and he shall be thy servant for ever. And also unto thy maidservant thou shalt do likewise.

"It shall not seem hard unto thee, when thou sendest him away free from thee; for he hath been worth a double hired servant to thee, in serving thee six years: and the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all that thou doest." (Deut. 15:12-18.)

In Jeremiah we read:

"At the end of seven years let ye go every man his brother an Hebrew, which hath been sold unto thee; and when he hath served thee six years, thou shalt let him go free from thee: but your fathers hearkened not unto me, neither inclined their ear.

"And ye were now turned, and had done right in my sight, in proclaiming liberty every man to his neighbour; and ye had made a covenant before me in the house which is called by my name:

"But ye turned and polluted my name, and caused every man his servant, and every man his handmaid, whom ye had set at liberty at their pleasure, to return, and brought them into subjection, to be unto you for servants and for handmaids.

"Therefore thus saith the Lord; Ye have not hearkened unto me, in proclaiming liberty, every one to his brother, and every man to his neighbour: behold, I proclaim a liberty for you, saith the Lord, to the sword, to the pestilence, and to the famine; and I will make you to be removed into all the kingdoms of the earth." (Jer. 34:14-17.)

In the book of Joshua we read how one group of people that had deceived the Israelites were made slaves and forced to become hewers of wood and drawers of water. (Josh. 9:23-27.)

When the Lord gave the law of the Sabbath in the Ten Commandments, he spoke of men servants and maid servants. They were probably people in bondage.

In the New Testament, reference is made to servants. (See Matt. 26:51; Luke 7:8.) Were they bondsmen and bondswomen?

It is well known, of course, that the Romans were slave holders, even in Palestine. And note Paul's advice when he wrote to the Ephesians, saying: "Servants, be obedient to them that are your masters according to the flesh, with fear and trembling, in singleness of your heart, as unto Christ." (Eph. 6:5.)

When Paul wrote to Titus he gave similar advice: "Exhort servants to be obedient unto their own masters, and to please them well in all things; not answering again." (Titus 2:9.)

He wrote to Timothy: "Let as many servants as are under the yoke count their own masters worthy of all honour, that the name of God and his doctrine be not blasphemed. And they that have believing masters, let them not despise them, because they are brethren; but rather do them service, because they are faithful and beloved, partakers of the benefit. These things teach and exhort." (1 Tim. 6:1-2.)

Peter gave the same advice, as may be seen in his first epistle: "Servants, be subject to your masters with all fear; not only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward." (1 Pet. 2:18.)

And the Colossians were told: "Servants, obey in all things your masters according to the flesh; not with eyeservice, as menpleasers; but in singleness of heart, fearing God." (Col. 3:22.)

From these scriptures it becomes obvious that the early Christians made converts among both free men and slaves. These words of the prophets were simply advice to those who were held in bondage but had joined the church. It was no expression condoning slavery at all; it was merely a recognition that slavery did exist and that some of the slaves had joined the church.

That the Lord ever gave justification to the sale and purchase of human slaves is impossible to believe. Slavery came as a curse from Noah, and it remained a curse. God allowed it through the curse of Canaan, but that does not say that he condoned it. Rather, his whole gospel plan is predicated upon freedom—freedom of choice, or, as we call it, free agency. And this for one great reason: that we may be accountable for our own sins. He made this abundantly clear to the Prophet Joseph Smith when he spoke of the United States Constitution. He said, referring to the afflicted Saints:

"It is my will that they should continue to importune for redress, and redemption, by the hands of those who are placed as rulers and are in authority over you—

"According to the laws and constitution of the people, which I have suffered to be established, and should be maintained for the rights and protection of all flesh according to just and holy principles;

"That every man may act in doctrine and principle pertaining to futurity, according to the moral agency which I have given unto him, that every man may be accountable for his own sins in the day of judgment.

"Therefore, it is not right that any man should be in bondage one to another.

"And for this purpose have I established the Constitution of this land, by the hands of wise men whom I raised up unto this very purpose, and redeemed the land by the shedding of blood." (D&C 101:76-80. Italics added.)

For a time the Lord allowed slavery in America, this land of the free, but he did not condone it any more than he condones a bank robbery, although he gives the robber the free agency to sin. Neither did he condone slave trade anciently. How could any slave be held accountable for his own deeds when he was constantly forced to obey another person? The people in the days of Moses were allowed slaves for a reason that we do not know, but the Lord regulated their treatment.

Why Abraham and Sarah had a bondwoman we do not understand. But the Lord heard the cries of Hagar in distress and sent an angel to help her. The actions of the Lord's ancient peoples merely fit into the customs of that day, just as in these days we fit into customs that are not necessarily approved of the Lord. He allows his people free agency, with the understanding that as we violate the rules of truth and right, we must pay the penalty.

Salvation through the gospel is entirely a matter of exercising free agency. Without such freedom there would be no free-will obedience, and without obedience in righteousness we never could develop the Christlike traits of character that are required before we can enter his presence.

Certainly Hagar's slavery was no comfort to anyone. It was a source of continual discord and conflict to Abraham and his whole family. It is still at the root of some of our worst international problems.
