Mark E. Petersen, Abraham: Friend of God ( 1979)

SIGNS OF THE COVENANT

The Lord deals with his people through covenants to remind them of their obligation to serve him.

As the time approached for the fulfillment of his promise to Sarah, he reiterated what he had previously said. A boy would be born to her. But before the fulfillment, he did two important things.

All through Abraham's early years and up to this point in his life, he had been known as Abram and Sarah as Sarai. Now the Lord changed their names, giving further significance to the fulfillment of the divine promises.

Abram had meant "father of height," according to one authority. Abraham means "father of a multitude." The relationship to the promise is quickly seen.

Sarai meant "a princess." That name was now changed to Sarah, indicating that she would become the queenly mother of multitudes.

As the Lord made these changes he said: "Neither shall thy name any more be called Abram, but thy name shall be Abraham; for a father of many nations have I made thee." (Gen. 17:5.)

When he changed Sarai's name, the Lord said to Abraham, "As for Sarai thy wife, thou shalt not call her name Sarai, but Sarah shall her name be. And I will bless her, and give thee a son also of her: yea, I will bless her, and she shall be a mother of nations; kings of people shall be of her." (Gen. 17:15-16.)

Next, the Lord gave a commandment instituting a physical sign of his covenant, a permanent one that would constantly remind Abraham and all his people of their obligation to serve him and have no other gods in their lives. He said:

"This is my covenant, which ye shall keep, between me and you and thy seed after thee; Every man child among you shall be circumcised.

"And ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin; and it shall be a token of the covenant betwixt me and you.

"And he that is eight days old shall be circumcised among you, every man child in your generations, he that is born in the house, or bought with money of any stranger, which is not of thy seed.

"He that is born in thy house, and he that is bought with thy money, must needs be circumcised: and my covenant shall be in your flesh for an everlasting covenant.

"And the uncircumcised man child whose flesh of his foreskin is not circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from his people; he hath broken my covenant."

Again the Lord announced his promise that Sarah would have a child. But Abraham doubted. He fell on his face "and laughed, and said in his heart, Shall a child be born unto him that is an hundred years old? and shall Sarah, that is ninety, bear?" Sarah too rejoiced at the idea.

Not believing, Abraham then prayed that Ishmael could be favored: "O that Ishmael might live before thee!"

But the Lord repeated his promise and removed all doubt: "Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son indeed; and thou shalt call his name Isaac: and I will establish my covenant with him for an everlasting covenant, and with his seed after him."

To satisfy Abraham's query about Ishmael, the Lord said: "And as for Ishmael, I have heard thee: Behold, I have blessed him, and will make him fruitful, and will multiply him exceedingly; twelve princes shall he beget, and I will make him a great nation. But my covenant will I establish with Isaac, which Sarah shall bear unto thee at this set time in the next year. And he left off talking with him, and God went up from Abraham." (Gen. 17:20-20.)

There was no more doubt. Abraham accepted the covenant and the sign of the covenant.

"And Abraham took Ishmael his son, and all that were born in his house, and all that were bought with his money, every male among the men of Abraham's house; and circumcised the flesh of their foreskin in the selfsame day, as God had said unto him.

"And Abraham was ninety years old and nine, when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.

"And Ishmael his son was thirteen years old, when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.

"In the selfsame day was Abraham circumcised, and Ishmael his son.

"And all the men of his house, born in the house, and bought with money of the stranger, were circumcised with him." (Gen. 17:10-27.)

Inasmuch as the promise of the Lord pertained to posterity, it was appropriate that the reproductive organ be circumcised as a physical and permanent reminder of the covenant. Since everyone was expected to obey the Lord's commandments in order to merit his blessings, every man of that time therefore was required to carry on his person the permanent reminder of the covenant, and that reminder was circumcision.

The expression "the uncircumcised" referred in ancient times to the gentile nations and was often used as a term of reproach. (See Judg. 14:3; 1 Sam. 17:26, 36; 2 Sam. 1:20.)

Any foreigners joining the Jewish community were required to be circumcised. (See Gen. 34:14-17.) The expression "the circumcision" as used in the New Testament distinguished between circumcised Jews and uncircumcised gentiles. (See Galations 2:8; Col. 4:11.) As the apostle Paul used the expression, it had a spiritual significance having to do with putting away the sins of the flesh. (See Col. 2:11.)

In the modern Church of Jesus Christ, no such requirement is made. We have other covenants and other signs instead. For example, we take upon ourselves the name of Christ and promise to obey him and keep his commandments. The promise of the Lord in return is that we may be freed of our sins and enter his church. What sign represents that?

It is baptism. Our burial in the water is a symbol of the burial of Christ in the tomb. Our coming forth from the waters of baptism is representative of his resurrection from the tomb. It is in baptism that we receive remission of our sins and take upon ourselves his holy name and pledge to serve him.

Another great sign of a covenant that we have today is the sacrament of the Lord's Supper. We partake of the broken bread in remembrance of the Lord's flesh, which was broken on the cross. We drink of the cup in remembrance of his blood, which was shed on the cross. The covenant is detailed in the words of the prayers offered in the administration of the sacrament.

In the days of Paul there was a dispute between gentiles and Jews coming into the Church. Paul argued that the gentiles were not subject to circumcision because it was related to the "old covenant," as were burnt offerings. No Christians are required by the Lord to submit to circumcision. In the atonement of Christ all things became new and old things were "done away." (See Acts 15; 3 Ne. 15.)

As with the early Christians, we of today live under the new law.
