Mark E. Petersen, Abraham: Friend of God ( 1979)

THE THREE VISITORS

Abraham lived in a tent on the plains of Mamre, where the Lord appeared to him and talked with him at length. It was on this occasion that Sarah laughed within herself when the Lord promised them a son in their old age.

"And he [the Lord] said, I will certainly return unto thee according to the time of life; and, lo, Sarah thy wife shall have a son. And Sarah heard it in the tent door, which was behind him.

"Now Abraham and Sarah were old and well stricken in age; and it ceased to be with Sarah after the manner of women.

"Therefore Sarah laughed within herself, saying, After I am waxed old shall I have pleasure, my lord being old also?

"And the Lord said unto Abraham, Wherefore did Sarah laugh, saying, Shall I of a surety bear a child, which am old?

"Is any thing too hard for the Lord? At the time appointed I will return unto thee, according to the time of life, and Sarah shall have a son.

"Then Sarah denied, saying, I laughed not; for she was afraid. And he said, Nay; but thou didst laugh." (Gen. 18:10-15.)

On this visit it was made known to Abraham that the Lord planned to destroy the nearby cities of Sodom and Gomorrah. "Their sin is very grievous," he explained.

At the same time other visitors came, angels who were on their way to Sodom prior to its destruction.

Abraham was worried that the Lord would destroy those cities, wicked as they were, because Lot and his family lived there.

It is not known why Lot would dwell in such a wicked place. He had chosen what he regarded as the best part of Palestine when Abraham gave him a choice, but the land bordered on Sodom. And now he lived there with his many cattle and other possessions. Like many a rancher, it appears he lived in the city while his ranch was out in the open spaces.

When the angels left, the Lord continued visiting with Abraham. "And Abraham drew near, and said, Wilt thou also destroy the righteous with the wicked?

"Peradventure there be fifty righteous within the city: wilt thou also destroy and not spare the place for fifty righteous that are therein?

"That be far from thee to do after this manner, to slay the righteous with the wicked: and that the righteous should be as the wicked, that be far from thee: Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?

"And the Lord said, If I find fifty righteous within the city, then I will spare all the place for their sakes.

"And Abraham answered and said, Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord, which am but dust and ashes:

"Peradventure there shall lack five of the fifty righteous: wilt thou destroy all the city for lack of five? And he said, If I find there forty and five, I will not destroy it.

"And he spake unto him yet again, and said, Peradventure there shall be forty found there. And he said, I will not do it for forty's sake.

"And he said unto him, Oh let not the Lord be angry, and I will speak: Peradventure there shall thirty be found there. And he said, I will not do it, if I find thirty there.

"And he said, Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord: Peradventure there shall be twenty found there. And he said, I will not destroy it for twenty's sake.

"And he said, Oh let not the Lord be angry, and I will speak yet but this once: Peradventure ten shall be found there. And he said, I will not destroy it for ten's sake." (Gen. 18:23-32.)

But the angels went on to the plain. When they arrived, Lot was sitting "in the gate of Sodom: and Lot seeing them rose up to meet them; and he bowed himself with his face toward the ground;

"And he said, Behold now, my lords, turn in, I pray you, into your servant's house, and tarry all night, and wash your feet, and ye shall rise up early, and go on your ways. And they said, Nay; but we will abide in the street all night.

"And he pressed upon them greatly; and they turned in unto him, and entered into his house; and he made them a feast, and did bake unleavened bread, and they did eat." (Gen. 19:1-3.)

The men of the city were guilty of sex perversions, and when they saw the two angels enter Lot's house, they lusted after them. Because of the city's dreadful iniquity, there has come down to us the word sodomy, which is related to one of Sodom's kinds of sin.

When Lot kept the angels in the house, the men outside the door threatened him. He went out to entreat with them, but when the uproar at the door increased, the angels pulled Lot back inside. They then "smote the men that were at the door of the house with blindness, both small and great."

The angels said to Lot: "Hast thou here any besides? son in law, and thy sons, and thy daughters, and whatsoever thou hast in the city, bring them out of this place:

"For we will destroy this place, because the cry of them is waxen great before the face of the Lord; and the Lord hath sent us to destroy it.

"And Lot went out, and spake unto his sons in law, which married his daughters, and said, Up, get you out of this place; for the Lord will destroy this city. But he seemed as one that mocked unto his sons in law.

"And when the morning arose, then the angels hastened Lot, saying, Arise, take thy wife, and thy two daughters, which are here; lest thou be consumed in the iniquity of the city.

"And while he lingered, the men laid hold upon his hand, and upon the hand of his wife, and upon the hand of his two daughters; the Lord being merciful unto him: and they brought him forth, and set him without the city.

"And it came to pass, when they had brought them forth abroad, that he said, Escape for thy life; look not behind thee, neither stay thou in all the plain; escape to the mountain, lest thou be consumed.

"And Lot said unto them, Oh, not so, my Lord:

"Behold now, thy servant hath found grace in thy sight, and thou hast magnified thy mercy, which thou hast shewed unto me in saving my life; and I cannot escape to the mountain, lest some evil take me, and I die:

"Behold now, this city is near to flee unto, and it is a little one: Oh, let me escape thither, (is it not a little one?) and my soul shall live.

"And he said unto him, See, I have accepted thee concerning this thing also, that I will not overthrow this city, for the which thou hast spoken.

"Haste thee, escape thither; for I cannot do any thing till thou be come thither. Therefore the name of the city was called Zoar.

"The sun was risen upon the earth when Lot entered into Zoar.

"Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heaven;

"And he overthrew those cities, and all the plain, and all the inhabitants of the cities, and that which grew upon the ground.

"But his wife looked back from behind him, and she became a pillar of salt.

"And Abraham gat up early in the morning to the place where he stood before the Lord:

"And he looked toward Sodom and Gomorrah, and toward all the land of the plain, and beheld, and, lo, the smoke of the country went up as the smoke of a furnace.

"And it came to pass, when God destroyed the cities of the plain, that God remembered Abraham, and sent Lot out of the midst of the overthrow, when he overthrew the cities in the which Lot dwelt." (Gen. 19:12-29.)

So the cities were destroyed, and Lot was saved for Abraham's sake.
