Mark E. Petersen, Abraham: Friend of God ( 1979)

MELCHIZEDEK AND JOSEPH SMITH

As seen in the previous chapter, the Prophet Joseph Smith has given us more information concerning Melchizedek than we have obtained from any other source. But more than just information has been given. The authority of the priesthood that was called after Melchizedek was conferred on Joseph Smith.

Without priesthood, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints could not have been organized; it would never have been restored; it could not function. As the Doctrine and Covenants explains, the Holy Priesthood "continueth in the church of God in all generations, and is without beginning of days or end of years."

The priesthood of Aaron "continueth and abideth forever with the priesthood which is after the holiest order of God.

"And this greater priesthood administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God.

"Therefore, in the ordinances thereof, the power of godliness is manifest.

"And without the ordinances thereof, and the authority of the priesthood, the power of godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh;

"For without this no man can see the face of God, even the Father, and live." (D&C 84:17-22.)

It will be remembered that when the Prophet Joseph went into the woods to pray the Lord told him that the existing churches had a form of godliness, but they denied the power thereof. (Joseph Smith—History 1:19.) D&C 84 of the Doctrine and Covenants introduces further light on this point. Note that it says that where the ordinances are not, and where the true authority is not, the power of godliness is not manifest. The various churches lacked the true ordinances and they lacked the true authority and hence had none of the power of godliness. They could not manifest something that they did not have. It becomes evident then that this power had to be restored in these last days. Without it the Church could not exist.

With this Holy Priesthood came great promises, too, for the Lord said:

"And also all they who receive this priesthood receive me, saith the Lord;

"For he that receiveth my servants receiveth me;

"And he that receiveth me receiveth my Father;

"And he that receiveth my Father receiveth my Father's kingdom; therefore all that my Father hath shall be given unto him.

"And this is according to the oath and covenant which belongeth to the priesthood.

"Therefore, all those who receive the priesthood, receive this oath and covenant of my Father, which he cannot break, neither can it be moved.

"But whoso breaketh this covenant after he hath received it, and altogether turneth therefrom, shall not have forgiveness of sins in this world nor in the world to come.

"And wo unto all those who come not unto this priesthood which ye have received, which I now confirm upon you who are present this day, by mine own voice out of the heavens; and even I have given the heavenly hosts and mine angels charge concerning you." (D&C 84:35-42.)

This was the Lord's part of the covenant of the priesthood. Our part is as follows: "For you shall live by every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of God." (D&C 84:44.)

To illustrate the need for a continuity of this priesthood in the Church, together with its covenant, the Lord further said:

"And every one that hearkeneth to the voice of the Spirit cometh unto God, even the Father.

"And the Father teacheth him of the covenant which he has renewed and confirmed upon you, which is confirmed upon you for your sakes, and not for your sakes only, but for the sake of the whole world.

"And the whole world lieth in sin, and groaneth under darkness and under the bondage of sin.

"And by this you may know they are under the bondage of sin, because they come not unto me.

"For whoso cometh not unto me is under the bondage of sin.

"And whoso receiveth not my voice is not acquainted with my voice, and is not of me.

"And by this you may know the righteous from the wicked, and that the whole world groaneth under sin and darkness even now." (D&C 84:47-53.)

The Lord also said of this priesthood:

"There are, in the church, two priesthoods, namely, the Melchizedek and Aaronic, including the Levitical Priesthood.

"Why the first is called the Melchizedek Priesthood is because Melchizedek was such a great high priest.

"Before his day it was called the Holy Priesthood, after the Order of the Son of God.

"But out of respect or reverence to the name of the Supreme Being, to avoid the too frequent repetition of his name, they, the church, in ancient days, called that priesthood after Melchizedek, or the Melchizedek Priesthood.

"All other authorities or offices in the church are appendages to this priesthood.

"But there are two divisions or grand heads—one is the Melchizedek Priesthood, and the other is the Aaronic or Levitical Priesthood.

"The office of an elder comes under the priesthood of Melchizedek.

"The Melchizedek Priesthood holds the right of presidency, and has power and authority over all the offices in the church in all ages of the world, to administer in spiritual things.

"The Presidency of the High Priesthood, after the order of Melchizedek, have a right to officiate in all the offices in the church.

"High priests after the order of the Melchizedek Priesthood have a right to officiate in their own standing, under the direction of the presidency, in administering spiritual things, and also in the office of an elder, priest (of the Levitical order), teacher, deacon, and member." (D&C 107:1-10.)

The offices of the First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve arise out of this priesthood, and, indeed, the other offices of the Church do also. (See D&C 107.)

All the powers of these priesthoods were conferred upon the Prophet Joseph Smith by the visitation of holy angels. John the Baptist began the series when he conferred upon Joseph and Oliver the Aaronic Priesthood on May 15, 1829. This was followed shortly by the visitation of Peter, James, and John, who conferred upon these same two men the Holy Melchizedek Priesthood, together with the apostleship.

Many powers and keys within this priesthood were conferred by other angels. Elijah came, bestowing the keys of his office to turn the hearts of fathers and children to each other in order that the great temple program of the Church could proceed with power. (Mal. 4:5-6.) Moses came with the authority to gather Israel from the four quarters of the earth and the ten tribes from the land of the north. (D&C 110.) Elias came with the keys of the dispensation of Abraham. This was the dispensation to which Melchizedek belonged since he was contemporary with Abraham, and was "keeper of the Lord's storehouse."

The Prophet wrote the following, describing heavenly visitations in this dispensation:

"Now, what do we hear in the gospel which we have received? A voice of gladness! A voice of mercy from heaven; and a voice of truth out of the earth; glad tidings for the dead; a voice of gladness for the living and the dead; glad tidings of great joy. How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of those that bring glad tidings of good things, and that say unto Zion: Behold, thy God reigneth! As the dews of Carmel, so shall the knowledge of God descend upon them!

"And again, what do we hear? Glad tidings from Cumorah! Moroni, an angel from heaven, declaring the fulfillment of the prophets—the book to be revealed. A voice of the Lord in the wilderness of Fayette, Seneca county, declaring the three witnesses to bear record of the book! The voice of Michael on the banks of the Susquehanna, detecting the devil when he appeared as an angel of light! The voice of Peter, James, and John in the wilderness between Harmony, Susquehanna county, and Colesville, Broome county, on the Susquehanna river, declaring themselves as possessing the keys of the kingdom, and of the dispensation of the fulness of times!

"And again, the voice of God in the chamber of old Father Whitmer, in Fayette, Seneca county, and at sundry times, and in divers places through all the travels and tribulations of this Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints! And the voice of Michael, the archangel; the voice of Gabriel, and of Raphael, and of divers angels, from Michael or Adam down to the present time, all declaring their dispensation, their rights, their keys, their honors, their majesty and glory, and the power of their priesthood; giving line upon line, precept upon precept; here a little, and there a little; giving us consolation by holding forth that which is to come, confirming our hope!" (D&C 128:19-21.)

This is the manner in which the powers of all other dispensations were brought together in this, the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times. That is what makes this the fulness of times.

So now Peter's prediction in Acts 3:21 was fulfilled. All the great prophets "since the world began" came to Joseph Smith, that noble servant of God who was chosen as the instrument through whom all would be restored. Each gave his powers, his keys, and his authorities to Joseph. And why? To prepare for the second coming of Christ, thus equipping the Church to build the kingdom to which the Lord will come.

But Joseph was martyred. What became of all those powers when he died? Did he take them with him into the grave? And if he did, how could—how can—the Church carry on the work? Authority in the ministry is required to make all things valid. What became of all those keys which the angels gave to Joseph Smith?

Joseph knew beforehand that he was to become a martyr. He was impressed with this fact for some time prior to his death. He knew that he himself was but the instrument through whom the restoration came. He fully realized that the keys given to him must continue in the Church or it could not function. Therefore, he conferred all these powers upon the Twelve Apostles who were chosen of God to carry on after his death.
