Mark E. Petersen, Abraham: Friend of God ( 1979)

THE KEYS TRANSMITTED

Prior to his death the Prophet Joseph Smith conferred upon the Twelve Apostles of the Church all the keys and power that the angels had bestowed upon him as part of the restoration of the gospel.

This empowered the Twelve to become the presiding body after his death, so that they could direct the work of the Church and continue to carry on its great mission without interruption.

On February 27, 1835, according to minutes kept by Oliver Cowdery, in answer to a question pertaining to the importance of the callings of the Twelve and how their calling was different from other callings in the Church, the Prophet said: "They are to hold the keys of this ministry, to unlock the door of the Kingdom of heaven unto all nations, and to preach the Gospel to every creature." (HC 2:200.) Who but Joseph Smith could perform such an ordination?

In connection with the dedicatory services in the Kirtland Temple, the Prophet on March 27, 1836, wrote this in his own history: "I then called upon the quorums and congregation of saints to acknowledge the Twelve Apostles, who were present, as Prophets, Seers, Revelators, and special witnesses to all the nations of the earth, holding the keys of the kingdom, to unlock it, or cause it to be done, among them, and uphold them by their prayers, which they assented to by rising." (HC 2:417.)

On August 16, 1841, the Prophet addressed a conference of the Saints. The official history of the Church, approved by the Prophet and included in his own writings, says of this address:

"President Joseph Smith now arriving, proceeded to state to the conference at considerable length, the object of their present meeting, and, in addition to what President Young had stated in the morning, said that the time had come when the Twelve should be called upon to stand in their place next to the First Presidency, and attend to the settling of emigrants and the business of the Church at the stakes, and assist to bear off the kingdom victoriously to the nations. . . . Moved, seconded and carried, that the conference approve of the instructions of President Smith in relation to the Twelve, and that they proceed accordingly to attend to the duties of their office." (HC 4:403.)

Heber C. Kimball said in an address in Salt Lake City October 8, 1852: "As to the power and authority vested in brother Brigham, do I doubt it? Have I the least hesitation as to his calling as the President of this Church? No, no more than I have that God sits upon His throne. He has the same authority that brother Joseph had. That authority was in the Twelve, and since brother Joseph stepped behind the vail, brother Brigham is his lawful successor. I bear testimony of what brother Joseph said on the stand at Nauvoo, and I presume hundreds here can bear witness of the same. Said he, `These men that are set here behind me on this stand, I have conferred upon them all the power, Priesthood, and authority that God ever conferred upon me.' " (Journal of Discourses 1:206.)

Wilford Woodruff, in general conference in April 1898, said: "The last speech that Joseph Smith ever made to the quorum of the Apostles was in a building in Nauvoo, and it was such a speech as I never heard from mortal man before or since. He was clothed upon with the Spirit and power of God. His face was clear as amber. The room was filled as with consuming fire. He stood three hours upon his feet. Said he: `You Apostles of the Lamb of God have been chosen to carry out the purposes of the Lord on the earth. Now, I have received, as the Prophet, seer and revelator, standing at the head of this dispensation, every key, every ordinance, every principle and every Priesthood that belongs to the last dispensation and fulness of times. And I have sealed all these things upon your heads.' " (Conference Report, April 1898, p.89.)

Brigham Young, in a letter written to Orson Spencer on January 23, 1848, said: "Joseph told the Twelve, the year before he died, `there is not one key or power to be bestowed on this church to lead the people into the celestial gate but I have given you, showed you, and talked it over to you; the kingdom is set up, and you have the perfect pattern, and you can go and build up the kingdom, and go in at the celestial gate, taking your train with you.' " (Millennial Star 10:115.)

Heber C. Kimball wrote in the Times and Seasons, October 1, 1844: "Bro. Joseph has passed behind the vail and he pulled off his shoes, and someone else puts them on, until he passes the vail to Bro. Joseph. President Young is our president, and our head, and he puts the shoes on first. . . . The Twelve have received the keys of the kingdom and as long as there is one of them left, he will hold them in preference to any one else."

Orson Hyde also wrote in Times and Seasons September 5, 1844: "The shafts of the enemy are always aimed at the head first.—Brother Joseph said some time before he was murdered. `If I am taken away, upon you, the Twelve, will rest the responsibility of leading this people, and do not be bluffed off by any man. . . .

" `Now if they kill me you have got all the keys, and all the ordinances and you can confer them upon others, and the hosts of Satan will not be able to tear down the kingdom, as fast as you will be able to build it up; and now says he on your shoulders will the responsibility of leading this people to rest, for the Lord is going to let me rest a while.' "

From a speech by Orson Hyde, found in the Journal of Discourses (13:180), we read: "I will give you my testimony. In one particular place, in the presence of about sixty men, he [the Prophet Joseph] said, `My work is about done; I am going to step aside awhile. I am going to rest from my labors; for I have borne the burthen and heat of the day, and now I am going to step aside and rest a little. And I roll the burthen off my shoulders on the shoulders of the Twelve Apostles. Now; said he, round up your shoulders and bear off this kingdom.' "

Brigham Young writes in the History of the Church (7:230):

"I know there are those in our midst who will seek the lives of the Twelve as they did the lives of Joseph and Hyrum. We shall ordain others and give the fulness of the priesthood, so that if we are killed the fulness of the priesthood may remain.

"Joseph conferred upon our heads all the keys and powers belonging to the Apostleship which he himself held before he was taken away, and no man or set of men can get between Joseph and the Twelve in this world or in the world to come.

"How often has Joseph said to the Twelve, `I have laid the foundation and you must build thereon, for upon your shoulders the kingdom rests.' "

The right to exercise the sealing powers as restored through Elijah the prophet is reserved for the President of the Church himself, and to those to whom he personally delegates that privilege. With reference to this, Parley P. Pratt said in the Millennial Star, January 1, 1845: "He proceeded to confer on Elder Young, the president of the Twelve, the keys of the sealing power as conferred in the last days by the spirit and power of Elijah, in order to seal the hearts of the fathers to the children and the hearts of the children to the fathers, lest the whole earth should be smitten with a curse." (HC 5:151.)

On Monday, July 2, 1839, the Prophet Joseph Smith met with the Twelve and other officers of the Church and gave them instructions. He placed a synopsis of his own remarks in his journal, from which the following is taken:

"O ye Twelve! and all Saints! profit by this important Key—that in all your trials, troubles, temptations, afflictions, bonds, imprisonments and death, see to it, that you do not betray heaven; that you do not betray Jesus Christ; that you do not betray the brethren; that you do not betray the revelations of God, whether in the Bible, Book of Mormon, or Doctrine and Covenants, or any other that ever was or ever will be given and revealed unto man in this world or that which is to come. Yea, in all your kicking and flounderings, see to it that you do not this thing, lest innocent blood be found upon your skirts, and you go down to hell. All other sins are not to be compared to sinning against the Holy Ghost, and proving a traitor to the brethren.

"I will give you one of the Keys of the mysteries of the Kingdom. It is an eternal principle, that has existed with God from all eternity: That man who rises up to condemn others, finding fault with the Church, saying that they are out of the way, while he himself is righteous, then know assuredly, that that man is in the high road to apostasy; and if he does not repent, will apostatize, as God lives. The principle is as correct as the one that Jesus put forth in saying that he who seeketh a sign is an adulterous person; and that principle is eternal, undeviating, and firm as the pillars of heaven." (HC 3:385.)

The Lord said this regarding the exclusive right of the President of the Church to receive revelation for the Church:

"But, behold, verily, verily, I say unto thee, no one shall be appointed to receive commandments and revelations in this church excepting my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., for he receiveth them even as Moses."

"For I have given him the keys of the mysteries, and the revelations which are sealed, until I shall appoint unto them another in his stead." (D&C 28:2, 7.)

"For behold, verily, verily, I say unto you, that ye have received a commandment for a law unto my church, through him whom I have appointed unto you to receive commandments and revelations from my hand.

"And this ye shall know assuredly—that there is none other appointed unto you to receive commandments and revelations until he be taken, if he abide in me.

"But verily, verily, I say unto you, that none else shall be appointed unto this gift except it be through him; for if it be taken from him he shall not have power except to appoint another in his stead. And this shall be a law unto you, that ye receive not the teachings of any that shall come before you as revelations or commandments;

"And this I give unto you that you may not be deceived, that you may know they are not of me.

"For verily I say unto you, that he that is ordained of me shall come in at the gate and be ordained as I have told you before, to teach those revelations which you have received and shall receive through him whom I have appointed." (D&C 43:2-7.)

So the powers of Melchizedek and his contemporaries (of whom Abraham was one), and all the other prophets "since the world began," remained in the Church of Jesus Christ. (Acts 3:21.) By those powers the Church functions now just as in the days of old.

It is significant that there was a storehouse system in Melchizedek's day and that we have such a system in the Church today. Such a storehouse was in the church in the days of Malachi also. He speaks of it as he says: "Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house." (Mal. 3:10.)

Evidently the storehouse keepers received the tithing then, as was the case with Melchizedek. Our storehouses are no different. They are "bishop's storehouses" in the welfare program, operated by the bishops of the wards, who are the men appointed to receive tithes in our day.

Melchizedek was a storekeeper then; our bishops, holding his order of the priesthood, are storekeepers today. Again we see how basic principles in the Church are preserved throughout the ages.
