Mark E. Petersen, Abraham: Friend of God ( 1979)

ISAAC THE HEIR

The ways of God are not the ways of man, and to some they seem to be foolishness when weighed by worldly wisdom.

The apostle Paul wrote to the Corinthians: "We preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumblingblock, and unto the Greeks foolishness." He said further: "The foolishness of God is wiser than men; and the weakness of God is stronger than men."

And then came this significant thing: "Ye see your calling, brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called: But God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise; and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things which are mighty." (1 Cor. 1:23-27.)

The worldly wise reject the choice of Isaac over Ishmael as being part of the so-called mythology of the Bible. They do the same with the story of Jacob and Esau. And when it comes to the account of Isaac being placed upon the sacrificial altar by his father, they denounce it as a fantastic fairy tale.

But that is worldly "wisdom." God knows what he is about. He sees the end from the beginning, and it was he who separated the descendants of Isaac from those of Ishmael, and those of Jacob from those of Esau.

Why do we now have the various nations if the peoples of the earth were not intentionally separated? Racial differences are seen from one end of the earth to the other with these distinct peoples living pretty much to themselves. The races for the most part are native to lands where they have lived throughout the ages. They did not originate themselves. They were born into their native situations as God planned it.

Paul had this in mind when he told the Greeks on Mars' hill that God "hath made of one blood [Adam's] all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth, and hath determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation." (Acts 17:26.)

There is much meaning in that scripture. First, God made all mankind of one blood—human. That is why various nations can interbreed—because they are all human. But humans can not interbreed with any other form of life. Human blood is distinct and is strictly one blood in this sense.

The Lord distributed the various peoples over the face of the earth into what became nations. He determined their times (meaning the periods in which they would live). In advance, or, to use the scriptural word, "before" their development, he determined the boundaries of their habitations.

To be fair with us all, the Lord must have based his decisions on his acquaintance with us in our premortal life. Something there persuaded him in his wise planning to distribute us and form us into various nations on earth. This was not left to chance.

Why did he make a difference between Isaac and Ishmael and between Jacob and Esau? Because he knew of their premortal experience, which we do not. By his foreknowledge, he knew where they would best be suited for this mortal life, and he placed them there.

In choosing bloodlines he named Isaac for one group of people and Ishmael for another. He chose Jacob for the perpetuity of Isaac's line, and he allowed Esau to go elsewhere. Similarly, various others were established in the human bloodstream.

The Lord covenanted through Isaac and not through Ishmael; but in fairness to him, Ishmael was promised nations, princes, and kings, even as was Isaac. God is fair to all men. He is just and no respecter of persons. To each he gives what is best suited for him, and he can judge this because he was well acquainted with us in our pre-earth life.

Worldly people do not believe in a premortal existence, but Latter-day Saints, by the power of revelation, have the facts; they know that we lived before we came here, and that God understood us well through his infinite perception, even before we were born. Note how he spoke to Job:

"Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth? declare, if thou hast understanding.

"Who hath laid the measures thereof, if thou knowest? or who hath stretched the line upon it?

"Whereupon are the foundations thereof fastened? or who laid the corner stone thereof;

"When the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy?" (Job 38:4-7.)

And consider the words of Solomon which may be applied to our pre-earth life:

"The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his works of old.

"I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the earth was.

"Where there were no depths, I was brought forth; when there were no fountains abounding with water.

"Before the mountains were settled, before the hills was I brought forth:

"While as yet he had not made the earth, nor the fields, nor the highest part of the dust of the world.

"When he prepared the heavens, I was there: when he set a compass upon the face of the depth:

"When he established the clouds above: when he strengthened the fountains of the deep:

"When he gave to the sea his decree, that the waters should not pass his commandment: when he appointed the foundations of the earth:

"Then I was by him, as one brought up with him: and I was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him." (Prov. 8:22-30.)

Although the Lord made covenants with Isaac, any child of Ishmael may have as many blessings in the Church or in eternity as any child of Isaac—if he will but serve Almighty God and keep his commandments. Also, any child of Isaac, regardless of heritage, may lose those blessings if he fails to keep the commandments of the Lord.

Do we remember what the Savior said to the Jews about having a privileged status simply because they were of Abraham's seed? He did not give them preference over others. The faithful—whether Jews or non-Jews—will be taken into the kingdom, but only on conditions of compliance with the gospel.

Said the Lord: "I say unto you, That many shall come from the east and west, and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven. But the children of the kingdom shall be cast out into outer darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth." (Matt. 8:11-12.)

And what does that mean? That unfaithful descendants of Abraham will be cast out regardless of their blood line, and that some from the east and west of non-Abrahamic lineage will be taken into the kingdom of heaven to dwell there with Abraham if they will obey.

So the Ishmaelites need not worry. If they will be faithful to the teachings of Christ, they can and will go with Abraham into the kingdom of heaven. This will come to them even while covenanted descendants of Abraham are being cast out because of their disobedience.

Obedience is the thing! God, who is no respecter of persons, offers salvation to all who will accept it on terms of true compliance with the commandments, regardless of race.

There is one commandment for all, and that is to become perfect like God. (Matt. 5:48.) And there is only one formula by which this is to be accomplished; that is, obedience to "one Lord, one faith, one baptism"—which is the gospel of Christ. (Eph. 4:5.) And in the final analysis, race or descent will give no one any special privilege.

When the Jews boasted of their Abrahamic descent, what did the Lord say? "Bring forth therefore fruits meet for repentance: And think not to say within yourselves, We have Abraham to our father: for I say unto you, that God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham." (Matt. 3:8-9.)

God covenanted with Abraham and Isaac because of their premortal faithfulness. But their children who do not live up to the covenant in this life can lose that advantage, while those not of Abraham may obtain that same advantage for themselves if they will accept and live the gospel.

We are God's children and he loves us all. He desires that each of us may be saved in his presence. But we must qualify for our salvation, regardless of racial origins.
