Mark E. Petersen, Abraham: Friend of God ( 1979)

THE WEDDING FEAST

One of the graphic illustrations given us by the Savior pertaining to the availability of salvation to all nations is that which is provided in the parable of the wedding feast:

"And Jesus answered and spake unto them again by parables, and said,

"The kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain king, which made a marriage for his son,

"And sent forth his servants to call them that were bidden to the wedding: and they would not come.

"Again, he sent forth other servants, saying, Tell them which are bidden, Behold, I have prepared my dinner: my oxen and my fatlings are killed, and all things are ready: come unto the marriage.

"But they made light of it, and went their ways, one to his farm, another to his merchandise:

"And the remnant took his servants, and entreated them spitefully, and slew them.

"But when the king heard thereof, he was wroth: and he sent forth his armies, and destroyed those murderers, and burned up their city.

"Then saith he to his servants, The wedding is ready, but they which were bidden were not worthy.

"Go ye therefore into the highways, and as many as ye shall find, bid to the marriage.

"So those servants went out into the highways, and gathered together all as many as they found, both bad and good: and the wedding was furnished with guests." (Matt. 22:1-10.)

It is clearly illustrated that all who are willing to come to the wedding feast (which means into the Lord's kingdom) may come. In the parable no mention is made of Abrahamic or any other ancestral distinction. They were people who came—good and bad—and they were made welcome because they complied with the Lord's invitation. But even for them there was one requirement: they had to have a wedding garment.

"And when the king came in to see the guests, he saw there a man which had not on a wedding garment:

"And he saith unto him, Friend, how camest thou in hither not having a wedding garment? And he was speechless.

"Then said the king to the servants, Bind him hand and foot, and take him away, and cast him into outer darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

"For many are called, but few are chosen." (Matt. 22:11-14.)

And what is the lesson here? It is that those coming into the kingdom, regardless of ancestry, personally must have cleansed themselves of their worldly filth and taken upon them the responsibility of the name (or the garment) of Christ. That is what qualifies them to enter the kingdom.

Obedience! There is no substitute for it and no excuse for being without it if we hope to enter the kingdom, or, to use the expression in the parable, to sit down to the wedding feast.

Although Isaac was given the covenant and Ishmael was not, by means of the subsequent scattering of the blood of Israel among all nations the promises made to Abraham were extended to every tongue and people. Hence the covenant will take in all believers, regardless of their nationality. And what is the reasoning behind all this? It is simple. The Lord commands us to become perfect like our Father in heaven is perfect. (Matt. 5:48.) God wants us, his children, to become like him. That is his work, his glory, and his great objective.

The apostle Paul speaks of the same principle and says that we must achieve to the status of a perfect man, "unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ." (Eph. 4:13.) That is our destiny.

But gaining perfection is a matter of development, going from teaching to acceptance to application and finally to realization. It is a growth process. Was there ever a plant that achieved its full growth instantly? Was there an animal that did? Was there ever a child who suddenly and without waiting became a man? It is all a process of growth and development.

It is just as unreasonable to suppose that a child can instantly become a man or that a freshman high school student can suddenly earn a doctor's degree from college as it is to suppose that we finite beings can suddenly become infinite, or that we imperfect humans can suddenly become perfect and divine.

That is why we have the gospel plan. It is our pattern of growth and development, and whosoever follows that pattern obtains the desired result regardless of nationality. It is just as certain as the conclusion of a chemical procedure that follows a definite formula.

But people who become doctors or engineers or great musicians need instruction and direction; they need teachers who already know the way. Otherwise there would be no genuine achievement. It is the same with becoming perfect like our Heavenly Father.

The Lord gave us the Church and its organization, headed by apostles and prophets, as the means by which we may achieve perfection. It was established for "the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ." (Eph. 4:12.) Hence we must be active in it.

The Lord said that his work and his glory are to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man. (Moses 1:39.) And what does that mean? That we may truly become like him—our eternal Heavenly Father!

To enter his presence and become like him, however, we must follow the formula that will bring that condition about. Perfection can be obtained in only one way—by compliance with the principles of perfection. Class privilege or racial preference cannot possibly do this for us.

Everyone may be saved who will accept and serve the Lord. No one will be saved who refuses to do this. Race and ancestry or the lack of them can never help us without true conversion and obedience.
