Mark E. Petersen, Abraham: Friend of God ( 1979)

THEY GO THEIR WAYS

And God said, Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son indeed; and thou shalt call his name Isaac: and I will establish my covenant with him for an everlasting covenant, and with his seed after him.

"And as for Ishmael, I have heard thee: Behold, I have blessed him, and will make him fruitful, and will multiply him exceedingly; twelve princes shall he beget, and I will make him a great nation.

"But my covenant will I establish with Isaac, which Sarah shall bear unto thee at this set time in the next year." (Gen. 17:19-21.)

Here the Lord makes a clear distinction between Isaac and Ishmael. Was he unjust? What was the nature of the covenant, and why did it distinguish between the two boys?

God herein was talking about the priestly line, about the choice of his prophets, his ministers here on earth. Through these chosen men, he would labor to save not only their own souls, but also others not even of the covenant.

The Savior made it abundantly clear that all men of every tongue and nation are welcome in the gospel kingdom. He himself labored only among the Jews, but that did not mean he was excluding other nations from salvation. How do we know? Because after his resurrection he sent his disciples to all nations, kindreds, and peoples, telling them: "Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature. He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned." (Mark 16:15-16.)

Nothing is said here about race, national lines, or covenants. The gospel is for all the world, for all peoples. Everyone—regardless of race—who believes, obeys, and is baptized, will be received. It is noted that more than a mere acceptance of Christ is required, however. Baptism and other works must accompany faith. (James 2:14-26.)

When the Lord spoke of his second coming, he added this explanation: "This gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come." (Matt. 24:14.)

The restoration of the gospel was to take place "in the hour of God's judgment" by means of an angel flying through the heavens. The sacred word then would be preached to "every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people." (Rev. 14:6.)

Can anyone say that God is a respecter of persons? Is it not clear that he wishes to treat everyone alike? But why are they not all treated alike? Simply because of the individual opinions, obstinacy, and prejudices of various persons.

What was the problem with Ishmael? We must acknowledge that the original choice of a covenant people related to premortal existence. But Ishmael could have had the blessings of the gospel here on earth had he possessed a different attitude, and had he been teachable and kind instead of hateful. If he had possessed love for the infant Isaac instead of hatred; if he had caressed the child instead of mocking him, would not Abraham, the friend of God, have seen to his salvation?

He loved Ishmael. He prayed to God, "O that Ishmael might live before thee." (Gen. 17:18.) Is there not significance in that remark?

Abraham knew that all faithful people will be received by the Lord. Had he suffered from some previous difficulties with Ishmael's boyish attitude? Hagar had hated Sarah for fourteen years. Would not this motherly antagonism have rubbed off on Ishmael, leading to his mocking Isaac?

Ishmael's own attitude is what took him away from the blessings that might have been his! He could have been baptized into the church in those days, and so could Hagar, if they had acted and felt differently! Ishmael was of the blood of Abraham. He was Abraham's son.

The gospel was on the earth in the days of Abraham. Then would Abraham's own flesh and blood, his own son, have been excluded from the blessings of the church—regardless of the covenant—if the boy had been faithful and believing?

To answer that, let us ask another question: Are we admitting Arabs into the modern church? The answer, of course, is yes. Would the Lord give to a modern descendant of Abraham something he would not willingly have given to an immediate son anciently?

On this point President Brigham Young said:

"Who are Israel? They are those who are of the seed of Abraham, who received the promise through their forefathers; and all the rest of the children of men, who receive the truth, are also Israel. My heart is always drawn out for them, whenever I go to the throne of grace.

"Israel is dispersed among all the nations of the earth; the blood of Ephraim is mixed with the blood of all the earth. Abraham's seed is mingled with the rebellious seed through the whole world of mankind.

"The Elders who have arisen in this Church and Kingdom are actually of Israel.

"Those islanders and the natives of this country are of the House of Israel—of the seed of Abraham, and to them pertains the promise; and every soul of them, sooner or later, will be saved in the Kingdom of God, or be destroyed root and branch.

"Again, if a pure Gentile firmly believes the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and yields obedience to it, in such a case I will give you the words of the Prophet Joseph: `The effect of the Holy Ghost upon a Gentile, is to purge out the old blood, and make him actually of the seed of Abraham.'

"We are to build up and establish Zion, gather the House of Israel, and redeem the nations of the earth. This people have this work to do, whether we live to see it or not. This is all in our hands." (Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 437.)

President Joseph Fielding Smith wrote: "The promise was made that in addition to Abraham's direct descendants, all who should receive the Gospel from that time forth, should also become of Abraham's seed by adoption." (The Way to Perfection, p. 88.)

He also added: "No person can receive the Gospel without becoming of the seed of Abraham. If they are not of his blood by descent they become so by adoption." (Ibid., p. 89.)

Look at Ishmael and Hagar now from this perspective. See what they missed! What a toll hatred levies on all its victims!

Abraham was instructed: "As many as receive this Gospel shall be called after thy name, and shall be accounted thy seed." He was told also that through him "shall all the families of the earth be blessed, even with the blessings of the Gospel, which are the blessings of salvation, even of life eternal." (Abr. 2:10-11.)

Would not "all the families of the earth" include Hagar's family and Ishmael's family when he grew up and married—if they would do as others receiving those blessings: accept and obey the truth?

Obedience is the thing!

Hagar's hatred, and Ishmael's reflection of her bitterness, closed the door against them. Only love can open it again, the true love of God.

They would not have been refused baptism into the kingdom in those days any more than now, if they had but obeyed. They both were of Abraham's house, one a wife, one a son. So it was attitude, revealed in their obedience or disobedience, that actually drew the line between Isaac and Ishmael. God had no prejudice against Ishmael. The scripture says that he loved the lad. (Gen. 21:20.) He also had due regard for the boy's mother.

When Hagar was in distress because of Sarah's jealousy, and she fled to the desert, it was the Lord who came to the rescue. "And God heard the voice of the lad; and the angel of God called to Hagar out of heaven, and said unto her, What aileth thee, Hagar? Fear not; for God hath heard the voice of the lad where he is. Arise, lift up the lad, and hold him in thine hand; for I will make him a great nation." (Gen. 21:16-18.)

Inasmuch as God loved the lad and promised that he would become a great nation, with kings and princes in his lineage, can anyone say that the Lord was treating him unjustly, especially in view of the boy's hateful attitude?

God grants all people their free agency, including Ishmael and Hagar. But both mother and son allowed bitterness to fill their souls. That is why they received no more of the divine blessings than they did.

Ishmael left the Abrahamic line and went to live in Paran, which is in the wilderness near Sinai. "And his mother took him a wife out of the land of Egypt." (Gen. 21:21.) So it was near Sinai that Ishmael began to rear his family. And now came a further mixture of Egyptian blood with that of Abraham. His descendants have continued to live in that general area ever since.

Isaac, as is known, remained with Abraham, eventually married within his own family circle, and followed after the God of heaven.

With respect to obedience being the source of our blessings, President Brigham Young at one time commented on the disobedience of ancient Israel and the efforts made by Moses to teach them the gospel and bring them back into the kingdom. He said: "If they had been sanctified and holy, the Children of Israel would not have traveled one year with Moses before they would have received their endowments and the Melchizedek Priesthood." (Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 106.)

But in their disobedience they traveled for forty years in the wilderness, until the older rebellious generation had died off.

Obedience is the thing, or as we sing in one of our hymns: "Sacrifice brings forth the blessings of heaven." (Hymns, no. 147.) The principle applies to all mankind, regardless of race or color or covenants or heritage. There is no progress in the kingdom without obedience.
