Mark E. Petersen, Abraham: Friend of God ( 1979)

THE SACRIFICE OF ISAAC

Is the account of Isaac's sacrifice true or false?

The Book of Jewish Knowledge, published by Nathan Ausubel, author of half a dozen large works having to do with the Jewish people, says the sophisticated Jews of modern times regard that event as an ancient morality play. To orthodox Jews for generations past, however, it has been a dominating influence shaping lives and building spirituality.

It is set forth in the Bible as follows:

"And it came to pass after these things, that God did tempt Abraham, and said unto him, Abraham: and he said, Behold, here I am.

"And he said, Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou lovest, and get thee into the land of Moriah; and offer him there for a burnt offering upon one of the mountains which I will tell thee of.

"And Abraham rose up early in the morning, and saddled his ass, and took two of his young men with him, and Isaac his son, and clave the wood for the burnt offering, and rose up, and went unto the place of which God had told him.

"Then on the third day Abraham lifted up his eyes, and saw the place afar off.

"And Abraham said unto his young men, Abide ye here with the ass; and I and the lad will go yonder and worship, and come again to you.

"And Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering, and laid it upon Isaac his son; and he took the fire in his hand, and a knife; and they went both of them together.

"And Isaac spake unto Abraham his father, and said, My father: and he said, Here am I, my son. And he said, Behold the fire and the wood: but where is the lamb for a burnt offering?

"And Abraham said, My son, God will provide himself a lamb for a burnt offering: so they went both of them together.

"And they came to the place which God had told him of; and Abraham built an altar there, and laid the wood in order, and bound Isaac his son, and laid him on the altar upon the wood.

"And Abraham stretched forth his hand, and took the knife to slay his son.

"And the angel of the Lord called unto him out of heaven, and said, Abraham, Abraham: and he said, Here am I.

"And he said, Lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do thou any thing unto him: for now I know that thou fearest God, seeing thou hast not withheld thy son, thine only son from me.

"And Abraham lifted up his eyes, and looked, and behold behind him a ram caught in a thicket by his horns: and Abraham went and took the ram, and offered him up for a burnt offering in the stead of his son.

"And Abraham called the name of that place Jehovah-jireh: as it is said to this day, In the mount of the Lord it shall be seen.

"And the angel of the Lord called unto Abraham out of heaven the second time.

"And said, By myself have I sworn, saith the Lord, for because thou hast done this thing, and hast not withheld thy son, thine only son:

"That in blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven, and as the sand which is upon the sea shore; and thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies;

"And in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed; because thou hast obeyed my voice.

"So Abraham returned unto his young men, and they rose up and went together to Beersheba; and Abraham dwelt at Beersheba." (Gen. 22:1-19.)

What is the Latter-day Saint point of view?

First of all, we accept the event as having truly happened. It is confirmed repeatedly in modern scripture, and that is our great assurance.

Second, in its way it seems to have presaged the sacrifice of Christ. The Father gave his own Beloved Son to die on the cross.

And next, it is one of the greatest examples of complete faith we know about, and should be a constant inspiration to us.

When the Book of Mormon prophet Jacob discussed the sacrifice of Isaac, he said that it "is a similitude of God and his Only Begotten Son." (Jacob 4:5.)

In D&C 132 (v. 36) of the Doctrine and Covenants, we have further confirmation that God commanded Abraham to offer up his son Isaac. That scripture specifically says: "Abraham was commanded to offer his son Isaac; nevertheless, it was written: Thou shalt not kill. Abraham, however, did not refuse, and it was accounted unto him for righteousness."

As to the purpose of this event, the Prophet Joseph Smith said: "The sacrifice required of Abraham in the offering up of Isaac, shows that if a man would attain to the keys of the kingdom of an endless life, he must sacrifice all things." (HC 5:555.)

The late Elder Melvin J. Ballard, of the Council of the Twelve, discussed this theme at one time and said:

"I think as I read the story of Abraham's sacrifice of his son Isaac, that our Father is trying to tell us what it cost him to give his Son as a gift to the world.

"You remember the story of how Abraham's son came after long years of waiting, and was looked upon by his worthy sire, Abraham, as more precious than all his other possessions; yet, in the midst of his rejoicing, Abraham was told to take this only son and offer him as a sacrifice to the Lord.

"He responded. Can you feel what was in the heart of Abraham on that occasion? You love your son just as Abraham did; perhaps not quite so much, because of the peculiar circumstances, but what do you think was in his heart when he started away from Mother Sarah and they bade her good bye?

"What do you think was in his heart when he saw Isaac bidding farewell to his mother to take that three days' journey to the appointed place where the sacrifice was to be made? I imagine it was about all Father Abraham could do to keep from showing his great grief and sorrow at that parting, but he and his son trudged along three days toward the appointed place, Isaac carrying the fagots that were to consume the sacrifice. The two travelers rested, finally, at the mountain side, and the men who had accompanied them were told to remain, while Abraham and his son started up the hill.

"The boy then said to his father: `Why, father, we have the fagots, we have the fire to burn the sacrifice, but where is the sacrifice?'

"It must have pierced the heart of Father Abraham to hear the trusting and confiding son say: `You have forgotten the sacrifice.' Looking at the youth, his son of promise, the poor father could only say: `The Lord will provide.'

"They ascended the mountain, gathered the stones together, and placed the fagots upon them. Then Isaac was bound, hand and foot, kneeling upon the altar. I presume Abraham, like a true father, must have given his son his farewell kiss, his blessing, his love, and his soul must have been drawn out in that hour of agony toward this son who was to die by the hand of his own father. Every step proceeded until the cold steel was drawn, and the hand raised that was to strike the blow to let out the life's blood. When the angel of the Lord said: `It is enough.'

"Our Father in heaven went through all that and more, for in his case the hand was not stayed. He loved his Son Jesus Christ, better than Abraham ever loved Isaac, for our Father had with him his Son, our Redeemer, in the eternal worlds, faithful and true for ages, standing in a place of trust and honor, and the Father loved him dearly, and yet he allowed this well-beloved Son to descend from his place of glory and honor, where millions did him homage, down to the earth, a condescension that is not within the power of man to conceive of.

"He came to receive the insult, the abuse, and the crown of thorns. God heard the cry of his Son in that moment of great grief and agony, in the garden when, it is said, the pores of his body opened and drops of blood stood upon him and he cried out: `Father, if thou be willing, remove this cup from me.'

"I ask you, what father and mother could stand by and listen to the cry of their children in distress, in this world, and not render aid and assistance? I have heard of mothers throwing themselves into raging streams when they could not swim a stroke to save their drowning child, rushing into burning buildings, to rescue those whom they loved.

"We can not stand by and listen to those cries without it touches our hearts. The Lord has not given us the power to save our own. He has given us faith and we submit to the inevitable, but he had the power to save, and he loved his Son and he could have saved him.

"He might have rescued him from the insult of the crowds. He might have rescued him when the crown of thorns was placed upon his head. He might have rescued him when the Son, hanging between the two thieves was mocked with, `Save thyself, and come down from the cross. . . . He saved others; himself he cannot save.'

"He listened to all this. He saw that Son condemned, he saw him drag the cross through the streets of Jerusalem and faint under its load. He saw that Son finally upon Calvary, he saw his body stretched out upon the wooden cross, he saw the cruel nails driven through hands and feet, and the blows that broke the skin, tore the flesh and crushed the bones and let out the life's blood of his Son. He looked upon that.

"In the case of our Father, the knife was not stayed, but it fell, and the life's blood of his beloved Son went out. His Father looked on with great grief and agony over his beloved Son, until there seems to have come a moment when even our Savior cried out in despair: `My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?'

"In that hour I think I can see our dear Father behind the veil looking upon these dying struggles until even he could not endure it any longer; and, like the mother who bids farewell to her dying child, has to be taken out of the room, so as not to look upon the last struggles, so he bowed his head, and hid in some part of his universe, his great heart almost breaking for the love that he had for his Son.

"Oh, in that moment when he might have saved his Son, I thank him and praise him that he did not fail us, for he had not only the love of his Son in mind, but he had love for us, and I rejoice that he did not interfere, and that his love for us made it possible for him to endure to look upon the sufferings of his Son and give him finally to us, our Savior and our Redeemer. For without him, without his sacrifice, we would have been buried in the earth, and there our bodies would have remained and we would never have come glorified into his presence. And so this is what it cost, in part, for our Father in heaven to give the gift of his Son unto men." (Improvement Era, October 1919, pp. 1029-31.)

In early Christian times, some of the converts put private interpretations upon this event and went far afield. Most of them were Jews who venerated Abraham anyway. They endeavored to mix the Abrahamic story with the account of Jesus on the cross, and made a combined presentation of two great sacrifices in the holy eucharist. Artwork also began to appear then, working the Abrahamic story into the atonement of Christ. But the difficulty in such a procedure was soon recognized and the matter was stopped.

The place of the sacrifice was on Mount Moriah, which later became the site for the erection of the temple of Solomon. This was also where the Lord appeared to David. (2 Chr. 3:1.) A giant mosque is now upon this place, evidencing the great respect the Arabs have for their illustrious ancestor.
