Mark E. Petersen, Abraham: Friend of God ( 1979)

THE MARRIAGE COVENANT

One of the great lessons we find in the life of Abraham is his strict adherence to the marriage covenant and the requirement that we marry within the faith and within the race.

How devastated he would have been if Isaac had married a Canaanite!

Abraham remembered that he had relatives in Haran where he had left his father, and to which area his brother Nahor afterward moved. He desired that one of the women of that branch of the family become the wife of Isaac.

The Lord too desired that Isaac marry well for the covenant's sake. Jesus Christ would be born in that lineage. The bloodline must be kept pure.

Abraham had a trusted servant and decided to send him to the home of Nahor for a daughter to marry Isaac. So careful was Abraham in this matter that he put his servant under oath. The scripture reads:

"And Abraham was old, and well stricken in age: and the Lord had blessed Abraham in all things.

"And Abraham said unto his eldest servant of his house, that ruled over all that he had, Put, I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh:

"And I will make thee swear by the Lord, the God of heaven, and the God of the earth, that thou shalt not take a wife unto my son of the daughters of the Canaanites, among whom I dwell:

"But thou shalt go unto my country, and to my kindred, and take a wife unto my son Isaac. . . .

"And the servant put his hand under the thigh of Abraham his master, and sware to him concerning that matter.

"And the servant took ten camels of the camels of his master, and departed; for all the goods of his master were in his hand: and he arose, and went to Mesopotamia, unto the city of Nahor." (Genesis 24: 1-4, 9-10.)

The rest of the story is told in Genesis. Isaac married Rebekah, within the family line.

The relationship of Isaac and Rebekah is given in this way: "And I bowed down my head, and worshipped the Lord, and blessed the Lord God of my master Abraham, which had led me in the right way to take my master's brother's daughter unto his son." (Gen. 24:48.)

The "master's brother" was Nahor, with whom Abraham was reared in Ur.

The same kind of caution was shown in the selection of a bride for Jacob. Again the bloodline was chosen. Again the lineage was kept pure, looking to the Savior's birth.

The same caution was pressed upon the Israelites in the days of Moses. Realizing that there were many unbelievers in the land, and that most of the neighbors were Canaanites, the Lord prohibited mixed marriages with them.

Among his declarations was the following:

"Neither shalt thou make marriages with them; thy daughter thou shalt not give unto his son, nor his daughter shalt thou take unto thy son.

"For they will turn away thy son from following me, that they may serve other gods: so will the anger of the Lord be kindled against you, and destroy thee suddenly. . . .

"The Lord did not set his love upon you, nor choose you, because ye were more in number than any people; for ye were the fewest of all people." (Deut. 7:3-4, 7.)

At another time the Lord decreed:

"This is the thing which the Lord doth command concerning the daughters of Zelophehad, saying, Let them marry to whom they think best; only to the family of the tribe of their father shall they marry.

"So shall not the inheritance of the children of Israel remove from tribe to tribe: for every one of the children of Israel shall keep himself to the inheritance of the tribe of his fathers.

"And every daughter, that possesseth an inheritance in any tribe of the children of Israel, shall be wife unto one of the family of the tribe of her father, that the children of Israel may enjoy every man the inheritance of his fathers." (Num. 36:6-8.)

Among the Latter-day Saints, the Lord provides temple marriage, which, of course, limits participation to the believers.
