Mark E. Petersen, Abraham: Friend of God ( 1979)

THE BOOK OF ABRAHAM

The Book of Abraham is one of our most important volumes of scripture. Consider for a moment what it provides:

Most people who believe in Christ are of the opinion that the Lord's career began with his birth in Bethlehem on that first Christmas night. There is little reason for them to think such a thing, for the Bible clearly shows that Jesus had a premortal life wherein he achieved Godhood. (John 1:1-14; Heb. 1:1-3.)

Jesus was chosen to be the Savior before this world was made. But how was he chosen for this great honor? Two mortal men that we know of were shown some details of this significant event. They were Abraham and Moses.

Abraham was shown the premortal spirits who were leaders among the primeval family of God. Of this he wrote:

"Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones;

"And God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the midst of them, and he said: These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits, and he saw that they were good; and he said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born.

"And there stood one among them that was like unto God, and he said unto those who were with him: We will go down, for there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell;

"And we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them;

"And they who keep their first estate shall be added upon; and they who keep not their first estate shall not have glory in the same kingdom with those who keep their first estate; and they who keep their second estate shall have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever." (Abr. 3:22-26.)

These were the spirit children of God, especially those who were to become leaders on earth, since evidently they already were leaders in the premortal world.

In particular was Abraham shown the Savior. He wrote: "And there stood one among them that was like unto God." (Abr. 3:24.)

There is only one Personage "like unto God," and that is Jesus the Christ, who at that pristine period was Jehovah. (D&C 110:1-4.)

How did John describe him? As being with God, and as a God himself, the Creator, for "all things were made by him; and without him was not any thing made that was made." (John 1:1-3.)

Paul described him as being "like unto God" when he told the Colossians that he was the image of the "invisible God, the firstborn of every creature:

"For by him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers: all things were created by him, and for him:

"And he is before all things, and by him all things consist.

"And he is the head of the body, the church: who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead; that in all things he might have the preeminence.

"For it pleased the Father that in him should all fulness dwell." (Col. 1:15-19.)

Paul also told the Hebrews that Christ was the "express image" of his Father's person. (Heb. 1:3.)

And, of course, the Savior taught his disciples that whoever had seen him had seen the Father, indicating that each was in the "express image" of the other. (John 12:45; 14:9.)

It is noted that our premortal life was spoken of as our "first estate" and that our earth life was referred to as our "second estate." The promise was there given that if the spirits who kept their first estate would also keep their second estate, that is, live righteously and successfully here on earth, they would then be "added upon" with glory "for ever and ever."

And then Abraham reveals the selection of the Savior: "And the Lord said: Whom shall I send? And one answered like unto the Son of Man: Here am I, send me. And another answered and said: Here am I, send me. And the Lord said: I will send the first." (Abr. 3:27.)

In that early council two volunteered to save the world, but only one was chosen. The other was rebellious and "kept not his first estate." He fought against God, and "at that day, many followed after him." (Abr. 3:28.) He became Satan.

Moses wrote of this same event:

"And I, the Lord God, spake unto Moses, saying: That Satan, whom thou hast commanded in the name of mine Only Begotten, is the same which was from the beginning, and he came before me, saying—Behold, here am I, send me, I will be thy son, and I will redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost, and surely I will do it; wherefore give me thine honor.

"But, behold, my Beloved Son, which was my Beloved and Chosen from the beginning, said unto me—Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever.

"Wherefore, because that Satan rebelled against me, and sought to destroy the agency of man, which I, the Lord God, had given him, and also, that I should give unto him mine own power; by the power of mine Only Begotten, I caused that he should be cast down;

"And he became Satan, yea, even the devil, the father of all lies, to deceive and to blind men, and to lead them captive at his will, even as many as would not hearken unto my voice." (Moses 4:1-4.)

The fall of Satan was also shown to Joseph Smith who wrote of that event in this language:

"And this we saw also, and bear record, that an angel of God who was in authority in the presence of God, who rebelled against the Only Begotten Son whom the Father loved and who was in the bosom of the Father, was thrust down from the presence of God and the Son,

"And was called Perdition, for the heavens wept over him—he was Lucifer, a son of the morning.

"And we beheld, and lo, he is fallen! is fallen, even a son of the morning!

"And while we were yet in the Spirit, the Lord commanded us that we should write the vision; for we beheld Satan, that old serpent, even the devil, who rebelled against God, and sought to take the kingdom of our God and his Christ—

"Wherefore, he maketh war with the saints of God, and encompasseth them round about.

"And we saw a vision of the sufferings of those with whom he made war and overcame, for thus came the voice of the Lord unto us." (D&C 76:25-30.)

John the Revelator was shown details of this event also and recorded:

"And there was war in heaven: Michael and his angels fought against the dragon; and the dragon fought and his angels,

"And prevailed not; neither was their place found any more in heaven.

"And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world: he was cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him." (Rev. 12:7-9.)

Isaiah also spoke of the fall of this "son of the morning":

"How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning! how art thou cut down to the ground, which didst weaken the nations!

"For thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God: I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north:

"I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like the most High.

"Yet thou shalt be brought down to hell, to the sides of the pit." (Isa. 14:12-15.)

It will be noted in Moses' record of these events that Lucifer said: "Behold, here am I, send me, I will be thy son, and I will redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost, and surely I will do it; wherefore give me thine honor." (Moses 4:1.)

Here is illustrated two dreadful things: One was the unmitigated and colossal egotism of Lucifer. The other was his determination to save people by force "that one soul shall not be lost." He would have destroyed free agency and thus made slaves of us all, his slaves, forever doomed to obey his wicked commands.

It is no wonder that the scripture says of him: "And he became Satan, yea, even the devil, the father of all lies, to deceive and to blind men, and to lead them captive at his will, even as many as would not hearken unto my voice." (Moses 4:4.)

From these scriptures it is evident that our Father in heaven intended that indeed the Savior, chosen in the premortal life to come here and offer salvation to all, would actually be his Son, the Son of God.

What a beautiful expression he made in that primeval council: "But, behold, my Beloved Son, which was my Beloved and Chosen from the beginning, said unto me—Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever." (Moses 4:2.) The Lord's prayer in Gethsemane was but a reflection of this same attitude.

So Jehovah was not only the Father's firstborn in the spirit world, but when he came to earth, he also became the only Begotten in the flesh. Thus on that first Christmas night, he became "Emmanuel, which being interpreted is, God with us." (Matt. 1:23.) Thus he became "the Son of the Highest," inheriting the throne "of his father David." (Luke 1:32.) And thus his name on earth was divinely called Jesus, "for he shall save his people from their sins." (Matt. 1:21.)

Jesus the Christ! Or as John the Baptist knew him, "The Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world." (John 1:29.)

So it was also that even to the Samaritan woman who spoke of the expected Christ, he said: "I that speak unto thee am he." (John 4:26.)

He organized his church, through which salvation comes. The Saints who are faithful therein are "they who are the church of the Firstborn. They are they into whose hands the Father has given all things." (D&C 76:54-55.)

To Abraham was revealed the selection of the Savior, and he recorded it for us to read.

The Book of Abraham, like the Book of Moses, is rich in doctrine and abundant in revealed facts so vital to our welfare. It is revelation. It is scripture. We accept it as we do others of our standard works. It is an essential part of the sacred literature of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
