Mark E. Petersen, Abraham: Friend of God ( 1979)

ABRAHAM ON CREATION

The account of creation as given in the Book of Abraham is distinctive in that it says that great work was done by "the Gods" in contrast to the belief that one God—one Almighty Being—made all things by himself, and out of nothing. There was a plurality of Gods engaged in creation. This fact is well corroborated in the Bible, including some passages in Genesis.

The Book of Abraham definitely teaches that this earth was made purposely as a home for the spirit offspring of God. It was not something that came about through some big accidental "bang," as the scientists say. Neither is life something that sprang up spontaneously and "grew like Topsy" with neither rhyme nor reason, spreading out into all its species.

God had space available. He had materials from which to make an earth, and he used them in his creative work. He did not make it out of nothing.

Most of his spirit children had kept their first estate. Now he was ready to introduce them to a second estate. "And we will prove them herewith to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them." So he said, "We will make an earth whereon these may dwell." (Abr. 3:25, 24.) This reveals the purpose in creation.

Thus earth life became a testing time, to see "if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them."

But what a reward if they will be faithful! "They who keep their second estate shall have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever." (Abr. 3:26.) And "all that my Father hath shall be given" unto them. (D&C 84:38.)

So it was with this purpose that the Lord said: "Let us go down. And they went down at the beginning, and they, that is the Gods, organized and formed the heavens and the earth." (Abr. 4:1.)

It was not a matter of making an earth—or the heavens—out of nothing. They went down and organized the materials that were available in space that also was available, and thus they provided creation.

"And the earth, after it was formed, was empty and desolate, because they had not formed anything but the earth; and darkness reigned upon the face of the deep, and the Spirit of the Gods was brooding upon the face of the waters." (Abr. 4:2.)

Note that not only were the Gods in conversation while employed in this creative undertaking, but "the Spirit of the Gods was brooding upon the face of the waters."

Then how was creation brought about? How were these materials organized into an earth? By the power of the Spirit of the Gods working under the direction of the Gods!

Mankind at times has seen but slight expressions of the powers of so-called nature. Earthquakes have shaken large areas, even changed their shape. Floods have come, lightning has struck with death and destruction, and tidal waves have devastated the land. Would not such powers of nature have been employed in forming and organizing the earth?

Who were these Gods?

We believe in a Godhead of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Who else would have participated in the creation?

Moses quoted the Lord in his revelation of the creation as saying: "And by the word of my power, have I created them, which is mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth. And worlds without number have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose; and by the Son I created them, which is mine Only Begotten." (Moses 1:32-33.)

The apostle Paul gave this same view to the Hebrews as he wrote:

"God, who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in time past unto the fathers by the prophets,

"Hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he hath appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds;

"Who being the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person, and upholding all things by the word of his power, when he had by himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high." (Heb. 1:1-3. Italics added.)

When John wrote his gospel he said: "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. The same was in the beginning with God. All things were made by him; and without him was not any thing made that was made." (John 1:1-3.)

Some of the newer translations of the Bible read as follows:

The New English Bible: "When all things began, the Word already was. The Word dwelt with God, and what God was, the Word was. The Word, then, was with God at the beginning, and through him all things came to be; no single thing was created without him."

The Authentic New Testament (Schonfield): "In the beginning was the Word. And the Word was with God. So the Word was divine. He was in the beginning, with God. By him everything had being. And without him nothing had being. What had being by him was Life. And Life was the Light of men."

The New World Translation: "In the beginning the Word was, and the Word was with God, and the Word was a god. This one was in the beginning with God. All things came into existence through him, and apart from him not even one thing came into existence."

Knox Roman Catholic Version: "At the beginning of time the Word already was; and God had the Word abiding with him, and the Word was God. He abode, at the beginning of time, with God. It was through him that all things came into being, and without him came nothing that has come to be."

Goodspeed American Translation: "In the beginning the Word existed. The Word was with God, and the Word was divine. It was he that was with God in the beginning. Everything came into existence through him, and apart from him nothing came to be."

When Abraham's revelation of the Creation discussed details, it is interesting that he used such expressions as these: "And the Gods prepared the earth to bring forth the living creature after his kind," "And the Gods organized the earth to bring forth the beasts after their kind," "And the Gods took counsel among themselves and said, Let us go down and form man in our image."

It is obvious that there was a plurality of Creators who worked together, and that they counseled and planned their work in advance.

The plural nature of the participation in creation is borne out in passages in the King James Translation. For example, Gen. 1:26 reads: "And God said, Let us make man in our image." (Italics added.) Note the plural form.

When the devil tempted Eve he said: "Ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil." (Gen. 3:5.) What Gods? And after the fall, "The Lord God said, Behold, the man is become as one of us." (Italics added.) (Gen. 3:22.) Note again the plural form.

The Roman Catholic Jerusalem Bible reads, regarding the creation of man: "God said, Let us make man in our image." (Italics added.)

The Knox Bible says: "And God said, Let us make man wearing our image." (Italics added.) Other Bibles say essentially the same.

After the fall, the versions read:

Knox: "Here is Adam become like one of ourselves." (Italics added.)

Goodspeed: "Man has become like one of us in knowing good and evil." (Italics added.)

Joseph Smith's Translation: "And I, the Lord God, said unto mine Only Begotten, Behold, the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil." (JST Gen. 3:28.)

Here is the answer: God spoke to his Beloved Son, and as we read these words, we see that the scriptures make sense in giving the plural form in each case.

Like Moses, Abraham was not present as an eyewitness to creation so that he could write about it first hand. He obtained all this detail in only one way—by revelation, just as Moses did.

In the case of the Book of Moses, the revelation given to Moses comprising that book was again given as modern revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith, and notations to that effect appear at the heads of the chapters of that book. The Book of Abraham has no such designations, but it could only be by revelation that this intimate picture of creation was provided.

The Prophet Joseph Smith, as is well known, obtained ancient writings in Egyptian mummies that he purchased. He makes frequent reference to them, one as the book of Abraham and the other as the book of Joseph, who was sold into Egypt.

President Joseph Fielding Smith wrote of this in his book Essentials in Church History:

"On the 3rd of July, 1835, Michael H. Chandler, came to Kirtland exhibiting four mummies and some rolls of papyrus covered with hieroglyphic figures. Mr. Chandler had been directed to the Prophet Joseph Smith as one who could translate the characters for him. At his request Joseph Smith gave a translation of a few of them which Mr. Chandler stated agreed with the decipherings of learned men who had examined them. He gave the Prophet a certificate to this effect. Shortly after this interview some of the Saints in Kirtland purchased the mummies and the manuscripts, and, with Oliver Cowdery and Wm. W. Phelps as scribes, the Prophet commenced to translate these records. To their great joy they discovered that one of these rolls contained writings of Abraham, or instructions given to him in Egypt from the Lord. The other contained writings of Joseph, son of Jacob. During the summer the Prophet prepared for the complete translation of the Book of Abraham, as it is called, which now appears in the Pearl of Great Price, one of the accepted standard works of the Church." (Pp. 183-84.)

In his historical writings, the Prophet speaks of these ancient records from time to time. Some of his references are as follows:

"Soon after this, some of the Saints at Kirtland purchased the mummies and papyrus, a description of which will appear hereafter, and with W. W. Phelps and Oliver Cowdery as scribes, I commenced the translation of some of the characters or hieroglyphics, and much to our joy found that one of the rolls contained the writings of Abraham, another the writings of Joseph of Egypt, etc.,—a more full account of which will appear in its place, as I proceed to examine or unfold them. Truly we can say, the Lord is beginning to reveal the abundance of peace and truth." (HC 2:236.)

"This afternoon I labored on the Egyptian alphabet, in company with Brothers Oliver Cowdery and W. W. Phelps, and during the research, the principles of astronomy as understood by Father Abraham and the ancients unfolded to our understanding, the particulars of which will appear hereafter." (HC 2:286.)

"In the afternoon I waited on most of the Twelve, at my house, and exhibited to them the ancient records, and gave explanations. This day passed off with the blessing of the Lord." (HC 2:287.)

"I returned home and spent the day in translating the Egyptian records. . . . At home in the morning. Weather warm and rainy. We spent the day in translating, and made rapid progress." (HC 2:318.)

The book of Joseph was never published. Whether or not it was translated is not known.

Only fragments of the pieces of papyrus owned by the Prophet are now extant; most of what he had is now missing. Scholars believe that some of the few scraps of the ancient papyrus now in the possession of the Church are from documents other than the actual Book of Abraham, although the facsimiles now printed in the Pearl of Great Price are definitely from that original book.

However, the Book of Abraham as we publish it, containing the revelations of the Lord to Abraham, is indeed scripture and is invaluable. It was published by and with the full authority of the Prophet Joseph Smith, who gave it to us as translated scripture.

It appeared first in the Times and Seasons in Nauvoo beginning in March 1842, and later in the Millennial Star in England. The Prophet was assisted in this work by Elder Wilford Woodruff.

Several newspapers of the period gave repeated space to the work. The Boston Daily Ledger also published Facsimile No. 1, showing Abraham on the sacrificial altar, on the front page of its edition of Thursday, April 7, 1842. This facsimile was also published in the New York Herald and the Dollar Week Bostonian.
