Mark E. Petersen, Abraham: Friend of God ( 1979)

SCATTERED ISRAEL

When the Lord told Abraham that through his seed all the nations of the earth would be blessed, he had two things in mind.

One was that in his lineage the Savior would be born. All individuals and all peoples are blessed through his atonement and gospel teachings.

Second, through blood descent, all peoples would be blessed by lineage. But how could this be, when the family line was so restricted in the days of Isaac, Jacob, and his twelve sons? It was accomplished through the subsequent mixing of the blood of Israel among all nations as Israel was scattered.

The late Dr. James E. Talmage of the Council of the Twelve, writing in his Articles of Faith, described it in this way:

"It has been said, that `if a complete history of the house of Israel were written, it would be the history of histories, the key of the world's history for the past twenty centuries.' Justification for this sweeping statement is found in the fact that the Israelites have been so completely dispersed among the nations as to give to this scattered people a place of importance as a factor in the rise and development of almost every large division of the human family. This work of dispersion was brought about by many stages, and extended through millenniums. It was foreseen by the early prophets; and the spiritual leaders of every generation prior to and immediately following the Messianic era predicted the scattering of the people, as an ordained result of their increasing wickedness, or referred to the fulfilment of former prophecies regarding the dispersion then already accomplished, and foretold a further and more complete diffusion of the nation." (Pp. 316-17.)

Various prophets in the Bible and Book of Mormon spoke of this scattering. As the Israelites mingled among the nations they intermarried, and thus their blood became a part of the peoples of the world. The coming of Lehi and his family to America was but one step in this scattering process.

Destruction came upon the nation of Israel in two steps. One was the capture and ultimate scattering of the Ten Tribes. The other was the scattering of the Jews following the destruction of Jerusalem in A.D. 70.

Dr. Talmage continues his description:

"Since the destruction of Jerusalem and the final disruption of the Jewish autonomy, the Jews have been wanderers upon the face of the earth, a people without a country, a nation without a home. The prophecy uttered by Amos of old has had its literal fulfilment—truly have Israel been sifted among all nations `like as corn is sifted in a sieve.' Let it be remembered, however, that coupled with this dread prediction was the promise: `Yet shall not the least grain fall upon the earth.' . . .

"As already stated, in the division of the Israelites after the death of Solomon ten tribes established themselves as an independent kingdom. This, the kingdom of Israel, was terminated as far as history is concerned by the Assyrian captivity, 721 B.C. The people were led into Assyria and later disappeared so completely that they have been called the Lost Tribes. They seem to have departed from Assyria, and while we lack definite information as to their final destination and present location, there is abundant evidence that their journey was toward the north. The Lord's word through Jeremiah promises that the people shall be brought back `from the land of the north,' and a similar declaration has been made through divine revelation in the present dispensation.

"In the writings of Esdras or Ezra, which, however, are not included among the canonical books of the Bible but are known as apocryphal, we find reference to the north-bound migration of the Ten Tribes, which they undertook in accordance with a plan to escape the heathen by going to `a farther country where never man dwelt, that they might there keep their statutes which they never kept in their own land.' The same writer informs us that they journeyed a year and a half into the north country, but he gives us evidence that many remained in the land of their captivity." (Ibid., pp. 324-25.)

With the blood of Israel thus scattered, people of all nations may hear and accept the gospel and receive of its blessings. In this remarkable manner, a vital phase of the promise to Abraham is fulfilled.

One of the clearest explanations of the scattering of Israel is given in the fifth chapter of Jacob in the Book of Mormon. Not only does Jacob illustrate both the scattering and gathering of Israel, but he also explains the transfusion and retransfusion of the life-giving fluid of both wild and tame olive trees, as they are grafted and regrafted upon each other. This clearly illustrates how Gentiles and Israelites have intermixed and how well Abraham's blood has been distributed abroad.

Again, it is a dramatic portrayal of the mercy of God, giving to all—even to the most disobedient—an opportunity to repent and be saved. Did he not say that he was sent to the sick, and that the well need no physician? And who is fully well, spiritually? Who is perfect but One?

Relate all of this now to the coming of both Elias and Moses to the Prophet Joseph Smith in the Kirtland Temple.

Elias brought the keys of Abraham's dispensation and specifically said that he was restoring the promises, "that in us and our seed all generations after us should be blessed." (D&C 110:12.) That speaks of present-day peoples of various nationalities coming into the Church now. And who are they? They are those of "every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people" of whom the angel spoke. (Rev. 14:6.)

So the prophecies referred to the scattered sheep, but also to their being gathered. And how are they being gathered? Through the powers restored to Joseph Smith by Moses! He also came to the Prophet Joseph in the Kirtland Temple. He committed to the Prophet "the keys of the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth, and the ten tribes from the land of the north." (D&C 110:11.)

And how is this gathering proceeding? Through the preaching of the gospel! The descendants of Joseph are being gathered into the fold, on many fronts. Joseph's people are in two general groupings. One is the children of Ephraim, who are the vast majority of the Latter-day Saints. The other is the family of Manasseh, represented in the descendants of Lehi. There are now more than four million Latter-day Saints in the world.

The Jews are being gathered too. The Latter-day Saints have nothing to do with their movement. The Jews themselves inaugurated it. And that is what caused their confrontation with the Arabs in Palestine.

There are about three million Jews in Palestine today. Conversion probably will not come to them before the second coming of Christ. (See D&C 45; Zech. 13 and 14.)

The return of the tribes from the land of the north is described in the Doctrine and Covenants as follows:

"And they who are in the north countries shall come in remembrance before the Lord; and their prophets shall hear his voice, and shall no longer stay themselves; and they shall smite the rocks, and the ice shall flow down at their presence.

"And an highway shall be cast up in the midst of the great deep.

"Their enemies shall become a prey unto them.

"And in the barren deserts there shall come forth pools of living water; and the parched ground shall no longer be a thirsty land.

"And they shall bring forth their rich treasures unto the children of Ephraim, my servants.

"And the boundaries of the everlasting hills shall tremble at their presence.

"And there shall they fall down and be crowned with glory, even in Zion, by the hands of the servants of the Lord, even the children of Ephraim.

"And they shall be filled with songs of everlasting joy.

"Behold, this is the blessing of the everlasting God upon the tribes of Israel, and the richer blessing upon the head of Ephraim and his fellows.

"And they also of the tribe of Judah, after their pain shall be sanctified in holiness before the Lord, to dwell in his presence day and night, forever and ever." (D&C 133:26-35.)

It is noted that they will have prophets among them. The Prophet Joseph Smith indicated in his day that John the Revelator was then among the Ten Tribes, preparing them for their return.

So we see that the promises made to Abraham have direct and significant relationship to us who live today. This is the day of gathering. We have the keys of Elias of Abraham's day by which all the "seed" to the latest generation will be blessed through our preaching of the restored gospel. We have the keys of Moses to gather them. And we have the keys of Elijah to bless them with their temple work.

It all fits together in one great pattern.

So Abraham was not just a patriarch noted for having lived in ancient times and having walked and talked with God. He was not just a "father of the faithful" whose children would be numbered as the stars of heaven. He was not just a prophet in whose life there was a foreshadowing of the sacrifice of Christ.

He was one of the chosen of the hosts of heaven whose influence has been felt quietly but surely down through the centuries as nations have intermarried and mixed their blood—and his blood—so that everyone could receive his blessings, if they would believe and live the gospel.

His influence is obvious as we now gather Israel. It is felt as we preach to the gentiles who will be "adopted" into Abraham's line because of their faithfulness. We have seen the changes in their lives. It is abundantly clear, too, as varieties of nationalities enter the temples and there receive their blessings, each in his own tongue. It is a great modern miracle.

Abraham, therefore, is unique in all the annals of religious history. He is especially significant to us who now carry the restored gospel abroad. That gospel goes to all nations, tongues, and peoples in order to reach his descendants, those to whom his ancient promises mean so much in this modern day.

Over four million are now in the fold. Each year many thousands of others are added. Abraham's "believing blood" is important in their conversions. Through it faith and salvation are offered to all whether they are of the "chosen race" or not. It helps them recognize the voice of the Good Shepherd.

Abraham has given birth to nations, kings, and queens, but also to God's prophets who have carried the good word through the ages.

Many of them have sacrificed their lives in doing so, sealing their testimonies with their blood—and his! However, that was but a reminder of his own willingness to sacrifice Isaac. Abraham knew what sacrifice was, and now so do many of his faithful descendants.

Abraham was also represented in the Great Sacrifice. It was he who became the favored progenitor of the Lord Jesus Christ. It was his line in which was born the Savior of the world, the Son of Almighty God.

So what of Abraham? God chose him as his friend!
