Mark E. Petersen, Abraham: Friend of God ( 1979)

THE PRIESTHOOD LINE

The final extension of the blessings of Abraham—priesthood and temple—has been made. By revelation the Lord gave to President Spencer W. Kimball the good word that now all peoples, regardless of race or color, may receive the priesthood blessings. Following is the announcement made by the First Presidency June 9, 1978:

The First Presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints today released the following statement:

As we have witnessed the expansion of the work of the Lord over the earth, we have been grateful that people of many nations have responded to the message of the restored gospel, and have joined the church in ever-increasing numbers. This, in turn, has inspired us with a desire to extend to every worthy member of the church all of the privileges and blessings which the gospel affords.

Aware of the promises made by the prophets and presidents of the church who have preceded us that at some time, in God's eternal plan, all of our brethren who are worthy may receive the priesthood, and witnessing the faithfulness of those from whom the priesthood has been withheld, we have pleaded long and earnestly in behalf of these, our faithful brethren, spending many hours in the upper room of the Temple supplicating the Lord for divine guidance.

He has heard our prayers, and by revelation has confirmed that the long-promised day has come when every faithful, worthy man in the church may receive the holy priesthood, with power to exercise its divine authority, and enjoy with his loved ones every blessing that flows therefrom, including the blessings of the temple. Accordingly, all worthy male members of the church may be ordained to the priesthood without regard for race or color. Priesthood leaders are instructed to follow the policy of carefully interviewing all candidates for ordination to either the Aaronic or Melchizedek Priesthood to insure that they meet the established standards for worthiness.

We declare with soberness that the Lord has now made known his will for the blessing of all his children throughout the earth who will hearken to the voice of his authorized servants, and prepare themselves to receive every blessing of the gospel.

Sincerely yours,

The First Presidency

Now in full fact is the gospel extended to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people. The restrictions of the past are lifted. The Lord again proves that all mankind are his children, with equal opportunity to become like him.

The full significance of the mission of Abraham may be beyond our finite comprehension, but it is obvious that his blessings are truly extended to those of every lineage.

How kind and gracious is the Lord. Now, no matter what we mortals may have done in our preexistence, he allows us this present opportunity to truly keep our second estate. If we do, we are promised that glory and progress shall be added upon us throughout the eternities.
