Susan Arrington Madsen, Growing Up in Zion: True Stories of Young Pioneers Building the Kingdom ( 1996)

Preface

This volume is devoted to the experiences, sacrifices, and contributions of nineteenth-century Latter-day Saint children and adolescents, and shows the significant role they played in helping to establish Zion in the mountains and deserts of the West. What better time than the 150th anniversary of the arrival of the first Mormon children in the Valley to recognize that young persons laughed, cried, spun, cooked, milked, planted, harvested, and prayed alongside their parents in this new land.

xI have chosen to let children who grew up in the Great Basin tell their own stories. Who can describe the dark, damp experience of sleeping in a dugout more effectively than the child who shivered each night in such a primitive home? Who better to tell of eating porcupine for dinner, or chewing on an old hawk boiled all night in a pot, than the boy who was hungry enough to swallow such a grisly meal? These boys and girls were there, and their own words have a power greater than any third-person retelling could convey.

xThis book contains three kinds of excerpts. First, there are longer reminiscences that describe the youthful experiences of the writers. Second, there are many shorter excerpts that enrich and complement the longer narratives. The shorter entries appear as sidebars; each tells a single incident or makes an observation that adds detail and color to our understanding of pioneer living.

xThe third category is a rare and remarkable collection of "letters to the editor" written by children and published in the Juvenile Instructor beginning in 1897. The Juvenile Instructor was a Church periodical, the masthead of which proclaimed it to have been "designed expressly for the education and elevation of the young." These early letters add the innocent and spontaneous voices of children. The other stories are mostly told by adults looking back on and describing their own youth.

xAs with most books, limits had to be set for this project or it could never have been completed. I have left out far more than I have included, but the excerpts here are representative of the more than 200 life histories I have studied.

xLimits had to be placed on age, place, and time. This book focuses on the experiences of youth under the age of twenty, growing up within the bounds of what was then called the State of Deseret and later the Utah Territory, between the year 1847, when the first Mormon pioneer company entered the Salt Lake Valley, and the turn of the century.

xFor those desiring to read more about the earlier or later lives of these young pioneers, the titles and locations of the longer histories are provided at the end of each chapter. The list of sources at the end of the book directs the reader to the sources of the shorter excerpts.

To illustrate this book, we have included more than a hundred photographs of young people from the Great Basin area in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Many of these children are unidentifiable, but their photographs give us a feel for the period of time in which they lived, the clothes they wore, and the friends and pets they cherished. Sources of these photographs are listed at the end of the book.

xiTo make the book more readable, spelling, grammar, and punctuation have been modernized in some instances. Other than this, words have not been changed except when necessary to clarify the meaning of a sentence. Sentences and phrases have sometimes been deleted, especially in longer entries, in places not critical to the narrative. The future married names of young women are included in parentheses in the chapter headings.

xiMany people contributed to the creation of this book. I express thanks to the LDS Church Sesquicentennial Committee for suggesting that Deseret Book Company publish the volume. I am deeply grateful to the staff of the library and archives of the Historical Department of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Salt Lake City, especially Richard Turley, Managing Director; William W. Slaughter, photograph archivist; and Melvin Bashore, reference librarian and indexer extraordinaire. I appreciate the friendly assistance of Ann Buttars and her associates at the Utah State University Merrill Library, Special Collections and Archives. Staff members in the Special Collections and Manuscripts Department of the Harold B. Lee Library at Brigham Young University and the Utah State Historical Society were generous with their help.

xiThose who gave excellent research suggestions and provided me with interesting histories include my father, Leonard J. Arrington; Lyndia Carter, Oregon-California Trails Association; Ross Peterson, Director, Mountain West Center for Regional Studies, Utah State University; George and Maria Ellsworth, Reed Durham, Sue Arnett, Roy Davis, Glenn Damron, Michael Johnson, Marie A. Done, Steve Bower, Lon Bower, Lorna P. Belnap, Gaylen and Elaine Ashcroft, Deleta Holland Selvage, Amy Howells White, Janet Seegmiller, Marjorie Conder, Mary Jane Fritzen, V. Philip Rasmussen, and the late A. J. Simmonds.

xiI appreciate the refining editing suggestions of Willis L. Pitkin, Jr., of the English Department at Utah State University, as well as the guidance of James C. Jacobs, professor of children's literature at Brigham Young University.

xiMy husband and friend, Dean, spent long hours reading the manuscript and making valuable suggestions. Together we have laughed and wept over what we have read.

xiI greatly appreciate the opportunity Deseret Book Company has given me to become acquainted with these sturdy, young Latter-day Saints. They are pioneers in the truest sense of the word.

xiSusan Arrington Madsen

1July 2, 1996

1Hyde Park, Utah
