Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

JOSEPH SMITH

Biographical Sketch

1Joseph Smith occupies a unique place among the prophets—his birth and his name, Joseph, were known nearly four thousand years before he came to the earth. Joseph who was sold into Egypt said of the great latter-day prophet:

1Yea, Joseph truly said: Thus saith the Lord unto me; a choice seer will I raise up. . . .

1And his name shall be called after me; and it shall be after the name of his father. And he shall be like unto me; for the thing, which the Lord shall bring forth by his hand, by the power of the Lord shall bring my people unto salvation.

1Yea, thus prophesied Joseph: I am sure of this thing. . . . (Nephi 3:7, 14-16; italics added.)

1Not only was the Prophet Joseph's birth known, but after his death, the Lord caused to have written and included as scripture the following:

1Joseph Smith, the Prophet and Seer of the Lord, has done more, save Jesus only, for the salvation of men in this world, than any other man that ever lived in it. (D&C 135:3.)

2Joseph Smith had bestowed upon him all of the priesthood authority needed to preside over the dispensation of the fulness of times, the dispensation in which all things that have been are gathered into one.

2Joseph Smith, because of the magnitude of his mission, received authority from, and was intimately acquainted with, numerous immortal beings. In addition to God the Father and his Son Jesus Christ, he received visitations from Moroni, Peter, James, John, John the Baptist, Moses, Elias, Elijah, and many others.

2Joseph Smith is also somewhat unique among the great latter-day prophets in that he served the Lord on the earth as a prophet while yet in his youth. The Prophet has recorded the following experience in his life which occurred when he was just fourteen years old:

2Later Joseph Smith had the great privilege of having a heavenly teacher to help prepare him to accomplish his assigned task of translating an ancient volume of holy scripture. He published his inspired translation of the sacred record when he was just twenty-four years old, and at the same age he became the leader of the Restored Church.

2Joseph Smith was a strong, vigorous, highly motivated prophet. He was greatly persecuted, but he never lost his eternal perspective, and he never ceased to be grateful and joyful.

2Joseph Smith was born on December 23, 1805, and just thirty-eight years later, in June of 1844, the initial latter-day prophet was faced with death. He had moved with his faithful followers four times to seek safety, but without success. The Prophet said, "If I go to Carthage I am a dead man." He did not want to leave his wife and four children; he wanted to see his unborn child. But it was not to be. On June 27, 1844, the first prophet of the last dispensation was killed by a mob of men with blackened faces.

3The bodies of Joseph and Hyrum lay side by side as they were returned to Nauvoo. Joseph Smith was dead at the early age of thirty-eight, but his life was a phenomenal success, and his deeds will be remembered and millions would be better because of him.

3Joseph Smith was the epitome of the whole, well-rounded man. He was an intense prophet, a devoted father, a capable leader, and an excellent scholar. But with it all, he had a love for athletics and possessed a delightfully keen sense of humor. He was totally unpretenious and was completely without guile. He was in very deed what he said he was—a prophet of the Living God.
