Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

9"A Burden Has Been Lifted from Me This Day"

9Finally a long-awaited day came. The translation (of the Book of Mormon Plates) was completed. Joseph Smith wanted those who cared for him to be present at the Whitmer farm in Fayette. His father was there, his mother, Oliver Cowdery, Martin Harris, and the Whitmers. He must have electrified the small group when he told them that this was the day when three others would behold the plates besides himself. He told Oliver Cowdery he would be one of the witnesses and David Whitmer would be another. And then, approaching Martin Harris, in essence he said, "Martin, you have got to humble yourself before God this day. If you do, you will also be privileged to be one of the witnesses."

The four left the house and went to the woods. They knelt and began to pray, praying vocally in turn. After each one had prayed twice, Martin Harris arose and said, "It is my fault that our prayers are not answered," and then he left. Shortly after his departure, a brilliant light appeared and an angel stood before them holding the plates and turning some of the leaves. They all heard the voice of God speak from the heavens bearing witness that the translation was correct. As the vision closed, Joseph Smith went to find Martin Harris. He found him praying. He knelt with him, and they prayed together. The same vision was opened to them. They beheld an angel, saw the plates, and they heard the voice of God. Martin Harris was soon so overcome with joy that he cried out, " 'Tis enough. 'Tis enough. Mine eyes have beheld. Mine eyes have beheld."

10Joseph had been gone from the Whitmer home for a long time. As he entered the house, he did not speak. He sat down by his mother. He laid his head on his mother's breast. So much had happened to the young prophet in the past decade, though he was not yet twenty-four years old. He in essence said, quietly, reflectively: "Mother, you don't know what a burden has been lifted from me this day. Now people will know that I don't go around to deceive them. The Lord has caused that the plates have been shown to three others besides myself, and they must be witnesses with me."

10Leon R. Hartshorn, Joseph Smith: Prophet of the Restoration (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1970), pp. 13-14.
