Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

HEBER J. GRANT

Biographical Sketch

189Heber Jeddy Grant was born on November 22, 1856. He was the first and only child of Rachel Ivans Grant. At the time of his birth, his father, Jedediah M. Grant, lay critically ill and just nine days later was dead at the age of 41. His loss was mourned by a multitude. He was truly a remarkable individual. At his death he was a counselor to President Brigham Young and mayor of Salt Lake City. At his funeral services, President Young paid him a unique tribute. He mentioned that "Brother Jedediah had been in the church a total of twenty-five years, but in those twenty-five years he had given the Lord one hundred years of Church service." That simple tribute eloquently described Heber J. Grant's valiant father. He was not privileged to know his father, but his father's influence was present in his life.

189President Grant told of an experience he had in 1891. He asked a president of a bank, a respected man who was not a member of the Church, to sign some bonds. He promptly declined to do so. Just a few minutes later he sent a messenger and asked president Grant to return. As President Grant entered the office, the influential businessman said:

190"Young man, give me those bonds." He signed them and then said, "When you were here a few moments ago, I did not know you. I have met you on the street now and then for a number of years and have spoken to you, but really did not know you. After you went out, I asked who you were. Learning that you were a son of Jedediah M. Grant, I at once sent for you. It gives me pleasure to sign your bonds. I would almost be willing to sign a bond for a son of Brother Jedediah if I knew I would have to pay it. In this case, however, I have no fears of having that to do."

190President Grant continues, "Although my father died when I was a babe nine days old, . . . years after his death I was reaping the benefits of his honesty and faithful labors." [^1]

190Rachel Ivans Grant, Heber's outstanding mother, never remarried and devoted her life to supporting and training her son. She struggled to support herself and her son by sewing and having people board in her house. Heber slept in a large closet that had been ventilated so that his room could be rented.

190On one occasion President Grant said:

190I thank the Lord for that mother of mine. . . . She became converted to the restored gospel. The men who converted her were the Prophet Joseph Smith himself and Erastus Snow. And my mother's brothers who were well to do financially offered to settle an annuity upon her for life if she would renounce her religion. One of her brothers said to her: "Rachel, you have disgraced the name of Ivins. We never want to see you again if you stay with those awful Mormons,"—this was when she was leaving for Utah—"but," he continued, "come back in a year, come back in five years, come back in ten or twenty years, and no matter when you come back, the latchstring will be out, and affluence and ease will be your portion."

190Later, when poverty became her lot, if she actually had not known that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God and that the gospel was true, all she needed to do was to return east and let her brothers take care of her. But rather than return to her wealthy relatives in the east where she would have been amply provided for, with no struggle for herself or her child, she preferred to make her way among those to whom she was more strongly attached than her kindred who were not believers in her faith. [^2]

190Rachel Ivins Grant was certain her son was going to grow up and become an apostle, and this he did at age twenty-five in the year 1882. The remarkable relationship between President Grant and his mother is truly inspirational.

191President Grant organized and presided over the Japanese mission and also presided over the European mission.

191At age sixty he became the president of the Council of Twelve. In 1918, at age sixty-two, he became the President of the Church. Speaking of this, President Grant said:

191On the day that Brother Joseph F. Smith bade me goodbye, and he died that very night, he told me that the Lord never makes a mistake. He said: "You have a great responsibility resting upon you. The Lord knows whom he wants to preside over his Church, and he never makes a mistake." [^3]

191Truly the Lord did call President Grant, and he directed him in his long years as the prophet, seer, and revelator. Elder Harold B. Lee has said:

191I heard President Clark, shortly after he came into the First Presidency, make an interesting public statement. He said that when President Grant called him to be a counselor in the First Presidency, he was worried. He had always thought of the President of the Church as the "mouthpiece" of the Lord. But he hadn't been long in the Presidency until he discovered his place.

191President Grant would say to each of his counselors, when they were discussing a serious matter, "What do you think about it?" and "What do you think about it?" And the counselors would respond. Sometimes their opinions were in contradiction or in conflict with what the President had thought. There was then the business of resolving the different points of view, but there would always come a time after a sufficient discussion when the President would say: "Now brethren, I feel that this is the thing we ought to do." Then President Clark remarked, "When he said that, I quit counseling because, to me, that was the prophet of the Lord speaking." [^4]

191President Grant served as President of the Church for twenty-seven years—longer than any other President except Brigham Young. During his devoted administration he dedicated three temples: Hawaiian, Canadian, and the Arizona Temple. The creation of the Church welfare program is one of a multitude of important contributions during his long and successful administration.

President Heber J. Grant died at age eighty-nine on May 14, 1945. He was a brilliant, persistent, devoted man. He was candid, and his life was open to inspection. One can readily identify with President Grant, and he has been and will always be a great example to those who want to live better before the Lord.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. Joseph Smith was eight years old at the time of this illness.
[^2] . . I saw a pillar of light exactly over my head, above the brightness of the sun, which descended gradually until it fell upon me. . . When the light rested upon me I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. (Joseph Smith 2:16, 17.)
