Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

MotherhoodGrant, Heber J.193"Behave Yourself, Heber"

193For years, Heber J. Grant's mother cherished in her heart promises which were made to her son in childhood. She had implicit faith in the fulfillment of those promises, provided he lived worthy of them. Referring to his mother, President Grant said: "My mother always told me, 'Behave yourself, Heber, and some day you will be an apostle. If you do not behave yourself, you will not be, because we have a revelation recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants which specifically states "there is a law irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of the world upon which all blessings are predicated, and when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated." [D&C 130:20.] I said, 'Mother, I do not want to be an apostle. I do not want to be a bishop. I do not want to be anything but a businessman. Just get it out of your head.' "

193When he was called to the apostleship, she asked him if he remembered a meeting where certain blessings were promised him. He replied: "No, I do not remember anything, only that when Aunt Zina was talking she said, 'You will become a great man in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and one of the apostles of the Lord, Jesus Christ.' "

194His mother said: "That is the reason I have told you to behave yourself. I knew it would not come true if you did not live worthily, but it has come true." Then she asked, "Do you remember Heber C. Kimball picking you up when you were a young boy and putting you on a table and talking to you at a great dinner he was having for a lot of his friends?" "Yes." "Do you remember anything that he said?"

194"No, I only remember that he had the blackest eyes I have ever looked into. I was frightened. That is all I can remember."

194"He prophesied in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ that you would become an apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ and become a greater man in the Church than your own father; and your father, as you know, became one of the counselors to President Brigham Young. That is why I have told you to behave."

194Bryant S. Hinckley, The Faith of Our Pioneer Fathers (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1956), pp. 69-71.
