Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

198"Bishop, I Have Made Two Hundred Eighteen Dollars and Fifty Cents"

198"I remember as a young man, I had fifty dollars in my pocket on one occasion which I intended to deposit in the bank. When I went on Thursday morning to fast meeting—the fast meeting used to be held on Thursday instead of Sundays—the Bishop made an appeal for donations. I walked up and handed him fifty dollars. He took five dollars of it and put it in the drawer and gave the forty-five dollars back to me and said that was my full share. I said: 'Bishop Woolley, by what right do you rob me of putting the Lord in my debt? Didn't you preach here today that the Lord would reward fourfold? My mother is a widow and she needs two hundred dollars.' He said: 'My boy, do you believe that if I take this other forty-five dollars you will get your two hundred dollars quicker?' I said: 'Certainly.' Well, he took it."

198While walking from the fast meeting to the place where he worked, an idea suddenly came to him. He sent a telegram to a man asking him how many bonds of a certain kind he would buy at a specified price within forty-eight hours, allowing Heber to draw a draft on him through Wells Fargo's Bank. He did not know the man. He had never spoken to him in his life but had seen him a time or two on the streets of Salt Lake. The man wired back that he wanted as many as he could get. Heber's profit on the transaction was two hundred eighteen dollars and fifty cents.

The next day he walked down to the Bishop and said: "Bishop, I have made two hundred eighteen dollars and fifty cents after paying that fifty dollars donation the other day, and so I owe twenty-one dollars and eighty-five cents in tithing. I will have to dig up the difference between twenty-one dollars eighty-five cents and eighteen dollars fifty cents. The Lord did not quite give me the tithing in addition to his 'four to one' income."

199Hinckley, Faith of Our Pioneer Fathers, pp. 71-72.
