Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

199"Would You Like to Go to the Naval Academy?

199"I met President George Q. Cannon, then our delegate to Congress, and he said: 'Would you like to go to the Naval Academy, or to West Point?'

199"I told him I would.

199"He said: 'Which one?'

199"I said, 'The Naval Academy.'

199" 'All right, I will give you the appointment without competitive examination.'

199"For the first time in my life I did not sleep well; I lay awake nearly all night long rejoicing that the ambition of my life was to be fulfilled. I fell asleep just a little before daylight; my mother had to awaken me.

199"I said: 'Mother, what a marvelous thing it is that I am to have an education as fine as that of any young man in all Utah. I could hardly sleep; I was awake until almost daylight this morning.'

199"I looked into her face; I saw that she had been weeping.

"I have heard of people who, when drowning, had their entire life pass before them in a few seconds. I saw myself an admiral, in my mind's eye. I saw myself traveling all over the world in a ship, away from my widowed mother. I laughed and put my arms around her and kissed her and said, 'Mother, I do not want a naval education. I am going to be a businessman and shall enter an office right away and take care of you and have you quit keeping boarders for a living.'

200"She broke down and wept and said that she had not closed her eyes, but had prayed all night that I would give up my life's ambition so that she would not be left alone.

200"Her prayers were answered, and her appeal to the Almighty was inspired by promises made to her son in his childhood by those she looked upon as being the servants of God."

200After declining the appointment to Annapolis he made up his mind to be a businessman and went to work. That was the end of his formal schooling. He soon became absorbed in his business affairs, but he utilized every spare moment of his time reading and improving his mind. As he read, it was his practice to mark passages that impressed him and to pass the book along to some friends. Many books that he gave away were "marked copies," which added to their value. When he became an apostle, he had more and better opportunities for reading. He often had one of his daughters or his secretary read to him, especially in his later years. Thus he kept well-informed on current issues. While he had but few scholastic credentials, Heber J. Grant was well educated.

200Hinckley, Heber J. Grant, pp. 33-34.
