Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

PerseveranceGrant, Heber J.207"That Which We Persist in Doing Becomes Easier for Us to Do."

207I propose to sing the "Holy City" in the big tabernacle before I get through with it, and I propose to sing it without a mistake. I do not say this boastingly, because I believe what Alma of old said, in the twenty-ninth chapter of his book, that "God granteth unto men according to their desires, whether they be for good or evil, for joy or remorse of conscience." I desire to sing, and I expect to work at it and stay right with it until I learn. The most I ever worked was to sing four hundred songs in four days; that is the heaviest work I have ever done in the singing line. There are a great many people who can learn to sing very easily. When I started to learn to sing, it took me four months to learn a couple of simple hymns, and recently I learned one in three hours by the watch and then sang it without a mistake.

207"That which we persist in doing becomes easier for us to do; not that the nature of the thing itself is changed, but that our power to do is increased." I propose to keep at it until my power to do is increased to the extent that I can sing the songs of Zion. Nobody knows the joy I have taken in standing up in the tabernacle and other places and joining in the singing, because it used to be a perfect annoyance to me to try and to fail, besides annoying those around me, because I loved the words of the songs of Zion, and would sing.

207I am very sorry now for having persecuted people as I used to. In our meetings in the temple the brethren would say, "That is as impossible as it is for Brother Grant to carry a tune," and that settled it. Everybody acknowledged that was one of the impossibilities.

I believe what the Lord says: "For my soul delighteth in the song of the heart; yea, the song of the righteous is a prayer unto me, and it shall be answered with a blessing upon their heads." (D&C 25:12.) I desire to serve the Lord and pray unto him in the songs of Zion; and I know that it produces a good influence.

208Heber J. Grant in Conference Report, April 1901, pp. 63-64.
