Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

208"I Sat There and Wept for Joy"

208>From October 1882, when I was called to be one of the Council of the Twelve, until the following February, I had but little joy and happiness in my labors. There was a spirit following me that told me that I lacked the experience, that I lacked the inspiration, that I lacked the testimony to be worthy of the position of an apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ. My dear mother had inspired me with such a love of the gospel and with such a reverence and admiration for the men who stood at the head of this Church, that when I was called to be one of them I was overpowered; I felt my unworthiness, and the adversary taking advantage of that feeling in my heart. Day and night the spirit pursued me, suggesting that I resign. And when I testified of the divinity of the work we are engaged in, the words would come back, "You haven't seen the Savior; you have no right to bear such a testimony," and I was very unhappy.

But in February 1883, while riding along on the Navajo Indian reservation with Elder Brigham Young, Jr., and fifteen or twenty other brethren, including the late President Lot Smith of one of the Arizona stakes, on our way to visit the Navajos and Moquis—as we were traveling that day, going through a part of the Navajo reservation to get to the Moqui reservation—as we were traveling to the southeast, suddenly the road turned and veered almost to the northeast. But there was a path, a trail, leading on in the direction in which we had been traveling. There were perhaps eight or ten of us on horseback and the rest in wagons. Brother Smith and I were at the rear of our company. When we came to the trail I said, "Wait a minute, Lot; where does this trail lead to?"

209He said, "Oh, it leads back into the road three or four miles over here, but we have to make a detour of eight or nine miles to avoid a large gully that no wagons can cross."

209I asked, "Can a horseman get over that gully?"

209He answered, "Yes."

209I said, "Any danger from Indians by being out there alone?"

209He answered, "No."

209I said, "I want to be alone, so you go on with the company and I will meet you over there where the trail and the road join."

209One reason that I asked if there was any danger was because a few days before, our company had visited the spot where George A. Smith, Jr. had been killed by the Navajo Indians, and I had that event in my mind at the time I was speaking. I had perhaps gone one mile when in the kind providences of the Lord it was manifested to me perfectly so far as my intelligence is concerned—I did not see heaven, I did not see a council held there, but like Lehi of old I seemed to see; and my very being was so saturated with the information that I received, as I stopped my animal and sat there and communed with heaven, that I am as absolutely convinced of the information that came to me upon that occasion as though the voice of God had spoken the words to me.

It was manifested to me there and then as I sat there and wept for joy that it was not because of any particular intelligence that I possessed more than a testimony of the gospel, that it was not because of my wisdom that I had been called to be one of the apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ in this last dispensation, but it was because the prophet of God, the man who was the chosen instrument in the hands of the living God of establishing again upon the earth the plan of life and salvation, Joseph Smith, desired that I be called, and that my father, Jedediah M. Grant, who gave his life for the gospel while one of the presidency of the Church, a counselor to President Brigham Young, and who had been dead for nearly twenty-six years, desired that his son should be a member of the Council of the Twelve. It was manifested to me that the prophet and my father were able to bestow upon me the apostleship because of their faithfulness, inasmuch as I had lived a clean life, that now it remained for me to make a success or failure of that calling. I can bear witness to you here today that I do not believe that any man on earth from that day, February 1883, until now, thirty-five years ago, has had sweeter joy, more perfect and exquisite happiness than I have had in lifting up my voice and testifying of the gospel at home and abroad in every land and in every clime where it has fallen to my lot to go.

210Heber J. Grant, "A Remarkable Manifestation," Improvement Era, 22 (Dec. 1918):97-99.
