Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

"I Was Willing to Vote for Myself"

I was made one of the apostles in October 1882. On the sixth of October, 1882, I met brother George Teasdale at the south gate of the temple. His face lit up, and he said: "Brother Grant, you and I"—very enthusiastically—and then he commenced coughing and choking, and went on into meeting and did not finish his sentence. It came to me as plainly, as though he had said the words: ". . . are going to be chosen this afternoon to fill the vacancies in the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles."

211I went to the meeting, and my head swelled, and I thought to myself, "Well, I am going to be one of the apostles," and I was willing to vote for myself, but the conference adjourned without anyone being chosen.

211Ten days later I received a telegram saying, "You must be in Salt Lake tomorrow without fail." I was then president of Tooele Stake. The telegram came from my partner, Nephi W. Clayton. When I got to the depot, I said: "Nephi, why on earth are you calling me back here? I had an appointment out in Tooele Stake."

211"Never mind," he said, "it was not I who sent for you; it was Brother Lyman. He told me to send the telegram and sign my name to it. He told me to come and meet you and take you to the President's office. That is all I know.'

211So I went to the President's office, and there sat Brother Teasdale, and all of the ten apostles, and the presidency of the Church, and also Seymour B. Young and the members of the Seven Presidents of the Seventies. And the revelation was read calling Brother Teasdale and myself to the apostleship, and Brother Seymour B. Young to be one of the Seven Presidents of the Seventies.

211Brother Teasdale was blessed by President John Taylor, and George Q. Cannon blessed me.

211After the meeting I said to Brother Teasdale, "I know what you were going to say to me on the sixth of October when you happened to choke half to death and then went into the meeting."

211He said, "Oh, no, you don't."

211"Yes, I do," and I repeated it: "You and I are going to be called to the apostleship."

He said, "Well, that is what I was going to say, and then it occurred to me that I had no right to tell it, that I had received a manifestation from the Lord." He said, "Heber, I have suffered the tortures of the damned for ten days, thinking I could not tell the difference between a manifestation from the Lord and one from the devil, that the devil had deceived me."

212I said, "I have not suffered like that, but I never prayed so hard in my life for anything as I did that the Lord would forgive me for the egotism of thinking that I was fit to be an apostle, and that I was ready to go into that meeting ten days ago and vote for myself to be an apostle."

212Heber J. Grant in Conference Report, October 3, 1942, pp. 24-25.
