Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

216"The Next Sabbath He Applied to Me for Baptism"

216I remember what to me was the greatest of all incidents in my life, in this tabernacle. I saw for the first time, in the audience, my brother who had been careless, indifferent, and wayward, who had evinced no interest in the gospel of Jesus Christ.

216As I saw him for the first time in this building, and as I realized that he was seeking God for light and knowledge regarding the divinity of this work, I bowed my head, and I prayed that if I were requested to address the audience that the Lord would inspire me by the revelations of his Spirit, by that Holy Spirit in whom every true Latter-day Saint believes, that my brother would have to acknowledge to me that I had spoken beyond my natural ability, that I had been inspired by the Lord.

216I realized that if he made that confession, then I should be able to point out to him that God had given him a testimony of the divinity of this work.

216I took out of my pocket a book that I always carried, called a Ready Reference, and I laid it down on the stand in front of me when I stood up to speak. . . . I prayed for the inspiration of the Lord and the faith of the Latter-day Saints, and I never thought of the book from that minute until I sat down at the end of a thirty-minute address. . . .

216I devoted the thirty minutes of my speech almost exclusively to a testimony of my knowledge that God lives, that Jesus is the Christ, and to the wonderful and marvelous labors of the Prophet Joseph Smith, bearing witness to the knowledge God had given me that Joseph was in very deed a prophet of the true and living God.

216The next morning my brother came into my office and said, "Heber, I was at a meeting yesterday and I heard you preach."

217I said, "The first time you ever heard your brother preach, I guess?"

217"Oh, no," he said, "I have heard you many times."

217He said, "I generally come in late and go into the gallery. I often go out before the meeting is over. But you have never spoken as you did yesterday. You spoke beyond your natural ability. You were inspired of the Lord." The identical words I had uttered the day before, in my prayer to the Lord!

217I said to him, "Are you still praying for a testimony of the gospel?"

217He said, "Yes, and I am going nearly wild."

217I asked, "What did I preach about yesterday?"

217"You preached upon the divine mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith."

217I answered, "And I was inspired beyond my natural ability; and I never spoke before—at any time you have heard me—as I spoke yesterday. Do you expect the Lord to get a club and knock you down? What more testimony do you want of the gospel of Jesus Christ than that a man speaks beyond his natural ability and under the inspiration of God, when he testifies of the divine mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith?"

217The next Sabbath he applied to me for baptism.

217"The Conversion of a Wayward Brother," Instructor, 104 (July 1969): 241.
