Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

"One-half of One Percent a Day"

The story of how Heber J. Grant saved two Church banks during the prolonged and disastrous panic of 1891-93 is so characteristic of his faith that we give this account of it. He made a trip to New York City in 1891 to sell one hundred thousand dollars worth of Z.C.M.I. notes owned by one of the banks. Money was then lending on the New York Stock Exchange at one-half percent a day, one hundred eighty-two and one-half percent per year. These notes bore six percent interest. Think of it! He states:

218"Before starting, I was talking with President Woodruff, who knew why I was going. He smiled and said, 'You are going east on a very difficult mission. Sit down and let me give you a blessing." I sat down and he gave me a wonderful blessing, stating that I would get all the money I needed and more would be offered to me if I needed it. I went out with a feeling of perfect assurance that I would be successful. I heard that the directors of the Deseret National Bank were laughing at the idea of my being foolish enough to think I could cash Z.C.M.I. notes in the East at six percent per annum when money was one-half of one percent a day."

218He stopped, on the way, at Omaha and asked the president of the Omaha National Bank, a correspondent of one of his banks, to cash a note of twelve thousand dollars. The president smiled and said: "The idea of your coming down here, trying to get money when it is one-half of one percent a day. Your banks are as well fixed financially, if not better, than ours. Young man, let me give you some advice. Go home and call your bank friends together and decide to lend a little more than would be considered strictly safe and the money will circulate around and come back into you bank again to take care of your own bank."

218Brother Grant told this gentleman he was not asking for advice, that he had to go east for one hundred thousand dollars, that he intended to get it and on his return he would call on him and tell him where he got it. The bank president said: "Well, Mr. Grant, it will be a long time before I will see you."

When Brother Grant got to Chicago, he asked the vice-president of a bank there to cash two notes for twelve thousand dollars each. This bank was also one of their correspondents. He did not even ask Brother Grant to come into the bank. He stood on the outside of the counter, smiled, and declined to cash the notes. He said: "Young man, have you read the morning papers?" "Certainly," Brother Grant replied. "Have you read the financial sheet?" "Yes." "What is money loaning for in New York?" Brother Grant answered: "One-half of one percent a day." "Well, do you expect to get any money at six percent per annum?" "Yes, I do," responded Brother Grant, "because that is a rate you charge your customers if their balances are good enough to justify your making loans." Again, he replied: "I did not come to Chicago to get advice. I had the same advice from the president of the Omaha Bank. I told him I would go on my way, then on my way home I would call and tell him how I got the money, and I'll do the same with you." The vice-president smiled and said that he did not expect to see him for a long time.

219When he reached New York, he had not sold one of his notes, but from then on he was divinely guided. It is a long and interesting story, but this is what he said in conclusion: "I borrowed $336 thousand all told. Before going to the train to go home, I received a telegram saying that we needed forty-eight thousand dollars more. I felt sure it was a mistake, that they did not need it, and I started for Chicago and wired one of my insurance friends at Hartford, and he made arrangements to get forty-eight thousand dollars if I needed it after I got home. After I got home, it was not needed; therefore, it was never borrowed."

219>From the day President Woodruff blessed him and promised him that he would get all the money he wanted and more if he needed it, he proceeded with the most perfect assurance that this promise made by a prophet of God would be fulfilled; and it was fulfilled to the very letter. This is the same faith that heals the sick and works miracles, but its application is in a different way. On his return, he called on the banker in Chicago who didn't expect to see him for a long time. He had only been gone a short time, and had much more money than he expected. When he got to Omaha, he did the same thing. The banker was utterly astonished. He felt he was a marvel; he wondered how Brother Grant did it.

219Bryant S. Hinckley, The Faith of Our Pioneer Fathers (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1959), pp. 76-78.
