Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

221"Darn You, Heber Grant."

221I have related the wonderful blessing that my dear friend Richard W. Young received by obeying the advice and counsel of President John Taylor. But the remarkable record of good fortune that resulted from following the advice of President Taylor was no more wonderful than the result of Richard's obeying the counsel of President Wilford Woodruff, successor to President Taylor.

221Richard W. Young, like me and many others, invested quite heavily in Utah-Idaho Sugar stock which, at the time, paid a very generous dividend. . . .

221When the trouble broke out between the United States and Spain I was visiting Richard in his office. He remarked that as a graduate of West Point it was his duty to volunteer again to enter the army. He thought that he would probably have the rank and pay of a major and stated that his compensation as a major would not pay one-half of the interest on his debts, but honor and duty demanded his return to the army.

221I replied that it would take ten times as much courage to remain home and not enter the army, and I advised him to consult President Wilford Woodruff and take his advice, stating that if President Woodruff advised him to remain at home, I felt he ought to accept that advice, notwithstanding the ridicule that might come to him by doing so. I said: "There may be some special labor that the Lord has for you to perform that is of more importance than for you to volunteer and go to the Philippines where perhaps you might lose your life."

221He said that he would not think of such a thing as to speak to President Woodruff about returning to the army, and further remarked: "He is one of the most tender-hearted men in the world. He is as tender-hearted as a woman. I feel sure he would not advise me to volunteer."

222I replied: "Do you accept me, Richard, as an apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ, with authority to call people on missions?"

222He answered: "I certainly do."

222I said: "All right, as an apostle, I call you on a mission to go to President Wilford Woodruff and ask for his advice as to your returning to the army, and your mission is to follow that advice and counsel, no matter how much you dislike to do so. I will stay right here in your office until you return and report."

222He said: "Darn you, Heber Grant." He picked up his hat and went to see President Woodruff, looking anything but happy.

222He returned smiling and said: "President Woodruff is as full of fight as an egg is full of meat. He remarked, 'If you don't go back to the army, Brother Young, after graduating from West Point, you will disgrace the name you bear, and it will be a reflection upon your dear, dead grandfather, President Brigham Young.'"

222Richard was very happy. He took President Woodruff's advice, joined the army, and went to the Philippines, notwithstanding the fact that he was heavily in debt and was very much concerned about leaving his unsettled obligations. But while he was still in the Philippines, one of the corporations in which Richard had twelve thousand dollars' worth of stock at par value, and which was worth only nine thousand when he joined the army, paid a special cash dividend of one hundred percent and during Richard's absence paid dividends of from ten to twenty percent regularly. Soon after his return home it paid a special dividend of forty percent. These two special dividends, to say nothing of the large regular dividends that were paid, netted him enough to cancel all of his debts and leave him a home and some other valuable property in addition.

The increase in the value of Richard's securities while he was in the Philippine Islands was very remarkable. The war with Spain lasted but a short time. After the war he was appointed by the governor-general of the Philippine Islands, William H. Taft (afterwards president of the United States), one of the supreme court judges of the Islands, and he was also appointed to write the code for the islands. He made an excellent record while in the Philippines and gained the love and confidence of that splendid man, William H. Taft, who ever afterwards was a friend not only of Richard W. Young, but of the Mormon people.

223When Richard returned to Utah, he resumed his law practice and was one of the prosperous, successful lawyers of our state. Subsequently, as we all know, he was blessed of the Lord by being chosen to preside over the Ensign Stake of Zion, one of the important stakes of the Church; and he made a splendid stake president.

223When the World War broke out, he again returned to the army and was made a brigadier-general. Because of his experience and education at West Point, he was detailed to train soldiers and was in charge of one of the large training camps, Fort Kearney. I had the pleasure of visiting with him and the late Brigham H. Roberts, the chaplain, while they were at Kearney.

223Richard was only a short time in Europe when he wrote a fine article for the Improvement Era. The armistice having been signed almost immediately after Richard's arrival overseas, he did not actively participate in the World War, except in the training camp. In my former article regarding Richard W. Young, I quoted from the hymn, "God Moves in a Mysterious Way." Certainly God did move in a very wonderful and mysterious way in blessing my near and dear friend when he followed the advice of President Taylor, and also I feel to a much greater extent when he followed the advice of President Woodruff.

223Faith is a gift of God, and when people have faith to live the gospel and to listen to the counsel of those who preside in the wards and stakes and of the General Authorities of the Church, it has been my experience that they have been abundantly blessed of the Lord, and that many of them have come out of great financial and other difficulties in a most miraculous and wonderful way.

224"Obedience is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams." [1 Samuel 15:22.]

224Heber J. Grant, "Further Facts on Following Counsel," Improvement Era, 39 (June 1936): 331-32.
