Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

PriesthoodGrant, Heber J."Her Pulse Beat Only Twenty-eight Times to the Minute"

When my wife died I took my oldest three daughters to Boston, New York, and other places in the hope that the sorrow caused by the death of their mother might be forgotten. When we reached Washington two of them were taken ill with diphtheria. They were as sick as any children I have ever seen. The younger of the two was so low that her pulse beat only twenty-eight times to the minute, and I felt sure she was going to die. I knelt down and prayed God to spare her life, inasmuch as I had brought my children east to relieve the terrible sorrow that had come to them, and prayed that I should not have the additional sorrow of taking one of my children home in a coffin. I prayed for her life, and shed bitter tears of humiliation. While praying, the inspiration came to me that if I would administer to her, she would live. Some people say we cannot know for a certainty that we receive manifestations from the Lord. Well, I know that I was shedding tears of sorrow, fear, and anguish while I was praying, and I know that immediately thereafter I received the witness of the Spirit that my little girl should live, and I shed tears of unbounding joy and gratitude and thanksgiving to God, thanking him for the inspiration that came to me to send for the elders that they might administer to my little girl.

226Hiram B. Clawson and George Q. Cannon were in Washington at the time, and I sent for them. When George Q. Cannon laid his hands upon my daughter's head to seal the anointing wherewith she had been anointed, he made a statement that I have never heard before or since in all my life, in any prayer. He said, in substance: "The adversary, the destroyer, has decreed your death and made public announcement that you shall die; but by the authority of the priesthood of the Living God, we rebuke the decree of the adversary, and say that you shall live and not die; that you shall live to become a mother in the Church of Christ." She did live to become a mother, and in the providences of the Lord her children are the great-grandchildren of the man who held the priesthood of God and gave her that blessing.

226Heber J. Grant in Conference Report October 3, 1941, pp. 12-13.
