Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

GEORGE ALBERT SMITH

Biographical Sketch

231George Albert Smith was born in Salt Lake City just across the street from Temple Square. He had an unusually noble parentage. President Smith's great-grandfather was John Smith, a brother to Joseph Smith, Sr. He was the first stake president in Salt Lake Valley and later served as the Patriarch to the Church. Following is an account of the conversion of John Smith and his son, George A. Smith.

John Smith's son George, who was baptized on that day is the original George Albert Smith, the grandfather of President George Albert Smith, and the person for whom President Smith was named. He is usually referred to as "George A." He was a cousin of the Prophet Joseph and was called to be an apostle at age twenty-one. No one else in this dispensation has been called at such a young age. George A. Smith was also a counselor to Brigham Young.

232George A. Smith's son was John Henry Smith, who also served in the Quorum of the Twelve and later in the First Presidency as a counselor to President Joseph F. Smith. John Henry Smith was one of President George Albert Smith's ideals; in speaking of him President Smith remarked, "I have never met a greater man than my father. . . ."

232In light of this information there is a great significance in the promises made in the patriarchal blessing given to George Albert Smith when he was fourteen years of age. Four years after John Henry Smith was called to the Quorum of the Twelve, a patriarch pronounced the following blessings upon Elder Smith's son, George Albert:

232". . . Thou shalt become a mighty prophet in the midst of the sons of Zion. And the angels of the Lord shall administer unto you, and the choice blessings of the heavens shall rest upon you. . . .

232"And thou shalt be wrapt in the visions of the heavens, and thou shalt be clothed with salvation as with a garment, for thou art destined to become a mighty man before the Lord, for thou shalt become a mighty apostle in the Church and kingdom of God upon the earth, for none of thy father's family shall have more power with God than thou shalt have, for none shall exceed thee; . . . and thou shalt become a man of mighty faith before the Lord, even like unto that of the brother of Jared; and thou shall remain upon the earth until thou art satisfied with life, and shall be numbered with the Lord's anointed and shall become a king and a priest unto the Most High. . . ." [^1]

232President Smith was twenty-two years old when he married Lucy Emily Woodruff in 1892. Shortly after his marriage he filled a mission to the Southern States. He was sustained as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve at age thirty-three in 1903. He presided over the European Mission from 1919 to 1921 and became the general superintendent of the YMMIA in 1921.

He was prominent in the National Society of the Sons of the American Revolution and was a member of the national executive board of the Boy Scouts of America. On the death of Heber J. Grant in 1945 he was sustained as President of the Church. He presided over the Church in some important and critical years just after World War II.

233He was known throughout the world for his great humanity. He loved everyone and treated everyone with love and kindness. The following is taken from a conference address given by President George Albert Smith. The occasion was his seventy-eighth birthday, and by reading it one can gain insight to the greatness of President Smith and the conviction of a man beloved by the Lord and by millions of people.

233I am celebrating my birthday. Seventy-eight years ago today, right across the street, I was born. My life has been spent very largely in this community and traveling for the Church. I don't know of any man in all the world that has more reason to be grateful than I. People have been kind and helpful to me, members of the Church and nonmembers alike. Wherever I have gone, I have found noble men and women. Therefore on this my birthday, after having traveled approximately a million miles in the world in the interests of the gospel of Jesus Christ, one of the frailest of my mother's eleven children, I testify that the Lord has preserved my life, and I have had joy beyond expression, and I have enjoyed the results of loving my neighbor as myself, and all this brings happiness.

233After all these years of travel in many parts of the world, associating with many of the great and good men and women of the world, I witness to you, I know today better than I ever knew before that God lives; that Jesus is the Christ; that Joseph Smith was a prophet of the Living God; and that the Church that he organized under the direction of our Heavenly Father, the Church that received divine authority, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the Church that was driven into the wilderness and with headquarters now in Salt Lake City, Utah, is still operating under the guidance of the same priesthood that was conferred by Peter, James, and John upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery. I know that, as I know that I live, and I leave that testimony with you, and I pray that our Heavenly Father will continue to guide us and help us and inspire us and bless us, which he will if we are righteous. I am so thankful to be here with you this morning, and to look into your faces, hundreds of whom I have met in different parts of the country, and I take this occasion to thank you for your kindness to me as I have traveled among you.

May the Lord add his blessings. Thankful for the comforts that we have today, I pray that his peace and his love will abide with us forever, and that we may be the means under his guidance of bringing millions of his children to an understanding of his truths that they, too, may be blessed and are blessed this day. This is my testimony to you, that this is the gospel of Jesus Christ, the power of God unto salvation to all those who believe and obey it, and I bear that witness in the name of Jesus Christ, our Lord. Amen. [^2]

234President George Albert Smith died at age eighty-one on April 4, 1951.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. Joseph Smith was eight years old at the time of this illness.
[^2] . . I saw a pillar of light exactly over my head, above the brightness of the sun, which descended gradually until it fell upon me. . . When the light rested upon me I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. (Joseph Smith 2:16, 17.)
