Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

Protection, DivineSmith, George Albert243"The Lord Had Again Spared My Life"

243I was considered a very good swimmer and thoroughly enjoyed the sport. This particular day the tide was very high and very swift. As I left the shore and swam out into the ocean, I dived through the big breakers as they would crest and spray over me. My objective was the large swells beyond the breakers, where I could lie on my back and ride the big swells up and down. While engaging in this interesting sport, one very huge wave crested and broke before I could right myself following the dive through the previous one.

244The second one caught me and threw me to the floor of the ocean. I could feel myself being dragged out by the under-tow. At this particular time many waves came in rapid succession and I was not able to right myself before I had to dive from one into another. I realized that my strength was rapidly leaving me, that it was going to be necessary for me to find some means of help. As I rode to the crest of one high wave, I saw the underpilings of a pier close at hand, and I thought if with super-human effort I could reach the security of the pilings that I would be able to save my life. I silently asked my Heavenly Father to give me the strength to reach my objective. As I was washed into arm's length of the pier, I reached out and put my arms around one of the posts. They were covered with sharp, dark blue barnacles, and as I wound my arms and legs around its security, they cut my chest, legs, and thighs. I hung on as long as I could stand the pain and watched for a big friendly swell to come my way that I might throw myself on it and travel closer to shore. Each time with a prayer in my heart I would make the effort traveling from one pile to another with the aid of the rolling swell. Slowly but surely, and with great difficulty, I made my way to the shore where the water was shallow enough for me to walk to the beach. I was so weak, and so nearly drowned, I was unable to walk home until I had rested for some time. Lying on the sand with its warmth and security, I thought of the harrowing experience that I had just endured and my heart was filled with gratitude and humility that the Lord had again spared my life.

244A Story to Tell, pp. 158-59.
