Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

252"And Just Because I Tried To Be Polite to Someone"

252In Chicago a number of years ago, during the Century of Progress Exposition, I went into our Church booth one day and inquired of the missionaries as to who had charge of the great cultural and scientific fair.

252They told me the man's name was Dawes, and I asked, "Is he the brother of Charles G. Dawes, who was vice president of the United States and also ambassador to Great Britain?"

252And they answered, "Yes."

252"I am delighted to know that," I said. "I happen to know him."

252To myself I said: "I think I will go and call on him. He will be Henry Dawes." His secretary answered the telephone, and I inquired, "Is Mr. Dawes there?"

252"Yes, sir."

252"May I come over and see him?" I asked.

252She said: "There are already a hundred people ahead of you, and they all want a job."

252I smiled and said: "Well, that may be true, but I am probably the one man he would like to see because I have a job."

252"Do you know him?"

253"Yes. I am from Salt Lake City. I just want to pay my respects."

253She told Mr. Dawes that George Albert Smith of Salt Lake City was there and wanted to meet him, and he told her to have me come over. So, instead of running me behind a hundred people to wait my turn, she took me to a side door, and there stood before me a tall man whom I had never seen before in my life.

253He said, "I am Mr. Dawes."

253He was very pleasant, but you can imagine how embarrassed I was. He was Mr. Dawes, and he was Ambassador Dawes' brother, but he was Rufus Dawes. I did not know there was a Rufus Dawes in the world.

253"I have only come to tell you that this is a wonderful fair." I said, "and to express to you my appreciation for what you have done in organizing and seeing it through. It is marvelous what has been accomplished, and what an education it is to so many people. That is all I wanted to come and say, and to congratulate and thank you."

253"That is very considerate," he said. "Come in."

253"No, that is all I came to say. There are a hundred people waiting to see you."

253"None of them will say anything as nice as what you have said," he replied.

253So, I went in, out of ideas and out of breath, almost. He insisted on my sitting down, and the next thing I said was: "By the way, Mr. Dawes, where do your people come from?"

253"Do you mean in America?" he asked.

253"I mean anywhere."

253"Are you interested in genealogy?" he questioned.

253"I certainly am," I answered. "We have one of the finest genealogical libraries in Salt Lake City."

He said, "Excuse me just a moment," and he walked out of his office and came back with a carton about the size of an old family Bible. He took his knife, opened the carton, and took out a package wrapped in white tissue paper. He took the tissue paper off and put on the table one of the most beautifully bound books I have ever seen. It was well printed and profusely illustrated, and the cover was elegantly embossed with gold.

254As I looked it over, I said, "Mr. Dawes, that is a beautiful piece of work."

254"It ought to be. It cost me twenty-five thousand dollars."

254"Well," I said, "it is worth it."

254He said, "Is it worth anything to you?"

254"It would be if I had it."

254"Alright, you may have it!" Twenty-five thousand dollars worth of genealogy placed in my hand by a man whom I had met only five minutes before! I was amazed. Our visit continued but a short while longer. I told him how delighted I was to have it and that I would place it in the genealogical library in Salt Lake City.

254Before I left the room, he said, "Mr. Smith, this is my mother's genealogy, the Gates genealogy. We are also preparing my father's genealogy—the Dawes family. It will be one just like this. When it is finished, I would like to send you a copy of that also."

254Fifty thousand dollars worth of genealogy! And just because I tried to be polite to someone.

254I do not think that was an accident. The Dawes family is one of the most prominent families in the United States, and in that line is the Gates family, including Jacob Gates, one-time member of the First Council of the Seventy. Other Church families also run through these books.

254The man Rufus Dawes died before the second volume was finished. He left word with Charles G. Dawes, his elder brother, to be sure to send me a copy of that book when it was finished. I was afraid that Charles G. Dawes didn't know anything about it, so about a year later I called on him and told him how I had obtained the other volume.

254"I know all about it," he said, "and we will have another of my father's line for you as soon as it is completed." And this second volume, according to promise, came to me.

254Albert L. Zobell, Topic Echoes (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1964), pp. 41-45.
