Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

ProphetsSmith, Lucy MackSmith, Joseph, Jr.Smith, Lucy Mack"Did You Feel Strangely When Smith Took You by the Hand?"

Shortly after the family of Joseph Smith, Sr., moved to Far West, Missouri, in the summer of 1838, difficulties arose between the Saints and the mob element in that area. It started at an election held at Gallatin, the county seat of Daviess County, Missouri, when a group of non-Mormons attempted to prevent certain of the brethren from voting. The Prophet was not present at the time. A struggle occurred in which several non-Mormons were hurt, and the report was afterward circulated that Joseph Smith had himself killed seven men and intended to organize the Saints and exterminate all who were not of the Mormon faith.

20A few days thereafter, Joseph was at the home of his parents, writing a letter, when a large body of armed men came to the door. Eight of their officers dismounted and entered the house, stating that they had come "to kill Joe Smith and all the 'Mormons'." When Mother Smith informed them that her son had not been in Daviess County, one of the officers rejoined, "There is no doubt that the report is perfectly correct; it came straight to us, and I believe it; and we were sent to kill the Prophet and all who believe in him, and I'll be d_____d if I don't execute my orders." After some further comments, Joseph arose from his writing table and was introduced by his mother. As they stared at him, "he smiled, and, stepping towards them, gave each of them his hand, in a manner which convinced them that he was neither a guilty criminal nor yet a hypocrite." He then sat down and explained to them the attitude of the Saints and what their course had been amid the difficulties that had been heaped upon them. After talking to them for some time, he turned and said, "Mother I believe I will go home now. Emma will be expecting me." At this, two of the officers sprang to their feet and suggested that he should not go alone and that they would attend him in order to protect him. As the three men left the house, Mother Smith overheard the following conversation among the officers who remained at the door:

201st Officer: "Did you not feel strangely when Smith took you by the hand? I never felt so in my life."

202nd Officer: "I could not move. I would not harm a hair of that man's head for the whole world."

203rd Officer: "This is the last time you will catch me coming to kill Joe Smith, or the 'Mormons' either."

201st Officer: "I guess this is about my last expedition against this place. I never saw a more harmless, innocent-appearing man than the 'Mormon' Prophet."

202nd Officer: "That story about his killing those men is all a d_____d lie, there is no doubt of it; and we have had all this trouble for nothing; but they will never fool me in this way again; I'll warrant them."

20Lucy Mack Smith, History of Joseph Smith, pp. 254-56.
