Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

256"Brother Smith, the Governor of New York Wants to Talk to You"

256During World War I, I was in Washington, D.C., and wrote New York's Governor Charles Seaman Whitman telling him that on my way home I would like to stop and pay my respects to him. I received a telegram: "Come right along. I will receive you here."

256But I found myself in Albany a day early. The Governor was out of town. I left the telephone number of my hotel with the Governor's secretary and then contacted the missionaries. They were going to visit the home of one of the families of Saints that evening, and I was invited to go along. I left that telephone number with the hotel clerk.

256About nine o'clock that evening the telephone rang. The sister answered it and reported, "Brother Smith, the governor of New York wants to talk to you."

256"You are certainly coming to see me, aren't you?" the voice on the telephone asked.

256"I stopped here for that purpose," I said. "What time shall I come?"

256"Ten o'clock."

256"Ten o'clock tomorrow morning?"

256"Ten o'clock tonight—at the Governor's mansion, not at the office."

257I went back to the missionaries, saying that one of them would have to come and help me find the governor's mansion. One of them offered to come, and we said good-bye to those Saints who had entertained us in their home.

257The mansion was surrounded by guards as a wartime precaution. We had a little difficulty convincing them that we had an appointment at that hour, but finally were past the gate and introduced to the governor, who said: "Come with me and we will go up to my den, and we will have a good time together; no one will bother us up there."

257Surrounded by the governor's library, the three of us talked. Finally, the conversation turned to the war, and the governor was happily surprised at the number of LDS boys that I told him were in the services. And of how we had supported the bond drives.

257"You have done better than we have done. But, how is this war coming out?"

257"Don't you know, Governor?" I asked.

257"No, I don't know who is going to win it."

257"Well," I said, "where is your Book of Mormon?"

257He turned around in his swivel chair and reached into the book cupboard behind him, and laid a copy of the Book of Mormon on the table in front of me. And the young missionary's eyes fairly popped out of his head. Here we were in the home of the governor of the State of New York, and he had a Book of Mormon.

257"Governor," I said, "I am not going to take a lot of time, but you can find out right in here how this war is coming out. We are going to win the war." I read to him what is found in the Book of Mormon with reference to this people and this nation, in which the Lord told us: "There shall be no kings upon this land which shall rise up unto the Gentiles. . . . I, the Lord, the God of heaven, will be their king," and then he refers to the fact that if we keep his commandments we have the promise from him of his preservation and his watchcare.

257"I had not seen that," the governor said.

257I replied, "You are not doing a very good job reading your Book of Mormon."

258I laid the book down, and our visit continued. Out of the corner of my eye I saw the young missionary pick up that book. I knew what he was wondering—just how the governor had a copy. The missionary turned to the first page, and there he read the inscription: "To the Honorable Charles Seaman Whitman, Governor of New York, with compliments and best wishes of George Albert Smith."

258Albert L. Zobell, Story Gems (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1953), pp. 23-26.
