Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

DAVID O. MCKAY

Biographical Sketch

261When David Oman McKay was born in Huntsville, Utah, on September 8, 1873, to David McKay and Jennette Evans McKay, Brigham Young was the President of the Church.

While he was a young boy a double tragedy struck the McKay household. His two older sisters, Margaret, age eleven, and Ellena, age nine, died within four days of each other. Margaret died of the effects of rheumatic fever, and Ellena died of pneumonia. Joint funeral services were held, and the grave that had been dug for Margaret was enlarged and the sisters were placed side by side. One year passed, and David McKay received a mission call to Scotland. The call followed very closely the deaths of his two daughters, and in addition, his wife, Jennette, President McKay's mother, was expecting a baby. But the Lord had called. Sister McKay insisted that her husband go, and David McKay said to his son David O., "Take care of Mama." Ten days after David McKay left for Scotland, the baby, a daughter, was born. It was during this absence that a humorous incident took place. President McKay, age eight, was assisting his mother in feeding the cattle. He had carried several arm loads of hay, but each time as he returned with another the previous armload had disappeared. He quickly threw in another and said to his mother, "Let's give them two large armfulls of hay and run to the house before they eat it."

262Jennette McKay worked hard and she and her children were blessed greatly during her husband's absence. After two years, when David McKay walked up the lane toward his Huntsville home, he saw a long-hoped-for addition to the house. He had known nothing of it. It was Sister McKay's surprise.

262President McKay's mother received a small inheritance, but it was sufficient to send her children to school. David O. McKay played on the University of Utah's first football team and was valedictorian of his graduating class; he planned to be a school teacher. And then there was Emma Ray Riggs, a lovely young lady whom he had grown very fond of. He looked to his future with joy and anticipation, and then the unexpected—a call to serve the Lord in Scotland.

262David O. McKay, at age twenty-three, received an unexpected and inconvenient call to serve the Lord. It had been only fifteen years since his own father had received an unexpected and inconvenient call to the same mission. What if David McKay had not accepted that call from God? What if David O. McKay had not seen the strength of his father and the courage of his mother that day fifteen years before. It was in the mission field that great spiritual growth took place and his future as an extraordinary servant of the Lord Jesus Christ became assured.

He returned to marry Emma Ray Riggs in the Salt Lake Temple on January 2, 1901. He served as an instructor at the Church-owned Weber Academy in Ogden, Utah. This was near his childhood home. He became the principal of that institution, stake Sunday School superintendent, and then in 1916 at the early age of thirty-one, he became a member of the Quorum of the Twelve. He served faithfully in a great many capacities—general superintendent of the Sunday Schools, Church commissioner of education, president of the European Mission, and then at age sixty-one he was chosen as a counselor to President Heber J. Grant. Upon Heber J. Grant's death, he was chosen to the same position by President George Albert Smith and continued in that position until the death of President Smith.

263April, 1951, at the age of seventy-eight, David Oman McKay stood in the tabernacle on Temple Square and spoke to those assembled. He had just been unanimously sustained as the Prophet, Seer and Revelator by the Saints. As he brushed back the tears he said, "No one can preside over the church without first being in tune with the head of the Church, our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ. He is our head. This is his church. Without his divine guidance and constant inspiration, we cannot succeed. With his guidance, with his inspiration, we cannot fail." (Conference Reports, April, 1951, p. 157.)

263President McKay's administration, like his life before, was dramatic. He and Sister McKay went to nation after nation to visit and bless both members and nonmembers. Temple building commenced in many countries. Missionary activities expanded, and the Church population grew. President David O. McKay looked like a prophet—tall, handsome, distinguished, gentle, and filled with love and universally loved by his people and all who were privileged to know him.

263On Sunday, January 18, 1970, word went throughout the world that David Oman McKay was dead. Tens of thousands came to pass by his body and pay their last respects. They were only representative of millions throughout the world who mourned. All who knew him will forever be better individuals, because they had known greatness. Perhaps few men had been loved like President David O. McKay. All responded to his keen wit, his brilliant mind and the greatness of his soul. David O. McKay, prophet, seer and revelator, will ever live in the memory of those who knew and loved him.
