Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

ProphetsMcKay, David O.Holy Ghost, Gifts ofMcKay, David O.270"Brethren, There Are Angels in This Room"

270On May 29, 1899, a memorable priesthood meeting was held in Glasgow in connection with the Scottish conference, and it illustrates the spirit of this mission and the love and sympathy existing among those who labored there. President McKay records the events in his diary, excerpts from which follow:

270A peaceful, heavenly influence pervaded the room. Some of the elders were so affected by it that they expressed their feelings in tears.

Just as Brother Young sat down after giving his report, Elder Charles Woolfenden said, "Brethren there are angels in this room," and everyone present, impressed with the spirit of the occasion, and sensing the divine influence, could testify to the truth of his remarks. Elders wept for joy; sobs came from different parts of the room, and they were fitting, too, for it seemed manly to weep there.

271At the conclusion of the reports, all joined in a prayer of thanksgiving to the Lord for his blessings and manifestations. President James L. McMurrin then addressed the meeting and said, among other things, "The Lord has accepted our labors, and at this time we stand pure before him." He continued, "Yes, brethren, there are angels in this room;" and the announcement was not startling, but seemed wholly proper. Designating two of the brethren, he said their guardian angels were present, then turning to me he continued, "Let me say to you, Brother David, Satan has desired you that he may sift you as wheat; but God is mindful of you, and if you will keep the faith, you will yet sit in the leading councils of the Church."

271It was no coincidence that on July 17, 1887, when David was thirteen years old, Patriarch John Smith had also said, in his blessing, "For the eye of the Lord is upon thee—the Lord has a work for thee to do, in which thou shalt see much of the world. It shall be thy lot to sit in council with thy brethren, and preside among the people, and exhort the saints to faithfulness."

271Morrell, Highlights, pp. 37-38.
