Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

CourageMcKay, David O."In Spite of All Odds"

Father has always had the courage to stand up for his convictions. Even when a boy, his determination to hold his ground when he was convinced he was right was always evident. An incident is told by Thomas E. McKay that happened during a Fourth of July baseball game between Huntsville and Eden. Keen rivalry had always existed between these two teams, and on this holiday the grandstand was packed and feelings were tense. During the seventh inning one of the Huntsville players was forced to leave the game because of an injury, and David O. was drafted to take his place although he was much younger than the players on the regular team. It was an exciting moment for him because the score was tied and had been for several innings. David O. was a good batter and received a cheer when his turn came around. As the playing proceeded, the umpire called the second strike. The pitcher on the Eden team, however, claimed that it was the third strike. He was a large, burly fellow with a quick temper, and he was known to be a bully and quite a pugilist. He picked up a baseball bat, and coming up to David O. he waved the bat menacingly and demanded, "Get out of there, kid, or I will crack this on your head!"

272Immediately a hush came over the spectators, who anxiously awaited the outcome. Thomas E. claims that he was shaking in his boots to see his brother in such a predicament. However, his older brother was up to the situation. In a cool tone he said, "The umpire called only two strikes; so go back to your pitcher's box and try to get me out; you have one more chance!" By this time John Allen, one of the best players, came strolling over with a bat in his hand as though he were waiting for his turn at the plate. The pitcher looked at the determination on David O.'s face and at John Allen's warning glance and decided to continue the game. His next throw was a swift straight ball. David O. connected and made a two-base hit. The next batter hit a single, and father was able to make home plate safely. This brought a thunderous applause from the spectators because this was the deciding run of the game. Although father's friends congratulated him on making the run, the true congratulations were in their hearts because he stood up to a bigger man in spite of all odds and because he refused to be bullied when he knew that he was right.

272Llewelyn R. McKay, Home Memories of President David O. McKay (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1956), pp. 162-63.
