Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

LoveMcKay, David O.273"One Little Bird Was Outside Trying to Get In"

273Several years ago someone broke into the farm and stole the President's best saddles from the saddle house. One of these was a hand-carved Mexican saddle and was prized very highly by President McKay. When the unfortunate incident became known, a group of stake presidents in Weber and Davis counties presented him with the best saddle available, so that he could still enjoy riding his horses while in Huntsville. Care was taken that this new saddle was kept in a safe place. Other saddles were later purchased to replace the ones that were stolen, and these were kept in the saddle house, but under lock and key. One day, during hot weather, when members of the family were at the home in Huntsville, two of President McKay's sisters were out for a drive and decided to check on things at the farm. They found the door to the saddle house locked, but one of the windows open. They immediately corrected what they felt was a bit of carelessness and went on their way with a feeling of satisfaction that another theft had been averted.

273That afternoon President McKay drove up to keep an appointment at Huntsville, with barely enough time to return to Salt Lake City for a later engagement. Upon being told of the open window, he said, "I left that window open purposely because there is a bird's nest inside, and that is the only entrance the parent birds have to carry food to their babies. I think I shall just have time to run over."

273When the sisters said they would correct the mistake, he insisted on doing it, saying, "I must pick up a halter that needs repairing, anyway." When he returned to the house after the two-mile drive, he said in his gracious way, "It was just as I expected—one little bird was outside trying to get in, and the mother was inside attempting to get out."

274His kindness to everyone and to everything has given him a benign demeanor that is one of his great characteristics. It has made him more like the One who "marks the sparrow's fall."

274Morrell, Highlights, pp. 294-95.
