Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

PrayerMcKay, David O.277"I, Too, Was Praying"

277Sunday morning, April 24, 1921, dawned in a cloudless east and promised a clear day.

277We held the usual prayers and scripture repeating exercises, and at ten a.m. met in the Sunday School session of conference.

277Having wet my feet yesterday, I have aggravated my cold. As a result, I'm so hoarse I can scarcely speak above a whisper, a condition that forebodes difficulty and disappointment for me and for the people on this the heaviest day of our tour!

277Ten a.m. I managed to tell the children a story, but my voice was weak and husky. However, Brother Cannon was at his best, so we had an excellent meeting.

277A thousand people—Maoris and Pakehas, sitting, reclining, and standing—assembled for the afternoon service. They came with curiosity and high expectation. It was my duty to give them a message, but I was not only too hoarse to speak and be heard by that crowd, but I was also ill!

277However, with a most appealing prayer in my heart for divine help and guidance, I arose to perform my duty. My voice was tight and husky. Five minutes after I began, someone shouted from the group standing on my right, "Joseph Smith didn't receive the revelation on polygamy!"

277Evidently the emissaries of the devil had chosen an opportune moment to obtain some free advertising. I hesitated a moment, turned my head in his direction, saw some men scuffling, and the crowd beginning to sway towards them. Motioning to the audience to remain quiet, I said with as much good nature as I could muster, "When the sons of God met, the devil came also." Many grasped the application and broke into laughter. Some began to clap, but I motioned for order, and continued with my discourse.

278Then happened what had never before happend to me. I entered into my theme with all the earnestness and vehemence I could muster and spoke as loud as possible. Feeling my voice getting clearer and more resonant, I soon forgot I had a voice and thought only of the truth I wanted my hearers to understand and accept. For forty minutes I continued with my address, and when I concluded, my voice was as resonant and clear as it ever was!

278Brother Cannon concluded with a fervent testimony; and thus our fifth meeting closed with thanksgiving and rejoicing in every heart!

278When I told Brother Cannon and some other brethren how earnestly I had prayed for the very blessing I had received, he said, "I, too, was praying—never prayed more fervently for a speaker in my life."

278Middlemiss, Cherished Experiences, pp. 85-86.
