Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

GratitudeMcKay, David O.278"Brother Cannon, I Think We Should Return and Leave Our Blessing"

278The month spent in Samoa passed all too quickly, with some of the largest conferences yet held, in preparation for which every detail had been carefully arranged. Missionary meetings were as satisfactory as the larger meetings, attended by members, investigators, and friends. When the time for farewells arrived, genuine friendships had been formed, and the parting was a sad one for the people who had never before had the privilege of meeting one of the General Authorities.

279At the last party there were beautiful interpretations of the island dances in native costume, singing, and instrumental selections, and then, as they returned to the mission home, fathers and mothers brought their children to be blessed, occupying the last moments before the necessary departure. Of these last experiences Elder McKay recorded the following:

279As we came out, we found the people standing in a double column from our door out across the lawn to the street. They had prepared a farewell song for us and all began to sing. As we passed through the lines, shaking hands with them, sobs interrupted the singing. Staunch old Papo, the head of the village, sobbed like a child and clung to us as though we were his son. As we mounted our horses, we looked back and saw the crowd, headed by the band, coming toward us for one more parting hand-shake.

279>From that spot to the dugway leading to the ocean, there was a straight, grassy roadway, lined with tall native trees and tropical vines. As we rode slowly up the gentle incline, the band leading, the people followed as though they could not yield to parting. We had gained, perhaps, a quarter of a mile ahead of them, when I felt tempted to say, "Brother Cannon, I think we should return and leave our blessing with them here in this beautiful grove."

279As we approached the sobbing crowd, I was thrilled with the picturesque setting. Hanging my folded umbrella on an overhanging limb, Kippin, our interpreter, told them why we had come back. Their sobs were louder than my voice when I commenced the prayer, but they became more subdued as I continued, and their "Amen" was distinct and impressive at the end.

279An elder who remained with the crowd reported what happened after the visitors left:

279The villagers watched as long as they could see their friends, then returned sadly to their homes. Kippin, the interpreter, immediately sat down and wrote the prayer as he remembered it. He and some of the others then conceived the idea of burying a copy of it on the spot where Apostle McKay had stood and covering it with a pile of stones to mark the place. The town bell was rung, the people reassembled, and the plan was presented and approved. A copy of the prayer, together with an account of the entire proceedings, was sealed in a bottle and placed in a hole which was covered with stones, each of the heads of families throwing a handful of soil to assist in the covering. The branch on which the umbrella was hung was taken back to the village as a souvenier, and steps were taken to erect a monument at the sacred spot.

279Morrell, Highlights, 69-70.
