Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

281"Isn't This Brother McKay"

281Another month was spent in visiting the missions of Australia, then on to Java, India, Egypt, and Palestine. Traveling through the Holy Land was like passing familiar towns, villages, rivers, lakes, mountains, and gardens because of Elder McKay's long and intimate association with these places in Old Testament history, and especially because of his love of the life of Christ and his apostles.

President Grant had expressed a hope that in their travels the two could visit the Armenian Mission, which had received such harsh treatment during the great World War. On a special fast day, several thousand dollars had been contributed for the relief of these suffering people, but almost a year had passed since the brethren had left home, and they had no recent information about conditions in this part of the world. Cablegrams to the president of the European Mission and to the United States Consul at Aleppo brought only information that J. Wilford Boothe was on his way to Aleppo. Elder McKay's diary, under date of November 2, 1921, reads:

282We have no idea where President Boothe is. We shall leave Jerusalem for Haifa, enroute to Aleppo, tomorrow morning. We have concluded to go by auto through Samaria, visiting Bible scenes. At three-thirty p.m. of the same day, we ascended the Mount of Olives, and, choosing a secluded spot, near where Jesus is supposed to have stood, we knelt in humble supplication and thanksgiving to God, asking that we might be led by inspiration on our trip to the Armenian Mission.

282Upon returning to the hotel, I felt strongly impressed that we should go to Haifa by train instead of by auto. When I said as much to Brother Cannon, be replied, "If you feel that way we had better take the train." Our greatest desire as we neared this mission was to meet Elder Boothe. Indeed, it seemed that our trip to Syria would be useless unless we should meet him. We were strangers. We knew no one. The branches of the Church in Syria were disorganized, and the members were scattered.

282During all our travels, besides giving excellent addresses at every meeting, Brother Cannon had assumed the responsibility of arranging for train and boat tickets and hotel accommodations, and had never failed in a single instance; but shortly after leaving Jerusalem, when asked if he had the name of a hotel in Haifa, he said he had forgotten to ask about it, but would contact the Allenby Hotel runner when the train stopped at Lud.

282When they changed trains at that station, and were again on their way, they both realized that they had forgotten to speak to the hotel representative.

282Arriving at Haifa, Brother Cannon remained with the luggage while Brother McKay left to make inquiry regarding a suitable hotel. After some difficulty, he returned in about ten minutes reporting that there seemed to be two fairly good ones, and they would take the one whose runner appeared first. The delay caused by locating a hotel brought them to the station office door just at the same moment that another traveler reached it. He said, "Isn't this Brother McKay?" Elder McKay then records in his diary:

Astounded beyond expression to be thus addressed in so strange a town, I turned and recognized Elder Joseph Wilford Boothe, the one man above all others that we were most desirous of meeting. We had met, too, at the most opportune time and place. Having known nothing of our whereabouts, he had come from the western part of the world, hoping in his heart to meet us. We had come from the east, praying that we might meet him, and there we had met at the very time and place best suited to our convenience and to the success of our mission to Armenia.

283As we recounted to each other our experiences, we had no doubt but that our coming together was the result of divine interposition. If we had taken an auto from Jerusalem, or if we had remembered to secure the name of a hotel before we left the Allenby, or if we had thought to ask at Lud, we should not have met Elder Boothe. It is true we would have been in town that same day, but we had intended to stay at a hotel across the city from the one he decided upon, where we never should have met him; and our visit to Armenia would have failed.

283Morrell, Highlights, pp. 70-72.
