Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

284"The Maoris Corrected Him"

284One of the most important events on my world tour of the missions of the Church was the gift of interpretation of the English tongue to the Saints of New Zealand at a session of their conference, held on the twenty-third day of April, 1921, at Puke Tapu Branch, Waikato District, Huntly, New Zealand.

284The service was held in a large tent, beneath the shade of which hundreds of earnest men and women gathered in anxious anticipation of seeing and hearing an apostle of the Church, the first one to visit that land.

284When I looked over that vast assemblage and contemplated the great expectations that filled the hearts of all who had met together, I realized how inadequately I might satisfy the ardent desires of their souls, and I yearned, most earnestly, for the gift of tongues that I might be able to speak to them in their native language.

285Until that moment I had not given much serious thought to the gift of tongues, but on that occasion I wished with all my heart that I might be worthy of that divine power.

285In other missions I had spoken through an interpreter, but, able as all interpreters are, I nevertheless felt hampered—in fact, somewhat inhibited—in presenting my message.

285Now, I faced an audience that had assembled with unusual expectations, and I then realized, as never before, the great responsibility of my office. From the depth of my soul, I prayed for divine assistance.

285When I arose to give my address, I said to Brother Stuart Meha, our interpreter, that I would speak without his translating sentence by sentence what I said, and then to the audience I continued:

285"I wish, oh, how I wish I had the power to speak to you in your own tongue, that I might tell you what is in my heart; but since I have not the gift, I pray, and I ask you to pray, that you might have the spirit of interpretation, of discernment, that you may understand at least the spirit while I am speaking, and then you will get the words and the thought when Brother Meha interprets."

285My sermon lasted forty minutes, and I have never addressed a more attentive, a more respectful audience. My listeners were in perfect rapture—this I know when I saw tears in their eyes. Some of them at least, perhaps most of them, who did not understand English, had the gift of interpretation.

285Brother Sidney Christie, a native New Zealander who had been a student at Brigham Young University, at the close of my address whispered to me, "Brother McKay, they got your message!"

285"Yes," I replied, "I think so, but for the benefit of some who may not have understood, we shall have Brother Meha give a synopsis of it in Maori."

285During the translation, some of the Maori corrected him on some points, showing that they had a clear conception of what had been said in English.

285Middlemiss, Cherished Experiences, pp. 73-74.
