Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

MiraclesMcKay, David O."The Storm Had Suddenly Changed Its Course"

In 1954 the general authorities approved the building of a temple at once somewhere in the South Pacific. The location could not be determined so easily, since there were many Church members in all of the islands, as well as on the continent of Australia. All must be given consideration, but since only one temple could be built it would have to be located where it could serve the most people to the best advantage.

288Accordingly, it was decided by the General Authorities that President McKay should visit all the missions involved and make a careful survey of conditions and needs and then determine the location of the new temple.

288Such a trip was planned, and on January 1, 1955, President and Sister McKay left Salt Lake City by plane, accompanied by President Franklin J. Murdock of the Highland Stake who was to serve as secretary of the tour. Plans called for them to visit all of the missions of the Pacific Islands and make the trip a missionary tour as well as a fact-finding trip. Some of the islands had been visited by previous presidents of the Church, and President McKay had visited all of them in 1921. This visit, however, would be the first to all of the missions by the President of the Church.

288First stop was San Francisco, where the party remained until January 4, 1955, then leaving by plane for Honolulu, Hawaii. As they left the airport they were informed that a hurricane warning was posted for the mid-Pacific area and undoubtedly would alter their plans. Some concern was expressed about continuing the flight, but President McKay expressed no worry at all and insisted that they continue. He recounted his travels over almost all of the globe without any serious trouble and said he felt secure while on this important mission.

288The flight to the Hawaiian Islands was made without any difficulty. Only a few hours were spent in Hawaii since they planned to tour these islands on their return trip. They left Honolulu in the evening, with President and Mrs. Wendell B. Mendenhall of the San Joaquin Stake joining their party there.

During the night a stop was made at Canton Island, a small spot in the Pacific, where they were warned of the dangers of hurricane weather. Their next scheduled stop was at Nandi, in the Fiji Islands, and the plane's route was directly in the path of the storm. The pilot was apprehensive about continuing, but while they were waiting, an unexplainable thing occurred. Reports were received that the storm had suddenly changed its course, almost reversing itself, and they could proceed to Fiji with no concern.

289This peculiar action of the hurricane caused a good deal of comment at Nandi and Suva, on the Fiji Islands. Weather officials explained in detail the abrupt change of the storm's path, but could offer no explanation for it, and called the typhoon "The Screwball."

289Morrell, Highlights, pp. 178-79.
