Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

HealingsMcKay, David O.292"First Violets of Springtime"

292William (not the boy's true name) was a lad who had been taught to pray. When he was about ten years old, his father was nearly killed in an automobile accident. It happened early in the morning, and so grief-stricken were the mother and children, including William, that none could eat a meal or cared to.

However, later in the day, after the doctors had sewed up the lacerations, repaired the broken bones, and given assurances that daddy was not fatally injured, the loved ones calmed their fears and began to resume the regular family routine.

293As was the practice in that Mormon home, before the evening meal, all knelt in prayer. Following it, William started away from the table. Seeing this his mother said, "Come, Will, sit down and eat your dinner."

293"No, mother," replied the lad, "I am not hungry."

293"You must!" insisted the mother. "You haven't eaten all day. Don't worry any longer, Daddy will be all right."

293"Please excuse me, Mother; I am fasting and want to go to my room."

293He did go to his room, and there knelt in earnest prayer for his father's speedy and complete recovery.

293Rising from his knees, he put on his hat, picked from his little garden the few first violets of springtime, walked to the hospital, and placed the flowers in his injured father's hand. As the father received them, he recognized in the lad's face an expression that reflected the yearning of his little soul for his father's recovery. There was no need for words. Father and son understood each other, and the Lord comforted both—the boy in the consolation, the father in the assurance that the Lord would answer the lad's prayer.

293And he did in a miraculously speedy and prominent recovery.

293They never sought in vain

293That sought the Lord aright.

293The incident related above is a true story of the automobile accident in which President McKay was injured; and the child called William, who prayed for his father, was in reality President McKay's own son.

293Middlemiss, Cherished Experiences, pp. 28.
