Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

LoveMcKay, David O."Please Find That Little Girl in the Blue Dress"

During the trip to Europe to dedicate the temple sites at Zollikofen, Switzerland, and at Chapel Hill, England, I noticed that no matter how fatiguing it was for father, he always shook hands with everyone present. . . . After the dedication at Chapel Hill I observed that father looked tired, and I decided to spare him the autograph signing if at all possible. . . . The first in line was a sweet little girl about nine years of age.

295"May I have President McKay's autograph?" she inquired of me.

295I began to find excuses, not knowing that father was just behind me overhearing the conversation. He put his hand on my shoulder and said, out of the children's hearing distance, "My boy, never hurt or disappoint a child. Children are most sensitive to praise, to criticism, and to recognition than we realize. I can take the time to sign these few autographs—it means a lot to these youngsters, and I wouldn't disappoint them for anything."

295He turned to the little girl and jokingly asked, "Do you think I can write plainly enough so you can read it?"

295The young girl wasn't sure whether or not father was in earnest and became flustered. At that moment, President Reiser interrupted to ask a pressing question, and a minute or two of conversation between the two men ensued. When father turned to the table to begin writing autographs, the girl had disappeared.

295I have never seen father more upset. "Llewelyn," he called, "please find that little girl in the blue dress. I'm sure she has the impression that I didn't wish to sign her book. She misinterpreted my remarks. You must find her. She must not go home with this false impression!"

295Before long branch presidents and mission presidents were looking for a little girl in blue, but all search was in vain.

295During the drive back to London, father mentioned the incident again. One of the elders riding with us said, "We think we know who the little girl is, and the branch president in the village where she lives is going to inquire and will phone you tonight in London."

295Sure enough, a telephone call came that night, and this is what father instructed:

296Tell that little girl I am sorry I missed her at New Chapel, and that I have asked the branch president to send her book to me by mail to Salt Lake City; I will sign my autograph and mail it directly back to her.

296And he did!

296Llewelyn R. McKay, Home Memories, pp. 133-35.
