Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

JOSEPH FIELDING SMITH

Biographical Sketch

303April 6, 1970, the one-hundred-fortieth anniversary of the organization of the Church was a special, sacred occasion. It was on that day that Joseph Fielding Smith was sustained in a solemn assembly as Prophet, Seer, and Revelator and President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

303Joseph Fielding Smith was named for his father, President Joseph F. Smith, who presided over the Church from 1901 to 1918. Joseph Fielding Smith was also the grandson of Hyrum Smith, who died with his brother, the Prophet Joseph Smith, at the Carthage Jail in 1844. President Smith was rightly proud of his ancestry.

303He said:

303I am . . . proud to be a descendant of Latter-day Saint parentage, of the fifth generation. I am also proud to be a grandson of one of the original members of the Church, a man who was faithful to the end, and laid down his life for the truth; and I am glad to know that so many of his descendents are actively engaged in the cause, and are also faithful in the truth. [^1]

303On another occasion President Smith paid tribute as follows:

I have also been impressed this afternoon by the singing of this hymn, sacred to me, composed by President Taylor, who dearly loved the Prophet Joseph Smith. I never read this hymn or hear it sung without being touched in my soul, and I shall take the liberty this afternoon, in my weak and imperfect way, to read it, for I realize that in the singing we do not always get the full comprehension of the words, which may not be impressed upon our souls, especially in a large gathering such as this, as we would like to have them:

304O, give me back my Prophet dear,

304And Patriarch, O give them back,

304The Saints of Latter-days to cheer,

304And lead them in the Gospel track!

304But, O, they're gone from my embrace,

304>From earthly scenes their spirits fled,

304Two of the best of Adam's race,

304Now lie entombed among the dead.

304Ye men of wisdom, tell my why—

304No guilt, no crime in them were found—

304Their blood doth now so loudly cry,

304>From prison walls and Carthage ground:

304Your tongues are mute, but pray attend,

304The secret I will now relate,

304Why those whom God to earth did lend,

304Have met the suffering martyrs' fate.

304It is because they strove to gain,

304Beyond the grave a heaven of bliss,

304Because they made the gospel plain

304And led the Saints to righteousness;

304It is because God called them forth,

304And led them by His own right hand,

304Christ's coming to proclaim on earth,

304And gather Israel to their land.

304It is because the priests of Baal

304Were desperate their craft to save,

304And when they saw it doomed to fail,

304They sent the Prophets to their grave.

304Like scenes the ancient Prophets saw,

304Like these the ancient Prophets fell,

304And, till the resurrection dawn,

304Prophet and Patriarch, farewell.

My heart is always touched when I hear this beautiful hymn, or when I read it. I understand the spirit that rested upon President Taylor when he wrote it; but I rejoice, my brethren and sisters, in this fact—although the prophet who stands at the head of the dispensation of the fulness of times, and the patriarch who stood with him have been taken from us, the Lord has not left us helpless. There has never been a time since the restoration of the gospel when we have not had a prophet, some one to lead us, to direct us, to teach the commandments of God that we might walk in the straight and narrow path. We are not without leaders. . . . [^2]

305President Smith further said:

305The time shall never come when the Lord will not find some one that he can trust; in whom he has confidence, and who will be qualified to stand to represent him among the people. This is my testimony, and I rejoice in its truth. [^3]

305Joseph Fielding Smith was born on July 19, 1876.

305In April of 1898 he married Louie Emyle Shurtliff, and a year later he was called to serve in the British Mission. He was ordained a seventy by his father on May 12, 1899, and left the next day for the mission field. He labored in the Nottingham Conference for two years, returning home in June, 1901.

305Upon his return, President Smith accepted employment with the Church Historian's Office, where he ultimately devoted a greater part of his life. Further responsibility came to him in 1907 when he was appointed secretary of the Genealogical Society.

305Two years before he became a member of the Council of the Twelve, President Smith lost his first wife, Louie Emyle. She died March 30, 1908. On November 2, 1908, he married Ethel Georgina Reynolds. She died August 26, 1937. President Smith married Jessie Evans, former contralto and concert singer and soloist with the Salt Lake Tabernacle Choir, April 12, 1938. 1938

305Two daughters were born to President Smith's first wife, and his second wife bore him five sons and four daughters. . . . [^4]

President Smith was called to fill a vacancy in the Quorum of the Twelve in 1910 at the young age of thirty-three. At the time of his call, his father was the President of the Church and one of his brothers was a General Authority, which gives an indication of the quality of his family. President Smith served as an apostle for sixty years, longer than any other man in this dispensation. President Smith held the responsible position as President of the Quorum of the Twelve for nineteen years and for five years was a counselor in the First Presidency. In addition to his remarkable record as a General Authority, his service and contributions in other areas were almost unparalleled in the history of the Church. President Smith was Church Historian for forty-nine years and had twenty-four volumes of his writings and sermons published. He was recognized throughout the Church for his exceptional knowledge of Church history and Church doctrine.

306In 1956, members of the Council of the Twelve published a tribute to President Joseph Fielding Smith. Among other things they said:

306We who labor in the Council of the Twelve under his leadership have occasion to glimpse the true nobility in his character. Daily we see continuing evidences of his understanding and thoughtful consideration of his fellow workers. . . . We only wish that the entire Church could feel the tenderness of his soul and his great concern over the welfare of the unfortunate and those in distress. He loves all the Saints and never ceases to pray for the sinner.

306With remarkable discernment, he seems to have but two measures in arriving at final decisions. What are the wishes of the First Presidency? Which is best for the kingdom of God? In his profound gospel writings and in his theological dissertations, he has given to his associates and to the Church a rich legacy which will immortalize his name among the faithful. . . . [^5]

306How fitting it is that the capable, beloved grandson of Hyrum Smith and son of Joseph F. became the Prophet, Seer, and Revelator in these latter-days.

306After President Smith was sustained as President of the Church by the unanimous vote of the Church members he said:

307My beloved brethren and sisters:

307I stand before you today in humility and in thanksgiving, grateful for the blessings which the Lord has poured out upon me, upon my family, upon you, upon all his people.

307I know we are engaged in the work of the Lord and that he raises up men to do his work in every time and age of the earth's history. . . .

307I desire to say that no man of himself can lead this Church. It is the Church of the Lord Jesus Christ; he is at the head. The Church bears his name, has his priesthood, administers his gospel, preaches his doctrine, and does his work.

307He chooses men and calls them to be instruments in his hands to accomplish his purposes, and he guides and directs them in their labors. But men are only instruments in the Lord's hands, and the honor and glory for all that his servants accomplish is and should be ascribed unto him forever.

307If this were the work of man, it would fail, but it is the work of the Lord, and he does not fail. And we have the assurance that if we keep the commandments and are valiant in the testimony of Jesus and are true to every trust, the Lord will guide and direct us and his Church in the paths of righteousness, for the accomplishment of all his purposes. [^6]

307President Smith died on Sunday, July 2, 1972. Funeral services were held in the Salt Lake Tabernacle on July 6, and burial was in the Salt Lake City cemetery.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. Joseph Smith was eight years old at the time of this illness.
[^2] . . I saw a pillar of light exactly over my head, above the brightness of the sun, which descended gradually until it fell upon me. . . When the light rested upon me I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. (Joseph Smith 2:16, 17.)
