Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

HumorQuincy, Josiah23"Did You Say Joe Smith in a Sermon?"

23As written by Josiah Quincy.

23While the Prophet escorted his visitors about the city, the minister continued the contest on one issue after another. As they stopped in a beautiful grove, Joseph commented, pointing to a platform and a number of seats, "When the weather permits we hold our services in this place, but shall cease to do so when the Temple is finished."

23The minister remarked with a note of sarcasm, "I suppose none but Mormon preachers are allowed in Nauvoo."

23"On the contrary," replied the Prophet, "I shall be very happy to have you address my people next Sunday, and I will insure you a most attentive congregation."

23"What! Do you mean that I may say anything I please and that you will make no reply?" inquired the minister.

23To this the Mormon leader replied, "You may certainly say anything you please; but I must reserve the right of adding a word or two, if I judge best. I promise to speak of you in the most respectful manner."

23As they rode on the dispute continued. "Come," said the Prophet as he slapped his antagonist on the knee to emphasize his production of a triumphant test, "if you can't argue better than that, you shall say all you want to say to my people and I will promise to hold my tongue. For there's not a Mormon among them who would need any assistance to answer you."

23The minister later sought to even things up by referring to some point of doctrine which he considered erroneous. "Why, I told my congregation the other Sunday that they might as well believe Joe Smith as such theology as that," he declared.

23"Did you say 'Joe Smith' in a sermon?" inquired the Mormon leader.

24"Of course I did. Why not?" rejoined the minister.

24The Prophet's reply was given with a quiet superiority that was overwhelming: "Considering only the day and place, it would have been more respectful to have said Lieutenant-general Joseph Smith."

24Clearly the worthy minister was no match for the head of the Mormon church.

24Andrus, Joseph Smith, the Man and the Seer, pp. 28-29.
