Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

ProphetsSmith, Joseph Fielding309"A Mighty Man in Israel"

309In the year 1896 President Smith received a patriarchal blessing from John Smith, the Patriarch to the Church. The following . . . is copied from that blessing:

309Thou art numbered among the sons of Zion, of whom much is expected. Thy name is written in the Lamb's Book of Life and shall be registered in the chronicles of thy fathers with thy brethren. It is thy privilege to live to a good old age and the will of the Lord that you should become a mighty man in Israel. Therefore, I say unto thee, reflect often upon the past, present, and future. If thou shalt gain wisdom by the experience of the past, thou shalt realize that the hand of the Lord has been and is over thee for good, and that thy life has been preserved for a wise purpose. Thou shalt realize also that thou hast much to do in order to complete thy mission upon the earth. It shall be thy duty to sit in counsel with thy brethren and to preside among the people. It shall be thy duty also to travel much at home and abroad by land and water, laboring in the ministry; and I say unto thee, hold up thy head, lift up thy head, lift up thy voice without fear or favor as the Spirit of the Lord shall direct, and the blessing of the Lord shall rest upon thee. His Spirit shall direct thy mind and give thee word and sentiment that thou shalt confound the wisdom of the wicked and set at naught the councils of the unjust.

Early in the year 1910 President John R. Winder, a great and good man, passed from this life. His position as a counselor to President Joseph F. Smith was filled by the choosing and sustaining of Elder John Henry Smith as counselor. Also at this April conference of 1910 Elder Joseph Fielding Smith was chosen as apostle to fill the vacancy in the Quorum of the Twelve, thus fulfilling part of the inspired promise of the patriarch. Subsequently he became President of the Quorum, and on January 23, 1970, was called to serve the highest position in the Church, that of President—the Prophet, Seer, and Revelator to lead us in these troubled times.

310A. William Lund, "Forty Years An Apostle," Improvement Era, 53 (April 1950): 315-16.
