Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

MoralityMcConkie, Amelia Smith316"The Best Company Is None Too Good"

316The following story was told by President Smith's daughter, Amelia Smith McConkie.

316Knowing full well that your associates can have great influence upon your actions, Joseph Fielding Smith counseled and cautioned his children to be wise in their choice of friends. He knew that their friends could determine the things they did, and the places they went and thereby determine whether they found lasting happiness in righteous living or momentary pleasures.

316Often as he spoke to his family as they sat around the breakfast table or in their family home evenings he would tell them of the story of Alma pleading with his son, Corianton, to repent and do the things he had been taught, saying, "Remember, my son, wickedness never was happiness."

316To impress these principles upon his children he related his experience in looking for employment upon his return from his mission to Great Britain.

316He was married at this time, and the job he had did not pay enough to support himself and a wife, therefore he was desirous of improving his situation. About this time he was offered a job as a traveling representative for a company which would take him into an area covering much of the western states. The salary would be exceptionally good for those days. Thus it was a tempting offer even though it would necessitate associating with people whose standards were not always in keeping with his. On inquiring why they were offering him this position he was told the man who had it had been discharged, as he had succumbed to the temptations connected with the environment he was in. They were offering him the position because they felt he would be above temptation, and could be trusted.

317Before giving the employer an answer Joseph Fielding Smith went to his father, President Joseph F. Smith, and explained the situation, asking for advice. Looking straight at him his father's immediate response was, "My boy, the best of company is none too good."

317"That's all I wanted to know," was his reply, and he declined the job to the great astonishment of the man who made the offer. Not long after that he was employed in the Church Historian's Office where he remained until he became the tenth President of the Church.
