Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

Missionary WorkSmith, Joseph Fielding318"We Lived on Bean Soup"

318I was called to go on a mission March 17, 1899, by President Lorenzo Snow. I accepted and was set apart to fill a mission in Great Britain. My brother Richards was also called to go on a mission at the same time and place. We traveled together.

318The afternoon of May 12, 1899, I was set apart and ordained a seventy by my father, President Joseph F. Smith. . . .

318June 2, we reached the coast of Ireland and I saw my first view of part of the old country. Our actions on the ship had been a credit to us because we were asked by some why we didn't smoke or drink beer. We had a chance to tell them about the Word of Wisdom.

319On June 3 we could see Ireland on one side and Wales on the other. We arrived in Liverpool just two weeks after we had left Philadelphia. We were taken to headquarters and then assigned to our different fields of labor. I was assigned to the Nottingham Conference. My brother Richards, who traveled with me, was sent to Leeds.

319I left Liverpool at four P.M., June 4, and arrived in Nottingham at 7:30 that same evening. No elders were expecting me. I arrived at the mission home. The door was locked. I left my trunk on the outside and sat on it. A few youngsters who were in the street gathered around and began to sing,

319Chase me, girls, to Salt Lake City,

319Where the Mormons have no pity.

319I went out into the street where they were, and they all ran away. But that was my first welcome in the mission field.

319June 6 was a very important day in my life. I came from my home less than a month before for the purpose of preaching the gospel unto this nation, Great Britain. The streets were crooked and different from the ones at home, but we tracted and got along very well. I visited twenty-five homes on my first visit in the mission field, had many of the doors slammed in my face, and received a number of insults; but I think it all did me some good.

319We held meetings on the streets. We would travel maybe six miles, or eight miles. Sometimes we would go fourteen miles. We didn't think anything about walking from one place to another. The longest walk that I ever had in the mission field—and we always walked; we never rode—was from Uttoxeter in Staffordshire, through Derby, to Nottingham. I left at six a.m., and I arrived in Nottingham at twelve that night, traveling on foot all that distance.

319We thought nothing of walking twelve or fourteen miles to hold a meeting.

319We had members of the Church in certain towns, ten or fifteen miles away from our headquarters, and we thought nothing of going to see them and walking all the distance. I don't remember ever riding on a bus while I was in the mission field. I walked. . . .

320Several of us elders lived in the headquarters of the conference and we would take turns in cooking the meals. I got to be quite a cook. We had to wait upon ourselves. I taught them some things that they didn't know; one was that navy beans were very good. You could eat them boiled or in soup.

320I went to the store one day to get some navy beans. (I was in charge at the headquarters.) The man reached down off the shelf a one-pound package and handed it to me. I said, "I don't want just one pound; I want eight or ten pounds." He looked at me in astonishment. He went to his shelf, looked up, and he took down eight one-pound packages and said, "This is all I've got." I took the eight packages home. We lived on beans boiled and bean soup. You don't know how good it is if you haven't tried it. . . .

320I shall always be grateful that the Lord gave me this experience. I am grateful—and I have said this many times—that I wasn't born 500 years ago, or 1,000 years ago, when the gospel wasn't here upon the face of the earth.

320I thank the Lord constantly that I am living in this day when the gospel is restored. The blessings are here: men and women can be baptized for the remission of their sins; men can be ordained to receive the Holy Priesthood and go forth into the mission field with divine authority to preach the gospel of Jesus Christ.

320Joseph Fielding Smith, My Missionary Experiences, Brigham Young University, Speeches of the Year (Provo, 1966), pp. 3-7.
