Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

"See If You Cannot Get the Spirit"

I know a man who went to school when I went to school; we played together, went to school together. When he grew up to be a man, he went East and became a scientist. He came back, and then he began to create a great deal of disturbance in the Sunday School classes, questioning the revelations that had been given through the Prophet Joseph Smith. This came to my attention when one of the members of the class came to see me and said, "This brother comes to our class, and he is just a disturbance." As I was well acquainted with him, I made it my duty to get hold of him and asked him why he did those things that were disturbing the members of the class.

323"Well," he said, "I cannot accept all of the revelations that were given to the Prophet Joseph Smith."

323"Are there any of them you can accept?"

323"Yes," he said, "I can accept some of them," but he could not accept all of the doctrines that had come through the revelations of our Father in heaven and his Son Jesus Christ to the Church.

323After we got through with the conversation, and I had a long conversation with him, he said, "Now, I am going to ask you one favor. Please do not take any step to have me excommunicated."

323I said, "Why do you want to stay in the Church when you are opposing its doctrines?"

323He said, "I will tell you why. I was raised in the Church, and my friends are members of the Church. I have few associations outside of the Church. If I should be excommunicated that means that I should be cut off from all communication, all fellowship with the people with whom I am now associating, and I do not want that to happen. So please do not take any steps to have me excommunicated."

323I thought there was some hope for him so I did not take any such step; but I did talk to him kindly and try to get him to see the folly of his ways, to repent, and when he went to classes—and he could go to the classes—he should not go with the spirit of defiance or opposition to the doctrines which the others believed. I said, "If you don't believe them, then keep still and see if you cannot get the Spirit of the Lord so that you can accept them."

323Well, he is dead now. I do not know whether he repented or not; but brethren, the gospel of Jesus Christ is the most vital thing in all the world to us. We should so live that we can accept every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of God, and that is a commandment from him.

323Conference Report, October, 1959, p. 18.
