Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

IntegritySmith, Joseph Fielding324"I Keep Two of Your Faith with Me"

324I suppose there are members in the congregation and who are listening in who are anxious to know something about their boys who are in the service of the country in the Far East. . . .

324You fathers and mothers who have sons serving in the forces, be proud of them. They are fine young men. Some of our servicemen are converts who have been brought into the Church by the teachings, by precept, and by example—principally by example of the members of the Church who are also serving with them in the forces.

324I met a number of young men who said, "We came in the Church because of the lives of these young men and because they taught us the principles of the gospel."

324They are doing a good work. There might be one or two that may be careless, but those young men with whom I had the privilege of meeting, talking to, would bear their testimony of the truth and were walking humbly.

324And as I met with the officers and chaplains (and unfortunately, at this time, we have no chaplain of the Church there)—but when I met with them, universally they said, "We like your young men. They are clean. They are dependable."

324One of these chaplains, when I was talking with him, said, "I keep two of these young men of your faith with me all the time. If I lose one of them, if he is called away, I get another." While I was talking with him, a young man came in with a message, and when he was in there, he held out his hand and said, "I am Brother so-and-so." (I do not remember his name now.) He received the instruction given him and departed. A little later another one came. He likewise was a member of the Church. This man, not a member of the Church, said, "I keep them with me all the time because they are dependable."

325Be proud of your boys. Be proud of your young men in the mission field. . . .

325The Spirit of the Lord is leading them. The doors are opening for them to preach the gospel.

325Now just one more word that I would like to say. This comes a little close to me; nevertheless I want to say it. Sister Smith's singing everywhere we went was a great help. When she could not go to Korea, we took a record of "The King of Glory," and we were able to broadcast the recording from the military grounds so it could be heard all over the city; so her voice was heard there, although she was not privileged to accompany me.

325It was a glorious visit.

325The Lord bless you.

325Conference Report, October 1955, pp. 42-44.
