Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

MotherhoodLee, Harold B.334"The Faith of a Mother"

334Since nine o'clock last night [^1] I have lived an entire lifetime in retrospect and in prospect. I spent a sleepless night. I never closed my eyes one moment, and neither would you if you had been in my place. Throughout the night, as I thought of this most appalling and soul-stirring assignment, there kept coming to me the words of the Apostle Paul, which he spoke in explanation of the human qualities that were to be found in the Lord and Savior:

334"For we have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin.

334"Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need." (Hebrews 4:15-16.)

334One could not have listened to the soul-stirring testimony of President Heber J. Grant, in bearing testimony as to his feelings when he was called to the apostleship, or his experiences in calling others to similar positions, without realizing that he has been close to his Heavenly Father in this experience. Therefore I shall take the word of the Apostle Paul. I shall come boldly unto the throne of grace, and ask for mercy and His grace to help me in my time of need. With that help I cannot fail. Without it I cannot succeed.

334Since my childhood I have looked upon these men as the greatest men on the face of the earth, and now the contemplation of an intimate association with them is overwhelming and beyond my comprehension.

I thank God today for my parentage. My father and mother are listening, either in this great assembly or on the radio, if perchance they did not get into this meeting. I think perhaps this is my way of paying tribute to the two family names they gave me at my birth, Bingham and Lee. I trust I shall not disgrace those names. I have been blessed with a splendid father and a grand and lovely mother, one who didn't display often her affection, but who showed her love in tangible ways that, as a child, I came early to recognize as true mother love.

335As just a high school boy, I went away on a high school debating team trip. We won the debate. I came back and called Mother on the telephone only to have her say, "Never mind, son. I know all about it. I will tell you when you get home at the end of the week." When I came home she took me aside and said, "When I knew it was just time for this performance to start, I went out among the willows by the creekside, and there, all by myself, I remembered you and prayed God you would not fail." I have come to know that that kind of love is necessary for every son and daughter who seek to achieve in this world: my tribute to my parents.

335Ye Are the Light of the World (Deseret Book Co., 1974), pp. 327-28.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. Joseph Smith was eight years old at the time of this illness.
