Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

PriesthoodLee, Harold B.335"Put the Priesthood of God to Work"

335I had a lesson years ago as to the greatness of priesthood. A call came for me from the First Presidency, asking me to come to their office on a day that I shall never forget—April 20, 1935.

335I was a city commissioner at the time, as well as a stake president. In our stake there were 4,800 of our 7,300 people who were wholly or partially dependent. There were few government work programs; the finances of the Church were low; and we had been told that not much could be done so far as outside help was concerned. We had only one place to go, and that was to apply the Lord's program as set forth in the revelations.

336It was from our humble efforts in helping our people that the First Presidency, knowing of our experience, called me asking if I would come to their office. It was Saturday morning and they had no other appointments on their calendar, so for hours they talked with me. They told me they wanted me to resign from the city commission and they would release me from being stake president; they wished me now to head up the welfare movement to turn the tide from government relief and help put the Church in a position where it could take care of its own needy.

336After that morning I drove my car up to the head of City Creek Canyon into what was then called Rotary Park, and there, all by myself, I offered one of the most humble prayers of my life.

336There I was, just a young man in my thirties. My experience had been limited. I was born in a little country town in Idaho and had hardly been outside the boundaries of the states of Utah and Idaho. And now, to put me in a position where I was to reach out to the entire membership of the Church worldwide, was one of the most staggering contemplations I could imagine. How could I do it with my limited understanding?

336As I knelt down, my petition was, "What kind of an organization should be set up in order to accomplish what the Presidency has assigned?" And there came to me on that glorious morning one of the most heavenly realizations of the power of the priesthood of God. It was as though something were saying to me, "There is no new organization necessary to take care of the needs of this people. All that is necessary is to put the priesthood of God to work. There is nothing else that you need as a substitute."

336Conference Report, October 1972, pp. 123-24.
