Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

25"I Preached a Sermon and Baptized Three"

25The year was 1832. Joseph Smith was living in Hiram, Ohio. Although he was a prophet, he was not insulated from nor isolated from hardship, suffering, or sorrow. In the year 1828, Emma Smith had given birth to a child while she and the Prophet were living in Harmony, Pennsylvania. The child, a son, died the same day. In 1831, a year prior to our 1832 setting, Emma had given birth to twins—a boy and a girl. What joy there must have been in the Smith household that day, but how shortlived was that joy. Before the sun had set, both infants were dead. Strangely enough, on that very same day, Sister John Murdock, who lived nearby, also gave birth to twins; and they also were a boy and a girl. The twins lived, but Sister Murdock died. Can you picture in your mind the Prophet—a young man, a large man, a sorrowing man—visiting with John Murdock. They exchange sympathetic expressions. If you have never read the story, you can guess the outcome. When John Murdock's twins were nine days old, they were brought to Emma—a boy and a girl. These babies, adopted by the Prophet and his wife, would in a measure replace those buried. These babies would ease Emma Smith's aching heart.

That same year . . . John Johnson invited the Prophet and his family to come to live with him in his spacious farm house at Hiram. The Prophet gladly accepted the invitation. At the time he was engaged in revising the Bible, and this assistance was most welcome.

26The Prophet's children were subject to illness as were other children; and in March, 1832, both of the infants had the measles. This necessitated not just one but both parents' being up with the babies for several nights. Finally, near midnight one night, the Prophet insisted that his wife go into an adjoining room to get some rest. She was reluctant, but he was persistent. He assured her that he would listen for any outcry from their little son, who was the sicker of the two infants. She consented and retired to the next room. Joseph lay down on a small bed next to the crib of the little boy Joseph. He had intended to listen, but soon fatigue overcame him, and he was asleep.

26Unknown to him, a mob of some forty men had gathered in the woods a short distance from the house where they waited patiently for the lamps to be extinguished. After the house became dark, they continued to wait until they were certain that all of its occupants were asleep. They approached quietly and opened the door; and the Prophet, sleeping very soundly, was in their grasp and raised from his bed before the screams of his wife, Emma, awoke him. He fought desperately to free himself. He was an athletic man, powerfully built, six feet tall and weighing over 200 pounds. He managed to free one leg and kicked one of the mobsters with tremendous force. The mobster reeled back, landed on the frozen earth, and cried out, in essence, "Don't let loose of him, don't let loose of him. If you let loose of him, he'll run over the lot of us." He then choked the Prophet Joseph. The Prophet was carried several hundred feet from the house. His clothing was torn from him, and the mob tried to force acid into his mouth. He clenched his teeth and resisted. They cursed him and slammed the bottle against his teeth until they chipped one of his front teeth and spilled the acid on the ground. As they called for the bucket of tar, one of the mobsters was so filled with hate that he could not contain himself, and he fell upon the unprotected body of Joseph Smith and said, "G_____D_____ you, I'll show you how the Holy Ghost falls on a person." He then began to scratch the flesh of the Prophet.

27Joseph Smith was covered with the hot tar and left on the ground.

27Eventually, he partially recovered his strength and started toward the house. In the meantime Emma had gathered up her sick babies and taken them out into the cold night to hide them, fearing the mob would return and do them harm. She returned to the house before Joseph did and was there to open the door when he called to her. As she looked upon her husband covered with tar and blood, she thought that he was completely covered with blood. The shock was more than she could stand, and she fainted. Joseph called out again, and Brother Johnson appeared with a blanket. Joseph wrapped it around himself and went into the house. The remainder of the night was spent removing the tar. The washing and scraping was done under the direction of Dr. Fredrick G. Williams with others assisting.

27Joseph recorded the events of the night in a concise, objective, factual way. Then he said that with the rising of the sun it was the Sabbath day, and records very simply, "I preached a sermon and baptized three."

27Hartshorn, Joseph Smith: Prophet of the Restoration: pp. 1-3.
