Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

337"Acquiring That Special Witness"

337I shall never forget my feelings of loneliness the Saturday night after I was told by the President of the Church that I was to be sustained the next day as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. That was a sleepless night. There ran through my mind all the petty things of my life, the nonsense, the foolishness of youth. I could have told you about those against whom I had any grievances and who had any grievance against me. And before I was to be accepted the next day, I knew that I must stand before the Lord and witness before him that I would love and forgive every soul that walked the earth and in return I would ask Him to forgive me that I might be worthy of that position.

337I said, as I suppose all of us would say as we are called to such a position, or any position, "President Grant, do you feel that I am worthy of this call?" And just as quick as a flash, he said, "My boy, if I didn't think so, you would never be called to this position."

337The Lord knew my heart and He knew that I was not perfect and that all of us have weaknesses to overcome. He takes us with imperfections and expects us to begin where we are and make our lives conform fully with the principles and doctrines of Jesus Christ.

337The following day I went to the temple where I was ushered into the room where the Council of the Twelve meet with the First Presidency each week in an upper room. I thought of all the great men who have occupied those chairs and now here I was, just a young man, twenty years younger than the next youngest of the Twelve, being asked to sit in one of those chairs. It was frightening and startling.

337And then one of the Brethren, who arranged for Sunday evening radio programs, said, "Now you know that after having been ordained, you are a special witness to the mission of the Lord Jesus Christ. We want you to give the Easter talk next Sunday night."

338The assignment was to bear testimony of the mission of the Lord concerning His resurrection, His life, and His ministry, so I went to a room in the Church Office Building where I could be alone, and I read the Gospels, particularly those that had to do with the closing days and weeks and months of the life of Jesus. And as I read, I realized that I was having a new experience.

338It wasn't any longer just a story; it seemed as though I was actually seeing the events about which I was reading, and when I gave my talk and closed with my testimony, I said, "I am now the least of all my brethren and want to witness to you that I know, as I have never known before this call came, that Jesus is the Savior of this world. He lives and He died for us." Why did I know? Because there had come a witness, that special kind of a witness, that may have been the more sure word of prophecy that one must have if he is to be a special witness.

338Joint Nottingham and Leicester conference, Nottingham England Stake, September 2, 1973. (See Ensign, February 1974, p. 18.)
