Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

RevelationLee, Harold B.342"Obey the Counsels of the Church"

342In Kelsey, Texas, I once heard a group of anxious people asking, "Is now the day for us to come up to Zion, where we can come to the mountain of the Lord and be protected from our enemies?"

342I pondered that question; I prayed about it. What should we say to those people who were so anxious? I studied the subject and learned something of what the Spirit has taught, and I know now that the place of safety in this world is not in any given place; it doesn't make much difference where we live. The all-important consideration is how we live. I have found that security can come to Israel only when the Saints keep the commandments, when they live so that they can enjoy the companionship, the direction, the comfort, and the guidance of the Holy Spirit of the Lord, when they are willing to listen to the men whom God has sent here to preside as His mouthpieces, and when they obey the counsels of the Church.

342When a decision has been reached by the presiding councils of the Church and a majority of these councils has decided on a certain policy, and there then develops a minority vote contrary to that majority decision, one may know with a surety that that minority voice is not speaking the will of the Lord. I tremble when I think of that statement. I am greatly concerned when I now sit in one of the presiding councils of the Church and remember that in days gone by, some have fallen by the way because they went out in contradiction of the majority decision of that body. And so that places before us a safe guide. Should there be those, even though in high places, who may come among us who are not speaking the policy of the Church as declared by the men whom we sustain as prophets of the living God, the Church may know that those who thus speak are not speaking the mind of the Lord and the voice of the Lord and the power of God unto salvation.

342Conference Report, April 1943, p. 129.
