Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

343"Why Do You Want to Go on This Mission, Son?"

343While I was attending a stake conference, I was to interview some of the prospective missionaries. Before one boy came to see me, the stake president said, "Now here is a boy who has just come through a serious experience. He is just out of the service. He suffered shell-shock in battle, and I think we need to talk pretty carefully to him and make certain that he is prepared to go."

343So as I talked with the young man, I said, "Why do you want to go on this mission, son? Are you sure that you really want to go, after all the harrowing experiences you have had?"

343He sat thoughtfully for a few moments and then said, "Brother Lee, I had never been away from home when I went into the service, and when I got out into the camps, every waking hour I heard filthy, profane language. I found myself losing a certain pure-mindedness, and I sought God in prayer to give me the strength not to fall into that terrible habit. God heard my prayer and gave me strength. Then we went through basic training, and I asked Him to give me physical strength to continue, and He did. He heard my prayer. As we moved up toward the fighting lines and I could hear the booming of the guns and the crackling of the rifles, I was afraid. Again I prayed to God to give me the courage to do the task that I was there to do, and He heard my prayer and gave me courage.

343"When I was sent up with an advance patrol to search out the enemies and to send back for the reinforcements, telling them where to attack—and sometimes the enemy would almost hedge me around until I was cut off, and it seemed that there was no escape—I thought that surely my life would be taken. I asked for the only force of power to guide me safely back, and God heard me. Time and again through the most harrowing experiences He led me back. Now," he said, "I am back home. I have recovered, and I would like to give thanks to that power to which I prayed—God, our Heavenly Father. Going out on a mission, I can teach others that faith which I was taught in Sunday School, in seminary, in my priesthood class, and in my home.

344I want to teach others so that they will have that same strength that guided me through this difficult experience."

344Ye Are the Light of the World, pp. 111-12.
