Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

344"Faith to Hold to Church Standards"

344I was asked to address a group of young girls a few years ago at the Lion House, where they were being shepherded under the direction of the great Young Women's Mutual Improvement Association. At the close of our meeting this lovely girl took me aside, and from her purse she unfolded a picture of a handsome young soldier. Underneath the picture was something about love, and his name signed. I asked, "Well, what does this mean?"

344Tears were swimming in her eyes. She replied, "I met that young man here in an army camp. He was not a member of the Church. He was clean and fine, and he had the ideals I had longed for in a companion, all except one thing—he was not a member of the Church. And when he proposed marriage to me, I said, 'Only will I be married when I can be married in the house of the Lord, because love means something more than just a thing that pertains to this life. It is an eternal thing, and I want to be married in the temple.'"

344Well, he reasoned with her, he pleaded with her, he scolded, and then he became angry; and finally, after repeated efforts to break down her religious objection to a marriage out of the temple, he left her. It was now time to go overseas, and she cried her heart out the night he left, thinking that maybe she had made a mistake because her heart had gone out to this fine young man.

345During a long ocean voyage over to Australia, where he was to be stationed and from where he was to go into combat, he began to think about this young woman. He began to think that he had been a little hasty in his judgment about her religious convictions. Perhaps it was her religion that had made her the fine girl that she was. With that on his mind, he began to seek companionship with our Latter-day Saint men. He finally met a Latter-day Saint chaplain there and became associated with the LDS boys of the camp, and he began to study the gospel. On her birthday he had sent her this picture, and behind the picture was a slip of paper which proved to be a certificate evidencing the fact that he had been baptized a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. In the letter that accompanied the picture, he had said, "I am preparing now to live worthy so that when I come home, I can be ordained an elder and together we can be married in the house of the Lord."

345There, young men, is the first thing that you must think of if you would have exaltation in the celestial kingdom. Marriage is eternal, and here was a young woman who realized the foundation on which she must build if she were to have a fulness of eternal happiness.

345Stand Ye in Holy Places, pp. 374-75.
