Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

FatherhoodLee, Harold B.346"A Husband's Most Precious Gift"

346In the old Provo Tabernacle some years ago, we held a meeting of husbands and wives where we tried to inspire those who were less active in the Church. . . .

A lovely sister was asked to come forward to tell about the joy that had come into their home since her husband had now become active in the Church. They had gone to the temple, and now they had the joy of an eternal union. They had fallen in love when they were youngsters, but he had been careless and smoked and didn't go to his meetings. Thus, when they were ready to be married, he hadn't been advanced to the position of elder in the Melchizedek Priesthood and couldn't take her to the temple. But he said, "I promise you that if you will marry me in a civil marriage, I will take you to the temple. I will make myself worthy."

347However, he was like the man who said he knew a man who could quit smoking because he had done it a thousand times; he would quit in the morning and smoke again before nightfall. Finally somebody took this man by the right hand, as Peter did the impotent man at the Gate Beautiful, and lifted him up, so to speak—taught him how to walk without tobacco smoke, without drink, and to walk straightforwardly. He was ordained an elder, and then came the day when the bishop gave him a temple recommend.

347The wife told about that beautiful experience in the temple where, across an altar, they were sealed together for eternity. And then the doors opened and their five little girls, dressed in white, came in and joined them around that sacred altar, and a man of God pronounced them a family through the eternities.

347As she spoke, she looked over the pulpit, and right down in front of her was her husband. As she looked at him, she seemed to forget that anyone else was present. She said to him, "Daddy, I don't know how to tell you how grateful the girls and I are for what you have done for us; because, you see, except for you who have the priesthood of God to unlock the key to an eternal home, none of us could be together in the hereafter. From the bottom of our hearts we thank you, our Daddy."

347As the man sat there and sobs shook his body, I wished that all the careless daddies in this church could have heard the commendation that came from this woman, who was so grateful for the repentance of her husband.

347Address at the Brigham Young University Sixth Stake quarterly conference, April 27, 1969.
