Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

SPENCER W. KIMBALL

Biographical Sketch

355Spencer W. Kimball was ordained twelfth president of the Church on December 31, 1973. He had been sustained to serve in the Council of the Twelve in October 1943, and had been acting president of the Twelve (January 23, 1970, to July 7, 1972) and then president of the Twelve (July 7, 1972-December 31, 1973).

355President Kimball was born March 28, 1895, in Salt Lake City, one of eleven children of Andrew and Olive Woolley Kimball. His paternal grandfather was Heber C. Kimball, one of the original twelve apostles in this dispensation and a counselor in the First Presidency to Brigham Young. His maternal grandfather, Edwin Dilworth Woolley, was business manager for President Young.

355When Spencer W. Kimball was three years old, his father was sent to the Gila Valley of Arizona, to preside over the St. Joseph Stake, an assignment he fulfilled for more than twenty-six years. He then served ten years as president of the Indian Territory Mission. The family settled in Thatcher, Arizona.

President Kimball received a call in 1914 to serve in the Swiss-German Mission, but the assignment was changed when World War I broke out, and he served instead in the Central States Mission. Upon returning from his mission he attended Arizona State University and then served briefly in the military, just before the Armistice of 1918 was signed.

356On November 16, 1917, he married Camilla Eyring, a teacher at the Gila Academy at Thatcher. She was born in Colonia Juarez, Mexico, and had been forced with her family to flee when the Mexican Revolution broke out.

356Spencer W. and Camilla Eyring Kimball are parents of three sons and one daughter: Spencer L., director of the research department of the American Bar Association; Andrew, an executive in the foreign department of General Electric; Edward, professor of law at Brigham Young University; and Olive Beth (Mrs. Grant M. Mack), a homemaker and a member of the Tabernacle Choir. Including children, grandchildren, great-grandchildren, and in-laws, the Spencer W. Kimball family now numbers nearly seventy.

356President Kimball was active in Church and civic affairs in Arizona before his call to the Council of the Twelve in 1943. A businessman, he was a founder of an insurance company and held many positions in civic groups. At age twenty-nine he became a counselor in the St. Joseph Stake, then was called to be first president of the Mt. Graham Stake when it was divided from the St. Joseph Stake in 1938.

356As a General Authority, he has long been associated with missionary work. He served for many years as chairman of the executive committee of the Church's Missionary Committee, and since becoming president of the Church, there has been considerably increased emphasis on missionary efforts world-wide. For a quarter of a century he was chairman of the Church's Indian Committee and helped institute the successful Indian placement program. As president, he has presided over the Washington D.C. Temple dedication, area general conferences in Europe, South America, and the Orient, and has traveled extensively to nearly every corner of the world. He is the author of two widely read books, The Miracle of Forgiveness and Faith Precedes the Miracle.
