Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

28"It Is Cold-blooded Murder"

28We were placed under a strong guard, and were without shelter during the night, lying on the ground in the open air, in the midst of a great rain. The guards during the whole night kept up a constant tirade of mockery, and the most obscene blackguardism and abuse. They blasphemed God;

29mocked Jesus Christ; swore the most dreadful oaths; taunted Brother Joseph and others; demanded miracles; wanted signs, such as "Come Mr. Smith, show us an angel." "Give us one of your revelations." "Show us a miracle." "Come, there is one of your brethren here in camp whom we took prisoner yesterday in his own house, and knocked his brains out with his own rifle, which we found over his fireplace; he lays speechless and dying; speak the word and heal him, and then we will all believe." "Or, if you are Apostles or men of God, deliver yourselves, and then we will be Mormons." Next would be a volley of oaths and blasphemies; then a tumultuous tirade of lewd boastings of having defiled virgins and wives by force, etc., much of which I dare not write; and, indeed, language would fail me to attempt more than a faint description. Thus passed this dreadful night, and before morning several other captives were added to our number. . . .

29The Prophet's life was spared only by the courageous act of Alexander Doniphan. Brigadier General Doniphan received an illegal order from his commanding officer Major General Samuel D. Lucas to take Joseph Smith and the other prisoners into the public square at 9:00 the next morning and shoot them. General Doniphan wasted no time in sending the following bold reply to his superior officer:

29It is cold-blooded murder. I will not obey your order. My brigade shall march for Liberty tomorrow morning at 8:00; and if you execute these men, I will hold you responsible before an earthly tribunal, so help me God. (HC 3:190-191)

29Hartshorn, Joseph Smith: Prophet of the Restoration, p. 24.
