Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

HumorKimball, Spencer W.370"This Is No Ordinary Man"

370As told by Elder Boyd K. Packer.

370In 1957 throat problems developed, to be diagnosed as cancer of the vocal cords. This, perhaps, was to be his Gethsemane.

371He went east for the operation. Elder Harold B. Lee was there. As President Kimball was prepared for surgery he agonized over the ominous possibilities, telling the Lord that he did not see how he could live without a voice, for his voice to preach and to speak was his ministry.

371"This is no ordinary man you're operating on," Elder Lee told the surgeon. From the blessings and the prayers, an operation a bit less radical than the doctor recommended was performed.

371There was a long period of recuperation and preparation. The voice was all but gone, but a new one took its place. A quiet, persuasive, mellow voice, an acquired voice, an appealing voice, a voice that is loved by the Latter-day Saints.

371In the intervening time he could work. During interviews he tapped out on the typewriter answers to questions and spent his time at the office.

371Then came the test. Could he speak? Could he preach?

371He went back home for his maiden speech. He went back to the valley. Anyone close to him knows it is not a valley, it is the valley. There, in a conference of the St. Joseph Stake, accompanied by his beloved associate from Arizona, Elder Delbert L. Stapley, he stood at the pulpit.

371"I have come back here," he said, "to be among my own people. In this valley I presided as stake president." Perhaps he thought that should he fail, here he would be among those who loved him most and would understand.

371There was a great outpouring of love. The tension of this dramatic moment was broken when he continued, "I must tell you what has happened to me. I went away to the East, and while there I fell among cutthroats. . . ." After that it didn't matter what he said. Elder Kimball was back!

371Ensign, March 1974, p. 4.
