Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

"Guests of the Lord"

Beloved students [of Brigham Young University], you are guests here—guests of the Lord, whose funds pay in large measure for your education. You are guests of the Lord, his church, his leaders, his administration, his people. You and your parents make a smaller but necessary contribution.

375In a faraway land to the south is an old man, somewhat crippled, untrained. The children, several, are ragged; their clothes are hand-me-downs, and winter or summer they trudge barefooted to a little primitive school. The home is tiny—two small rooms, one under the other with a ladder connecting. The little mother makes baskets and sells at the public market. The father makes chairs and tables out of the native jungle trees and, on his calloused, leathery bare feet, walks long distances, carrying his furniture those miles to market, hopefully. The middle man or the bargaining buyer leaves him very little profit from his honest labor; but because he is a faithful member of the Church, he takes his tithing to his branch president. And it finally reaches the treasury house, and part of it is allocated to the Brigham Young University.

375This dear old man, this deprived little mother, and these gaunt little children, along with their fellow members and numerous others who are tithepayers, become host to you—the guests—and supply a goodly percentage of the wherewithal for land and buildings and equipment and instructions.

375The boy working in the cornfield in India is your host, for he returns his ten percent.

375The rich man living in his luxury who pays his tithing is your host.

375The widowed mother with several hungry children is your hostess.

375The custodian of your meetinghouse is your host.

375The Navajo on the desert following his little band of sheep trying to find enough grass—he is your host. His dollars are few, his tithing is meager, but his testimony of the gospel, his dreams for his children, and his love for his fellowmen and his Lord induce him to send in his little tithing. He also becomes a joint host for you.

375As guests we have opportunities and responsibilities. Our rights are few. Our demands should be fewer. As guests we gratefully accept the favors of our hosts and hostesses.

375Would a guest attend a banquet uninvited? Would he dress in fatigue clothes when the host had set it up as a black-tie affair? Would he respect the host and his position? Would he say disparaging things about his host even while accepting of his hospitality?

376Would he declare his freedom to eat with his fingers, laugh raucously, tell evil stories about his host?

376Would he come early or stay too late? Would he take with him the host's treasures? Would he monopolize the conversation and disregard the wishes of the host? Would he ill-behave himself, ignore the wishes of the host, or defy his requests?

376Would he march or riot or demand? Would he criticize—the house too small, the temperature not right, the cook ugly, the waitresses inefficient? Because other guests have been known to be unruly, would he take license therefrom? Because other guests at other houses of hospitality destroy the property of their host, lock the doors, sit in or sleep in, would these guests follow suit?

376Would guests come ill-clad? unbathed? unwashed? Would a guest belittle his host or embarrass him? Would guests declare their independence, forget their opportunities, or demand their supposed rights?

376The greatest of all universities is our joint blessing. Let us all together keep it the pleasant oasis in the desert, where there is water and coolness when the desert sands blast in their fury.

376Let us keep it an island of beauty and cleanness in an ocean of filth and destruction and disease. Let us keep it as a spring of pure cool water though surrounded by sloughs and stagnant swamps of rebellion and corruption and worldliness outside.

376Let us keep it a place of peace in a world of confusion, frustration, mental aberrations, and emotional disturbances. Let us keep it a place of safety in a world of violence where laws are ignored, criminals coddled, enforcement curtailed, buildings burned, stores looted, lives endangered.

376May we keep this glorious place a home of friendships and of eternal commitments, a place of study and growth and improvement, a place where ambition is kindled and faith is nurtured and confidence is strengthened, and where love for God and our fellowmen reaches its highest fulfillment. Let it continue to be a place of confidence and common admiration and understanding, with students and instructors and staff all people of confidence, affection, and serenity.

376Let us not regard this as just another university—not just classrooms and professors, students and books, and laboratories.

May we enjoy the privileges and opportunities of this great institution, profit by our rich experience here, and extend our continued gratitude to the Lord and the joint hosts and hostesses in their gracious and generous hospitality.

377My beloved young folks, stay true. Live the gospel. Love the Lord, I beg of you, in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.

377"In the World But Not of It," BYU Speeches of the Year, May 14, 1968, pp. 12-14.
