Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

Generosityde Hoyos, Arturo377"He Is a Prophet of the Lord"

377For Dr. Arturo de Hoyos, now a faculty member at Brigham Young University, President Kimball is a very special man. Dr. de Hoyos writes:

377"In the winter of 1947, I was a freshman at BYU and had come to school from Mexico after I finished a fulltime mission. My roommate, Alfonso Rodriguez, also from Mexico, was also a returned missionary. We had found a room on the back of a house which had no heat other than a gas stove and no refrigerator. The snow was a new experience to us. Apart from a few small problems like not having winter clothing, not knowing English, and other such minor details, we were full of enthusiasm and were enjoying being at BYU. We were making adjustments. To save money for books, we had decided to eat only when absolutely necessary.

"This particular Sunday we had gotten up early. Among other things, we had been discussing the best way to go about defrosting some chocolate milk in a carton we had left outside on the window sill. It had frozen during the night. As it was the only food we had, all the alternatives had to include saving the milk. As we considered the matter, we even thought of fasting again and perhaps leaving the milk for Monday, which would get us one day closer to our next parttime paycheck late in the week.

378"But we were not discouraged. True, we were getting kind of thin, but we were still very happy to be alive and at BYU. We also reasoned that there were spiritual compensations. We figured that we had fasted enough that semester to cast off any type of bad spirit that we might encounter.

378"As we were considering what to do with our frozen milk, we heard a knock on the door. I opened the door and the visitor said, 'Hi, boys. I am on my way to stake conference in Sanpete County and I thought I would stop and say hello and see how you were getting along.' As he spoke, a thousand thoughts went running through my mind, most of them in Spanish: 'Shall I ask him to come in? . . . No, the room isn't very nice. . . . Buenos dias. . . . I wonder why he is here? . . . How do you do? . . . Perhaps we should invite him to have breakfast with us . . . Frozen chocolate milk for three? . . . How did he know we were here? . . . An apostle of the Lord in our room! . . .' Finally I said, 'Come in, Brother Kimball.'

378"He came in and shook hands, and somehow we never felt embarrassed. Alfonso said something like, 'We are fine and happy.' We just looked at him and said little and, as I remember, we did not even invite him to sit down. But from the beginning he had made us feel at ease. As he talked he looked at us with that marvelous look of his that always conveys peace, concern, care, joy of life, complete knowledge of suffering, unselfishness, a deep desire to do good, and plain, simple love.

378" 'Your mission president told me you were in Provo,' he said, 'and the other day I called the university to find out where you lived.'

378"The previous June, during mission conference in Mexico City when Alfonso and I had been released from our two years of service, he, Spencer W. Kimball, had been the visiting authority. And he had remembered us, had called to find our address, and had stopped to see us; and now he was here in our room visiting us!

378"He did not stay long. But it was long enough to lift our spirits up in a way that would be impossible to forget. And not only our spirits. For as he left and shook hands with us I found a $20 bill in mine! 'God bless you,' he said. 'Let me know how you get along.'

379"Alfonso and I stood there in the middle of our room. We did not say much for a long time. I opened my hand and showed him the $20.

379" 'I wonder how he knew,' I said, just to say something.

379" 'He is a prophet of the Lord,' Alfonso said, 'and he knows.' "

379Ensign, March 1975, p. 12.
