Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

EZRA TAFT BENSON

Biographical Sketch

381President Ezra Taft Benson was ordained and set apart as prophet, seer, revelator, and president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in a special meeting of the Council of the Twelve Apostles held in the Salt Lake Temple on Sunday, November 10, 1985. The membership of the Church sustained President Benson in a solemn assembly held in the Tabernacle on Temple Square on April 6, 1986. President Benson had served as a member of the Council of the Twelve since October 1943 and as president of the Council since December 30, 1973.

From 1933 to 1937, President Benson was a member of the Boise Stake presidency in Boise, Idaho. When the stake was divided in November 1938, he was called as president of the Boise Stake. He served in that capacity until the spring of 1939 when he moved to Washington, D.C. to accept the position as executive secretary of the National Council of Farmer Cooperatives. In June 1940 he was called as the first president of the Washington Stake. He occupied this position until he was called to the Council of the Twelve in October 1943.

382President Benson is a great-grandson of the apostle Ezra T. Benson, one of the first company of pioneers who entered the Salt Lake Valley with Brigham Young on July 24, 1847. President Benson's parents were among the early settlers of southern Idaho, where in the small town of Whitney he was born August 4, 1899. As a young man, he was active in Scouting, priesthood work, and in the Church auxiliary organizations. He attended the Oneida Stake Academy in Preston, Idaho and later Utah Agricultural College (now Utah State University) in Logan, Utah.

382From 1921 to 1923 he served as a missionary in the British Mission. Following his return home, he continued his education at Brigham Young University in Provo, Utah, graduating with honors, and subsequently he received a scholarship to Iowa State College in Ames, Iowa. There he received his M.S. degree, graduating with honors as well as being inducted into Gamma Sigma Delta, the National Honor Society of Agriculture. He later did additional graduate work at the University of California in Berkeley.

382From 1929 to 1930 President Benson worked as a county agricultural agent in his native Idaho and a year later was asked to head the newly organized department of agricultural economics and marketing at the University of Idaho.

382In that capacity he helped organize the Idaho Cooperative Council and served as its first secretary. In the spring of 1939 he was appointed executive secretary of the National Council of Farmer Cooperatives, a federation of 4,600 cooperative groups nationwide. He subsequently served on several advisory committees and national boards in the fields of agriculture and Scouting. He has also served as a director of several commercial business firms and is a member of the Board of Trustees of Brigham Young University.

On January 15, 1946, President Benson was appointed president of the European Mission of the Church with headquarters in London. The European Saints, under local leadership, had been carrying on during the war under distressing circumstances. Elder Benson was sent to attend to the spiritual affairs of the people, to reopen the missions so that active proselyting and organizational activities might be resumed, and to alleviate suffering among members by distributing food, clothing, bedding and other needed supplies among the Saints. President Benson was one of the first civilians to travel throughout war-torn Europe. He was released from this calling on December 11, 1946.

383President Dwight D. Eisenhower, recognizing President Benson's outstanding administrative ability as well as his years of experience in agricultural affairs, appointed him to the United States Cabinet as Secretary of Agriculture in 1952. One of only two Cabinet members to serve the full eight years with Ike, President Benson returned to full-time Church service in 1961.

383On September 10, 1926, Ezra Taft Benson and Flora Amussen were married in the Salt Lake Temple. They are the parents of six children (two sons and four daughters) and thirty-four grandchildren. President and Sister Benson have a goal for their family, that in this life and in the next there will be "no empty chairs." They are striving for all chairs to be filled, for all family members to be present.

383It is a joy for members of the Church to sustain and follow the thirteenth president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Ezra Taft Benson is a trusted, proven, faithful servant.
