Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

385"Father Called on a Mission"

385A rich blessing for the entire family came as a complete surprise to all. It was during the time, many years ago, when sacrament meeting was held at 2:00 p.m. in the rural wards. We usually went to meeting in the white-top buggy, which would hold the entire family. But at this particular time there was an epidemic—chicken pox, I believe—in the ward. Parents were to attend sacrament meeting, but the children were to stay home. So Father and Mother went to meeting in the one-horse buggy.

385As Father and Mother returned from sacrament meeting and we all gathered around the buggy, we saw something we had never seen before in our home. Both Father and Mother were crying at the same time—and they had just returned from sacrament meeting. Being the oldest, I asked what was wrong. Mother assured us everything was all right. "Then why are you crying?" we asked. "Come into the house and we'll tell you all about it."

As we gathered around the old sofa in the living room, they explained why there were tears. When sacrament meeting was over, the storekeeper opened the store just long enough for the farmers to get their mail, as the post office was in the store. There was no R.F.D. in those days, and opening the store briefly saved a special trip to the post office.

386As our parents proceeded homeward, Father driving and Mother opening the mail, there was a letter from Box B in Salt Lake City. This was a call to go on a mission. No one asked if you were able, ready, or willing to go. The bishop was expected to know and the call came without warning.

386Then Mother explained that they were happy and grateful that Father was considered worthy to fill a mission. Then Father explained, "We're crying a bit because we know it means two years of separation, and your mother and I have never been separated more than two nights at a time in all of our married life, and that has been when I've been in the canyon for poles, fence posts, or derrick timbers."

386Father went on his mission, leaving Mother at home with seven children. The eighth was born four months after he left. In preparation, the small dry farm was sold to finance the mission. A family moved into part of our expanded farm home to rent the row cropland. We children, under Mother's day-to-day encouragement and Father's letters of blessings, took care of the dairy herd and the hay and pastureland.

386You can well imagine who had the hardest end of that mission. But not once did we ever hear a murmur from Mother's lips as she would sing at her work the ballads of youth and the songs of Zion she and Father had enjoyed so much in the ward choir. In fact, my first baby tending—we call it sitting now—I remember was as a boy of seven years tending my younger brothers and sisters while Father and Mother went to choir practice on Wednesday evenings.

It was hard work, but a rich two years. Letters from Father from what seemed to us far away—Davenport, Iowa; Springfield, Illinois; Chicago; Cedar Rapids; etc.—coupled with family prayer and unity brought into that home a spirit of missionary work that never left it. Later, seven sons went on missions from that home, some of them on two or three missions.

387Many years later at the bedside of that noble mother, who, as Father confided to me as the oldest child, had only a few weeks unless the Lord intervened, I heard her farewell words to her fifth son as he left for his mission. "Remember, George, no matter what happens at home, I want you to stay and finish your mission." A few weeks later a telegram from the First Presidency to President LeGrand Richards of the Southern States Mission told of her passing. And a year later a second telegram told of the passing of Father. But true to the wish of his mother and the missionary spirit of that true Latter-day Saint home, George stayed and finished his mission, and a summer later he returned to his old field of labor on a short-time mission. In the brief will, first call on the modest assets was provision for missions for the two younger sons.

387My father, who as a young man had helped to support several of his twelve brothers and sisters on missions also, was spoken of by a prominent citizen, state senator, and nonmember of the Church in these words: "Gentlemen, today we buried the greatest influence for good in Cache Valley." How grateful we eleven children are for parents who always, by word and example, were faithful to the great missionary call of the Master.

387Ezra Taft Benson, God, Family, Country (Deseret Book Co., Salt Lake City, 1974), pp. 52-55.
