Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

"I Was Almost Walking On Air"

Father, how old do you have to be to receive a patriarchal blessing?" asked an Aaronic Priesthood youth at the end of a Sunday School class in which two returned missionaries had made brief reports of their missions.

388The rural Whitney Ward was blessed with a bishop who loved the young people and the great missionary cause. Often from the pulpit and in classes he would quote from the Bible the Lord's counsel to his ancient apostles: "Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature." (Mark 16:15.) And then he would emphasize the great responsibility placed upon the Church in our day to "share the gospel with others" and "our duty to preach the gospel to all the world." As a true "missionary bishop," he expected every boy to be ready for a mission.

388As a means of stimulating interest, the bishop had each returned missionary make a brief report of his mission in the Sunday School to the children and a more complete report in the sacrament meeting later in the day. This particular morning two missionaries had reported. Although it was sometimes difficult to understand how it could be "the happiest two years of my life," as they would conclude after recounting their hardships of opposition, we early got a desire to go on a mission.

388This was the desire that prompted the question I had asked my father that Sunday morning. He told me he knew of no age requirement, but one should be old enough to understand what it means, and of course one must be worthy. I asked him if I was worthy. He informed me that he thought I was, but he was not the one to say because "that is the responsibility of the bishop. Why don't you ask the bishop if you might receive a recommend for a patriarchal blessing?" This I did. After a careful but brief interview in one corner of the chapel—because fifty or sixty years ago many chapels didn't have bishops' offices—he gave me a signed recommend.

As I proudly showed it to my father, he pointed to a tall, white-haired man and said, "Brother Dalley, our stake patriarch, is visiting here today. Why don't you present the recommend to him and ask when you might receive a blessing?" The patriarch responded kindly by putting his hand on my shoulder and saying, "If you'll come with me, we'll walk up the road to the home of my son-in-law, Brother Winward, and I'll give you the blessing right today."

389Up the road, arm-in-arm with this godly man, we went to the farm home. In the parlor, a room used on special occasions, with Brother Winward as scribe, this noble patriarch placed his hands upon my head and gave a clear answer to a boy's prayer. I was promised, if faithful, of course, that I would go on a mission "to the nations of the earth, crying repentance to a wicked world." Filled with happiness and assurance that this and other promises in the blessing would be fulfilled, it seemed that I was almost walking on air during the mile walk to our farm home, where I broke the glad news to the family.

389God, Family, Country, pp. 51-52.
