Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

PrayerBenson, Ezra TaftMissionary WorkBenson, Ezra Taft"The Power of Prayer"

On Sunday evening the elders, dressed in black suits and bowlers, began their open-air assembly near the railway station in Sunderland [England]. As the meeting progressed, attendance increased steadily. Some persons became rowdy, and when the pubs closed, a large group of men, many inebriated, swelled the audience. In order to make themselves heard, the elders turned their backs to each other and shouted their message. Some persons on the periphery began to yell, "What's all the excitement?" Others shouted back, "It's those dreadful Mormons." With increasing pandemonium, the shout went out, "Let's get 'em and throw 'em in the river!"

391The elders became separated, with the crowd pushing Ezra down one side of the railway station and his companion down the other. As he was pushed along in a man-made circle some ten feet in diameter, Ezra began to pray silently for help. "When it seemed that I could hold out no longer," he reported, "a big husky stranger pushed his way through to my side. He looked me straight in the eye and said in a strong, clear voice, 'Young man, I believe every word you said tonight.' As he spoke a little circle cleared around me. This to me was a direct answer to prayer. Then a British bobby appeared."

391The policeman escorted Ezra home with strict instructions to stay put. But when his companion didn't return, Ezra disguised himself in an old English cap and jacket and set out to find him. An onlooker who quickly saw through the disguise told Ezra that the elder's head had been "mashed in." Ezra started off in a sprint to find him and ran into the same policeman, who confirmed that the elder had had a nasty blow, but that he, the policeman, had helped him safely home.

391"I went back to the lodge and found my companion disguising himself in order to go out and look for me," Ezra wrote. "We threw our arms around each other and knelt together in prayer. . . . Resorting to prayer in such a time of crisis was not born of desperation. It was merely the outgrowth of the cherished custom of family prayer with which I had been surrounded since earliest childhood."

391Ezra Taft Benson, A Biography, pp. 62-63.
