Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

ExampleBenson, Ezra Taft"Good Mormons Live It"

Many years ago, a member of our district council in the mission in Washington was traveling by plane. He had been in Canada, and on the flight back the plane developed trouble and had to land on an auxiliary landing field in Pennsylvania. It was a cold night, and the passengers were told that the plane would probably be on the ground for an hour. They got out and stretched and wandered around a little, and then they noticed over in the brush a light. They walked over toward this light and found a CCC camp, and as they opened the door they got an aroma of hot food. So they got courage and walked in, and they were invited to join the CCC boys at dinner. Now, the member of our district council found himself seated between two CCC boys, and when they brought around the hot coffee our friend, who didn't use it ordinarily, thought, "The coffee is hot and I am cold and there isn't anything else readily available to drink." So he took some and engaged in conversation with the two boys beside him. One of them said, "Where do you come from?" He said, "I come from Washington, but originally I came from Utah." "You don't happen to be a Mormon, do you?" "Yes," he replied, "I am a Mormon." The boy said, "You are not a very good one, are you?" Well, he was a pretty good one, and it was an awful shock to him to hear this comment. He said, "What do you know about the Mormons?" The boy said, "Well, a couple of years ago I was in St. George, Utah, and I attended Mormon services. I know you Mormons have in your church what you call the Word of Wisdom, and that good Mormons live it." Can you imagine how the district councilor felt? It wasn't the cup of coffee—that is not going to destroy anyone—but it was the

395fact that he hadn't maintained that which he believed in. He hadn't kept the standards.

395It never pays to let down your standards in this church. You will be thought more of if you live the gospel, if you will be what you profess to be. You will be happier, you will have a better feeling inside, you will do more good in the world, and you will be more effective missionaries. So live church and missionary standards wherever you go.

395God, Family, Country, pp. 62-63.
