Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

CallingsBenson, Ezra Taft396"A Greater Call"

396I know something of the honors which men can bestow, but I know that there is nothing that can compare with the honors which come to us as servants of the Lord through the priesthood of God.

May I be pardoned if I refer to a recent trip during which time I passed through this city and during which time this great call [as an Apostle] was announced. I had been holding a series of meetings with cooperative and agricultural leaders throughout the southwest, in California, and in the intermountain states. While in California, I spent Saturday afternoon and Saturday night at the home of the president of the organization with which I am associated, the National Council of Farmer Cooperatives. This man is a national figure. He was a member of the board during President Hoover's administration. He is a friend of our people. When my fifteen-year-old son and I bade him and his good wife good-bye on Sunday morning, with one of his men who was driving us to Bakersfield, he called me to one side and said: "We know you've had opportunities to go elsewhere, but we want you to stay with the cooperative movement. All you need to do is name your figure. Don't become disinterested. We want you to continue."

397I said, "Mr. Teague, I have no desire to leave the fine group of men with whom I have been associated during the past four years. I love the cooperative movement—I believe in it. It squares with my philosophy of life, my religious philosophy."

397Then only a few days later this call came. I called this man on the phone from Grand Junction, Colorado, and said, "Mr. Teague, the Church has called me to a more important work," and then I indicated what the call was, and this good man said, "With all my heart I congratulate you." From that day until this, there has been nothing but words of praise and congratulations to me personally, but particularly for the Church and its fine ideals and standards and the type of manhood which it turns out into the world.

I carried in my pocket as I went through Salt Lake a note to call to my attention a matter which I proposed to discuss with some of the brethren. I had an opportunity for almost a year to go elsewhere at a figure that shocked me, running into tens of thousands of dollars, an offer to go into the active management of a great cooperative corporation. It would mean leaving the Washington Stake, and I had hoped to have an opportunity to confer with the leaders of the Church. But now there was no need of conferring, for in the meantime this call came, a call greater than any call that can come from men—that can be offered by the men of the world.

398Reed A. Benson, comp., So Shall Ye Reap (Deseret Book Co., Salt Lake City, 1960), pp. 11-12.
