Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

FamilyBenson, Ezra Taft398"We Need More of That Spirit in Our Home"

398I was seated in my office in Salt Lake City when I received a telephone call from a man in New York, a multimillionaire and one of our great industrialists. He had a son in a camp just outside Salt Lake City who had been expecting to be shipped overseas, and then the war had ended and so the servicemen were crowded into that camp. This boy was discouraged and his father was worried about him, so he called and said, "Would you please call him on the telphone and see if you can cheer him up a bit." I said, "Of course, I would be happy to." And so I called him and said, "Wouldn't you like to come into the office for a little visit?" He said, "I surely would."

He was a bit delayed coming in and I was just ready to leave for home when he arrived. I said, "Wouldn't you like to go out to the house with me and take pot luck with the family? My wife doesn't know you are coming, but you will be welcome." He said, "I can't imagine anything I'd rather do tonight than that." So he went with me and we had our dinner and we had our prayer. Then we gathered around the piano afterward and enjoyed ourselves in some singing. After we visited for a while, I drove him down to the bus. In a few days, I got a letter from his father. And you know, you would have thought I had saved the boy's life! In the letter, the father quoted a letter from his son in which the son had said, "Father, I didn't know there were any people in this world who lived like that."

399Yes, we take it all for granted. Here was a man worth millions of dollars, who could buy his son anything that dollars could buy and never miss the dollars, and yet this simple thing of prayer and devotion in the home had passed him by. We need to be more grateful. I think there is no true character without gratitude. It is one of the marks of a real strong character to have a feeling of thanksgiving and gratitude for blessings. We need more of that spirit in our homes, in our daily association, in the Church, everywhere. It doesn't cost anything, and it is so easy to cultivate. It is so easy also to be dissatisfied and to be envious of other people.

399God, Family, Country, pp. 201-2.
