Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

"I Think You Should Stay"

I have many happy memories associated with my brethren in the Council of the Twelve. There were eight years when I was not able to meet with them often, and how I missed being there! But I felt that I had received a call from our prophet when, on learning of the possibility of my being appointed Secretary of Agriculture in President Dwight D. Eisenhower's Cabinet, President David O. McKay said, "My mind is clear, and if the invitation comes in the right spirit, I feel you should accept."

400I remember leaving with a promise of staying two years, and then at the end of two years, the insistence of President Eisenhower that I stay another two years, and then four years more.

400One morning I received in my office in Washington a call from the White House. The appointment secretary on the other end of the line said, "We have a man here by the name of David O. McKay from Salt Lake City who has asked to see the President. Do you know him, and do you think we should have him see the President?" I said I was sure the President would feel honored to see David O. McKay.

400After his interview with the President, President McKay came over to my office and said, "Brother Benson, I didn't even tell my counselors that I was leaving this morning. I just received the impression to get on the plane and come back here to see the President and ask if he wouldn't release you now that the 1956 campaign is over and he has been reelected. You have been here four years."

400I said, "President McKay, I hope you were successful."

400He said, "No, I was not. Of course they can't force you to stay, but I think we have an obligation to our country and that we should accede to his wishes. I think you should stay on."

400But there were very few weeks while I was in Washington that my thoughts didn't turn to the Salt Lake Temple on Thursday, because I knew that on that day of the week the members of my quorum, whom I love most deeply, would be on their knees with the First Presidency, and then they would be gathered around the altar, dressed in the robes of the holy priesthood, and on that day I would be especially remembered.

400God, Family, Country, pp. 69-70.
