Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

"They Have Come At Last"

I know that the Lord can touch the hearts of men behind the iron curtain. I have seen it happen. I have been very close to it. I remember very well our efforts to get to Warsaw, Poland, in 1946 and my desire to get up to Selbongen in East Prussia where we had one congregation, the only congregation in Poland and the only Church-owned building in Germany at that time. There was one plane going, taking supplies to the American Embassy, but no passenger service. We had to get permission from the Russians and the Poles to get into Warsaw. Brother Fred Babbel, who was with me, had tried to make arrangements without success, and then I had tried, and we still weren't successful. But our plane was to leave in two days, and so we did some fasting and praying. At last I went to see the Russian general who was in charge of the Poles and finally, after about two hours in his office with him, he signed the document to permit us to go. Then we made arrangements to ride on the plane with the Americans who were carrying supplies to the American Embassy. I learned later that this general lost his commission because he had given permission for an American to go into Poland, and I always felt that the Spirit worked on this man, because he had previously turned us down.

405In Warsaw there was only one hotel that was even partially intact, and that was the Polonia Hotel. I shared one room with seven other men, most of them members of the press. We got the Americans to loan us a jeep, and we drove up to Selbongen. It took us all day to drive there on Sunday, through two rainstorms and with no cover on the jeep. When we drove into the little town of Selbongen we found the name had been changed to Zelback, because the Poles had changed all the names throughout the area. There was no one on the street because it was Sunday, and as we approached our little chapel, we saw a woman running away from us. She had seen this military vehicle and had thought it meant more trouble, because the people had been persecuted and their homes had been ransacked.

Well, we stopped the jeep and I jumped out. When the woman saw we were civilians, she turned around and came walking toward us. Then she recognized us—I guess from a picture, I don't see how else—and she screamed, "Oh, it's the Brethren! They have come at last!" She ran to us with tears in her eyes and then guided us to the home of the branch president. I think I never saw so many tears shed by a small group as we saw that day, as the word spread and the people came into the branch president's home. Then we held a meeting. I said, "Haven't you had your meetings today, yet?" They said, "Yes, we have had our meetings—priesthood, Sunday School, and sacrament meeting—but now that you are here we want another meeting." It was five o'clock, just starting to get dusk, and so we set the meeting for six and sent the members out to notify the Saints. At six o'clock the little chapel was filled.

406During the service, as I was speaking near the time of closing, two Polish soldiers came in the front door and took a few steps into the building. I motioned for them to come forward. There were only two vacant seats, on the front row. Then, through the interpreter, I told them why I was there and on what authority and something about our work. I went ahead speaking to the people after the soldiers had taken seats at my invitation. I could tell the people were frightened of them, because as they came down the aisle the women would push away from the aisle. As we came to the end of the service and were starting to sing the closing song, they left the meeting place.

406We had planned to close the meeting, but three or four people stood up immediately and asked, "Couldn't we have another meeting? This was not like a real meeting with soldiers here." One lady said, "I have a candle at home I have been saving for a special occasion [there were no lights in the building]." She said, "I will go get it if you want to read from the scriptures." And so we held another meeting for an hour and a quarter with these wonderful people.

406God, Family, Country, pp. 71-73.
