Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

"I Never Heard of a People with Such Vision"

I thought of our first interview with General McNarney, the top general in the American forces. It was in the I. G. Farbin building in Frankfurt, which had been spared by "pin bombing," because the Americans expected it would be their headquarters when the war was over, as it was.

407We had driven our little jeep up to the building, parked it, and gone in to see if we could get an appointment with the general. We had been in Europe just a few days. We wanted to get permission from him to make our own distribution of our welfare supplies to our own people through our own channels. In those days, of course, everything was being distributed through the military. We were told by the colonel at the desk that we couldn't get an appointment for three days. The general was very busy, with important delegations coming to see him. We returned to our car and had a prayer together, then went back in. In the meantime, the secretary at the desk had been changed, and, in less than fifteen minutes, we were in the presence of General McNarney.

407Then I saw the Spirit operate on that man. I heard him say, "Under no conditions can you have permission to distribute your own supplies to your own people. They must come through the military." And, of course, we recognized immediately that if we had to go through the military, our Saints wouldn't get much of the supplies. And so we started telling him about the program of the Church, and when he saw we were somewhat determined, he said, "Well, you go ahead and collect your supplies, and probably by the time you get them collected the policy will be changed." I said, "General, they are already collected; they are always collected. We have ninety warehouses full of supplies. Within twenty-four hours from the time I wire our First Presidency in Salt Lake City, carloads of food, bedding, clothing, and medical supplies will be moving toward Germany." When I said this, he said, "I never heard of people with such vision." And before we left him we had written authorization to make our own distribution to our own people through our own channels, and from that moment on we had wonderful cooperation.

So I know that the Spirit can operate on nonmembers of the Church in high positions when it is in the interests of the work of the Lord. I have seen it with my own eyes.

God, Family, Country, pp. 73-74.
