Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

408"Twenty-Two People Were Living in One Room"

408Probably the saddest part of our mission [in 1946] was with our refugees. These poor unwanted souls had been driven from their once happy homes to destinations unknown. They came with all their earthly possessions on their backs, but after organizing them into branches and calling them into meetings, they sang the songs of Zion with a fervor I am sure has never been surpassed. We visited some of their homes—their shacks—where as many as twenty-two people were living in one room—four complete families! And yet they knelt together in prayer night and morning and bore testimony to us regarding the blessings of the gospel.

Now, just a word about the Welfare Program. I bring to you, my brothers and sisters, the deep gratitude and thanksgiving of the Saints in Europe. The spirit of the Welfare Program was there long before we arrived. The Saints in various countries had sent help to their less fortunate brothers and sisters in other nations. Welfare gardens had been planted. We found them among the bombed-out buildings. We ran on to many instances where, following bombings, branches had joined together and pooled all their remaining supplies, food, clothing, and household articles, and turned them over to the priesthood for distribution according to need.

409It was a great joy when the welfare supplies came through. It was also a great surprise to the military authorities and others to learn with what dispatch the supplies arrived from Zion. . . .

409I have faced congregations of more than a thousand Latter-day Saints where it was estimated by the mission president that more than eighty percent of the total clothing worn was clothing from Zion, sent through the Welfare Program. My brethren and sisters, do you need any further evidence of the need for this program and the inspiration back of it? I wish you could have spent a few days with me in Europe during this past year. I tell you God is directing this program. It is inspired! Had it not been so, there would have been many, many hundreds more of our Latter-day Saints perish with hunger and die of cold because of the lack of simple food commodities and clothing.

409Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3, pp. 33-34.
