Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

35"I Am Gazing upon the Valleys of Those mountains"

35[Among those present when this prediction was uttered was Elder Anson Call, who has left on record additional details respecting this remarkable prediction. He says that in the shade of the building mentioned was a barrel of ice water, and the men were drinking it to quench their thirst on the hot August day. Following is Anson's account:]

35"With the tumbler still in his hand he prophesied that the Saints would go to the Rocky Mountains: and, said he, 'this water tastes much like that of the crystal streams that are running from the snowcapped mountains. . . .' I had before seen him in a vision and now saw while he was talking his countenance changed to white, not the deadly white of a bloodless face, but a living brilliant white. He seemed absorbed in gazing at something at a great distance and said: 'I am gazing upon the valleys of those mountains.' This was followed by a vivid description of the scenery of these mountains as I have since become acquainted with it.

35"Pointing to Shadrach Roundy and others he said: 'There are some men here who shall do a great work in that land.'

36Pointing to me, he said: 'There is Anson, he shall go and shall assist in building up cities from one end of the country to the other and you,' rather extending the idea to all those he had spoken of, 'shall perform as great a work as has been done by man; so that the nations of the earth shall be astonished; and many of them will be gathered in that land and assist in building cities and temples and Israel shall be made to rejoice.'

36"It was impossible to represent in words this scene, which is still vivid in my mind, of the grandeur of Joseph's appearance, his beautiful descriptions of this land and his wonderful prophetic utterances as they emanated from the glorious inspiration that overshadowed him.

36Joseph Smith, History of the Church, 5:85-86.
