Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

BRIGHAM YOUNG

Biographical Sketch

39After the Prophet's death, Sidney Rigdon, Joseph Smith's wavering former counselor, had returned from Pittsburg to plead with the people to make him the guardian of the Church. He called a meeting of the Saints and addressed them. When he concluded, Brigham Young, President of the Council of the Twelve, stood and said, "Here is Brigham. Have his knees ever faltered?" Every honest person in that congregation was compelled in his heart to reply, "No, Brother Brigham. You have never faltered. >From the moment you first heard the gospel fourteen years ago, your course has been an undeviating course of righteousness and truth, and you have pursued it with astonishing zeal."

39As the people watched and listened to Brigham Young, the mantel of Joseph fell upon him and he looked and sounded like the martyred prophet. Brigham Young asked all those who wanted Sidney Rigdon to lead them to manifest it. No one raised his hand. He then asked for a show of hands of those who would sustain the Twelve, with Brigham Young as the president of the Quorum, the presiding body in the Church. The voting was unanimous.

40Brigham Young had been sustained as an original member of the Quorum of the Twelve in this dispensation in 1835. The death of David W. Patton and the apostasy of Thomas B. Marsh brought Brigham Young to the presidency of that quorum. He was a tireless worker in the cause of truth. Under his leadership the temple at Nauvoo was completed as a monument to the Lord Jesus Christ and the beloved Prophet, Joseph Smith. Brigham Young was the leader of the mass exodus to the West and looked over Salt Lake Valley and declared, "This is the right place." He was loved of his people. He was a man of faith and a man of vision. Under his inspired leadership, more than three hundred communities were colonized. The missionary efforts of the Church became world-wide and tens of thousands of converts came to Zion. He was universally loved and respected by his people, and when he came to a community, it was a great occasion. No one had to encourage the Saints to provide a warm welcome for their Prophet. The greeting was spontaneous and joyous. The bands played, banners waved, people cheered, and little girls dressed in starched dresses threw flowers in the roadway before the Prophet's carriage. Brigham Young led his people for more than thirty years, and under his inspired leadership, the forbidding wilderness literally blossomed as a rose.

40Brigham Young was born on June 1, 1801, in Whittingham, Vermont. In 1829 he moved to Mendon, New York, just fifteen miles from Palmyra. In 1830 a missionary of the Restored Church came to Mendon. He approached the home of a family named Tomlinson. Phinehas Young, a brother of Brigham Young, was having lunch with the Tomlinsons. The missionary said:

40" 'There is a book, sir, I wish you to read.' The thing appeared so novel to me, [said Phinehas] that for a moment I hesitated, saying—'Pray, sir, what book have you?' 'The Book of Mormon, or, as it is called by some, the Golden Bible.' 'Ah, sir, then it purports to be a revelation?' 'Yes,' said he, 'it is a revelation from God.' I took the book, and by his request looked at the testimony of the witnesses [which in that day, in the first editions, was in the back of the book] . . . Said he—'If you will read this book with a prayerful heart and ask God to give you a witness you will know of the truth of this work.' I told him I would do so, and then asked him his name. He said his name was Samuel H. Smith. 'Ah,' said I, 'you are one of the witnesses.' 'Yes,'

41said he, 'I know the book to be a revelation from God, translated by the gift and power of the Holy Ghost, and that my brother, Joseph Smith, Jun., is a Prophet, Seer and Revelator.' " [^1]

41The book was read by Phinehas, his father, John Young, and by Brigham Young. Brigham Young had little opportunity to meet Mormon missionaries, and it wasn't until April 14, 1832, that he was baptized. He was ordained an elder the same day and his soul was filled with the "fire" of the gospel. He yearned to meet the Prophet Joseph, and in company with his brother, Joseph Young, and his close friend, Heber C. Kimball, he traveled to Kirtland, Ohio, to meet Joseph Smith. He dedicated himself to the Prophet, moved to Kirtland to be near him and to follow his example and direction.

41From the time Brigham Young heard the gospel in 1830 until 1837, he traveled thousands of miles—mostly on foot—for the sake of the gospel. His loyalty and zeal from his introduction to the gospel to the time of his death is legend.

41Four years before the end of his life, President Young wrote the following to the editor of the New York Herald:

41My whole life is devoted to the Almighty's service, and while I regret that my mission is not better understood by the world, the time will come when I will be understood, and I leave to futurity the judgment of my labors and their result as they shall become manifest. [^2]

41At the age of seventy-six, Brigham Young lay near death. He had lived a full, exemplary life. His eyelids were shut; he appeared to be unconscious. Suddenly his eyes opened, and in a strong voice he uttered one word three times: "Joseph. Joseph. Joseph." He closed his eyes, and the great prophet Brigham Young was dead. The date—August 29, 1877.

41Preston Nibley, who wrote extensively of Brigham Young, said:

If I were to point out the principle thing, which, more than all others, made President Young the great man he was, I think I should reply, without hesitation, that it was his ability to believe—his great faith. First, faith in a living God, to whom he felt personally responsible and to whom he felt obligated to render up an accounting for all the deeds done in the flesh. Second, faith in every principle and doctrine revealed and taught by the Prophet Joseph Smith, and a firm and unyielding determination to shape his life according to those principles. Third, faith in himself, and in his ability to carry on the great work of establishing the Kingdom of God, the leadership of which had come to him after the death of the Prophet. Time and time again, in this history, I have been astounded by the strength of this man's faith; such faith I never encountered in any other person. On his tombstone one might well have written, HE BELIEVED. Yes, he believed his religion, this great man, and he shaped his life to its principles, to his dying day.

42Brigham Young carried on the work commenced by Joseph Smith in a remarkable manner. Those who were concerned about the future of the Church at Joseph's death, those who thought it was Joseph Smith's church, quickly learned that the leader of the Church was the Lord Jesus Christ, and that Brigham Young had been prepared to assume leadership of the Church under the direction of the head of the Church. What a great leader the second prophet of the dispensation of the fulness of times was!

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. Joseph Smith was eight years old at the time of this illness.
[^2] . . I saw a pillar of light exactly over my head, above the brightness of the sun, which descended gradually until it fell upon me. . . When the light rested upon me I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. (Joseph Smith 2:16, 17.)
