Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

43"He Talked to the Lord"

43Heber J. Grant seems to have gained inspiration and encouragement from President Brigham Young whom he met in a rather unusual way:

43Fifty-four years ago [1863], as a little child, I took a sleigh ride with President Brigham Young, that is, I ran out and took hold of the back of the sleigh, intending to ride a block and then drop off and walk home; but President Young was driving such a fine team, or at least his driver was, that I dared not let go, hence rode on till we reached the Cottonwood, and then when the sleigh slowed up, to pass through the stream, I jumped off, and the president saw me. He said, "Stop, Brother Isaac, stop. The little boy is nearly frozen. Put him under the buffalo robe and get him warm." Isaac Wilson was his driver. After I got warm he inquired my name, and told me about my father, and his love for him. He told me to tell my mother that he wanted her to send me up to his office in six months to have a visit with him; and in six months I went for the visit. From that time, fifty-four years ago, until the day of his death, I was intimately acquainted with President Young. . . .

I was almost as familiar in the homes of President Brigham Young as I was in the home of my own mother. . . . I have spent hours and hours, as a child, in the rooms of Eliza R. Snow, listening to her counsel and advice, and hearing her relate incidents in the life of Joseph Smith the Prophet, and bearing witness of the wonderful blessings of God to Brigham Young. As I say, I was familiar with the Prophet Brigham Young. I knelt down time and time again in his home in the Lion House at family prayers, as a child and as a young man; and I bear witness that as a little child, upon more than one occasion, because of the inspiration of the Lord to Brigham Young while he was supplicating God for guidance, I have lifted my head, turned and looked at the place where Brigham Young was praying, to see if the Lord was not there. It seemed to me that he talked to the Lord as one man would talk to another.

Church History, Student Supplement (Provo: Seminaries and Institutes of Religion, 1969), pp. 61-62.
