Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

Young, BrighamGrant, B. F.53"I Saw a Tear Rolling down His Cheek"

53The following story was related by B. F. Grant, son of Jedediah M. Grant.

53My father died when I was only a few weeks old. Mother made moccasins out of deer skins, and sold them to stores at a very small margin of revenue to her. She did housework for different families when it was obtainable. When I was two years old, mother married outside the Mormon Church. As she was going to Denver, Colorado, to live, grandmother persuaded her to leave me in her care. Grandmother was a cripple. It was difficult for her to care for a little boy, and so after a time, she gave me to Beason Lewis, who lived in Richmond, Cache Valley. I remained with this family until I was between eleven and twelve years old. About this time mines were discovered in Montana, and trains passed through Utah buying flour, butter eggs, etc., to be carried to the Montana mines. One of these trains stopped at the Lewis place to make repairs to their wagons. I made arrangements to run away from home and go with this train to Montana. I remained there until I was fourteen. The terminus of the Union Pacific was located at Corinne, where the freight from Montana was delivered. I met one of the freighters, who, learning that I was a son of Jedediah M. Grant, invited me to go back to Utah with him. I returned to Salt Lake City when I was between fourteen and fifteen years of age. I went to work in a coal and wood yard.

53I had been in Salt Lake City only a short time when in some way President Young learned where I was and what I was doing. President Young's son Feramorz and my brother, Heber, at the request of President Young, searched me out and informed me that President Young wanted to see me.

The next day I called on him at his office, and he happened to be alone. I told him who I was, and he did not merely reach out his hand to shake mine, but he arose from his chair and gave me a father's handshake. In so doing he discovered that the callouses on my hands were hard and thick, and he remarked, "My boy, what kind of work are you doing?" I replied, "I am unloading coal and chopping wood."

54He then resumed his seat and continued his inquiry regarding my past life and what I had been doing. He remarked, "Isn't it pretty heavy work, shoveling coal and chopping wood, for a boy of your age?"

54I replied, "No, sir, I have been used to hard work all my life."

54He answered, "Wouldn't you like to have something easier than your present work, for instance, a position in a store?"

54I replied, "I haven't got sense enough to work in a store."

54He said, "What do you mean by that?"

54I replied, "I can neither read, nor write."

54I discovered this good and great man's heart was touched by this remark. I saw a tear rolling down his cheek, and he took his handkerchief and wiped them off and said, "My boy, come and live with me; I will give you a home; I will clothe you; I will send you to school; and you can work during the vacation for me."

54I accepted his kind offer. He became a father to me. He furnished a home; he clothed me and provided an opportunity for me to attend school; and he gave me five dollars a week for spending money, which was a very princely allowance in those days of hardship and trial. His own sons would laughingly tell me they thought I was their father's pet.

54Soon after I went to live with President Young, I was given a team and was doing general work on his farm and performing other duties incident to pioneer life. Many a time I have passed him on the road with a load of gravel, sand or other materials, and I don't remember an instance in my life that this great man, if he saw me, ever failed to recognize me by waving his hand. I cannot help but think, where in the world could you find another man of his importance and busy life who would condescend to recognize or speak of a boy such as I?

55During the vacation when I was driving a team, at times breakfast would be served a little late. There was a certain time when every team was supposed to be hooked up and going to its work. When breakfast was late I would not always be on time with my team. The foreman complained to me about this and I told him that I milked the cows and fed the pigs and did the chores, but could not go to work without breakfast. One morning he became angry and told me if I couldn't get out on time to quit. I, boy-like, took his advice without calling on President Young, left, and went to work in the coal yard again.

55President Young was soon informed of this and sent for me. When I went into his office he shook hands and wanted to know why I left home. I told him the boss had discharged me.

55"Oh," he said, "the boss? Who is he?" I gave the foreman's name.

55He laughed and said, "No, my boy, I am the boss. Didn't I make arrangements for you to come and live with me?"

55I replied, "Yes, sir."

55He then said, "Remember, when you are discharged I will attend to it myself; now go back, get your team and go to work."

55"I don't know whether _____ will allow me to go to work now."

55"Never mind, my boy," he assured me, "I'll attend to it myself."

55B. F. Grant, "Church Section," Salt Lake Deseret News, May 30, 1942, p. 4.
