Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

ProphetsYoung, BrighamYoung, BrighamTaylor, John56"It Appeared to Be Joseph Smith"

56As told by John Taylor.

56After the martyrdom of the Prophet, the Twelve soon returned to Nauvoo and learned of the aspirations of Sidney Rigdon. He had claimed that the Church needed a guardian, and that he was that guardian. He had appointed the day for the guardian to be selected, and of course was present at the meeting, which was held in the open air. The wind was blowing toward the stand so strongly at the time that an improvised stand was made out of a wagon, which was drawn up at the back part of the congregation, and which he, William Marks, and some others occupied. He attempted to speak, but was much embarrassed. He had been the orator of the Church; but, on this occasion his oratory failed him, and his talk fell very flat. In the meantime President Young and some of his brethren came and entered the stand. The wind by this time had ceased to blow. After Sidney Rigdon had spoken, President Young arose and addressed the congregation, which faced around to see and hear him, turning their backs towards the wagon occupied by Sidney.

. . . It was necessary that there should be some manifestation of the power of God. . . . No sooner did President Young arise than the power of God rested down upon him in the face of the people. It did not appear to be Brigham Young; it appeared to be Joseph Smith that spoke to the people—Joseph in his looks, in his manner, and in his voice; even his figure was transformed so that it looked like that of Joseph, and everybody present, who had the Spirit of God, saw that he was the man who God had chosen to hold the keys now that the Prophet Joseph had gone behind the veil, and that he had given him power to exercise them. And from that time forward, notwithstanding the claims of Sidney Rigdon . . . God has borne testimony to the acts and teachings of His servant Brigham, and those of his servants, the apostles, who received the keys in connection with him. God sustained him and upheld him, and he blessed all those that listened to his counsel.

57John Taylor in Journal of Discourses, 23:363-64.
