Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

59"Go, Said President Young; We Will Remain Here"

59The following was told by President Joseph F. Smith.

I am happy to express to this audience my knowledge of the successors of Joseph Smith. They raised me, in part, so to speak. In other words, with them I journeyed across the deserts, by the side of my ox-team, following President Brigham Young and his associates to these barren wastes, barren as they were when we first entered this valley. I believed in him then, and I know him now! I believed in his associates, and I know them now; for I lived with them. I slept with them, I traveled with them, I heard them preach and teach and exhort, and I saw their wisdom of Almighty God.

60When President Young set his foot down here, upon this desert spot, it was in the midst of persuasion, prayers and petitions on the part of some Latter-day Saints who had gone forward and landed upon the coast of California, that beautiful, rich country, semi-tropical, abounding in resources that no inland country could possess, inviting and appealing for settlers at that time. And just such settlers as President Brigham Young could have taken there—honest people, people who were firm in their faith, who were established in the knowledge of truth and righteousness and in the testimony of Jesus Christ—which is the spirit of prophecy—and in the testimony of Joseph Smith which was a confirmation of the spirit of Christ and His mission—these people pleaded with President Young. "Come with us," they said, "and let us go to the coast. Go where roses bloom all the year 'round, where the fragrance of flowers scents the air from May until May, where beauty reigns; where the elements of wealth are to be found and only need to be developed. Come with us."

"Go," said President Young; "we will remain here, and we will make the desert blossom like the rose. We will fulfill the scriptures by remaining here." . . . Why, bless your soul, what did President Young know about Utah, at that early day? We did not know that there was even a lump of coal in existence in the land. I myself passed the first fall and winter after our entrance into this valley hauling wood out of Mill Creek Canyon and Parley's Canyon; and during that fall and winter I hauled forty loads of wood with my oxen and wagon out of these canyons. Every load I cut and hauled diminished the supply of wood for fuel for the future; and I said to myself: What will we do when the wood is all gone? How will we live here when we can't get any more fuel, for it was going rapidly. I followed that pursuit until it took me three days in the mountains with my ox-team and wagon, to get a load of wood for winter fuel; and what were we to do? Yet President Young said, "This is the place." Well, ordinarily, our judgment and our faith would have been tried, in the decision of the President, if we had not had implicit confidence in him. If we had not known that he was the mouthpiece of God, that he was the real and legitimate successor of the Prophet Joseph Smith in the presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, we could have doubted his wisdom, and we could have faltered in our faith in his promise and word. But no, we believed him; and we stayed; and so far as I am concerned I am here yet. And I propose to remain here as long as the Lord wants me to stay.

61And what has developed? Well, before the wood gave out entirely in the mountains we discovered coal up in Summit County, and then we began to discover it all along the mountains here, and we kept on discovering it. . . . We have discovered that this country was really the gold-mine country of the world; that here abounded silver as well as gold. . . . We have discovered now that some of our mountains here are practically made of copper, and men are hewing copper out of the mountains by millions of tons. . . .

. . . I was a farmer. I had to plow my land and farm it, but I did not have a spear of grass or hay to feed my team, and how was I going to do my spring work? This valley produced very little hay at that time. I hitched up my team, my brother and I, and we drove sixty miles to the south and bought a couple of loads of wild grass hay, and carted that hay down sixty miles to feed our teams in order to plow our land. I used to think, how in the world are we going to live in Utah without feed for our teams? Just then the Lord sent a handful of alfalfa seed into the valley, and Christopher Layton planted it, watered it, and it matured; and from that little beginning, Utah can now produce a richer crop of hay than Illinois or Missouri can do. So the hay question was settled, and the coal question was settled, then the question of producing food from the land. Why, it was a marvel . . . the soil is rich, and everything is favorable for Zion here where President Young determined that he would stay. If we had not stayed here it is clear we would have been overwhelmed and swallowed up by the multitudes who rushed to California [Gold Rush in 1849].

62Preston Nibley, Faith Promoting Stories (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1943), pp. 78-84.
