Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

JOHN TAYLOR

Biographical Sketch

65The bodies of Joseph and Hyrum were in wagons shielded from the burning sun by brush. John Taylor had been placed on a sled because the pain caused by the movement of a wagon was to much to bear. At intervals loyal friends would bathe his wounds with ice water to lessen the pain. The procession neared Nauvoo, and it was met by a mournful host.

65John Taylor survived Carthage Jail. The Lord had chosen this young apostle to lead this church one day. Even before his demonstration of courage at Carthage, the stalwart John Taylor had been given the title "Defender of the Faith" by his fellow Saints. John Taylor, like Brigham Young, never wavered.

65Parley P. Pratt was called by Heber C. Kimball to undertake a mission to Canada in 1836, and the Lord carefully directed Elder Pratt to John Taylor. The following was written by Parley P. Pratt:

My place of destination was Toronto, around on the north side of the lake. If I went by land I would have a circuitous route, muddy and tedious to go on foot. The lake had just opened, and steamers had commenced plying between the two places; two dollars would convey me to Toronto in a few hours, and save some days of laborious walking; but I was an entire stranger in Hamilton, and also in the province; and money I had none. Under these circumstances I pondered what I should do. I had many times received answers to prayers in such matters; but now it seemed hard to exercise faith, because I was among strangers and entirely unknown. The Spirit seemed to whisper to me to try the Lord, and see if anything was too hard for him, that I might know and trust Him under all circumstances. I retired to a secret place in a forest and prayed to the Lord for money to enable me to cross the lake. I then entered Hamilton and commenced to chat with some of the people. I had not tarried many minutes before I was accosted by a stranger, who inquired my name and where I was going. He also asked me if I did not want some money. I said yes. He then gave me ten dollars and a letter of introduction to John Taylor of Toronto. . . . (Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, pp. 134-35.)

66The means to pursue his journey and the name of John Taylor came to Parley P. Pratt as a direct answer to prayer. John Taylor was converted to the Church and journeyed to Kirtland to meet Joseph Smith.

66John Taylor was born in Milnthrope, Westmoreland County, England, on November 1, 1808. In 1830 he emigrated with his family to Canada. He was ordained an apostle on December 19, 1838, under the hands of Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball. Elder Taylor was a courageous missionary, writer, and newspaper editor.

66In the summer of 1857, Elder Taylor spoke of the approach of Johnson's Army during the Utah War. His remarks exemplify the courage and determination that were so characteristic of his life:

66So far as I am concerned, I say let everything come as God has ordained it. I do not desire trials; I do not desire affliction; I would pray to God to leave me not in temptation; . . . but if the earthquake bellows, the lightnings flash, the thunders roll and the powers of darkness are let loose, and the spirit of evil is permitted to rage and an evil influence is brought to bear on the Saints, and my life with theirs, is put to the test—let it come. . . . I know that President Young and those associated with him are full of the spirit of revelation, and they know what they are doing; I feel to acquiesce and put my shoulder to the work, whatever it is. If it is for peace, let it be peace; if it is for war, let it be to the hilt. [^1]

66President Brigham Young said of John Taylor:

With regard to brother John Taylor, I will say that he has one of the strongest intellects of any man that can be found; he is a powerful man, he is a mighty man, and we may say that he is a powerful editor, but I will use a term to suit myself, and say that he is one of the strongest editors that ever wrote. . . .

67After the death of Brigham Young, the Quorum of the Twelve, with John Taylor as the quorum president, presided over the Church until October, 1880, at which time John Taylor became the President of the Church.

67His administration lasted until July 25, 1887. On that day he died at Kaysville, Utah. The day after his death the following appropriate tribute appeared in the Deseret News:

67Once more the Latter-day Saints are called upon to mourn the death of their leader—the man who has held the keys of the Kingdom of God upon earth. President John Taylor departed this life at five minutes to eight o'clock on the evening of Monday, July 25th, 1887, aged 78, 8 months and 25 days.

67In communicating this sad intelligence to the Church, over which he has so worthily presided for nearly ten years past, we are filled with emotion too deep for utterance. A faithful, devoted and fearless servant of God, the Church in his death has lost its most conspicuous and experienced leader. Steadfast to and immovable in the truth, few men have ever lived who have manifested such integrity and such unflinching moral and physical courage as our beloved President who has just gone from us. He never knew the feeling of fear connected with the work of God. But in the face of angry mobs, and at other times when in imminent danger of personal violence from those who threatened his life, and upon occasions when the people were menaced with public peril, he never blanched—his knees never trembled, his hand never shook. Every Latter-day Saint always knew before-hand, on occasions when firmness and courage were needed, where President John Taylor would be found and what his tone would be. He met every issue squarely, boldly and in a way to call forth the admiration of all who saw and heard him. Undaunted courage, unyielding firmness were among his most prominent characteristics, giving him distinction among men who were distinguished for the same qualities. With these were combined an intense love of freedom and hatred of oppression. He was a man whom all could trust, and throughout his life he enjoyed, to an extent surpassed by none, the implicit confidence of the Prophets Joseph, Hyrum and Brigham and all the leading men and members of the Church. The title of "Champion of Liberty," which he received at Nauvoo, was always felt to be most appropriate for him to bear. But it was not only in the possession of these qualities that President Taylor was great. His judgment was remarkably sound and clear, and through life he has been noted for the wisdom of his counsels and teachings.

68His great experience made his suggestions exceedingly valuable; for there has scarcely been a public movement of any kind commenced, carried on, or completed since he joined the Church, in which he has not taken part. (Nibley, The Presidents of the Church, pp. 118-20.)

68John Taylor was a powerful man, well built—six feet tall—a brilliant orator, debator and writer, an unwavering servant of the Lord Jesus Christ. He was an intimate friend of the Prophet Joseph Smith and has taken his unique place in Church history.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. Joseph Smith was eight years old at the time of this illness.
