Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

MoralityGrant, Heber J.ForgivenessGrant, Heber J.73"I Shut Up the Book and Rushed Back to the President"

73The following is by President Heber J. Grant:

73I shall tell you one incident in my life.

73A man was cut off from the Church for adultery and asked to be restored. President John Taylor wrote a letter to the brethren that had taken action against the man, in which he said: "I want every man to vote his own convictions, and not to vote to make it unanimous unless it is unanimous."

73When the matter was presented and voted upon, the vote stood half for and half against restoration.

73Later he came up again, and a majority were in favor of his being baptized.

73Finally, all of the men that were at the trial, except one, voted to let him be baptized. President John Taylor sent for me and told me I was the only man that stood in the way of this man's being baptized, and he said: "How will you feel when you meet the Lord, if this man is permitted to come up and say he repented although his sins were as scarlet, and you refused to let him be baptized?"

73I said: "I will look the Lord squarely in the eye, and I will tell Him that any man that can destroy the virtue of a girl and then lie and claim that she was maligning him and blackmailing him, will never get back into this Church with my vote. You said in your letter to vote our convictions, and I will vote them and stay with them unless you want me to change."

73He said: "Stay with your convictions, my boy."

73I walked to my home, only one block away. I picked up the Doctrine and Covenants. I was reading it prayerfully and humbly, and marking passages. Instead of its opening at the bookmark, it opened at the passage:

74Wherefore, I say unto you, that ye ought to forgive one another; for he that forgiveth not his brother his trespasses standeth condemned before the Lord; for there remaineth in him the greater sin.

74I, the Lord, will forgive whom I will forgive, but of you it is required to forgive all men. (D&C 64:9-10.)

74I shut up the book and rushed back to the President, and I said, "I give my consent."

74Brother Taylor had a habit, when something pleased him, of shaking himself and laughing, and he said: "My gracious, Heber, this is remarkable; what has happened?" And I told him. He said: "Heber, when you left here a few minutes ago did you not think: what if he had defiled my wife or daughter? And when you thought that, did you not feel as if you would like to just knock the life out of that man?"

74I said, "I certainly did."

74"How do you feel now?"

74"Well, really and truly Brother Taylor, I hope the poor old sinner can be forgiven."

74"You feel a whole lot better, don't you?"

74I said, "I certainly do."

74He added: "I put that clause in that letter for you and my son. You have learned a lesson as a young man. You have learned a good lesson, that this gospel is one of forgiveness of sin, of awful sin, if there is true repentance; and it brings peace into your heart when you forgive the sinner. It brings peace when you love the man that you hated, provided the man turns to doing right. You have learned a lesson in your youth. Never forget it." And I never have.

74Heber J. Grant in Conference Report, October 5, 1941, pp. 148-49.
