Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

TestimonyTaylor, John75"Under a Dark Cloud"

75Shortly after his baptism, John Taylor was ordained an elder in the Church, and began his labors in the ministry. He was now preaching the gospel in America in fulfillment of the revelation he received in his youth.

75So rapidly did the work spread in Canada, that apostles Orson Hyde and Orson Pratt were sent to assist Parley. The country was excited on the subject of "Mormonism," and the ministers alarmed. Public discussions were frequent, and the truth everywhere triumphed. All through the summer of 1836, Elder Taylor was actively engaged in the ministry, and when in the autumn the apostles departed for Kirtland, he was appointed to preside over the churches they had founded.

75In March of the following year, Elder Taylor visited Kirtland and there met the Prophet Joseph Smith, who entertained him at his house and gave him many items of information pertaining to the work of the Lord in this dispensation. At that time there was a bitter spirit of apostasy rife in Kirtland. A number in the Quorum of the Twelve were disaffected towards the Prophet, and the Church seemed on the point of disintegration. Among others, Parley P. Pratt was floundering in darkness and, coming to Elder Taylor, told him of some things wherein he considered the Prophet Joseph in error. To his remarks Elder Taylor replied:

"I am surprised to hear you speak so, Brother Parley. Before you left Canada you bore a strong testimony to Joseph Smith being a prophet of God, and to the truth of the work he has inaugurated; and you said you knew these things by revelation, and the gift of the Holy Ghost. You gave to me a strict charge to the effect that though you or an angel from heaven was to declare anything else I was not to believe it. Now Brother Parley, it is not man that I am following, but the Lord. The principles you taught me led me to him, and I now have the same testimony that you then rejoiced in. If the work was true six months ago, it is true today; if Joseph Smith was then a prophet, he is now a prophet."

76To the honor of Parley, be it said, he sought no further to lead Elder Taylor astray; nor did he use much argument in the first place. "He with many others," says Elder Taylor, "was passing under a dark cloud; he soon made all right with the Prophet Joseph, and was restored to full fellowship."

76Roberts, Life of John Taylor, pp. 39-40.
