Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

Missionary WorkTaylor, John"I Have Had a Singular Dream"

The Prophet Joseph told us just before we left for England (1839) that we must not preach the gathering to the people, because at that time there was no place to gather to. "Preach the first principles of the gospel," said he, "but do not say anything about the gathering." We did as he directed us. The principle of gathering was not preached; but a great many came into the Church—a great many thousands were baptized. Myself and an uncle of Brother Joseph F. Smith—that is, his mother's brother—ministered in Liverpool; we raised up a church there. I remember on one occasion a certain sister came to me and said: "Elder Taylor, I have had a singular dream, and I do not know what it means." We had not preached, as I have said, the principle of gathering, because Joseph told us not to preach it. "What is the nature of the dream?" I inquired. "I thought," she said, "there were a number of Saints standing on the pier head (the place where the vessels start from), and they seemed as if they were bound for somewhere. They said they were going to Zion, and they sang the songs of Zion; and you were with them. Now, can you interpret the dream for me? "I guess I could," said I, "but let it alone for the present." We could not prevent people from being impressed in this way. We could not help the Lord giving them dreams, neither could Joseph Smith. It was the privilege of the Saints to have revelation for themselves. . . . Joseph Smith might tell us it was not wisdom to preach the principle of gathering; but we could not help the Lord revealing that principle through the medium of the Holy Ghost, which was to teach us all things. The Holy Ghost had operated upon this woman—and upon many others at the same time—in this way. Afterwards we received a letter from Brother Joseph stating that we might teach the principle and instruct the people to gather to Nauvoo. Now I could interpret the dream. I could have done so before had I not been prohibited.

82John Taylor in Journal of Discourses, 24:199-200.
