Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

ObedienceGrant, Heber J.89"Richard, He Did Not Give Any Reasons."

89As told by President Heber J. Grant.

89As a young man Richard W. Young graduated as a cadet at West Point, and before going to the school he was set apart by his grandfather, President Brigham Young, to serve as a missionary while in the school, and then, after graduation, to continue as a missionary in the army.

89After his graduation there was a surplus, so he assured me, of graduates from West Point, and more second lieutenants than the army needed, and it was considered no disgrace whatever for the graduates to resign. On the contrary, the government was pleased to receive their resignations with the understanding that they would volunteer should our country ever be engaged in war.

89Richard consulted his uncle, Colonel Willard Young, and other friends including myself, stating that he would like to resign, as he was the only living child of his widowed mother. He hated to be separated from her, and an army career would not permit him to be near her.

89Some of us agreed to lend him money to secure a legal education, which would cost, he thought, from four to six thousand dollars. We had no doubt he would make a success as a lawyer and would repay the loan.

89After he had partially arranged for the money to pay his expenses for his education as a lawyer, he said to me:

89"Heber, inasmuch as grandfather blessed me and set me apart as an army missionary, do you think it is proper for me to resign that missionary labor without consulting his successor, President John Taylor?"

89I told him it would not be right. He consulted President Taylor, and was told to remain in the army. It was a great disappointment to Richard.

90When he secured his appointment in the army after his graduation, he was assigned to Governor's Island, a few minutes' ride from New York City. He entered Columbia Law School in New York, was graduated with honors, and during the time of securing his education he received a salary as second lieutenant and had quarters for himself and his family on Governor's Island, then counted by many as the finest army post in the entire United States. He not only escaped being in debt several thousand dollars for his legal education, but in addition received a salary while securing his education.

90After he had been graduated from Columbia Law School, General Winfield Scott Hancock, who was in command at Governor's Island, commended him on the industry he had exhibited in preparing himself for the battle of life. . . .

90General Hancock also said he wished he could promote Richard W. Young. But as that was out of the question, he was pleased that he could do one thing for him, and that was to choose him as one of his own staff officers. He remarked: "Lieutenant Young, you are chosen on my staff with the rank of major."

90I was in New York City at the funeral of ex-President U. S. Grant. As I recall it, the procession was over five miles long. I was watching the procession from one of the insurance offices on Broadway, and it filled my heart with pride and gratitude to see a grandson of Brigham Young riding with the commanding general on the first line of that great five mile funeral procession.

90After graduation as a lawyer, Richard still kept in mind his wish to return to Salt Lake City, to be at home with his mother and to help take care of her, but feared that with the limited salary he was getting after graduation from West Point he could do little or nothing for her.

90Subsequently, when the permanent judge advocate-general had been given a special assignment at Washington, General Hancock appointed Richard temporary judge advocate-general of the eastern department of the army, and . . . was working to have him permanently appointed judge advocate-general of the Missouri department at the time General Hancock died.

91Richard then fell back to the rank of lieutenant, as another "Pharoah," figuratively speaking, had arisen who did not know "Joseph." Richard came home on a vacation, and in the mean-time I had become one of the apostles. He then asked me, also his uncle, Brigham Young, Jr., to plead with President Taylor to permit him to resign, as he had secured his education as a lawyer and wanted to come home and get behind him the starvation period of a young legal graduate.

91Brother Brigham Young, Jr., and I argued to the best of our ability at a meeting in the old Endowment House for Richard to be released from the army. Some others spoke in favor of his resignation, and when we had finished our talks, President Taylor said: "The time has not yet arrived for that young man to resign from the army."

91This was a very great disappointment to Richard. He wanted to know what the reasons were. I told him there were no reasons given, only that President Taylor said he ought not to resign.

91He said: "I would like to have some reasons."

91I smiled and said: "Richard, he did not give any reasons when he told you to stay in the army, and you secured your education free of debt and were paid a salary by the government while you were doing so, and upon graduation you were honored by being chosen on the staff of General Hancock. I think you can now well afford to take the advice of President Taylor." He said: "Oh, I wouldn't think of doing anything else, but I wish there were some reasons."

91I assured him that when Brother Taylor said, "Your young friend ought to stay in the army," I had an impression that that was exactly the right thing.

91Richard was on his way to his new assignment—I have forgotten to what place he was assigned—when he met one of his fellow students who had graduated in the same class, and he was bewailing his fate because he had to come way out to Utah. He thought Richard—as I remember the expression—was a lucky dog, in having the appointment which had been assigned to him, having previously had the best place in the army, namely, Governor's Island, and then getting another fine appointment.

92Richard suggested to his fellow graduate that they apply to the secretary of war for an exchange of assignments. They did so. The exchange was made, and Richard was stationed at Fort Douglas for four years and was able to be in the law office of his relative, the late LeGrand Young, and get through what is known as the starvation period of four years as a young lawyer, drawing a good salary from the government and having a fine residence at Fort Douglas without expense.

92The day that the announcement was made that Richard's assignment at Fort Douglas had expired I called at President John Taylor's office—I have forgotten for what purpose—and he said, "I see by the morning paper that your dear friend Richard W. Young's term has expired at Fort Douglas and he is about to go East. You may tell him that the time has now arrived for his missionary labors in the army to end, and he is at liberty to resign."

92Faith, we are told, is a gift of God, and Richard had the faith to accept the counsel and advice of President Taylor. And it is little less than wonderful that he should have secured the finest post, so considered, in the army, secured his education without running into debt, and received a salary from the government while securing it.

92Certainly God moves in a mysterious way his wonders to perform.

92My experience is that men who have sufficient faith to trust in God come out of difficulties, financial and otherwise, in a most miraculous and wonderful way.

92Heber J. Grant, "On Following Counsel," Improvement Era, 39 (March 1936): 131-32.
