Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

93"I Do Not Feel Like Singing"

93The Prophet Joseph, his brother Hyrum, John Taylor, and Willard Richards were imprisoned in the Carthage Jail. Elder Taylor to cheer the Prophet sang the following sacred song, which had recently been introduced into Nauvoo.

93Once when my scanty meal was spread

93He entered—not a word he spake!

93Just perishing for want of bread;

93I gave him all; he blessed it, brake.

93In prison I saw him next,—condemned

93To meet a traitor's doom at morn;

93The tide of lying tongues I stemmed,

93And honored him 'mid shame and scorn.

93My friendship's utmost zeal to try,

93He asked if I for him would die;

93The flesh was weak, my blood ran chill,

93But the free spirit cried, 'I will.'

93Then in a moment to my view,

93The stranger started from disguise;

93The tokens in his hands I knew;

93The Savior stood before mine eyes.

93He spake, and my poor name he named—

93"Of me thou hast not been ashamed;

93These deeds shall thy memorial be;

93Fear not, thou didst them unto me."

93The afternoon was sultry and hot. The four brethren sat listlessly about the room with their coats off, and the windows of the prison were open to receive such air as might be stirring. Late in the afternoon Mr. Stigall, the jailor, came in and suggested that they would be safer in the cells. Joseph told him that they would go in after supper.

94Hyrum Smith asked Elder Taylor to sing again "A Poor Wayfaring Man of Grief."

94Elder Taylor: "Brother Hyrum, I do not feel like singing.

94Hyrum: "Oh, never mind; commence singing and you will get the spirit of it."

94Soon after finishing the song the second time, as he was sitting at one of the front windows, Elder Taylor saw a number of men, with painted faces, rushing round the corner of the jail towards the stairs. They were halted at the entrance but a moment. "The guards were hustled away from the door, good naturedly resisting until they were carefully disarmed."

94The brethren must have seen this mob simultaneously, for they all leaped to the door to secure it, as the lock and latch were of little use. The mob reaching the landing in front of the door fired a shot into the lock. Hyrum and Doctor Richards sprang back, when instantly another ball crashed through the panel of the door and struck Hyrum in the face; at the same instant a ball, evidently from the window facing the public square where the main body of the Carthage Greys were stationed, entered his back, and he fell, calmly exlaiming: "I am a dead man!"

94With an expression of deep sympathy in his face, Joseph bent over the prostrate body of the murdered man and exclaimed: "Oh, my poor, dear brother Hyrum!"

94While Joseph was firing the pistol Elder Taylor stood close behind him.

94Elder Taylor beat down the muzzles of those murderous guns.

94"That's right, Brother Taylor, parry them off as well as you can," said the Prophet, as he stood behind him.

Meantime the crowd on the landing grew more dense and were forced to the door by the pressure of those below crowding their way up stairs. The guns of the assailants were pushed further and further into the room—the firing was more rapid and accompanied yells and horrid oaths. Certain that they would be overpowered in a moment, Elder Taylor sprang for the open window directly in front of the prison door, and also exposed to the fire of the Carthage Greys from the public square. As he was in the act of leaping from the window, a ball fired from the doorway struck him about midway of his left thigh. He fell helplessly forward towards the open window, and would have dropped on the outside of the jail, but that another ball from the outside, striking the watch in his vest pocket, threw him back into the room.

95As Elder Taylor was thrown back from the window Joseph Smith attempted to leap out, but in doing so was instantly shot and fell to the ground with the martyr-cry upon his lips: "O Lord, my God!"

95B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of the Church (Provo: Brigham Young University Press, 1965), 2:283-86.
