Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

96"Applying Ice Water to My Wounds"

96I do not remember the time that I stayed at Carthage, but I think three or four days after the murder, when Brother Marks with a carriage, Brother James Allred with a wagon, Dr. Ellis, and a number of others on horseback, came for the purpose of taking me to Nauvoo. I was very weak at the time, occasioned by the loss of blood and the great discharge of my wounds, so when my wife asked me if I could talk I could barely whisper no. Quite a discussion arose as to the propriety of my removal, the physicians and people of Carthage protesting that it would be my death.

96It was finally agreed, however, that I should go; but as it was thought that I could not stand riding in a wagon or carriage, they prepared a litter for me. I was carried downstairs and put upon it. A number of men assisted to carry me, some of whom had been engaged in the mob. As soon as I got downstairs, I felt much better and strengthened, so that I could talk; I suppose the effect of the fresh air.

96I found that the tramping of those carrying me produced violent pain, and a sleigh was produced and attached to the end of Brother James Allred's wagon, a bed placed upon it, and I propped up on the bed. Mrs. Taylor rode with me, applying ice water to my wounds. As the sleigh was dragged over the prairie,

97which was quite tall, it moved very easily and gave me very little pain.

97When I got within five or six miles of Nauvoo the brethren commenced to meet me from the city, and they increased in number as we drew nearer until there was a very large company of people of all ages and both sexes, principally, however, men.

97For some time there had been almost incessant rain, so that in many low places on the prairie it was from one to three feet deep in water, and at such places the brethren whom we met took hold of the sleigh, lifted it, and carried it over the water; and when we arrived in the neighborhood of the city; where the roads were excessively muddy and bad, the brethren tore down the fences, and we passed through the fields.

97Never shall I forget the differences of feeling that I experienced between the place that I had left and the one that I had now arrived at. I found myself very much better after my arrival at Nauvoo than I was when I started on my journey, although I had traveled eighteen miles.

97Roberts, History of the Church, 7:117-19.
