Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

ObedienceWoodruff, Wilford118"I Feel Like a Subject for a Dissecting Room"

118The whole of that mission to England, from the beginning to the end, placed the apostles in such a position that they had to walk by faith from first to last. . . . As soon as we prepared ourselves to go on our mission to England . . . the devil undertook to kill us. I have myself been in Tennessee and Kentucky for two or three years, where, in the fall, there were not enough well persons to take care of the sick during the ague months, and yet I never had the ague in my life until called to go upon that mission to England. There was not one solitary soul in the Quorum of the Twelve but what the devil undertook to destroy; and, as we said yesterday, when Brother Taylor and myself, the two first of the quorum ready for the trip, were on hand to start, I was shaking with the ague. And I had it every other day. And on my well day, when I did not have it, my wife had it. I got up and laid my hands upon her and blessed her, and blessed my child, having only one at the time, and I started across the river. And that man who sits behind me today, Brigham Young the President of the Church and kingdom of God upon the earth, paddled me across the Missouri river in a canoe, and that is the way I landed in Nauvoo. I lay down on a side of sole leather by the post office, and I did not know where to go. . . . I was not able to stand on my feet, and I lay down there. By and by the Prophet came along, and, said he: "Brother Woodruff, you are going on a mission?"

118"Yes," I said, "but I feel more like a subject for the dissecting room than for a mission."

He reproved me for what I said and told me to get up and go. Brother Taylor, the only member of the Quorum of the Twelve who was well, and I traveled together, and on the way he fell to the ground. . . . Brother Taylor fell twice in that way, taken with the bilous fever, and no man in that quorum could boast that he went on that mission without feeling the hand of the destroyer, for it was laid upon us all. I had the shaking ague and lay on my back in a wagon, and was rolled over stumps and stones until it seemed as if my life would be shaken out of me. I left Brother Taylor behind, by his advice, for said he, "We are both sick, and if you stay you can't do anything here." . . . I got to Buffalo, New York.

119>From there I traveled along to Farmington, Connecticut, my native place, and I stayed there fifteen days at my father's house, coughing and shaking every day. My father never expected that I should leave my bed, and my stepmother did not expect that I should ever get better. A message came from an uncle of mine, who had just died, and his last words were: "I want you to send for friend Wilford. I want him to come and preach my funeral sermon."

119My father said: "You can't go and preach that sermon, for you can't sit up in your bed."

119Said I: "Never mind, get . . . your horse and wagon." And he did so, and I got into it, and rode over that morning in a chilly wind. And the hour that my ague was coming on I got before a big blazing fire and preached the funeral sermon of my friend. And the ague left me from that day, and I went back and went on my way rejoicing.

In process of time Brother Taylor came along, and he and I crossed the ocean together and arrived in England. And here I want to make a little statement of my experience in those days concerning circumstances that took place with me. When Brother Brigham left home he told me that all his family had was one barrel of rotten flour. Two hundred cents would have bought every pound of provision I left with my family when I left home. But we left our wives, for we had the commandment of God upon us; and we were either going to obey it, or die trying. That was the spirit of the elders of Israel; and I blessed my wife and child and left them in the hands of God, and to the tender mercies of our noble bishops. . . . We traveled without purse and scrip, and we preached without money and without price. Why? Because the God of heaven had called upon us to go forth and warn the world.

Journal of Discourses, 18:122-25.
