Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

122"Mr. Woodruff, I Would Like to Be Baptized"

122On Sunday, the eighth, I preached at Frome's Hill in the morning, at Standley Hill in the afternoon, and at John Benbow's Hill Farm in the evening.

123The parish church that stood in the neighborhood of Brother Benbow's, presided over by the rector of the parish, was attended during the day by only fifteen persons, while I had a large congregation, estimated to number a thousand, attend my meeting through the day and evening.

123When I arose in the evening to speak at Brother Benbow's house, a man entered the door and informed me that he was a constable and had been sent by the rector of the parish with a warrant to arrest me.

123I asked him, "For what crime?"

123He said, "For preaching to the people."

123I told him that I, as well as the rector, had a license for preaching the gospel to the people, and that if he would take a chair I would wait upon him after meeting.

123He took my chair and sat beside me. I preached the first principles of the everlasting gospel for an hour and a quarter. The power of God rested upon me, the Spirit filled the house, and the people were convinced.

123At the close of the meeting I opened a door for baptism, and seven offered themselves. Among the number were four preachers and the constable.

123The latter arose and said, "Mr. Woodruff, I would like to be baptized."

123I told him I would like to baptize him. I went down to the pool and baptized the seven. We then met together and I confirmed thirteen and broke bread unto the Saints. And we all rejoiced together.

123The constable went to the rector and told him if he wanted Mr. Woodruff taken up for preaching the gospel, he must go himself and serve the writ, for he had heard him preach the only true gospel sermon he had ever listened to in his life.

123The rector did not know what to make of it, so he sent two clerks of the Church of England as spies, to attend our meeting and find out what we did preach.

123But they were both pricked in their hearts, and received the word of the Lord gladly, and were baptized and confirmed members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

123The rector became alarmed and did not dare to send anybody else.

124The ministers and rectors of the South of England called a convention and sent a petition to the archbishop of Canterbury to request Parliament to pass a law prohibiting the Mormons from preaching in the British dominion.

124In this petition the rector stated that one Mormon missionary had baptized fifteen hundred persons, mostly members of the English church, during the last seven months.

124But the archbishop and council, knowing well that the laws of England gave free toleration to all religions under the British flag, sent word to the petitioners that if they had the worth of souls at heart as much as they had the ground where hares, foxes and hounds ran, they would not lose so many of their flock.

124I continued to preach and baptize daily.

124Nibley, Three Mormon Classics, pp. 91-93.
