Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

LORENZO SNOW

Biographical Sketch

129Many came to visit the Prophet Lorenzo Snow in his later years. That which they wrote reveals the kind of man he was. A Mr. Prentis of South Carolina wrote:

129The Reverend W.D. Cornell wrote of Elder Snow:

I . . . found myself shaking hands with one of the most congenial and lovable men I ever met . . . a master in the art of conversation, with a rare genius, enabling him to make you feel a restful welcome in his society.

130President Snow is a cultured man, in mind and soul and body. His language is choice, diplomatic, friendly, scholarly. . . . The tenor of his spirit is as gentle as a child. You are introduced to him. You are pleased with him. You converse with him, you like him. You visit with him long, you love him. [^2]

130The great and impressive prophet of God, Lorenzo Snow, was the last of the first generation prophets. He was born at Mantua, Portage County, Ohio, on April 3, 1814.

130Lorenzo Snow, at the time he first heard of the restored Church, was a very capable college student interested in a military career. Eliza R. Snow, his sister, was converted to the Church and attempted to convert her brother. President Snow was impressed with Joseph Smith's father and writes of his great influence upon him:

130He surprised me when he said, "Don't worry, take it calmly and the Lord will show you the truth of this great latter-day work, and you will want to be baptized." . . . I studied the principles . . . I heard the Prophet discourse upon the grandest of subjects. At times he was filled with the Holy Ghost, speaking as with the voice of an archangel and filled with the power of God; his whole person shone and his face was lightened until it appeared as the whiteness of the driven snow. . . . Finally my prayers were answered and I was convinced of the truth sufficiently to want to be baptized to get a knowledge for myself of the testimony that Joseph Smith had seen God. . . .

130I was at that time a young man full of worldly aspirations, with bright prospects and means to gratify my ambition in acquiring a liberal, collegiate education. Besides I had many wealthy, proud . . . friends and relatives who watched eagerly for me to achieve high honors in life. It will therefore be easily understood that no small effort was needed to form the resolution to abandon those prospects, disappoint those expectations, and join the poor, ignorant, despised 'Mormons,' as they at that early day, were regarded . . .

130However, through the help of the Lord—for I feel certain he must have helped me—I laid my pride, worldly ambition and aspirations upon the altar, and, humble as a child, went to the waters of baptism, and received the ordinances of the gospel, administered by one who claimed to be an Apostle. [^3]

Elder Snow continued to investigate the Church and was baptized in June, 1836, at Kirtland, Ohio. At age thirty-five he was ordained an apostle in February of 1849. President Snow was a great missionary. He served in the British Mission from 1840-1843. During the mission, he presented a copy of the Book of Mormon to Queen Victoria. In 1849 he was called to a mission in Italy. He was always a leader in educational, cultural, and civic affairs.

131President Snow became the President of the Council of Twelve in 1889 and at age eighty-four was sustained as President of the Church. He died on October 10, 1901.

131Because of his excellent preparation and greatness of soul, in just three years as prophet, seer, and revelator, he was able to make great contributions that have been of continuing benefit to the Church and its members.

131Brigham Young, Junior, paid this tribute to Lorenzo Snow:

131I have looked upon President Lorenzo Snow as a second father. I have loved him as a father, and I mourn his departure; but I feel thankful that he was surrounded with every comfort, that peace prevailed in his home and with the people, and that he passed to his rest in the midst of his loving family and friends. About two hours before his death I laid my hand upon his brow and said, "President Snow, do you recognize me?" He looked at me with his sweet smile and eyes full of intelligence, and said, "I rather think I do." He was intelligent nearly to the last, and he knew that his time had come, for he spoke of it. If the prayers and faith of the people could have saved him, President Snow would be alive today; but God has willed it otherwise, and we are deprived of a man who has been one of the most valiant of those who were raised up by the Almighty to assist in laying the foundations of the great cause which he instituted for the salvation of his sons and daughters.

I have known President Snow since before the death of the Prophet Joseph Smith. I knew him well before the Prophet was martyred, and I knew he was a friend of the Prophet, a friend of the leaders of the Church, and a friend of God. Though but a boy, I recognized in this man a power that was born of the Holy Spirit. I have known his works since 1843, and no man that has lived among us has been more thorough, more diligent, wiser in all positions where he has been placed, and shown more integrity to the work, than the late President Lorenzo Snow. I loved that man, as I loved his predecessors; and the grand work that he has accomplished in the last three years will live in the history of the Church, showing forth the greatness and the executive and financial ability of the man. He will stand among the foremost of those who have inaugurated this great and glorious work of the latter days. Thank God that I was acquainted with him! Though I mourn the loss of his society, I know that he has gone to a reward that is great and glorious; for him there is a crown laid up that shall never fade. I know his family will miss him, and his brethren will miss him; but Lorenzo Snow has done a magnificent work, and his example is worthy of emulation. [^4]

132President Snow was laid to rest in Brigham City on Sunday, October 13, 1901.

---
Notas:
[^2] . . I saw a pillar of light exactly over my head, above the brightness of the sun, which descended gradually until it fell upon me. . . When the light rested upon me I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. (Joseph Smith 2:16, 17.)
