Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

137"Mr. Snow, It Is Too Late"

137The following incident took place as Lorenzo Snow returned from a mission to England aboard the ship Swanton.

137The steward, a German by birth, was a young man, very affable in manner and gentlemanly in deportment—a general favorite and respected by all. During the latter part of the voyage he took sick and continued growing worse and worse, until death seemed inevitable. All means proved unavailing, and the captain, by whom he was much beloved, gave up all hope of his recovery and requested the officers and crew to go in, one by one, and take a farewell look of their dying friend, which they did silently and solemnly, as he lay unconscious and almost breathless on his dying couch.

137Immediately after this sad ceremony closed, one of our sisters, by the name of Martin, without my brother's knowledge went to the captain and requested him to allow my brother to lay hands on the steward, according to our faith and practice under such circumstances, saying that she believed that the steward would be restored. The captain shook his head and told her that the steward was now breathing his last, and it would be useless to trouble Mr. Snow. But Sister Martin was not to be defeated; she not only importuned, but earnestly declared her faith in the result of the proposed administration, and he finally yielded and gave consent.

137As soon as the foregoing circumstance was communicated to my brother, he started toward the cabin where the steward lay, and in passing through the door met the captain, who was in tears. He said, "Mr. Snow, it is too late; he is expiring; he is breathing his last!" My brother made no reply, but took a seat beside the dying man. After devoting a few moments to secret prayer, he laid his hands on the head of the young man, prayed,

138and in the name of Jesus Christ rebuked the disease and commanded him to be made whole. Very soon after, to the joy and astonishment of all, he was seen walking the deck, praising and glorifying God for his restoration. The officers and sailors acknowledged the miraculous power of God, and on landing at New Orleans several of them were baptized, also the first mate, February 26, 1843.

138Eliza Smith, Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow, pp. 65-66.
