Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

139"You Have Been Drowned"

139The following occurred in Hawaii.

139As we were moving along, probably more than a quarter of a mile from where we expected to land, my attention was suddenly arrested by Captain Fisher calling to the oarsmen in a voice which denoted some alarm, "Hurry up, hurry up!" I immediately discovered the cause of the alarm. A short distance behind us I saw an immense surf, thirty or forty feet high, rushing towards us swifter than a race horse. We had scarcely a moment for reflection before the huge mass was upon us. In an instant our boat, with its contents, as though it were a feather, was hurled into a gulf of briny waters, and all was under this rolling, seething mountain wave. It took me by surprise. I think, however, that I comprehended the situation—in the midst of turbulent waves—a quarter of a mile from the shore, without much probability of human aid.

I felt confident, however, there would be some way of escape—that the Lord would provide the means—for it was not possible that my life and mission were thus to terminate. This reliance on the Lord banished fear and inspired me up to the last moment of consciousness. In such extreme cases of excitement, we seem to live hours in a minute, and volume of thoughts crowd themselves into one single moment. It was so with me in that perilous scene.

140Having been somewhat subject to faint, I think that after a few moments in the water I must have fainted, as I did not suffer that pain common in the experience of drowning persons. I had been in the water only a few moments until I lost consciousness. The first I knew afterwards, I was on shore, receiving the kind and tender attention of my brethren.

140The first recollection I had of returning consciousness was that of a small light—the smallest imaginable. This soon disappeared, and I was again in total darkness. Again it appeared much larger than before, then sank away and left me, as before, in forgetfulness. Thus it continued to come and go, until, finally, I recognized, as I thought, persons whispering, and soon after I asked in a feeble whisper, "What is the matter?" I immediately recognized the voice of Elder Cluff as he replied, "You have been drowned; the boat upset in the surf." Quick as lightning the scene of our disaster flashed upon my mind. I immediately asked, "Are you brethren all safe?" The emotion that was awakened in my bosom by the answer of Elder Cluff, will remain with me as long as life continues: "Brother Snow, we are all safe." I rapidly recovered, and very soon was able to walk and accompany the brethren to our lodgings."

140LeRoi C. Snow, "Thou Shalt Have Long Life," Improvement Era, 44 (Oct. 1941): 630.
