Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

Missionary WorkSnow, Lorenzo"The Gentleman Seemed Struck with Amazement"

On one occasion (having been joined by Brother A. Butterfield) I called at a hotel for our night's lodging. . . . As we approached the house, we saw the landlord standing upon the porch. Accosting him, I told him we were Mormon preachers, traveling as the elders in former times, and asked him if he would be so kind as to accommodate us with supper and a night's lodging. He very gruffly refused, saying that he kept travelers for their money—not for gospel pay, and advised us to go home, get employment, earn money, then give him a call, and he would be happy to entertain us. I replied that inasmuch as he had met our request with a decided refusal, we would bid him a good evening. But as I was turning to go, it forcibly occurred to me to say something further. Therefore, I said to him, "My friend, it is not our wish to crowd ourselves upon you, but we think it might be well for you to know the fact that two servants of God have called upon you for a supper and a night's lodging, which you have thought proper to refuse. The future results of what you have done you do not now know; but we know, and a time will come when you also will know. When that scripture is fulfilled which says, 'When the Son of Man shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory: and before him shall be gathered all nations: and he shall separate them as a shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats. Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world, for I was hungry, and ye fed me; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me in; naked, and ye clothed me. Then shall the righteous say, Lord, when saw we hungry and fed Thee? Or when saw we Thee a stranger and took Thee in? Then shall the King say to them, Inasmuch as ye have done it unto the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me.' When this event takes place, you will then know that we were servants of God commissioned to preach his Gospel; and when engaged in this work, we asked you to administer to our necessities, and you turned us away. This is all I wish to say; we will now go. Good night."

142The gentleman seemed struck with amazement and at a loss what to say or do. We had not proceeded far, however, before our ears were saluted with, "Stop, gentlemen, hold on. Turn back, gentlemen, walk in, walk in." Of course, we turned back and walked in, and were invited to sit down to a good supper, after which the neighbors were called in, who, with the landlord and family, listened attentively with apparent interest to our preaching. We had excellent lodging and a good breakfast in the morning, and left without a question whether we had money or not.

142Eliza Smith, Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow, pp. 17-19.
