Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

142"Brother Snow, That Is True Gospel Doctrine"

142In the spring of 1840, just before leaving on his first mission to England, Lorenzo Snow spent an evening in the home of his friend Elder H. G. Sherwood, in Nauvoo. Elder Sherwood was endeavoring to explain the parable of the Savior about the husbandman who sent forth servants at different hours of the day to labor in the vineyard. While thus engaged in thought this most important event occurred, as told by President Snow himself.

143"While attentively listening to his (Elder Sherwood's) explanation, the Spirit of the Lord rested mightily upon me; the eyes of my understanding were opened, and I saw as clear as the sun at noon-day, with wonder and astonishment, the pathway of God and man. I formed the following couplet which expresses the revelation as it was shown to me, and explains Father Smith's dark saying to me at a blessing meeting in the Kirtland temple, prior to my baptism, as previously mentioned in my first interview with the Patriarch:

143As man now is, God once was:

143As God now is, man may be.

143"I felt this to be a sacred communication which I related to no one except my sister Eliza, until I reached England, when in a confidential, private conversation with President Brigham Young in Manchester, I related to him this extraordinary manifestation."

143Soon after his return from England, in January, 1843, Lorenzo Snow related to the Prophet Joseph Smith his experience in Elder Sherwood's home. This was in a confidential interview in Nauvoo. The Prophet's reply was: "Brother Snow, that is true gospel doctrine, and it is a revelation from God to you."

143Let us understand clearly that while Lorenzo Snow, through a revelation from God, was the author of the above couplet expression, the Lord had revealed this great truth to the Prophet and to Father Smith long before it was made known to Lorenzo Snow. In fact, it was the remarkable promise given to him in the Kirtland Temple, in 1836, by the Patriarch that first awakened the thought in his mind, and its expression in the frequently quoted couplet was not revealed to President Snow until the spring of 1840. We cannot emphasize the fact too strongly that this revealed truth impressed Lorenzo Snow more than perhaps all else; it sank so deeply into his soul that it became the inspiration of his life and gave him his broad vision of his own great future and the mighty mission and work of the Church.

143LeRoi C. Snow, "Devotion to a Divine Inspiration," Improvement Era, 22 (June 1919): 656.
