Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

144"President Snow Said I Would Not Die"

144As told by Andrew May of Rockland, Idaho (1939).

144I was born February 22, 1871, at Call's Fort, north of Brigham City, in Box Elder County, Utah, and I was living there in 1894. I was twenty-three years of age. During June of this year, I was stacking hay for Thad Wight. It was about eleven a.m. in the forenoon, and Conrad Nelson was running the Jackson fork. The hay was green. A load came up, and I called for Nelson to trip it. And I thought the fork had gone over me. As I raised up the long fork tine struck me in the back and went right through my body. The tine broke my ribs and pushed the bones through my breast.

144Hyrum G. Smith (late Patriarch of the Church) was working across the fence and was one of the first to reach me. He helped carry me on a sheet into Brother Wight's house. They sent to Brigham City for Dr. Carrington, who arrived about five p.m. He just looked over me, probed the wound, took some blood out of my lungs through my breast and said, "Tom Yates, there is no use doing anything for a dead man . . . He will not need anything more. I cannot do anything for him."

144They carried me over to my own home, then my mother-in-law came; she put her hand on my breast. I became semiconscious and everything seemed like a dream. I could not remember anything during the night. Dr. Carrington said, "If he should live he will not amount to anything because he will never get well and will be subject to all kinds of diseases and will have a weak lung and system." He said he could do nothing for me and then went back to Brigham City.

President Lorenzo Snow was in Brigham City, and the next morning he heard of my accident . . . and came to our house to see me. He and my father were very close friends. He came in, looked me over, and my wife asked him to administer to me. Instead of doing so he stood by the bedside and asked if I had been anointed. He was told that I had. He then put his hands on my head and gave me a wonderful blessing. The doctor said I was going to die, but President Snow said to me I would not die, but that I would live just as long as life was desirable unto me.

145Romney, The Life of Lorenzo Snow, pp. 395-97.
