Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

145"He Called Me Back"

145As told by Lorenzo Snow's son LeRoi C. Snow.

145For several long weeks Ella Jensen had lingered, almost between life and death, with scarlet fever. In order to relieve the tired parents from their weary hours of loving care, the kind neighbors took turns in staying at the Jensen home overnight to help look after the sick girl.

145[After being visited at about four o'clock in the morning by her dead uncle, who informed her that messengers would come at ten o'clock to conduct her into the spirit world, Ella continued to grow weaker.]

145Towards ten o'clock, Uncle Jake, the father, who was holding his daughter's hand, felt the pulse become very weak. A few moments later he turned to his wife saying: "Althea, she is dead; her pulse has stopped." The heartbroken parents wept and grieved at the loss of their beautiful daughter.

"We talked the matter over and wondered what we should do. I told my wife that I would go to town, more than a mile from home, and see President Snow, tell him about her death and have him arrange for the funeral.

146"I went out to the barn, hitched up, and drove to the tabernacle where your father, President Lorenzo Snow, whom we all loved so much, was in meeting. I went into the vestry, behind the main hall, wrote a note and had it sent to your father, who was speaking to the congregation. When the note was placed upon the pulpit, President Snow stopped his talking, read the note, and then explained to the Saints that it was a call to visit some people who were in deep sorrow and asked to be excused.

146"President Snow came into the vestry, and after I told him what had happened he meditated a moment or two and then said: 'I will go down with you.' Just as we were about to leave, President Snow stopped me, saying: 'Wait a moment, I wish you would go into the meeting and get Brother Clawson. I want him to go also.' President Clawson was then the president of the Box Elder Stake."

146President Rudger Clawson . . . being invited by President Snow to go along, says:

146"As we entered the home we met Sister Jensen, who was very much agitated and alarmed. We came to Ella's bedside and were impressed by the thought that her spirit had passed out of the body and gone beyond.

146"Turning to me President Snow said: 'Brother Clawson, will you anoint her.' Which I did. We then laid our hands upon her head and the anointing was confirmed by President Snow, who blessed her and among other things, used this very extraordinary expression, in a commanding tone of voice, 'Come back, Ella, come back. Your work upon the earth is not yet completed, come back.' Shortly afterward we left the home."

146Uncle Jake, Ella's father, continues his account: "After President Snow had finished the blessing, he turned to my wife and me and said, 'Now do not mourn or grieve any more. It will be all right.' "

As already stated, it was ten o'clock in the morning when Ella died. It was towards noon when Jacob Jensen reported to President Snow at the tabernacle service, and not long after twelve o'clock, noon, when President Snow and President Clawson left the home after the administration.

147Uncle Jake says that he and his wife remained at the bedside. The news of the death spread about the city. Friends continued to call at the home, express their sympathy to the sorrowing parents, and leave. Continuing in Uncle Jake's words:

147"Ella remained in this condition for more than an hour after President Snow administered to her, or more than three hours in all after she died. We were sitting there watching by the bedside, her mother and myself, when all at once she opened her eyes. She looked about the room, saw us sitting there, but still looked for someone else. And the first thing she said was: 'Where is he? Where is he?' We asked, 'Who? Where is who?' 'Why, Brother Snow,' she replied. 'He called me back.' "

147LeRoi C. Snow, "Raised from the Dead," Improvement Era, 22 (Sept. 1929): 881-86, 972-80.
