Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

JOSEPH F. SMITH

Biographical Sketch

157The year was 1844. Hyrum Smith was riding at the side of his Brother, the Prophet Joseph Smith. They stopped by a little six-year-old boy, Hyrum's son, Joseph F. Smith. His father didn't dismount. He reached down and swept him up in his strong arms, held him close, kissed him, and lowered him back to the street, and then they rode on to carthage.

157Joseph F. also remembered being awakened in the night by a rapping on the window. As he awoke, he heard someone say, "Sister Smith, your husband has been killed." He never forgot coming into the mansion house so he could see the faces of his father and the Prophet Joseph as they lay in their coffins. [^1]

157Joseph Fielding Smith (known throughout his life as Joseph F. Smith) was born in Far West in 1838. While he was an infant his mother, Mary Fielding Smith, herself very weak and ill, went to visit his father, Hyrum Smith, in the Liberty Jail where he was confined for nearly six months.

Although Joseph Fielding was only six when his father, assistant President and Presiding Patriarch of the Church was martyred, he remembered him well and throughout his life. His favorite Church hymns were the ones his father had taught him.

158And what a noble father he had. He stood next to the Prophet Joseph Smith in the kingdom of God and in life. The prophet said of his devoted brother on one occasion:

158There was Brother Hyrum who next took me by the hand—a natural brother. Thought I to myself, Brother Hyrum what a faithful heart you have got! O may the Eternal Jehovah crown eternal blessings upon your heart, as a reward for the care you have had for my soul! O how many are sorrows we have shared together; and again we find ourselves shackled with the unrelenting hand of oppression. Hyrum, thy name shall be written in the book of the law of the Lord, for those who come after thee to look upon, that they may pattern after thy works. [^2]

158The last words of Joseph on this occasion are prophetic and interesting in that Hyrum's own Son, who grew to love and honor the name "Joseph" would be one to pattern his own life after the life and works of his father.

158When just nine years old, he assumed the role of a man and assisted his mother in moving to Salt Lake City from Winter Quarters by driving two yoke of oxen with a heavy loaded wagon the entire distance. [^3]

158Before Joseph F. turned fourteen, his mother died. No finer woman has ever lived in this Church; her courage is legend. At fifteen, he was ordained an elder, received his temple endowments, and departed for a mission in the Hawaiian Islands.

158He prayed fervently that the Lord would bless him that he might be able to speak the language. In just over three months, he could speak the language fluently.

158After nearly four years, he was called by President Young to return to Utah because of the threat of the approaching United States Army.

After more than a year's service defending the Saints during the Utah War, young Joseph F. was given a job in the Church Historian's office. When he was twenty-seven, he was ordained an apostle by President Brigham Young and was called to also serve as a counselor to the First Presidency.

159When John Taylor became the President of the Church, he selected Joseph F. Smith as his second counselor, and Lorenzo Snow also chose him for the same position. Upon the death of President Snow, Joseph F. Smith became the Prophet, Seer, and Revelator. How remarkable that the young son of Hyrum would grow up to be a counselor to four great presidents, all of whom had been closely associated with Hyrum Smith in the leading counsels of the Church, and then became the President of the Church himself.

159President Wilford Woodruff during his life observed the son of Hyrum carefully and in 1866 wrote the following in his journal:

159Joseph F. Smith spoke an hour and fifteen minutes, and the power of God was upon him. He manifested the same spirit that was upon his uncle Joseph Smith, the Prophet, and upon his father, Hyrum Smith. [^4]

159Wilford Woodruff prophesied twenty years before Joseph F. Smith became President of the Church that he would be called to occupy that position. Following is an account of that prophecy:

159Elder Woodruff interested the children by speaking of incidents in the life of the Prophet Joseph Smith and of his labors. He then turned to Elder Joseph F. Smith and asked him to arise to his feet. Elder Smith complied. "Look at him, children," Wilford Woodruff said, "for he resembles the Prophet Joseph more than any man living. He will become the President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. I want you, everyone of you, to remember what I have told you this morning." [^5]

159As President Smith stood to give his opening address in April conference in 1916, he said:

. . . I feel sure that the Prophet Joseph Smith and his associates, who, under the guidance and inspiration of the almighty, and by his power began this latter-day work, would rejoice and do rejoice. I was going to say if they were permitted to look down upon the scene that I beheld in this tabernacle, but I believe they do have the privilege of looking down upon us as the all-seeing eye of God beholds every part of his handiwork. For I believe that those who have been chosen in this dispensation and in former dispensations, to lay the foundation of God's work in the midst of the children of men for their salvation and exaltation, will not be deprived in the spirit world from looking down upon the results of their own labors. . . .

160I have a feeling in my heart that I stand in the presence not only of the Father and of the Son, but in the presence of those whom God commissioned, raised up, and inspired to lay the foundations of the work in which we are engaged.

160I thank God for the feeling that I possess and enjoy and for the realization that I have, that I stand, not only in the presence of Almighty God, my Maker and Father, but in the presence of His Only Begotten Son in the flesh, the Savior of the world; and I stand in the presence of Peter and James (and perhaps the eyes of John are also upon us and we know it not), and that I stand in the presence of Joseph and Hyrum and Brigham and John, and those who have been valiant in the testimony of Jesus Christ and faithful to their mission in the world, who have gone before. When I go, I want to have the privilege of meeting them with the consciousness that I have followed their example, that I have carried out the mission in which they were engaged as they would have it carried out; that I have been as faithful in the discharge of duty committed to me and required at my hand as they were faithful in their time, and that when I meet them I shall meet them as I met them here, in love, in harmony, in unison, and in perfect confidence that I have done theirs.

160I hope you will forgive me for my emotion. You would have peculiar emotions, would you not, if you felt that you stood in the presence of your Father, in the very presence of Almighty God, in the very presence of the Son of God and of holy angels? You would feel rather emotional, rather sensitive; I feel it to the very depths of my soul this moment. So I hope you will forgive me, if I exhibit some of my real feelings." [^6]

160What a beautiful, touching and dramatic moment as the son of Hyrum, who saw his father last when he was just six years old, stands filled with emotions in the presence of heavenly beings including his own great father, whom he has not seen for more than seventy years; and what honor he had brought to his father, Hyrum, and his uncle, the Prophet Joseph Smith.

160Joseph F. Smith, one who served as an apostle and a counselor to four great presidents, then stood at the head of the Church himself for seventeen years.

160President Joseph F. Smith died on November 19, 1918,

161just eleven days after the close of World War I. He was eighty years of age.

161At this time an influenza epidemic was sweeping the country. Consequently, no public funeral was held, yet many saints echoed in their hearts the words uttered at the graveside by President Heber J. Grant: "I loved Joseph F. Smith as I never loved any other man that I have ever known. May God bless his memory." [^7]

161Shortly after President Joseph F. Smith died, Charles W. Nibley, a life-long friend and associate, among other things said the following about him:

161As a preacher of righteousness, who could compare with him? He was the greatest that I ever heard—strong, powerful, clear, appealing. It was marvelous how the words of living light and fire flowed from him. [^8]

161I have visited at his home when one of his children was down sick. I have seen him come home from his work at night tired, as he naturally would be, and yet he would walk the floor for hours with that little one in his arms . . . loving it, encouraging it in every way. . . . [^9]

161Never was man more moral and chaste and virtuous to the last fiber of his being than he. Against all forms or thoughts of licentiousness, he was set, and as immovable as a mountain. [^10]

161How fitting that his son, his namesake, should bring additional honor to his great name.

161Joseph F. Smith lived as he taught. He did not ask anything of the Latter-day Saints that he was not practicing himself.

161He stressed love, kindness, and a personal testimony, but these things could never be a substitute for diligence, study, and knowledge. He asked for excellence in all areas, and he himself stood as an example of excellence.

161He was a noble man and an exceptional prophet-leader.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. Joseph Smith was eight years old at the time of this illness.
[^2] . . I saw a pillar of light exactly over my head, above the brightness of the sun, which descended gradually until it fell upon me. . . When the light rested upon me I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. (Joseph Smith 2:16, 17.)
