Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

169"Leaving the Company Behind"

169After leaving Winter Quarters, we coupled two of our wagons together and hitched one team on the two wagons. Then we started out to cross the plains in that way—by uncoupling the wagons at the bottom of each hill, and pulling one wagon at a time up the hill, then coupling them together again and driving on to the next hill, and so on, till we reached Elk Horn River. This was the place where the Camp of Israel had assembled to fit out for the journey.

The widow, my mother, went to the supervisor, the man in charge of public cattle of the Company, and tried to obtain assistance to go on with the company. But after diagnosing our case, considering the number of wagons we had and the helplessness of the whole company, he very sternly informed the widow that there was no use for her to attempt to cross the plains that year, and advised her to go back to the river, to Winter Quarters, and wait another year, when perhaps she could be helped out.

170I am happy to say, the widow had a little mettle in her, and she straightened up and informed the gentleman that she would beat him to the Valley, and would ask no help from him, either, and turned away.

170Returning to camp, we unloaded the wagon, took the best two yoke of oxen we had, and the widow and her brothers started back to the Missouri River. Here they succeeded in borrowing and hiring enough cattle to suffice for the journey. Then they returned to the Elk Horn. Strange to say, the widow and her family were assigned to the company of fifty over which the good captain to whom she had applied for help presided, and we journeyed in that way, having a good many troubles and difficulties on the road. . . .

170But we finally struck the east side of East Mountains on the Pioneer trail. . . . Our worn-out cattle wearily dragged our heavy wagons up the eastern side of the mountain, and when we reached the summit we obtained a glimpse over the tops of the mountains of the valley and the Great Salt Lake. It was a most delightful sight to some of us! . . .

170Early next morning, the captain gave notice to the company to arise, hitch up, and roll over the mountain into the valley.

170To our consternation, when we gathered up our cattle, the essential part of our means of transportation for some reason had strayed away and were not to be found with the herd. A brother of mine, who was also a boy scout at that time, then obtained a horse and rode back over the road in search of the lost cattle. The captain ordered the march to begin, and, regardless of our predicament, the company started out up the mountain. The morning sun was then shining . . . without a cloud appearing anywhere.

I had happened to hear the promise of my dear mother that we would beat the captain into the Valley, and wouldn't ask any help from him, either. I sat in front of the wagon with the teams we had in hand hitched to the wheels, while my brother was absent hunting the others. I saw the company winding its slow way up the hill, the animals struggling to pull their heavy loads. The forward teams now had almost reached the summit of the hill, and I said to myself, "True enough, we come thus far, and we have been blessed, and not the slightest help from anyone has been asked by us." But the last promise seemed to be now impossible, and the last chance of getting into the valley before the rest of our company was vanishing, in my opinion.

171You have doubtless heard the descriptions of the terrific thunder storms that sometimes visit the mountains. The pure crystal streams a few moments before flow gently down their channels; but often after one of these rains, in a few minutes they become raging torrents, muddy, and sometimes bringing down fallen trees and roots and rocks.

171All of a sudden, and in less time than I am taking now to tell you, a big, dark, heavy cloud arose up from the northwest going directly southeast. In a few minutes it burst in such terrific fury that the cattle could not face the storm, and the captain seemed forced to direct the company to unhitch the teams, turn them loose, and block the wheels to keep the wagons from running back down the hill! The cattle fled before the storm down into the entrance into Parley's Canyon, from the park, into and through the brush.

171Luckily, the storm lasted only a short time. As it ceased to rain, and the wind ceased to blow, my brother drove up with our lost cattle. We then hitched them to the wagon, and the question was asked by uncle of my mother:

171"Mother, what shall we do? go on, or wait for the company to gather up their teams?" She said: "Joseph (that was her brother's name), they have not waited for us, and I see no necessity for us to wait for them."

171So, we hitched up and rolled up the mountain, leaving the company behind. And this was on the twenty-third day of September, 1848.

We reached the Old Fort about 10 o'clock that Saturday night. The next morning, in the Old Bowery, we had the privilege of listening to President Brigham Young and President Kimball, Erastus Snow, and some others, give some very excellent instructions. Then on the afternoon of that Sunday, we went out and met our friends coming in, very dusty, and very sore-footed and tired.

172The prediction of the widow was actually fulfilled; we beat them into the valley, and we asked no help from them, either!"

172Joseph F. Smith, "A Plucky Pioneer Mother," Improvement Era, 21 (July 1918): 755-58.
