Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

"True Blue, Through and Through"

It was while on [his] homeward journey [from his mission] that he was forced to pass through a very trying scene. It should be understood that the feeling existing towards the Latter-day Saints was running very high. The terrible scene at Mountain Meadows was fresh in the minds of the people, and of course they erroneously blamed President Brigham Young, in particular, and all of the Mormon people of being guilty of that horrible deed. Then, also, the army of the United States was on its way to Utah by orders from the President of the United States, their coming being based upon false charges that had been made by government officials from Utah who were extremely antagonistic against the Latter-day Saints. There were many men scattered abroad who had murder in their hearts, who said they would not hesitate to kill Mormons wherever they were found. Under these circumstances the members of the Church were forced to travel in small companies on their journey homeward bound. One day after the little company of wagons had traveled a short distance and made their camp, a company of drunken men rode into the camp on horseback, cursing and swearing and threatening to kill any Mormons that came within their path. It was the lot of Joseph F. Smith to meet these marauders first. Some of the brethren, when they heard them coming, had cautiously gone into the brush down the creek, out of sight, where they waited for this band to pass. Joseph F. was a little distance from the camp, gathering wood for the fire when these men rode up. When he saw them, he said his first thought was to do what the other brethren had done and seek shelter in the trees and in flight. Then the thought came to him, "Why should I run from these fellows?" With that thought in mind he boldly marched up with his arms full of wood to the campfire. As he was about to deposit his wood, one of the ruffians, still with his pistols in his hands and pointing at the youthful elder, and cursing as only a drunken rascal can, declaring that it was his duty to exterminate every Mormon he should meet, demanded in a loud, angry voice, "Are you a Mormon?"

176Without a moment of hesitation and looking the ruffian in the eye, Joseph F. Smith boldly answered, "Yes, siree; dyed in the wool; true blue through and through."

176The answer was given boldly and without any sign of fear,

177which completely disarmed the belligerent man. And in his bewilderment, he grasped the missionary by the hand and said:

177"Well, you are the — pleasantest man I ever met! Shake, young fellow. I am glad to see a man that stands up for his convictions."

177Joseph F. said in later years that he fully expected to receive the charge from this man's pistols, but he could take no other course, even though it seemed that his death was to be the result. This man, evidently the leader of the band, then rode off, the others following him, and the Mormon company was not molested further. It was a tense moment, nevertheless, and the company thanked the Lord for their safe deliverance.

177Joseph F. arrived in Salt Lake City, February 24, 1858, having been absent from his home since May 8, 1854, nearly four years.

177Joseph Fielding Smith, Life of Joseph F. Smith, pp. 188-89.
