Leon R. Hartshorn, Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets ( 1971)

MoralitySmith, Joseph Fielding"I Would Rather a Thousand Times Die"

It is a very difficult matter to say anything at a time of sorrow and bereavement like the present that will give immediate relief to the sorrowing hearts of those who mourn. Such griefs can only be fully relieved by the lapse of time and the influence of the good Spirit upon the hearts of those that mourn, by which they can obtain comfort and satisfaction in their hopes of the future. For the loss of a father or mother in the family there is no adequate reparation, no remedy in this world which will supply such a loss; and about the only consolation we have is in the hope that we may so live that we may be permitted to meet again with our beloved, faithful, and true friends who go before, or who come after us, and enjoy their society once more in another sphere or state, which will be immortal. if we can only be satisfied in our minds of the witness of the good Spirit, to know that the course we pursue in this life is such as will secure to us this privilege, then in this reflection there is a degree of comfort and satisfaction, if not of joy, notwithstanding our separation, in time, from those that we have loved and cherished. For although they are gone from us, we know we shall meet them again in a better and more enduring sphere. I remember my feelings when first called upon to part with one of my children—my first born. It seemed to me to be an irreparable loss, a calamity, and if I had not restrained my feelings, I should have felt that it was cruel for the Lord to suffer one so bright, so pure and innocent, to be taken away by the hand of death, after remaining with us just long enough to become the joy of our hearts and the light of our home. Indeed it was a severe trial of our feelings to part with one who seemed so indispensable to our happiness, and for a time it seemed that the substance of our joy and hope had fled forever. But I have learned that there are a great many things which are far worse than death. With my present feelings and views and the understanding that I have of life and death, I would far rather follow every child I have to the grave in their innocence and purity, than to see them grow up to man and womanhood and degrade themselves by the pernicious practices of the world, forget the gospel, forget God and the plan of life and salvation, and turn away from the only hope of eternal reward and exaltation in the world to come.

Far better, in my judgment, to follow them to their graves before they have commenced such fearful acts, or fall into such fearful errors. I would rather a thousand times die while I have the faith of the gospel in my heart and the hope of eternal life within me, with the prospect of becoming worthy of inheriting a crown of eternal life which is the greatest gift of God unto man, than to live in possession of all the world affords and lose that gift.

180It would be far better for me and my whole family to die in the faith than to live and deny it and bring shame, disgrace, and ruin upon us forever.

180Joseph F. Smith in Journal of Discourses, 4:75-76.
