# “O Canada”

### “O Canada”
Heidi S. Swinton, To the Rescue: The Biography of Thomas S. Monson (Salt Lake City 2010)
 
 

“O Canada”
 

There is not any part of missionary work that President Monson hasn’t influenced. He served in every role in the Missionary Department during the course of his life. He’s toured most of the missions. You’d have to say just a handful of people in any generation would even be in the same category. He’s in a league by himself in terms of being a great missionary.
 

Elder Quentin L. Cook Quorum of the Twelve Apostles
 

In the morning session of general conference, April 6, 1959, Joseph Anderson, clerk of the conference, reported the Church’s statistical and financial data, which included the names of eight newly called mission presidents. Thomas S. Monson was one of them. It was the first time that the name “President Monson” would be placed before a general conference congregation; it would not be the last.
 

President Stephen L Richards, First Counselor in the First Presidency, had extended the mission call on February 21, 1959. He had called Tom at the Deseret News Press and asked, “Brother Monson, could you come and visit with me at your convenience?” This was a man Tom knew well. He had printed books for President Richards and saw in him a “great theologian, beautiful linguist, master craftsman of the English language.”1
 

Tom asked what time would be best, and President Richards responded, “Could you come now?”
 

Being summoned to the Church offices was not unusual for Tom, since he handled most of the Church’s printing projects. On the drive to President Richards’s office, he reviewed in his mind the progress of the General Handbook of Instructions, close to being printed at the Press. He had worked with President Richards on that publication for months. When he was ushered into the office on the southwest corner of the main floor—room 101, the same office President Monson would one day occupy as a member of the First Presidency for twenty-three years—President Richards, rather than reviewing the printing project, asked about Tom’s current Church assignments, praising his past service as a young bishop and as a member of a stake presidency. He looked at Tom and asked, “You haven’t been on a mission?”
 

“No,” Tom replied, explaining that he had served in the navy.
 

President Richards then extended a call to him to serve as mission president of the Canadian Mission, one of fifty missions in the entire Church. He informed Tom that he would be on a leave of absence from the Deseret News Press and that he was to leave within the month. The Monsons were barely settled in their new home; Frances was having difficulty with her third pregnancy; Tom had more jobs on the press than ever before; he was busy in Church assignments in his ward and stake. But he did not pause. “Yes,” he said, “I will serve wherever the Lord needs me.”2
 

That would be the last time Tom would see President Richards alive. On May 19, 1959, one month into the mission, he received a telegram from Church headquarters: “With profound sorrow we tell you President Richards passed away yesterday. Funeral Friday.” It was signed by David O. McKay and J. Reuben Clark.
 

Tom went home to tell Frances about the call. He explained the change ahead in their life and what it would mean for their young family. Schooled as a bishop’s wife in a very difficult ward, she was prepared to accept the assignment. Son Tommy, nearly eight, was excited at the thought of such an adventure—until he learned they wouldn’t be back for three years. Ann, just four, was very much a daddy’s girl and was happy to go as long as her family was there.
 

“To be called as a mission president at age thirty-one was unusual then and it is so today,” suggests Elder Quentin L. Cook of the Quorum of the Twelve. “We think we are calling somebody young who is in his late fifties. He was a fabulous mission president.”3 Elder Cook points out the legacy of President Monson’s service in Canada—his missionaries have been bishops, stake presidents, and mission presidents as well as great fathers and great mothers. As for President Monson, he learned missionary service from the ground up, and when he later toured missions as an Apostle, he tried to interview every single missionary, building their faith in Jesus Christ with his sincere testimony.
 

Today, most newly called mission presidents have at least six months to prepare for their service, as well as the benefit of several days of intensive training from Apostles and other Church leaders. The Monsons had just weeks. But those Apostles Tom knew well stepped in to help prepare him. Elder Harold B. Lee indicated that missionary work was different from being in a bishopric or a stake presidency, where wives are not included in discussions or deliberations. “Frances will be your best counselor,” he said. He gave further “pointed counsel” that has become a central theme in President Monson’s personal Church service and that he has shared repeatedly in leadership settings. “Remember, my friends,” Elder Lee said, “whom the Lord calls, the Lord qualifies.” He shared other wisdom with them: “When you are on the Lord’s errand, you are entitled to the Lord’s help,” and, “Remember, God shapes the back to bear the burden placed upon it.”4
 

Farewells for departing mission presidents were a tradition at the time. The Monsons’ meeting on April 12, 1959, focused on the scripture, “Be thou humble; and the Lord thy God shall lead thee by the hand, and give thee answer to thy prayers.”5 Prayer was then and continues to be so much a part of President Monson’s life and ministry. He has taught, “No . . . sincere, prayerful effort will go unanswered: that is the very constitution of the philosophy of faith. Divine favor will attend those who humbly seek it. . . . He who notes the sparrow’s fall will, in His own way, acknowledge us.”6
 

President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., spoke at the Monson farewell and concluded the meeting by advising Tom never to be embarrassed to answer a question with the words, “I don’t know.” The mission field was not the place to address or encourage speculation, President Clark said, emphasizing, “We get in difficulty if we think we know all the answers.” He illustrated with an experience of a mission president who brought an investigator to see him, hoping he would answer the man’s difficult questions. To each one of the ten questions, President Clark said, “I don’t know.”
 

“Brother Monson,” he then said, “if a member of the First Presidency can answer ‘I don’t know’ to ten consecutive questions, a mission president should not hesitate to respond the same way.”7 President Monson took the counsel to heart and has shared President Clark’s recommendations with Church leaders, particularly mission presidents, for years.
 

Before departing, Tom and Frances and their two children visited with President Clark, then age ninety-one, to say a final farewell. Tom realized that his dear friend was failing and would probably not be there to greet him at his return. Tenderly, President Clark took their son Tommy up on his knee and kissed his hands, then did the same with Ann. Turning to the parents, he expressed his love for them and told them how much they would be missed. “We’re expecting our third child,” Tom said. “If the child is a son, we shall name him after you.”
 

President Clark asked, “What name will you call him?”
 

“His name will be Clark,” Tom said.
 

President Clark, with a twinkle in his eye and a wry smile, said, “Well, don’t be afraid of the Joshua Reuben!”8
 

Seven months later, Tom sent President Clark a telegram announcing the birth of Clark Spencer Monson on October 1, 1959, in Toronto, Canada. He weighed 10 pounds 4 ounces. The delivery was difficult; Frances reacted to a drug that caused her blood pressure to skyrocket. Tom was not allowed in the room with her for several hours, and baby Clark wasn’t brought to her side until the next day. When she was discharged from the hospital, Frances was grateful to find her mother at the mission home ready to care for her and fix meals for the missionaries. Hildur, used to managing the cafeteria at the Salt Lake Federal Reserve Bank, felt right at home in the kitchen.
 

Upon receiving word of the baby’s birth, President Clark immediately wrote a letter to his namesake: “To Clark Spencer Monson: I am rather in hopes that this may be the first letter for you to receive in this mortal life, and as such I invoke upon you all of the blessings which the Lord has to bless and to encourage those who come to earth in these last days of the Fullness of times. . . . God bless you, Clark, in every way in which it is well that He should bless you. May He never cease to remember you.”9
 

When the Monsons left for Canada, they stored their furniture at Frances’s mother’s home and moved Tom’s parents and three of his younger siblings, Scott, Marilyn, and Barbara, into their house. Tom had to farm out his pigeons and chickens. He has remarked that he will never forget the tender scene as they left their home. Frances, with tears in her eyes, stroked the doorjamb of the front door, her last act at the home that they had built and that she so loved. She, like pioneer women before her, “faced an unknown future, a new life, a greater destiny as [she] well knew,” and she too “faced it with faith in God.”10
 

The young family took the train to Toronto, Canada, which was rapidly emerging as the financial and business center of that nation. Toronto was also the hub of Church activity east of Alberta. Two days later, April 26, 1959, they arrived in a snowstorm at the same railroad station where for the next three years President Monson would meet or wave farewell to 480 missionaries.
 

Toronto, capital of the province of Ontario, was both an agricultural center with rich farmlands and a growing industrial area. The name Toronto is believed to be of Indian origin, meaning “meeting place,” and such would be the case as the gospel and the people “met” through expanded missionary efforts. By the late 1950s, when the Monsons arrived, the city’s population had reached one million.
 

The area, commonly called Upper Canada, would become home to the Monsons. In 2010, at the cultural celebration held in conjunction with the dedication of the Canada Vancouver Temple, the Church’s 131st temple, President Monson delighted the thousands gathered by wearing on his lapel a Canadian flag pin with tiny flashing lights. They cheered when he changed the opening song to “O Canada.”
 

When the Monsons got to the mission home, immediately they had a family of 130 missionaries; that number increased to 180 by 1962. President Monson would later reminisce, “The next three-year period was one of the happiest of our lives, as we devoted full time to sharing the gospel of Jesus Christ with others.”11
 

President and Sister J. Earl Lewis, who had presided over the mission for three and a half years, took the Monsons on a two-week tour of the mission. They attended a number of member and missionary meetings and were introduced to the area.
 

The spacious mission home at 133 Lyndhurst Avenue needed repairs and renovation. Periodically, plaster fell in chunks from the ceiling to the living-room floor; the pipes were old, the furnace temperamental. But Frances worked hard to make it feel like home. The four floors housed not only the Monsons but also the missionaries who served in the office, which was on the third floor; the elder who served as a counselor in the mission presidency, along with his companion; incoming and outgoing missionaries; and at times those missionaries who were sick. “I wouldn’t trade that old mission home and all those missionaries, the sick ones and homesick ones,” President Monson has said. “[Frances] loved those missionaries and they knew it. I think she did more good than she realizes.”12 All who occupied the house ate together as family. Not surprisingly, breakfast, lunch, and dinner talk was mostly about the mission. In their three years in Canada, the Monsons had only three meals alone—at the Royal York Hotel Coffee Shop for Christmas Day dinner in 1959, 1960, and 1961.
 

Tom, twelfth mission president since the area had been reopened in 1919, grasped quickly the work ahead of him and felt the weight on his shoulders of presiding over the entire provinces of Ontario and Quebec.13 There were no wards or stakes, just fifty-five branches with more than five thousand members in nine scattered districts. Some lived more than a thousand miles from Toronto. The nearest temple was in Cardston, Alberta, more than two thousand miles to the west.
 

At first introduction, the missionaries were surprised that their new president was so young. President Monson was not much older than the majority of the missionaries. Then they heard him speak, felt that firm grip of his handshake, and watched him interact with others. “It didn’t take long to recognize the marked difference between him and the missionaries. He had a unique ability to blend with the missionaries and lead,” recalls Stephen Hadley, the first missionary to serve with him as a counselor. “He spoke with a special spirit.”14
 

“To know Tom Monson is to love him,” says Everett (Ev) Pallin, who became his first counselor in the mission presidency. “He is so warm. When you meet him, you feel there is a connection. His themes in his talks seem very simple, yet they always come down to loving and caring and serving each other. That’s what the gospel is all about. If we do that, then everything else falls in place.”15
 

“Be positive yet gracious in your work as a missionary as you meet your brothers and sisters and open the gospel to their view,” President Monson encouraged. “You are blessed with authority and with talents. Use that authority and those talents to their fullest as you serve here in the mission field. Yours is a labor of love—and this labor will bring you joy.”16
 

President Monson believed that spirituality was essential to missionary success. “Our teaching, our training, and our testifying will quicken our own spirituality and awaken in those to whom we minister a dedication and determination to follow in the footsteps of our Lord.”17
 

The Canadian Saints found in their new president great optimism. They enjoyed his humor and reveled in his teachings of the Savior and His ministry. He showed up at everything, everywhere. There was rarely a wedding or a social event where he didn’t make an appearance. He called members when they were sick, visited them at the hospital, and spoke at their funerals. And he engaged them in teaching the gospel.
 

“President Monson created an excitement and momentum that encouraged Latter-day Saints to stay in Ontario and build up the Church there,” observed Everett Pallin.18 Before his era, many members moved to Utah or Alberta, where the Church was already strong. By the time he left, they were staying in Ontario. He had the ability to unite entire congregations in a common cause, whether it was building a chapel, fellowshipping new members, inviting neighbors to listen to the missionaries, or preparing for the first stake in Canada.
 

The mission had a small chapel on Ossington Avenue in Toronto, which Heber J. Grant had dedicated in 1939. The Hamilton branch had a modest structure built by the Church; the Kitchener branch met in a home that had been converted into a chapel. All other congregations met in “vintage” chapels purchased from other denominations or in rented quarters such as lodge halls, schools, or hotels, where they often had to clean up debris from a civic gathering or even a dog show from the night before.
 

Feeling the weight of his calling, President Monson went into the backyard behind the mission home shortly after they arrived, getting down on his knees and pouring out his heart to his Father in Heaven. In this makeshift “sacred grove,” he promised, “I will give this mission everything I have, but I have just one wish—that I’ll not lose a missionary.” He recognized that “every missionary is the pride of his father and his mother, and they have entrusted that precious boy or that precious girl to me.”19 The Lord honored that request. President Monson’s ability to keep his missionaries in the field is legend.
 

President Monson’s first experience conducting a mission tour was with Elder ElRay L. Christiansen, an Assistant to the Quorum of the Twelve, who arrived four months into the Monsons’ service. Seven-year-old Tommy appreciated how kind the leader was, showing interest in a young man who was lonesome for his grandfather. Elder Christiansen “looked upon missionary work as a serious enterprise.” He interviewed all the missionaries. He also met with all the priesthood leaders in the district and counseled them on how they might best prepare to become a stake. President Monson watched and learned from this well-schooled General Authority and would in years to come employ the same exacting approach in his mission tours. Upon his return to Salt Lake City, Elder Christiansen reported he was “much impressed” with the mission and was “lavish” in his praise for the young mission president who obviously had his arms around the work.20 He was surprised that President Monson knew the names of all the missionaries. He didn’t know of Tom Monson’s gift for committing names to memory. Elder M. Russell Ballard, who presided over that mission a decade later, recalls sitting on the stand in Canada with Elder Monson: “He would tell me, well, that’s Brother So-and-so and that’s Sister So-and-so, and he would remember their circumstances. His memory was unbelievable when it came to calling up names. You’ve got to have that gift come with you from the other side of the veil.”21
 

Elder Bruce R. McConkie, at that time a member of the First Council of the Seventy, wrote to his friend Tom: “May I say that I have heard most excellent expressions relative to your good work as a mission president, both from Elder Christiansen who just returned and from others who have seen you operate. This is, of course, exactly what I expected would be the case.”22
 

Prior to a General Authority visit, President Monson and the mission staff spent a great deal of time preparing. Those who have worked with him over the years have seen that dedication to getting things exactly right, being thoroughly prepared. None of the missionaries wanted to let their president down.
 

Others who toured the mission included Elder Mark E. Petersen, Elder Spencer W. Kimball, and Elder Franklin D. Richards. Elder Petersen’s report reflected the comments of the others on subsequent visits: “President Monson is doing fine work. . . . He is a leader and inspires confidence in the missionaries. His counselors are giving him great assistance in administrative and proselyting work, stepping up mission activity. . . . All branches are under local administration. Elders quorums have been organized and most of the mission districts are well manned by local members. The mission building program is going forward . . . with eight new chapels soon to be built.”23
 

Canada has a significant place in early Church history, and President Monson wanted his missionaries to have a witness that they indeed were preaching on sacred ground. Canada was the first foreign mission field of the Church; Joseph Smith preached his first sermon outside the United States in Canada in 1833 and observed that “great excitement prevailed in every place we have visited. The result we leave in the hand of the Lord.”24 President Monson often refers to section 100 of the Doctrine and Covenants as the “Canadian revelation”: “Behold, . . . I have much people in this place, in the regions round about; and an effectual door shall be opened . . . in this eastern land.”25
 

One assignment President Monson took especially seriously was what he now describes as “the privilege of showing the missionaries how to serve the Lord.”26 He believes, “The power to lead is also the power to mislead, and the power to mislead is the power to destroy,”27 a principle he would teach repeatedly to new mission presidents, Church leaders, and teachers for years to come. He based his approach on a favorite scripture: “Therefore, strengthen your brethren in all your conversation, in all your prayers, in all your exhortations, and in all your doings.”29 He imagined the scene in every home of his missionaries: the parents of every missionary kneeling each day in prayer and asking Heavenly Father to bless that son or daughter in the mission field. “In that prayer,” he has told new mission presidents in their training, “they ask a blessing upon you, for you in effect become a mother and a father to their child.”28
 

His great faith inspired the missionaries. “There is a golden thread that runs through every account of faith from the beginning of the world to the present time,” he has taught. “Abraham, Noah, the Brother of Jared, the Prophet Joseph, and countless others were obedient to the will of God. They had ears that could hear, eyes that could see, and hearts that could know and feel. They never doubted.”30
 

One of President Monson’s first travels was to Timmins, as far north in his mission as he could go. When he came back, Frances was teary. “Why are you crying?” he asked.
 

“I’m homesick,” she said. “Aren’t you?”
 

“You do the crying for us,” he replied. “I’ve got 130 missionaries I’ve got to take care of, and if I cry, I will have them crying!”31 The work went on, and Frances was more than up to the task. She waded into every assignment diligently, from directing Relief Societies around the districts to running what amounted to a full bed-and-breakfast operation with great composure, efficiency, and quiet style.
 

But Frances didn’t like to speak or command attention. One of the elders prepared an agenda for a zone conference that had Sister Monson speaking for twenty-five minutes. When President Monson told her of the “assignment,” he did so with a chuckle—and then cut back her time to something more comfortable for her.
 

About eight months after the Monsons arrived in Toronto, Elder S. Dilworth Young of the First Council of the Seventy visited them on his way to another assignment. Elder Young later wrote to President Monson, “You’re a mission president for three years. You’re a husband and a father for eternity. Keep that in mind. Your dear friend, Dil.”32
 

Busy as he was, President Monson consciously carved out time to spend with his children. In the evenings, he and Tommy would sit in the mission office and play checkers. President Monson was a whiz at checkers. As a young man, he had played checkers with his bishop but lost repeatedly. Tired of being defeated, he purchased a book that identified various strategies for checkers, one of which was to label each square with a number and make moves accordingly. He committed all the moves and techniques to memory and seldom lost again in those contests with the bishop—or with anyone else.
 

Young Tommy came to know the community well when he signed up to deliver the Toronto Telegram. He found the school curriculum and traditions very different from those at home; they followed the English system, which allowed for forms of corporal punishment. One day he came home with “eyes as big as saucers,” telling of how the boy in front of him had been rapped on the knuckles with a ruler for being “out of order.”
 

On Ann’s birthday in 1959, her father and mother took her to see Queen Elizabeth, who was riding in a parade. “Ann, if you wave to the Queen, she will wave back to you,” he promised. Ann did as instructed and marveled, “She not only waved to me, she smiled. How did she know it was my birthday?”33
 

Ann started kindergarten in Canada, and she too became a missionary. She spoke to her teacher, Miss Pepper, about how happy she was to be a Mormon, and she shared the Book of Mormon and the Children’s Friend with her. Years later, when Miss Pepper retired, she visited Salt Lake City to see for herself what her young pupil found so engaging. The Monsons were out of town on an assignment and came home to a letter that read, “Dear Ann, I came to Salt Lake City today to see what you folks had because a little girl of five shared the Book of Mormon and the Children’s Friend. Your courage one cannot deny. I went to Temple Square. I went to the visitors’ center and now I see why you had that courage and testimony. Sorry I missed you.” Miss Pepper died shortly after returning to Canada. Still the missionary, Ann performed the temple work for her first teacher in Toronto.34
 

Ann gave her first Church talk in the Ossington chapel. The Saturday before she was to speak, she could not find the paper with the talk she had written. She glanced in the parakeet cage and saw it there, serving as a cage liner. She did not retrieve it. She had prepared her talk on the Prophet Joseph Smith and memorized it—as her father had instructed. She gave it the next day with no notes.35
 

President Monson involved his family in missionary work whenever possible. Missionaries would practice their teaching on Tommy, Ann, and even Clark. The children were willing subjects, much as Tom had been years earlier when he had listened to his sister rehearse her readings.
 

Two years younger than President Monson, Ev Pallin served the full three years as his first counselor, working specifically with the branches and districts. A convert himself, he understood missionary work. He would go to the mission home first thing in the morning and give his schedule to the mission secretary. President Monson would be having breakfast with his family, and the two would chat. They traveled on weekends to quarterly conferences, staying with members in the various areas. With nine conferences each convening four times a year, the men weren’t home much. “President Monson is a great person to work with, so complimentary,” Ev explains. “He treated me as an equal. I was tutored under him. The rest of my life in big decisions I would know how he would treat the situation and that’s what I would do.”36
 

President Monson’s second counselor—who would today be called an “assistant to the president”—worked with the missionaries. Stephen Hadley, one of those missionary counselors, had experiences with his president that were lifelong lessons. “I learned from President Monson that being a leader means more than just being there. It means being there for another. He has always been there for us—not just for me but for his entire contingent of missionaries.”37
 

Transfers were not blocked into six-week rotations, as is typically the schedule in missions around the world today. New missionaries arrived all month long. President Monson remembers thirty coming one month, thirteen at one time. During his tenure, the age of eligibility for missionary service was lowered from twenty to nineteen. He worried that the new missionaries might be less prepared, but “they didn’t miss a beat.”38
 

Ask his missionaries today what they remember about their president, and they will talk about his teachings, his example, his exuberance, his intellect. “He inspired confidence,” one says. “You had the strong feeling that he really cared for you,” another adds. “You trusted his ability.”39 One newly arrived missionary, Elder Michael Murdock, was sitting in a sacrament meeting when the bishop announced that the mission president would conclude the meeting. As President Monson walked up the aisle, he patted the new elder on the back, just a slight pat, but it provided reassurance. “I knew that he loved me,” Michael Murdock recalls. “I carried that with me all my mission.”40 Ev Pallin says, “You think of John the Beloved when you think of Tom Monson. Everything happens because of love, as far as he is concerned.”41
 

Many of the missionaries saw in their president what they imagined the Prophet Joseph had been like as a leader. He had the same youthful vigor, the same strong leadership characteristics, and the same humility. He had a happy way of handling things, always positive, always decisive. But he “wouldn’t stand for any monkey business.” He had the ability to make the missionaries feel good, Ev recalls, “even when he was chastising them. He had a rare combination of leadership skills.”42
 

The missionaries knew where their president turned for counsel. He had brought with him the portrait of the Savior that had hung in his office when he was bishop. (It still hangs in his office today.) Before working on transfers, one of them recalls, he would “get up from his chair and we would kneel and pray to receive the direction of the Lord. He offered a prayer and then had me offer a prayer.”43
 

President Monson worked from a board on the wall with pictures of missionaries, as had his predecessor. But he developed his own method for moving them around. His missionary counselors were always astounded by the president’s capacity to remember all the considerations. “He relied on the Lord. We watched it, and his choices always seemed to fit into the Lord’s larger plan.”44
 

Canada was leaning away from religion. In 1960 the electorate approved theaters and halls to show movies, plays, and concerts on Sundays; Sabbath sports events were already allowed. Catholics were the largest denomination; the United Church of Canada, second; and the Anglicans, third. Immigrants from Italy, Germany, Poland, Hungary, and even the Ukraine provided a fertile field for missionaries.
 

Missionaries in Welland on the Niagara Peninsula began teaching a group of Italian-speaking immigrants. These investigators invited the missionaries in and were willing to listen, but they did not understand the discussions, as none of the elders spoke Italian. Right around that same time, President Monson was contemplating transfers in that area. As he reviewed the missionaries, “trying to place them, by the will of the Lord, with the right companion and in the right place,” he stopped at the name of an Elder Smith. He pondered why he was drawn to that elder’s name. A transfer seemed premature. Yet the impression to move Elder Smith over to the Niagara Peninsula came so strongly that he made the move.
 

The next week, tears came to his eyes as he read in the missionary letters: “Dear President Monson, I know you were inspired in sending Elder Smith to us in Welland. We are teaching ten Italian-speaking families whose English skills are limited. In my heart I had been praying for a companion who could speak Italian. You found the only missionary in the mission who spoke Italian.” President Monson had known nothing about the elder’s language skills. He recalls, “With a name like Smith, you don’t think he is going to speak Italian.”45
 

The miracles continued. President Monson placed one new missionary from a rural area with a companion in the city of Oshawa. The two knocked at a door in a thick, blinding blizzard. Elmer Pollard answered the door and, taking pity on the two elders, invited them in. They shared their message and then asked him if he would join them in prayer. He agreed—if he could offer the prayer. His words astonished the elders. “Heavenly Father,” he said, “grant that these two unfortunate, misguided missionaries might see the error of their ways and return to their homes. They have come to a land about which they know nothing to teach that about which they know so little. Amen.” He walked the missionaries to the door and sent them on their way. His last words to the two were quite caustic: “You can’t tell me you actually believe Joseph Smith was a prophet of God!”
 

He didn’t wait for a reply. He shut the door, ending the exchange. The elders were walking away when the new missionary turned to his companion and said: “Elder, we didn’t answer Mr. Pollard’s question. He said we didn’t believe Joseph Smith was a true prophet. Let’s return and bear our testimonies to him.” His companion hesitated but finally agreed.
 

They again knocked at the door, and when it was answered the unseasoned elder spoke: “Mr. Pollard, you indicated we didn’t believe Joseph Smith was a prophet of God. I testify to you that Joseph was a prophet; he did translate the Book of Mormon; he saw God the Father and Jesus the Son. I know it.” The missionaries departed the doorstep.
 

“I heard this same Mr. Pollard, in a testimony meeting, state the experience of that memorable day,” President Monson has said. The once caustic investigator described: “That evening, sleep would not come. I tossed and turned. Over and over in my mind I heard the words, ‘Joseph Smith is a prophet of God. I know it. . . . I know it. . . . I know it.’ I could scarcely wait for morning to come. I telephoned the missionaries, using the address which was on the small card they had left behind containing the Articles of Faith. They returned, and this time, with the correct spirit, my wife and family and I joined in the discussion as earnest seekers of truth. As a result we have all embraced the gospel of Jesus Christ. We shall ever be grateful to the testimony of truth brought to us by courageous, humble missionaries.”46
 

Sister Monson claims her own converts. Running a busy mission home, she one day took a phone call and spoke with a person whose Dutch accent came through clearly. He asked, “Is this the headquarters of the Mormon Church?”
 

She assured him it was, at least for the Toronto area, and asked how she could help. The caller said, “We have come from our native Holland where we have had an opportunity to learn something about the Mormons. My wife would like to know more. I would not.” Frances, being the good missionary she was, said, “We can help you.” She wrote down all the pertinent information.
 

“This is a golden referral,” she told the missionaries on the staff excitedly as she gave them the names of Jacob and Bea de Jager and their family. But, as sometimes happens, they put off contacting the de Jagers. Days turned to weeks, and she continued to remind them, “Are you going to call on that Dutch family tonight, elders?” After a few more days she would prod again. Finally, exasperated, she said, “If you aren’t going to call the Dutch family tonight, my husband and I will!”
 

Elders Newell Smith and James Turpin committed to a visit that night. They returned to the de Jager home the next night and the next as the family received the teachings of the gospel and the spirit filled their hearts. Every one of them joined the Church—even the father who had professed in the beginning to have no interest.
 

Brother Jacob de Jager became the elders quorum president before his company transferred him to Mexico. He later served as a counselor to several mission presidents in Holland, then as a regional representative, and finally as a member of the First Quorum of the Seventy from 1976 to 1993. The de Jagers claim the special distinction of being “converts of Sister Monson in Canada.”47
 

President Monson focused on involving members in finding and fellowshipping investigators and new converts. They would join in the teaching and could speak with authenticity of their own conversions. Brother and Sister Anthony Belfiglio, who once were Catholic, could ask all the right questions, such as, “What parish are you in?”48 Brother William Stoneman could say how he lost his job as the chief bookbinder of the United Church of Canada when he joined The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. He would testify, “I found a better job—but more than that, I found greater truth, all the truth, and you will too. May we pick you up on Sunday? We’ll sit by you during our meetings and then we’ll be able to answer your questions.”49
 

“That kind of member involvement produces converts who stay and who build and who serve,” President Monson emphasized at a reunion in 2002 at the Ossington chapel. He knew of what he spoke. In attendance were converts who had joined the Church when he was a mission president nearly half a century before. He continues to admonish: “No mission in the Church will ever achieve its full potential without member missionary cooperation and involvement.”50 In an area like Canada, thin on membership, the missionaries could not keep busy working strictly from referrals. President Monson held to what worked in his mission and what he felt inspired to do. That included tracting and door-to-door contacting to find and rescue those lost to the ways of God. But he always credited the member program with the most dramatic increase in the number of converts.
 

President Monson’s ecumenical spirit was ideal for the diverse culture of his mission. He understood that there was room for every person’s faith and every person’s service. In speaking to a crowd gathered to commemorate the beginnings of the Church in Canada, he embraced the diverse nature of the country, saying: “I believe that we have seen in our lifetime a great movement toward an understanding that we’re all God’s children, whatever our color, whatever our faith, whatever our background.”51
 

Standardized lessons had yet to be integrated into missionary work, so President Monson created a seventy-five-page handbook that included general instructions, ideas regarding preparation, and helps for proselyting. His words in the introduction ring as true now as they did then: “Our missionary handbook is dedicated to the purpose of finding honest souls, helping them to gain a firm testimony of the restored gospel, and bringing them into the kingdom of God.”52 At district and mission leadership conferences, he worked from a four-point plan that included (1) appointing and training coordinator couples in every branch to assist in the interaction of investigators and new converts, (2) increasing the emphasis on investigators attending Church services, (3) introducing a district missionary program to supplement the work of full-time missionaries, and (4) accelerating the missionary teaching process by meeting with investigators on a more frequent basis.53
 

In 1959 President Monson initiated an extensive building program throughout the mission to get the Saints out of rented halls, unfinished basements, Elks lodges, and third-floor walk-ups. He told the story of taking an investigator into the basement of the Moose Hall, saying, “Here’s where the true Church of Jesus Christ meets,” and hearing a woman ask, “What is the purpose in your religion of the animal head on the wall?”
 

The answer, “Oh, we’re just meeting here temporarily.”
 

Then came the question, “Oh, is your church temporary in our city?”54
 

President Monson put in motion the building program to change such perceptions. Success in the missionary effort required having chapels for services.
 

Building fever swept the mission, and by March 1961 new ward buildings were completed in Timmins and Oshawa. President Monson started planning for meetinghouses in Toronto, St. Catharines, St. Thomas, London, and Sudbury. When he purchased land for the Etobicoke stake center, the $27,000 check was “the largest check” he had ever held in his hand. On December 11, 1966, Elder Monson, then a member of the Quorum of the Twelve, came back to dedicate that stake center. An overflow crowd of more than 1,700 attended. By then the stake had grown to 4,957 members, an increase of 2,654 in six and half years.55 The members were fine people, schooled in the gospel and committed to the work.
 

One of President Monson’s early visits among the Canadian Saints was to the struggling St. Thomas Branch. The members—just three families—met in a dilapidated “Orange Hall,” named for a fraternal order of William of Orange. Irving Wilson served as branch president; he blessed and helped pass the sacrament and conducted the meetings. Brother Wilson envisioned a new chapel just like one recently completed in Sydney, Australia, and pictured in the Improvement Era. He wanted an identical chapel in St. Thomas. President Monson suggested that in time such a structure could be built.
 

“We don’t want to wait,” said Brother Wilson. He asked for additional missionaries, promising to provide sufficient referrals to keep them busy. President Monson looked at Brother Wilson’s sincerity and eagerness and couldn’t say no. He sent six missionaries to St. Thomas.
 

Brother Wilson operated a small jewelry store and met with the missionaries in his back workroom. They knelt in prayer, and then he said, “This is the beginning of a new day in St. Thomas. We are going to build a chapel.” They needed members. “You do the teaching, I’ll get them here,” Brother Wilson told the missionaries. He reached for the phone directory and turned to the Yellow Pages, explaining, “We ought to have a building designed by a Mormon architect, and since we don’t have an architect who is a member of the branch, we need to convert one.” He went down the list of architects until he found a name he recognized. He did the same for others, including a builder, barrister, mechanic, and brick mason. He invited the individuals to his home, introduced them to the missionaries, and bore his testimony, as did his wife. Within two and a half years, the fledgling branch of three families had expanded to more than two hundred members. And then they built their chapel.
 

Brother Wilson believed that their building merited a Wurlitzer organ, a step above the regular-issue Hammond organ. The Church would contribute only enough for the standard Hammond model. But Brother Wilson was not to be deterred. He called the head of the Church Building Department and asked, “If we can get a Wurlitzer organ for the same price as a Hammond, will you agree to pay?” Permission was given, and Brother Wilson found a Wurlitzer.
 

At the first meeting in the new building, five different organists participated. They invited nonmembers to come and play the new Wurlitzer, and as those “guest organists” sat through the meetings, listening to the talks and the hymns, each one became an investigator and then a member.56
 

When President Monson first arrived in Toronto, missionaries were serving as district presidents over eight or ten branches; others were branch presidents. As quickly as possible, he moved local priesthood leaders into those responsibilities, allowing the missionaries more time to focus on finding investigators and teaching the gospel. This also provided leadership experience for the members, who had a lot of talent but little administrative experience in the Church.
 

When President Monson attended the North Bay Branch in a remote corner of Ontario, he found a small congregation of sisters, a handful of investigators, and one priesthood holder, Brother Donald Mabey. Recently transferred to the area by a diamond products company, Brother Mabey had executive experience in business, but he was a thirty-five-year-old deacon who had never had any priesthood responsibility in the Church. He rarely even attended church. Still, he held the highest priesthood authority in the North Bay Branch. President Monson called him to be the branch president.
 

“I am not qualified,” Brother Mabey responded, citing his total lack of experience in the Church. “Surely there is someone else who can do it.”
 

“No, Brother Mabey, if there were, I would not be calling you,” President Monson said. Brother Mabey finally accepted the calling, and the branch flourished under his care, as did his testimony and commitment.57
 

Because of the great distances in the mission, much of President Monson’s communication to and from the missionaries was by post or telegram. On one occasion, he received from a missionary in the north a telegram that said, “President, the temperature is 40 degrees below freezing. Please advise.”
 

President Monson sent a telegram back: “Dress warm, work hard, and don’t look at the thermometer.”
 

The district leader in Kitchener, Ontario, a city of some 80,000 people, wrote, “Dear President Monson: We have tracted out the city of Kitchener. Please tell us where to go next.”
 

President Monson responded, “Dear Elder: Happy to hear that you have tracted out the city of Kitchener. Now if you will teach and baptize the people in Kitchener, that will be your next assignment.”58
 

When President Monson learned that the Kingston area to the east had seen but one convert baptism in six years, he decided it was time to exert great faith. For years, missionaries assigned to “Stony Kingston” had marked their time there on the calendar like days in jail. One day Sister Monson read aloud to President Monson an entry in a book she was reading: “Brigham Young entered Kingston, Ontario, on a cold, snow-filled day. He labored there thirty days and baptized forty-five souls.”
 

The passage gave President Monson an idea. He moved all missionaries out of Kingston—they were happy to leave—and then he waited. Soon he announced that “a new city” would be opened for missionary work and described it as “the city where Brigham Young proselyted and baptized forty-five persons in thirty days.” The speculation began, and in weekly letters several missionaries hinted they would like the chance to open this new bonanza for missionary work. He assigned missionaries to Kingston—again—and it became “the most productive city in the Canadian mission.” All involved learned an important lesson. The city had not altered its appearance; the population had remained the same. “The change was one of attitude. Doubt yielded to faith.”59 Indeed, “they just picked up the plow and plowed on.”60
 

President Monson’s optimism was contagious. To him, “Success is contingent upon our effective use of the time given us. When we cease peering backwards into the mists of our path and craning forward into the fog that shrouds the future and simply concentrate upon doing what lies clearly at hand, then we are making the best and happiest use of our time. Success is the ratio of your accomplishments to your capabilities.”61
 

Creation of the Toronto Stake, the 300th stake in the Church, was a major milestone in the mission. President Monson had watched carefully as new stakes were established, most of them in the western United States. The Alberta Canada Stake, organized in 1895, had been the first stake outside the United States. He admits to holding his breath for fear that Toronto would be the 299th stake rather than the landmark 300th. When Puget Sound in Washington State became the 299th stake, he was delighted. Some time later when he visited the Puget Sound Stake on assignment, he began his message by saying, “I am honored to be here in the 299th stake of the Church.” The members marveled at his ability to know precisely when that stake was created and what number they were in sequence in the Church. He didn’t divulge that he had been watching from Upper Canada and hoping another stake would round out the 200s.
 

He asked his first counselor, Ev Pallin, who was familiar with the city, to recommend a facility large enough to hold the stake organization meeting. Brother Pallin found just the right place: the Odeon Carlton Theatre in downtown Toronto, which was closed on Sundays. When he told President Monson about it, Brother Pallin said, “You’ll like it because of the organ. You will feel like you are in the Tabernacle.” President Monson took Frances to a movie, The Story of Ruth, at the Odeon, but he didn’t see much of the film. He was busy walking up and down the aisles counting seats. The next time he met with Brother Pallin, he said of the Odeon, “That’s the place.”
 

It would require 90 percent attendance of the members in the new stake to fill the seats. President Monson and Brother Pallin organized both a 437-voice children’s chorus and a 325-voice Relief Society chorus in order to bring out as many people as possible. The creation of the stake was announced throughout the mission, and people came from everywhere. The conference drew 2,250 people, 92 percent of the new stake’s membership, “the largest assemblage of Latter-day Saints ever to come together in the history of the Church in Ontario.”62
 

Elder Mark E. Petersen and Elder Alma Sonne organized the Toronto Stake, the first stake in Eastern Canada, made up of three districts. William M. Davies, president of the Toronto District, was called as president. Now the Saints in the area would have all the blessings of a fully organized stake, including their own patriarch. Instead of having to travel to the Detroit Stake for their patriarchal blessings, they could receive them in their own area.
 

Three years had yet to be set as the standard length of service for a mission president. Most served about that—some a little more, some a little less. In January 1962, after almost three years in Toronto, President Monson received word that the management of the Deseret News Publishing Company was being reorganized and that he was slotted for a prominent position. A few months earlier, Preston Robinson, general manager of the Deseret News Publishing Company, had invited him down from the mission field to meet him at a printing company in Detroit to look over a new web-offset press. The Deseret News was making the move to web-offset printing, in which the paper is fed into the press on a continuous roll, printed on both sides in full color, folded, and then prepared for delivery at the end of the press. The Deseret News bought a press like the one President Monson and Brother Robinson saw.
 

So when President Monson received a letter of honorable release from his mission, he was not surprised. He was prepared to leave the mission but not ready to turn over to another “the wonderful missionary force.” He was convinced then and is still today “that it was the finest group of missionaries to be found anywhere in the world.”63 His roots had gone deep, and Canada had become “a treasured and hallowed nation” to him.64 The Monsons left “a little of their hearts” in Toronto.
 

Frank Pitcher and his wife, a couple from Calgary, Canada, replaced the Monsons, assuming responsibility for the mission on February 1, 1962.
 

President Monson left an imprint on his missionaries that was lasting. One of his elders, Wayne Chamberlain, recalls his own “exit interview” in 1961: “I sat in front of my mission president; he was thirty-three years old. He was the most dynamic man I had ever met in mortality. He had given me a vision of what this great gospel of Jesus Christ was all about and who Joseph Smith was and, most important, how to be an effective missionary. But he gave me one bit of advice that I have never forgotten. He said, ‘I am giving you a temple recommend. This will now be the most valuable possession in your world and in your life.’ Then he said, specifically, ‘I want you to use it and I expect you, Elder Chamberlain, to always be worthy to hold that recommend.’”65
 

As each missionary departed, President Monson explained that missions are a training ground for future service in the Lord’s kingdom. He did not realize how completely he was speaking of his own life to come.
 
 
 
 

Notes - Chapter 13: “O Canada”
 

 Epigraph. Interview with Quentin L. Cook, 18 September 2009.
 

1. Thomas S. Monson, address at mission presidents’ seminar, 23 June 2005.
 

2. Interview with TSM, 9 September 2008.
 

3. Interview with Quentin L. Cook, 18 September 2009.
 

4. Thomas S. Monson, address at Harold B. Lee Library Dedication, 15 November 2000.
 

5. Doctrine and Covenants 112:10.
 

6. Thomas S. Monson, “To Learn, to Do, to Be,” Ensign, November 2008, 67.
 

7. Monson, Errand, 192–93.
 

8. Monson, Errand, 191.
 

9. Letter from J. Reuben Clark, Jr., to Clark Spencer Monson, 1 October 1959.
 

10. See “Autobiography of Bathsheba Smith,” 14–15, LDS Church Archives.
 

11. TSM Journal, 21 February 1959.
 

12. As quoted in John Hart, “Mission presidents told to prepare for ‘greatest experience,’” Church News, 3 July 1993, 6.
 

13. The same geographical area of the Canadian Mission now is sectioned into three missions: Canada Montreal, Canada Toronto East, and Canada Toronto West.
 

14. Interview with Stephen Hadley, 14 October 2009.
 

15. Interview with Everett Pallin, 15 October 2009.
 

16. “The Canadian Missionary,” Canadian Mission Newsletter, Toronto, Canada, 1959.
 

17. Thomas S. Monson, address at General Authority training meeting, 29 September 1998.
 

18. Interview with Everett Pallin, 15 October 2009.
 

19. Thomas S. Monson, address at mission presidents’ seminar, 25 June 2007.
 

20. Monson, Errand, 239–41.
 

21. Interview with M. Russell Ballard, 9 September 2009.
 

22. Letter from Bruce R. McConkie to TSM, 3 September 1959.
 

23. “Church Officer Reports on Canadian Tour,” Church News, 3 September 1960, 10.
 

24. A History of the Mormon Church in Canada, 1830–1846 (Alberta, Canada: Lethbridge Stake, 1968), 5.
 

25. Doctrine and Covenants 100:3.
 

26. Thomas S. Monson, address at mission presidents’ seminar, 27 June 2006.
 

27. Thomas S. Monson, “Principles from Prophets,” address given at BYU, 13 September 2009.
 

28. Thomas S. Monson, “Motivating Missionaries,” mission presidents’ seminar, 22 June 2008; Doctrine and Covenants 108:7.
 

29. Thomas S. Monson, address at mission presidents’ seminar, 28 June 2008.
 

30. Thomas S. Monson, in Conference Report, April 1964, 132.
 

31. Interview with TSM, 17 June 2009.
 

32. Monson, address at mission presidents’ seminar, 23 June 2005.
 

33. Interview with Ann Monson Dibb, 6 June 2009.
 

34. Monson, address at mission presidents’ seminar, 23 June 2005.
 

35. John Farrington, “Return to Canada,” Church News, 8 May 2004, 3.
 

36. Interview with Everett Pallin, 15 October 2009.
 

37. Interview with Stephen Hadley, 14 October 2009.
 

38. Monson, address at mission presidents’ seminar, 23 June 2005.
 

39. See Interviews with Stephen Hadley, 14 October 2009; Michael Murdock, 29 October 2008.
 

40. Interview with Michael Murdock, 29 October 2008.
 

41. Interview with Everett Pallin, 15 October 2009.
 

42. Interview with Everett Pallin, 15 October 2009.
 

43. Interview with Stephen Hadley, 14 October 2009.
 

44. Interview with Stephen Hadley, 14 October 2009.
 

45. Thomas S. Monson, “The Prophet Joseph Smith—Teacher by Example,” Twenty-first Annual Joseph Smith Memorial Sermon, 11 December 1963.
 

46. Monson, “The Prophet Joseph Smith.”
 

47. Monson, Errand, 222–23.
 

48. Thomas S. Monson, address at General Authority training meeting, 23 June 2005.
 

49. Thomas S. Monson, address at General Authority training meeting, 2 April 2003.
 

50. Ossington Chapel Reunion, July 2002, videotape, LDS Church Archives.
 

51. Gerry Avant, “Church in Upper Canada: rich history is celebrated,” Church News, 16 August 1997, 8.
 

52. Canada Mission handbook, 1959.
 

53. Canada Mission handbook, 1959.
 

54. Thomas S. Monson, address at General Authority training meeting, 28 September 1999.
 

55. A History of the Mormon Church in Canada, 32.
 

56. Monson, Errand, 197–98.
 

57. See Thomas S. Monson, address at BYU College of Business, 14 March 1973; address at regional representatives’ seminar, 30 March 1990.
 

58. Thomas S. Monson, “Your Choice,” BYU Devotional, 10 March 1998.
 

59. Monson, Errand, 226.
 

60. Monson, address at mission presidents’ seminar, 23 June 2005.
 

61. Thomas S. Monson, “Timeless Truths for a Changing World,” address at BYU Women’s Conference, 4 May 2001.
 

62. TSM Journal, 23 February 1964.
 

63. Monson, Errand, 227.
 

64. Monson, address at mission presidents’ seminar, 25 June 2007.
 

65. Wayne Chamberlain, address at South Salt Lake Regional Meeting, Conference Center, 2009.
 
 
 

14
 
 
 
© 2010 Heidi S. Swinton 

Printed from Gospelink.com
