# “Weary Not”

### “Weary Not”
Heidi S. Swinton, To the Rescue: The Biography of Thomas S. Monson (Salt Lake City 2010)
 
 

“Weary Not”
 

For me, as a German, of course we claim President Monson, as he is claimed by everyone around the globe. He makes everyone feel that they are first in his attention; that is one of his great talents. The actual blessings he brought to our country and to Europe are so real and so significant and so singular in their value that I really believe that the Lord had prepared him to be an instrument in changing the history of Germany.
 

President Dieter F. Uchtdorf Second Counselor in the First Presidency
 

Since the Berlin Wall had gone up in 1961, no General Authority had attempted to visit the Soviet Zone in Germany. It was now 1968, and, “trusting in the Lord,” Elder Monson, newly assigned to the European nations, decided he would be the one to make that visit. He immediately contacted the United States government to determine what—exactly—he would find in divided Germany, particularly behind the Iron Curtain. The U.S. State Department official tried to discourage him from making any trips into East Germany, called then the German Democratic Republic (GDR),1 explaining that the United States had no diplomatic relations with that country. He was blunt: “If anything happens, we can’t get you out.”2
 

Elder Monson went anyway.
 

“You simply had to realize,” he explained years later, “that the objective was higher than any earthly authority, and with trust in the Lord you went.”3
 

This was not just another assignment to another part of the world. Behind the Iron Curtain were members very much in need of help—of rescue. To a great extent, Germany would define Thomas Monson’s apostolic ministry. It was in Germany that he saw, even in tragic circumstances, the Lord’s love for the downtrodden and forgotten. It was in Germany, on the other side of the world, that this strong and vigorous young Apostle applied his seasoned administrative skills and a heart to match. There he built upon his years of experience with the widows in the Sixth-Seventh Ward, adding to that cadre women who had lost their husbands in war and families bereft of loved ones.
 

The first time Elder Monson announced to Frances that he planned to visit the German Democratic Republic, he asked if she would like to go with him. She replied, “Tom, we have children to raise. You go, and I will stay here and watch the children. Then if you don’t come back, they will have one of us to give them guidance!”
 

“Pray for me,” he said.4
 

Elder Monson would visit a Germany that had been divided by the victors into four military zones, occupied by American, British, French, and Russian armies. Quickly, the United States, England, and France had begun to rebuild the shattered economy of “their” Germany. Russia, on the other hand, isolated its portion and established a police state where censorship and travel restrictions set back recovery efforts for half a century. Bombed-out buildings covered in soot from cheap coal marked the landscape. In a famed address given in 1946, Winston Churchill, former prime minister of Great Britain, stated, “From Stettin to the Baltic to Trieste in the Adriatic, an iron curtain has descended across the continent.”5
 

Those who were able, hundreds of thousands of East Germans, fled to other nations during those first years after the war. Fully a fifth of the population got out. Among those escaping the Russian rule were hundreds of Latter-day Saints.
 

President David O. McKay had traveled to West Berlin in 1952, and 1,300 members had been allowed to cross over from the East Zone to hear him speak, some selling the little they had, even furniture, to make the trip. The day after, the GDR government refused to allow East German citizens to visit Berlin. In August 1955 Elder Spencer W. Kimball spoke of his “glorious vision” of what would happen if the members stayed in Germany and did their part “unselfishly to rebuild the great kingdom.”6 Elder Adam S. Bennion visited West Berlin in July 1956, and President Henry D. Moyle spoke to the Saints in Leipzig in 1958; it was a reunion for him because he had labored there as a missionary years before. As had Elder Kimball, he emphasized that the Church was “entering a new era which will require the people to remain in their own native lands to build up and strengthen the Church there; and by doing so, they will lay the foundation for the establishment of regular Church organizations.”7 The last visit from Church headquarters before Elder Monson arrived was by Elder LeGrand Richards in 1959. The members heard the message, “Stay in the Zone,” and many did “because of the words of the prophets.”8
 

After World War II, the city of Berlin, located deep in the Soviet Zone, had, like Germany itself, been divided into four sectors under the four military powers. The American, English, and French sectors became known as West Berlin; the Soviet sector became known as East Berlin. On the morning of August 13, 1961, West Berliners awoke to find a barbed-wire wall encircling their side of the city, with armed guards lined up along it to “protect” the citizens of the Soviet Zone, now the German Democratic Republic, from Western influences. Communications, too, had been shut down, the major street crossings blocked, subway and rail stations closed, and travel between the East and the West sealed off. That September, Erich Honecker, a tough Communist who had scrambled to authority after the war, directed the construction of miles of concrete that became known as the Berlin Wall, the most infamous barrier in the world. A barren no-man’s-land, patrolled by troops with orders to shoot anyone trying to cross into the West, further separated the countries.9
 

The fewer than 5,000 Church members who had remained in East Germany—many following previous prophetic counsel to help build up the Church in their homeland—faced punitive practices by the government, designed to discourage religious activity. The intent was to supplant Christianity with socialist dogma and practices. The GDR constitution of 1949 granted churches the right to exist—unlike in other Communist countries—but made religious practice very difficult and always suspect.10 A government office of religious affairs controlled church activities, though it stopped short of preventing its citizens from worshipping. The state required notice of meetings and even monitored Sunday services; it prohibited missionary activity of any kind and did not allow any scriptures, handbooks, manuals, or even hymnals to come into the country. It denied entry to universities and advancement in the workplace to any citizen demonstrating religious inclinations. The little missionary work that was allowed for a time in East Germany after the war was performed by Church members living within the GDR—many of them newly returned soldiers who had barely survived the conflict.
 

Certainly the Latter-day Saints were few in numbers compared to the larger Christian denominations, such as the Catholics and Protestants, but being less obvious did not shield them from constant surveillance and even persecution. That the LDS Church’s headquarters were in the United States, that the majority of the membership was there as well, and that the Church had been founded on American soil only added to the government’s suspicions of the Mormons.11
 

Germany, though, had long been a stronghold for the Church. In the first half of the twentieth century, the area around Freiberg, Dresden, and Leipzig was “one of the most productive areas of membership growth” in the Church. The official records of the East German Mission, organized in late 1937, noted that the mission had a population of 7,267 members in 1939 and “was one of the largest missions (by population) in the world at that time.”12 In fact, Germany stood third in the world in total number of Church members; the United States and Canada were first and second, respectively.13
 

Some of the Church’s German branches that now fell in the Soviet Zone had first been established before many in the newly settled communities in Utah.14 The Dresden Branch, for example, was organized October 21, 1855; German convert Karl G. Maeser served as president. He and most of the branch emigrated to Utah in 1856; he returned to Germany as a missionary in 1867, serving three years, and then returned to Utah to take the position of principal of Brigham Young Academy, which later became BYU. A man of firm and unfailing faith, Maeser is famous for his charge that at the Academy not even “the ABCs would be taught without the Spirit.”15 (On July 14, 2001, President Monson dedicated a larger-than-life statue of Dr. Maeser placed at the Dresden stake center in the heart of town.)
 

In the mid-1930s, Adolf Hitler’s regime began to rebuild the German military and reacquire territory lost in the First World War. During this period, LDS Church meetings were interrupted by Nazis, and local Church leaders were interrogated. After the 1938 annexation of several countries into Germany, including Austria and parts of Czechoslovakia, Hitler’s intent was clear. The German political aggression created concerns for the leaders of the Church. Hitler’s ambitions seemed at odds with the welfare of the German Saints.
 

In order to judge the perilous situation, President Heber J. Grant and other Church leaders toured Germany and other European nations in 1937. The visit gave Saints in Europe the rare opportunity to be in the presence of the prophet of God. They were not disappointed. President Grant encouraged them “to appreciate and assume their full responsibilities as Church members and bearers of the priesthood” and to no longer “place so much reliance upon the [missionaries].”16 The following year, local members were called upon to take over the offices, which they did with integrity and earnestness.17
 

As war loomed in June 1938, President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., then First Counselor in the First Presidency and a former U.S. diplomat, toured the European missions and then met with the mission presidents in Berlin. He suggested that with mounting tensions, each mission president needed to devise a method of withdrawing missionaries. He helped determine the safest location to send missionaries. “We didn’t really realize that within six weeks of that time, we’d be starting to evacuate the missionaries,” President Franklin J. Murdock of the Netherlands Mission reported. “I don’t think President Clark realized that it was that soon.”18 The first withdrawal occurred in 1938, though it was more a trial run, as missionaries returned to their fields of labor when tensions in Germany subsided. A year later, on August 24, 1939, while Elder Joseph Fielding Smith was touring the European missions, a telegram from the First Presidency ordered a second and final evacuation of all 697 foreign missionaries serving in European missions, including mission presidents. One week later, on September 1, 1939, Europe went to war.
 

As the missionary evacuation began, the responsibility for the East German Mission was turned over to local members. On September 25, 1939, Thomas E. McKay, who was the last mission leader to leave the European continent, sent a letter to all members in Germany, encouraging them as they took over the responsibility for running the mission: “We pray sincerely to our Heavenly Father, that He might protect and bless those that have been called to arms and that He might strengthen those who have remained at home for the additional responsibilities that rest upon your shoulders. Pray, live a pure life, keep the word of wisdom, pay your tithing, visit and participate in all the meetings, keep free from finding fault and bearing false witness, sustain those that have been called to preside and it is our promise that the Lord will guide and lead you in all things and that you, even in the midst of afflictions and difficulties, will find joy and satisfaction. Be always mindful that we are engaged in the work of the Lord and that Jesus is the Christ.”19
 

When President Thomas McKay reported to authorities at Church headquarters, he assured them that the German Saints understood the gospel and were well qualified to carry on. Some of the leaders were second- and third-generation members. K. Herbert Klopfer, a twenty-seven-year-old German Mission translator who was given responsibility for the East German Mission after President McKay left, soon reported to Salt Lake City, “Meetings are held regularly and are well attended. . . . Everyone is doing his duty.”20
 

When the Relief Society all over the Church celebrated its centennial in March 1942, with the war in full force, over 500 attended the event in Hamburg, making it one of the largest Relief Society commemorations in the Church.21 And “on June 27, 1944, the branches in Germany held a memorial in honor of the one-hundredth anniversary of the martyrdom of Joseph Smith.”22
 

But the war took a tremendous toll. Food rationing was severe. Planes attacked day and night. Two and a half million Germans were killed in a six-month period in 1944. Among them was the acting East German Mission president, K. Herbert Klopfer. He had been a genius at organization, juggling the affairs of the mission even with his assignment in the German military. The story is told of his attending a sacrament service in Denmark—in his German uniform. When he stood to sing with the Saints, they recognized him as a fellow member and “brought him into the fold.” He died a prisoner of war on the Russian front. His counselors, Paul Langheinrich and Richard Ranglack, continued to provide leadership, strength, and counsel to the beleaguered members.
 

The Church members carried on faithfully, though as the war progressed, attendance at meetings dropped because of the disruption of everyday life and the members’ moving to rural areas seeking safety. “But the spirit has not suffered,” one district president reported. “Less-active members of the Church came back and joined us again,” Church leader Henry Burkhardt recalled. Nobody became less active or fell away from the Church. “We all looked for something to hold on to.”23
 

At the time, the sacrament was passed in both Sunday School and sacrament meeting Churchwide.24 Because of the cold and lack of fuel during the winter in the GDR, the sacrament water froze in the cups. The members chipped away the ice and partook. The few priesthood leaders who were not away fighting in the war blessed babies and baptized eight-year-old children, plus a few converts. To connect with outlying branches, Church leaders traveled by bicycle until the roads were destroyed and their bicycles stolen. Then they walked. As the war intensified on several fronts, with more men—from ages fifteen to sixty—drafted into service, some of the branches lost all priesthood leadership. Sisters continued to meet. They held Primary and joined in choir practice to draw upon the power of the Spirit. They shared accounts of their miracles and acknowledged the Lord’s hand in their lives.
 

As the war progressed, the horrors did as well. By the end, the people were exhausted, starving, homeless, and waiting for the return of their soldiers—many of whom did not return. But the members were not disheartened. They looked forward, their faith deepening; it was all they had. And it was enough. Duty, honor, covenants, and cooperation were what sustained them and stirred them on. No wonder Elder Monson loved them.
 

The scripture “Go ye forth as your circumstances shall permit”25 took on new meaning. “We can roll up our sleeves and get to work, and the Lord will do the rest,” one brother commented as they set about rebuilding a horse barn to serve as a makeshift meeting place.26
 

The members lived on potato peelings and had only the ragged clothes on their backs, but they found refuge with one another, sometimes fifty to a room because their homes were gone. In January 1946, just seven months after the war ended, Elder Ezra Taft Benson of the Quorum of the Twelve arrived in Europe by Church assignment. He was one of the first civilians given permission to travel in Germany. The stories of his ministry in the war-torn countries are epic in nature. He was able, because of the welfare plan of the Church, to distribute food, clothing, bedding, and medical supplies. At the sight of boxes piled on boxes filled with life-saving rice and beans, mission leader Richard Ranglack “broke down and cried.”27 Elder Benson had come to “rescue one and all.”28 He traveled over 60,000 miles during this ten-month “mission of mercy,” navigating bombed-out bridges and damaged roads. The Saints came by the thousands to hear him speak. They were mostly pale, thin, and dressed in rags, but “the light of faith” shone in their eyes.29 He taught the people “to be forgiving, [for] there are really no victors and no losers.” In war, he said, “everyone loses.”30
 

“Only with a faith in the ultimate consummation of the Lord’s purposes can people, with all their earthly possessions swept away, continue with spirits sweet and hearts free from bitterness,” Elder Benson said as he left the country at the conclusion of his assignment. “I promise you the richest blessings of eternity inasmuch as you continue faithful.”31 That promise would be repeated by Thomas S. Monson, another young and vigorous Apostle, more than twenty years later.
 

Elder Monson arrived in West Berlin on July 31, 1968, for his first visit as the supervisor of the Europe area and its missions in Germany, Austria, Switzerland, and Italy. Stanley D. Rees, president of the North German Mission, headquartered in Hamburg, met him. President Rees had responsibility for the northern states of West Germany (the Federal Republic of Germany) and West Berlin as well as East Berlin and all of the East German sector (the German Democratic Republic, Poland, Hungary, and other countries behind the Iron Curtain). Together, the men cautiously crossed through the checkpoint at the border to travel very briefly into East Berlin. And then Elder Monson and President Rees presented themselves at the border to return to West Berlin. Elder Monson found that, even with a U.S. passport, departure from East Germany was a long process.32 For the next twenty years he would cross into East Germany several times a year, but he was never casual about the experience.
 

“It was a little bit frightening to go through Checkpoint Charlie and see the machine guns and the shepherd dogs and Doberman pinschers waiting for a false move on your part,” he later recalled. “The border guards never smiled. They would attempt to stare you down.”33
 

At Elder Monson’s first visit, Church records in East Germany showed 4,641 members on the rolls in 47 branches and 7 member districts, with 47 baptisms in 1968, of which 17 were converts.34 The German and Italian missions had nearly 1,000 missionaries—almost all of them from the United States—serving in European countries, but none behind the Iron Curtain. In East Germany, the percentages for sacrament meeting attendance, home teaching, and other Church activities were far higher than in West Germany or in the other European stakes and districts.
 

On his second trip to East Germany, on November 9, 1968, Elder Monson joined President and Sister Rees and they again crossed at Checkpoint Charlie into the East Zone. He asked President Rees to pray that the guards would be blinded to “their true purpose” in visiting. This time they were going deep into the country, to Görlitz on the southern border, across from Poland and Czechoslovakia. As they passed through the inspection, they “were among a very few who were not asked to open their suitcases so the guards could make a detailed inspection of all the contents.”35
 

As he and the Reeses drove toward Görlitz, they passed through rural areas where farm machinery was horse-drawn, with not a tractor in sight. “The weather was cold and foggy; hence, a very dismal atmosphere pervaded the scene,” Elder Monson wrote.36 The autobahns were void of traffic, indicating the scarcity of automobiles in East Germany. Those who did have cars wrapped themselves in blankets because their vehicles, for the most part, had no heaters.
 

Elder Monson had long been intrigued with the history of the wars that had been fought on German soil and enjoyed reading about the First and Second World Wars. In college he had seriously considered majoring in history and becoming a teacher. One of the many bookcases in his office is filled with history books of that period. He has read them all.
 

On this November 1968 visit, Elder Monson and President Rees stopped at Dresden, one of the most heavily bombed cities during the war. On three evenings in February 1945, Allied bombs had taken the lives of 25,000 to 40,000 people in Dresden.37 Only a few new structures signaled the massive rebuilding necessary but still not much in evidence. Early missionaries had established a Church unit in Dresden in 1855, and members still held to that legacy; no war was going to compromise their place in God’s kingdom.
 

The hotel accommodations in Görlitz were “the most archaic” of any Elder Monson had seen. His room was cold, with a ceiling fifteen feet high, “a bed that resembled a box,” an ancient sink, and a Communist flag at the window. “Lavatory facilities existed only on the second floor of the hotel, and these were most inadequate.”38
 

Elder Monson and President and Sister Rees arrived at the Görlitz meeting unannounced. Such would always be the case in the decades ahead because of those who “watched and listened” in this Communist country. Attendance that day totaled 235. The members at first mistook Elder Monson for a missionary because he was obviously American and so young. But the members soon heard the mighty timbre in his voice and felt the power in his testimony and the strength of his spirit.
 

This was the first time since before the beginning of World War II that a General Authority had visited Görlitz. As a member of the Twelve, Elder Monson brought with him the scriptural commission of “power to open the door of [God’s] kingdom unto any nation whithersoever [the First Presidency] shall send them.”39
 

Thomas Monson’s love affair with Germany began with this meeting in Görlitz. The congregation was filled with people who were Saints in the purest sense of the word. Theirs was a strength born of surviving Hitler’s regime; almost every family had lost a loved one in the war. Most had lost their homes and their possessions. Elder Monson felt compassion for them. “It is one thing to make great sacrifice and emerge victorious,” he observed. “It is another thing to make great sacrifice and find yourself defeated.”40
 

Sister Edith Krause served as Elder Monson’s interpreter that day in Görlitz. “I found that frequently she was interpreting her version of what I should be saying,” he later remarked, “and that was fine with me.” When he referred to “President McKay,” for instance, she said instead “David O. McKay,” recognizing that soldiers who were listening would take exception to the reference to a “president.”41
 

When the Russians were invading the city near the end of the war, the branch president, fearful that his home would be searched, took the Church records to Edith and said, “Protect these, and the Lord will protect you.” Edith lived on the third floor of her apartment building. Not long after, Russian soldiers ransacked the first two floors of the building and were headed up the stairs to the third floor when “miraculously, their leader called them back and they went on their way to another block.” The Church records and the family remained safe.42
 

Like other Latter-day Saints, the Krauses were punished for their attention to the Church. Their nineteen-year-old son, Helaman, had been offered a full scholarship to the university if he would join the Communist Youth Party. He declined, saying he would prefer to pay his own way. He was allowed entrance only because his grades were superior, the highest in his entire school. Elder Monson wished that such a fine young man could serve a mission but knew it would not be possible “at this particular time.”43
 

That first meeting in Görlitz took place on the second floor of a damaged warehouse on a dingy street. The people were poor. They had little to ease their daily burdens. They had no patriarch, no wards or stakes—just branches. They could not receive the blessings of the temple. But they had hope. “The Spirit knows no borders; it needs no approvals to reach the hearts of those who are true to their beliefs,” Elder Monson noted.44 And these people were truly Latter-day Saints.
 

Despite the conditions in Görlitz, the congregation exuded “a marvelous spirit,” new life, hope, and resilience. A hymn they sang at the meeting was particularly appropriate:
 

If the way be full of trial, Weary not!
 

If it’s one of sore denial, Weary not!
 

If it now be one of weeping
 

There will come a joyous greeting,
 

When the harvest we are reaping—Weary not!45
 

Elder Monson had “never heard such singing.” Indeed, “the Saints showed their love for the Lord by the manner in which they sang the hymns,” and there was a unity that came from joining their voices. The messages in the meeting were superb; Elder Monson “felt uplifted and inspired,” marveling at the speakers’ “knowledge of the gospel and the scriptural messages which were provided, which spoke of gospel study and gospel scholarship.”46
 

These members had nothing but scriptures for study and teaching. One man explained, “We received a directive from President Burkhardt [then counselor in the mission presidency based in Hamburg] that all unauthorized religious materials, books, manuals, etc., were to be destroyed. I was heartbroken. I had, over the years, scraped together a small but nice library of Church materials, for which I had no official authorization. I sat in front of an open fireplace. ‘No,’ I said to myself. ‘I can’t do it.’ But in the end, I burned all of the books and manuals.” Less than two weeks after that, the secret police knocked on his door. “They searched my house for unauthorized printed material. I had none. From that experience I learned a great lesson about inspired leaders and listening to their counsel.”47
 

Elder Monson was touched by the sincerity of these wonderful Saints. He was humbled by their circumstances. “I have met with few congregations which have demonstrated a greater love for the gospel,”48 he recalls. As he stood at the pulpit, filled with emotion, he “felt the inspiration” and “followed it,” departing from his prepared text. The words he spoke were life-changing for him and for the German Saints as he made them a promise:
 

“If you will remain true and faithful to the commandments of God, every blessing any member of the Church enjoys in any other country will be yours.”49
 

That evening, back in his hotel room, the full impact of what he had promised hit him. “They had no patriarchs for patriarchal blessings, a wall prevented them from going to the temple for their endowment, they had no missionaries among them, they had no ability to hold youth conferences, they couldn’t print any of our church material.”50 On his knees he prayed, “Father, I am on Thy errand; this is Thy Church. I have spoken words that came not from me, but from Thee and Thy Son. Wilt Thou, therefore, fulfill the promise in the lives of this noble people.”51 There coursed through his mind the words from the Psalmist, “Be still, and know that I am God.”52
 

At that landmark meeting in Görlitz, Elder Monson met Henry Johannes Burkhardt, who would become a key figure in the Church in East Germany. Henry, a third-generation member, grew up in Chemnitz, a city of 375,000. In 1939, at the outbreak of the war, Chemnitz—renamed Karl-Marx-Stadt by the government after the war—had three thriving branches. The Chemnitz Center Branch had 469 members; it was officially the largest branch of the Church in all of Germany and had a fully functioning program of auxiliary activities. Some of Henry’s friends were captivated by the Hitler Youth movement. Henry was not. He preferred his Church activity, though he would be denied educational opportunities and work advancements because he never joined the movement.
 

The Chemnitz Center Branch lost at least fifty of its members in the war, more than any other branch in the mission. On March 5, 1945, massive air raids had reduced the city of Chemnitz to rubble. The first attack came just before noon; another followed in early evening. Henry, who had taken refuge in the basement with a wet blanket over his head, “thought he would not survive.” But the war taught him lessons that he would use the rest of his life. He learned “to be without fear,” a strength he would draw upon to defend the Church in countless experiences standing before government officials.53 He was known for his religious affiliation; the state police kept a file on him. He had been called as a counselor in the East German Mission (later renamed the Northern German Mission) in 1952, serving as best he could behind the Iron Curtain.
 

Elder Monson described Henry as “an individual who typifies the faith and devotion of the people.” Henry worked day and night. On a later visit to Dresden, Elder Monson wrote, “[We] had to tell [Henry] to go home—that he should sleep in his own bed rather than catching a few hours’ rest on a cot—so dedicated was he to the welfare of the Saints. He earned the trust of the Brethren. He was the man on whom we placed so much responsibility and to whom we looked for leadership for our Saints there.”54
 

Because it was difficult for the North German Mission president to receive approval from the GDR to visit Church members behind the Iron Curtain, Elder Monson proposed the creation of the Dresden Mission, with headquarters at Dresden and with Brother Henry Burkhardt as the new mission president. It would not be a true mission, as no missionaries could enter or leave the country, but there would be far less problem with the German government if it were called the Dresden Mission, with local leadership, remaining as autonomous as possible. Elder Monson proposed that Percy K. Fetzer, a regional representative, former mission president in Hamburg, and former Temple View Stake president in Salt Lake City (with whom Tom Monson had served), be assigned to work with the Dresden Mission as though it were a full-fledged stake in order to give them all the help and training possible. “Percy knows the people well, speaks German fluently, and, because he does not reside in West Germany, is able to come and go rather freely.” Brother Fetzer was unanimously approved in the meeting of the Quorum of the Twelve.55
 

President Burkhardt chose as counselors Erich Walter Krause and Gottfried Richter. These were men filled with the Spirit of God and steeped in the ways of working within the German Democratic Republic. Walter traveled around from branch to branch among the forty branches and kept the buildings in some state of repair. Gottfried operated a stationery store, which gave him access to hard-to-find supplies such as carbon paper. Since no materials or manuals could be brought into the country, and printing and publishing were strictly forbidden, all information and courses of study had to be typed, using carbon paper to make copies.
 

Elder Monson continued to visit East Germany, meeting with leaders, missionaries, and members. On the evening of June 14, 1969, a testimony meeting filled “with a glorious spirit” concluded a five-day genealogical workshop. The members had provided not just their self-imposed quota of 10,000 names but more than 14,000 names. “I don’t know of a day in my life,” wrote Elder Monson, “when so much good has been accomplished.”56 The faithfulness of the Saints, “their absolute unity and trust in their Heavenly Father,” were simply remarkable.
 

The next day, at a leadership meeting of the branch presidencies and district presidencies of the Dresden Mission, President Henry Burkhardt introduced materials from the new General Handbook of Instructions. This thrilled the leaders, who, by nature, “delight in following detailed instructions to the very letter.”57
 

Elder Monson had just completed overseeing revisions of the Church’s General Handbook of Instructions—a project that had taken three years. While in the temple one Thursday morning, he had said to Elder Spencer W. Kimball, “With all my heart I wish we had one copy of the newly completed German language edition of the handbook available in the German Democratic Republic.”
 

“Why can’t you simply mail one?” Elder Kimball asked.
 

Elder Monson replied, “The importation of such literature is forbidden. There is no way.”
 

Elder Kimball said, “I have an idea, Brother Monson. Why don’t you, since you have worked with the handbook, memorize it; and then we’ll put you across the border!”
 

Elder Monson laughed, and then he looked at Elder Kimball and realized he wasn’t joking. Elder Monson was skilled at memorizing, but he soon realized it was an impossible task—and would have been for anyone. He already knew the material, so he worked on learning the different categories so that he could go into East Germany and type for the Saints a workable copy.
 

When he crossed the border, he said to one of the leaders, “Give me a typewriter and a ream of paper and let me work.” He sat down at the table in the branch office and began to type the handbook as if he were sitting at home at the kitchen table preparing a talk. He was about thirty pages into it when he stood up to stretch and walk around the room. He was startled as he noticed on a shelf what appeared to be the General Handbook of Instructions. He picked it up. Not only was it the Handbook, it was in German. Though his work had been unnecessary, he was well versed concerning the Handbook for many years. How a Handbook came to be in East Germany, no one would say.58
 

One of those in attendance at the leadership meeting in June 1969 where President Burkhardt taught from the Handbook was Horst Sommer, who had met Elder Monson at the Görlitz Branch the November before. After that meeting the Sommers had spoken to Elder Monson about their ill son, and he had responded, “Matthias will get another priesthood blessing, and then the Lord will decide whether he will become well or whether the Lord will take him into His presence.” Brother Sommer explained that Matthias had died not long after Elder Monson’s counsel. There was silence. Brother Sommer, then serving as branch president, saw “the face of the Apostle become light, and he looked to the heaven for a time. Then he said: ‘Don’t be afraid for your son. He is in the presence of the Lord, and he works there very hard. It is your responsibility to be strong in the gospel so that you can go where he is already.’” Not knowing that Brother Sommer’s wife was home ready to deliver their third child, Elder Monson continued, “The Lord will send you another son, and this son won’t be your last child.” Sister Sommer had another boy, as Elder Monson had prophesied, and eight years later they had a girl.
 

Years later, on August 26, 1995, when President Monson dedicated a new chapel in Görlitz, Sister Sommer approached him, sure that after twenty-six years he would not remember the family. When she started to speak, he stopped her, stood up, and said to all in the room, “Here is the lady who lost a child and was promised another one.” That last child, Tabea, now eighteen years old, was in the room and began to weep. The Sommer family gathered around Elder Monson and embraced him. For them, “it was a very holy hour.”59
 

Frances could see why her husband felt so at home with the German people. “I believe you are a German at heart,” she told him. “You like everything orderly.”60 Percy Fetzer saw a likeness as well, commenting, “You have a Swedish name, Monson, but you are a German at heart.”61
 

A month after returning from the June 1969 visit to Germany, Elder Monson invited Percy Fetzer to his office and told him that the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve had approved Percy’s being ordained a patriarch, with authority to provide patriarchal blessings to worthy Saints in Eastern Europe. Though Karl Ringger, an ordained patriarch in Switzerland, had been able to provide some blessings to members when he was behind the Iron Curtain, there were far too many for him to accommodate on his infrequent visits. In Dresden alone there was a backlog of 800 worthy persons requesting patriarchal blessings. Thus, Elder Monson had recommended that Percy Fetzer be called. His promise in his first meeting in Görlitz was being fulfilled.
 

Brother Fetzer, with his special assignment, was able to give patriarchal blessings in East Germany and other Communist countries. When he was in Selbongen, Poland, giving blessings to a family named Konietz, he was inspired to promise “a young son that he would serve a mission in another country.” He then promised the daughter “that she would marry in the house of God.” To the parents, he promised that “they and the entire family would be together in a holy temple.” Inasmuch as Poland’s borders were closed, Brother Fetzer worried about the blessings he had given.
 

When he returned home, he called Elder Monson and asked to meet with him. As he sat down in Elder Monson’s office, he wept. “Brother Monson,” he said, “I have pronounced blessings which cannot be fulfilled, but I was persuaded by the Holy Spirit to say what I did. What shall I do?”
 

Elder Monson quietly motioned for Percy to join him in a kneeling prayer. At the conclusion of their prayer, the two “knew that somehow the blessings would be fulfilled.”62 Not long after, a Polish treaty allowed all German nationals trapped at the end of the war in Poland to go west. The Konietz family moved to Dortmund, in West Germany, and Brother Konietz eventually became a bishop. In 1973, Percy Fetzer, who had been called as president of the Swiss Temple, with his wife, Thelma, as matron, performed their family sealing in that temple. To Elder Monson’s mind came the familiar truth: “The wisdom of God ofttimes appears as foolishness to men, but the greatest single lesson we can learn in mortality is that when God speaks and a man obeys, that man will always be right.”63
 

During Elder Monson’s visits to Europe, he was often accompanied by whoever was serving as mission president of the North German Mission. Elder Hans B. Ringger, a stake president in Switzerland who eventually became a General Authority, accompanied him on many of his visits. Elder Ringger’s unique background, devotion to the Lord, Swiss citizenship, and multilingual capabilities made him invaluable in working with the Saints in the Eastern bloc countries. Brother Ringger praised the many experiences he had during those years working at Elder Monson’s side, saying that “his great spirit and love for the people” was a significant boost to the Saints. “He gave them hope that they had a future. He showed them his love for them and supported them wherever he could.”64 It was a historic and heartfelt work.
 

While visiting the Germany Central Mission in Düsseldorf in October 1970, Elder Monson met with the missionaries, including Elder Marc Larson. Just two weeks earlier, he had been scheduled to attend a conference in the Grand Junction Colorado Stake. During the conference, the stake president asked him to meet with Hale and Donna Larson, whose son Marc had just announced that he was leaving the mission field before completing his service. He agreed to meet with the distressed parents.
 

“Where is your son serving?” Elder Monson asked them.
 

“In Düsseldorf, Germany,” they replied.
 

Elder Monson placed his arms around Brother and Sister Larson and said, “Your prayers have been heard and are already being answered. With more than twenty-eight stake conferences being held this day attended by the General Authorities, I was the one assigned to your stake.” He explained that he would be in Düsseldorf the next week and would meet with their son.
 

He met with Elder Larson, who committed to completing his mission—and did so.65
 

Elder Monson’s visits to Europe were frequent. He grew to love the area of Berchtesgaden, one of the most picturesque spots in West Germany’s Bavaria. He visited this charming village as often as he could. In the summer, the square is filled with men in embroidered leather shorts or knee-length lederhosen, and the women wear frilly blouses with full skirts and aprons. Dozens of small shops line the square. Just beyond the shops is a dock, where one can board one of the electric-powered boats that travel from Berchtesgaden to points of interest across Königsee, a beautiful clearwater lake surrounded on three sides by steeply rising flanks of alpine mountains. Elder and Sister Monson often enjoyed taking the boat to St. Bartholomä Church, founded by monks in the twelfth century, and then back to Berchtesgaden. The lake’s position, surrounded by mountains, creates an echo that is known for its clarity. On the boat tours, the Monsons particularly enjoyed the traditional boat stops where a trumpet was played to highlight the echo.
 

One of Elder Monson’s most tender experiences in Germany was with Dieter Berndt, who would one day serve as a stake president in Berlin. It began with Edwin Q. “Ted” Cannon, who had served in Germany as a missionary before the war. One day Ted carried to Elder Monson’s office some slides that he had found among his mission pictures. He told Elder Monson that he had been home forty years and was just getting around to cataloging the slides. Among them were some Ted could not specifically identify. Every time he had planned to discard them, he had been impressed to keep them, although he was at a loss as to why. They were photographs he had taken when he served in Stettin, Germany, and pictured a family—a mother, father, and two small children, a girl and a boy. He remembered that their surname was Berndt and that there was a Berndt serving as a regional representative in Germany. He wondered if this Brother Berndt might be able to identify the Berndts in the photograph.
 

Elder Monson indicated that he was leaving shortly for Berlin and would be seeing Dieter Berndt. He agreed to show him the slides, to see if he might recognize the family in the photographs.
 

Wrote President Monson later: “The Lord didn’t even let me get to Berlin before His purposes were accomplished. I was in Zurich, Switzerland, boarding the flight to Berlin, when who should also board the plane but Dieter Berndt. He sat next to me, and I told him I had some old slides of people named Berndt from Stettin. I handed them to him and asked if he could identify those shown in the photographs. As he looked at them carefully, he began to weep. He said, ‘Our family lived in Stettin during the war. My father was killed when an Allied bomb struck the plant where he worked. Not long afterward, the Russians invaded Poland and the area of Stettin. My mother took my sister and me and fled from the advancing enemy. Everything had to be left behind, including any photographs we had. Brother Monson, I am the little boy pictured in these slides, and my sister is the little girl. The man and woman are our dear parents. Until today, I have had no photographs of our childhood in Stettin or of my father.’”66
 

The two wept together, and Dieter carefully placed the slides in his briefcase. At the next general conference in Salt Lake City, he had occasion to visit Brother Cannon and thank him for following the inspiration to keep the slides for forty years.
 

On Elder Monson’s East German visits he usually met with President Burkhardt, whom he considered “a giant of the Lord who goes forward in directing our affairs behind the Iron Curtain without regard to any consequence.” For safety’s sake, they held their meetings in an “automobile so that no listening devices could record our conversation.”67 If members had phones in their homes, they often were tapped. It was a common practice for neighbors to report on neighbors. Even some members in the Church branches had been coerced into submitting reports to the government about the activities of their leaders.68 It wasn’t so much Elder Monson who was at risk as it was the Church leaders who were citizens of the country.
 

At the conclusion of such a “meeting” in Erfurt, East Germany, in October 1970, Elder Monson told Henry of President Harold B. Lee’s concern for him. “Tell Brother Burkhardt,” President Lee, then serving in the First Presidency, had said, “that he and his associates, while absent from our presence, are never absent from our prayers and our thoughts. We commend them for their spirituality; we sustain them in their important responsibilities.”69 Elder Monson recounted in his journal, “As Henry walked from our car into the rainy night, I could not help but realize that the day of sacrifice is not over and there serve in the Church today men equally as dynamic and spiritually powerful as in any dispensation.”70
 

Another evening, in the rain in a rented car, Elder Monson felt impressed to ask Henry, “If your government received a letter from the Presidency of the Church inviting you to attend a worldwide general conference, do you believe they would possibly grant approval?”
 

Brother Burkhardt responded with his ever-present great faith, “I believe the Lord will open the way.”71 It took two years of regularly submitted invitations, but the government finally relented, allowing Brother Burkhardt—always under scrutiny—to go to general conference in Salt Lake City, there to personally give the First Presidency a full report of the Dresden Mission. President Burkhardt had to leave his wife and children at home as “hostages” in order to ensure his return. During that first visit, he spoke at the final portion of the German-speaking conference in the Assembly Hall held in conjunction with general conference. He enjoyed a great reunion with German members he had not seen in many years.
 

Next, the first counselor in the Dresden Mission presidency, Walter Krause, and his wife, Edith, were allowed to come to general conference. While in Salt Lake City, they attended the temple. It was a momentous day on April 3, 1973, when Elder Monson stood in the circle as President Kimball ordained Brother Krause to the office of patriarch to provide blessings to those in the Communist countries. The numbers of members desiring their blessings were so great that Patriarch Percy K. Fetzer could not possibly carry the load himself. But the calling of Brother Krause, long respected and tireless in his service, sent an important message to the sequestered Saints, that one of their number could so serve. Elder Monson counseled that when people receive their patriarchal blessings, they receive hope.72
 

In 1974, Gottfried Richter, second counselor in the Dresden Mission presidency, and his wife were permitted to attend general conference, which meant they too could visit the temple. Miraculously, in 1975, the East German officials rescinded a previous denial of Henry and Inge Burkhardt’s visa. It had taken many prayers to get the two of them together to general conference. Both the Richters and the Burkhardts were endowed and sealed by Elder Monson in the Salt Lake Temple and “literally bathed with their tears the little cloth which adorned the sacred altar.”73
 

In the years ahead, a small trickle of members from East Germany found a way to Salt Lake City to attend the temple or general conference. Elder Monson was always hosting someone and arranging opportunities for his visitors to meet Church officers. On one such occasion, a sister from East Germany was meeting with President Kimball and Elder Monson. She related how she had looked forward to the day President Kimball was coming to Dresden. “She had counted the weeks and then the days and then the hours until she would see the prophet of the Lord and hear him—a lifelong, treasured experience.” It was not to be. Her mother became ill and she could not leave her for the trip to Dresden where the prophet would speak. “All of my hopes were gone,” she related to those seated in the President’s office. She would “never see the prophet of the Lord.”
 

As she related her experience, President Kimball walked around from behind his desk and took her hand and kissed her on the forehead. She had fulfilled the commandment to honor her mother, and the Lord had granted a far greater blessing than that which she had ever hoped to receive.74
 

In August 1973, Elder and Sister Monson attended an area conference in Munich, West Germany. The Tabernacle Choir, then on tour in Europe, came to the conference. President Burkhardt and his counselors had been allowed to attend, although their wives and families were kept behind the Wall. “We had pledged to the German government that all those who were permitted to attend would return,” said Elder Monson. When an elderly woman passed away during one of the meetings, true to their word, the Church leaders made certain that her body was returned to East Germany.
 

That kind of attention to the laws of the land and respect for the government leaders and the rules they imposed would benefit the Church in years to come, as did the massive amount of information “collected” by those who watched what was going on. Years later Brother Burkhardt was allowed to see his government file, fat and filled with dates, quotes from talks, comments “overheard,” and reports of meetings. But Elder Monson had repeatedly counseled the members to abide by the twelfth Article of Faith: “We believe in being subject to kings, presidents, rulers and magistrates, in obeying, honoring and sustaining the law.” The fact that they obeyed the laws of the land, difficult as that may have been, that they sought changes and permissions through the proper channels and did not rebel or challenge authority, worked in their favor. They proved themselves trustworthy and were blessed.
 

What happened in the German Democratic Republic influenced the Church’s being allowed into other countries. Elder Russell M. Nelson later explained that as President Monson and he worked with leaders of other nations behind the Iron Curtain, they invited those leaders to examine the impact of the Church on the citizens of East Germany. Those governments sent teams into the GDR to talk to the leaders and to satisfy themselves that the doctrines of the Church were helpful for their people. Not only were the Saints “good citizens, productive, honest, and law-abiding, but the fact that they don’t use alcohol and drugs . . . that are so prevalent in so many societies today has made them want more of that for their own people.”75
 

During a visit to Dresden in April 1975, Elder Monson, who had just come from dedicating Portugal for the preaching of the gospel, felt impressed that he should also dedicate the German Democratic Republic, which as a separate country had never received a priesthood dedication from one of the Quorum of the Twelve. Acting on that inspiration, early in the morning of April 27, 1975, he gathered together a few of the leaders and went with them to a little outcropping overlooking the Elbe River. The group included President Burkhardt and his counselors and their wives and President Gary L. Schwendiman (acting as translator) and his wife, of the Germany Hamburg Mission. They walked through the woods for about twenty minutes; the sky was gray, with an intermittent drizzle. Elder Monson spent a few minutes describing the significance of a prayer of dedication.
 

Standing in a clearing, with the city of Meissen on the right and Dresden on the left, he offered a prayer “which was confirmed in its entirety by the Spirit of the Lord.”76 He later said: “There we bowed our heads and supplicated our Heavenly Father in dedicating this land for the purposes of His work.”77
 

Elder Monson delivered a beautiful prayer of dedication in which he expressed gratitude for the presence of the Church in the land, mentioned the great faith of the members, invoked the blessings of Heavenly Father upon the Saints and their posterity, pleaded for a way for the faithful to receive the blessings of the temple, and asked for a return of missionaries to the land. He sought for “the program of the Church in its fulness” to come again to the people, indicating that they had “through their faith . . . merited such blessings.” The prayer was history in the making.78
 

He later wrote: “During the prayer, a rooster happened to crow in the distance, signaling the beginning of the day; church bells began to chime down in the valley, signaling it was a Sabbath day. During that time, I felt heat on my hands. I knew we were in a rainstorm, but as we concluded the prayer and looked heavenward, it had cleared. A shaft of sunshine was coming right down to that little outcropping which engulfed us in its warmth. The warmth which we felt on our hands and our faces happened to be from that ray of sunshine from heaven, which confirmed to me that it was the dawning of a new day, acknowledged by our Heavenly Father.” Elder Monson was reassured “that the hand of the Lord was with this work.”79
 

That beautiful spot on the hill where the prayer was offered is, for President Monson and the people of East Germany, sacred ground. He recorded that up to that time, he had never “enjoyed a more spiritual experience as a member of the Council of the Twelve than the experience of offering the prayer in this Communist-controlled land, invoking the blessings of our Heavenly Father on as faithful a group of Saints as ever existed.”80 On occasion, he has returned to that sacred spot, always feeling the Spirit there.
 

In the district conference following the dedication of the land, Elder Monson felt impressed, as he looked at the congregation getting settled for the meeting, to ask seventeen-year-old Sabine Baasch to bear her testimony. Earlier, he had asked President Burkhardt to select two young people to share their testimonies. To his surprise, Sabine was on President Burkhardt’s list as well. A member of the choir, she not only spoke but then sang an impromptu solo of the hymn, “O My Father.” Her father, a professional musician from Leipzig, led the choir that day.81 Clearly, parents had been schooled in their homes when young and now were grooming their children in much the same way.
 

At the conclusion of the meeting, when they sang, “God Be with You Till We Meet Again,” their “Auf Wiedersehen, auf Wiedersehen” brought tears to Elder Monson’s eyes. To him, they were “the most wonderful Saints to be found anywhere” because they lived “after the pattern of the Savior.”82
 

The singing of the German Saints always stirred his heart. At one leadership session, he heard singing from another room and he asked if that was the choir practicing. “No,” he was told, “the men are just passing the time until their meeting.” Elder Russell M. Nelson once reported that a priesthood leader in Germany had told him if he wanted to get the attention of anyone in his congregation, he simply had to ban that person from singing in the choir.83
 

During the 1970s, members and leaders flooded the East German authorities with repeated requests for travel passes to Switzerland to attend the temple. The answer was predictable: No. Still they continued submitting their petitions.
 

Gunther Schulze and his wife, Inge, both third-generation members of the Church, sat in a car with Elder Monson on one of his visits to the GDR where he proposed the Church send a letter of invitation for them to visit one of the temples of the Church. The Schulzes replied, “Our position is too sensitive here.” As the visit concluded and they walked across the parking lot, Elder Monson looked at this faithful couple and called out to them in his limited German, “Bruder und Schwester Schulze, kommen Sie hier, bitte.” They came back, and he said, “I feel that the Lord would like to see you endowed in His holy house. You are worthy people; you are exemplary in your conduct; you are faithful in the pursuit of your Church responsibilities. Let’s trust in the Lord. Let’s allow our faith to exceed our doubt.” The three “knelt in the parking lot in the rain and poured out [their] hearts to God.”84 The invitation was sent, and permission was subsequently granted by the government for Brother and Sister Schulze to attend the temple.
 

In 1978, following conferences in the Dresden area, Elder and Sister Monson visited a small cemetery to honor a missionary who many years before had died in the service of the Lord. With a flashlight illuminating the headstone, Elder Monson read:
 

Joseph A. Ott
 

Born: 12 December 1870, Virgin, Utah
 

Died: 10 January 1896, Dresden, Germany
 

He recognized immediately something curious about the grave. Someone had polished the marble headstone to a sheen, pulled the weeds that encroached on all the surrounding markers, edged the bit of lawn, and placed flowers on the grave. He asked who had cared for the grave.
 

At first there was silence. Then Henry Burkhardt acknowledged that his twelve-year-old son, Tobias, was caring for the grave of the young American who had died shortly after arriving as a missionary. Tobias did not expect to have an opportunity to fulfill a proselyting mission but wanted to serve in some way, and he had felt that caring for the grave would be appropriate. He, like so many of the youth in this sequestered land, “made the decision between the world and the Church. They stayed with the Church.”85
 

The small group held a brief service at the cemetery, which lay near the foot of the hill where Elder Monson had earlier dedicated the land for the preaching of the gospel.
 

Elder Monson’s journal details many significant events relating to the buildings, dedications, and meetings. Also included are accounts of visits to hospitals to see the sick and to cemeteries to honor the dead. When the furnace failed in the Leipzig chapel and the meetings were held in the cold, he noted that the members sang the songs of Zion shoulder-to-shoulder, wearing their overcoats. “There was no lack of warmth, however, in the hearts of the members.” Of the thirty-nine members of record, thirty-seven were in attendance, their scriptures open.86
 

A letter from an East German member conveyed the feelings of many: “With the Saints who have come from that part of the world and who have taken a keen interest in all the events concerning the building of the Kingdom, we want to express our most heartfelt thanks to you, President Monson, for the untiring service rendered and the special love extended to the Saints behind the curtain. You may never know the deep love they have for you and the leadership of the Church.”87
 

In April 1978, Elder Monson met with the Quorum of the Twelve and the First Presidency to report formally on the progress of the Dresden Mission. When Elder Mark E. Petersen asked him if he had any reservations about crossing the border into East Germany, he assured them, “Absolutely not!” His assignment to supervise the area was then extended, though he had already been carrying the responsibility for ten years.
 

Later in April 1978, Elder Monson and Elder Charles Didier crossed into East Berlin, where President Burkhardt advised them that the government had monitored previous meetings at the meetinghouse. So they met in an apartment above a bakery to discuss plans and review decisions of the Brethren regarding the Dresden Mission. The homes in East Germany were cold and dreary, as well as drab and in need of repair; however, the homes of the members were warm with the Spirit, though they had little in the way of adornment or furnishings.
 

In that small apartment, they discussed combining the Zwickau and Karl-Marx-Stadt Districts and reviewed plans for visits from General Authorities and general auxiliary board members. At the conclusion of the meeting, Elder Monson felt impressed to bless the home and the family who lived there—father, mother, sixteen-year-old daughter, and nine-year-old son. He later wrote, “I cannot help but feel that our Heavenly Father will reward the devotions of such choice members of the Church who live and who worship under such difficult circumstances.”88
 

It would not be long before the truth of those feelings would be fully manifested.
 
 
 
 
 

Notes - Chapter 19: “Weary Not”
 

 Epigraph. Interview with Dieter F. Uchtdorf, 2 September 2009.
 

1. Though the official name of the socialist state established in 1949 was German Democratic Republic (GDR), it was informally called East Germany by those in the West. Geographically it bordered West Germany (officially Federal Republic of Germany) to the south and west, the Baltic Sea to the north, Poland to the east, and Czechoslovakia to the south.
 

2. Interview with TSM, 9 September 2008.
 

3. KBYU Interview with TSM for documentary A Fortress of Faith, October 1988.
 

4. Thomas S. Monson, Faith Rewarded: A Personal Account of Prophetic Promises to the East German Saints (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1996), 1.
 

5. Winston Churchill, “The Sinews of Peace,” address at Westminster College, Fulton, Missouri, 5 March 1946. Churchill served as Prime Minister of Great Britain from 1940 to 1945 and again from 1951 to 1955.
 

6. Justus Ernst, comp., Highlights from the German-Speaking Latter-day Saints Mission Histories, 1836–1960, LDS Church Archives, 97.
 

7. Ernst, Highlights, 115.
 

8. Ernst, Highlights, 117.
 

9. “Ever since its founding in 1959, East Germany lost a steady stream of citizens who emigrated to the Federal Republic [West Germany] in order to claim citizenship as guaranteed by the [West German] Basic Law. Before 1961, such emigration proved fairly easy in that one needed only to cross from the eastern to the western zones of Berlin. The building of the Berlin Wall put a halt to such direct emigration, but not before the Federal Republic received the staggering total of 3,419,042 emigrants from the East.” Richard A. Leiby, The Unification of Germany, 1989–1990 (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1999), 25–26.
 

10. Bruce W. Hall, “And the Last Shall Be First: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the Former East Germany,” Journal of Church and State, vol. 42 (Summer 2000):485–89.
 

11. Hall, “And the Last Shall Be First,” 487–88.
 

12. Roger P. Minert, In Harm’s Way, East German Latter-day Saints in World War II (Provo, UT: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 2009), 23; see also Presiding Bishopric, “Financial, Statistical, and Historical Reports of Wards, Stakes, and Missions, 1884–1955,” Der Stern, final no. for 1939–41.
 

13. Gilbert W. Scharffs, Mormonism in Germany: A History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Germany (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1970), xiv.
 

14. Garold and Norma Davis, “Behind the Wall: The Church in Eastern Germany,” Tambuli, February 1992, 12.
 

15. Rodney Taylor, “Karl G. Maeser memorialized in native Germany,” Church News, 21 July 2001.
 

16. David F. Boone, The Worldwide Evacuation of Latter-day Missionaries at the Beginning of World War II, master’s thesis (Provo, UT: Brigham Young University, 1981), 1–2.
 

17. Minert, In Harm’s Way, quoting East German Mission Quarterly Reports, 1938, no. 40.
 

18. Boone, Worldwide Evacuation, 4.
 

19. Robert C. Freeman, “When the Wicked Rule the People Mourn: The Experiences of the German Saints during World War II,” in Donald Q. Cannon and Brent L. Top, eds., Regional Studies in Latter-day Saint Church History—Europe (Provo, UT: Brigham Young University, 2003), 90; see also Ernst, Highlights, 47–48.
 

20. See Scharffs, Mormonism in Germany, 107.
 

21. See Freeman, “When the Wicked Rule,” 91.
 

22. Scharffs, Mormonism in Germany, 109.
 

23. Minert, In Harm’s Way, 181.
 

24. The sacrament was passed in Sunday School worship service (opening exercises) until 1980, when the Church implemented the “Church Consolidated Meeting Schedule.” See “News of the Church, Church Consolidates Meeting Schedule,” Ensign, March 1980, 73.
 

25. Doctrine and Covenants 84:117.
 

26. Letter from Lt. Col. John Richard Barnes to President Thomas McKay; Thomas McKay Correspondence 1939–1946, European Mission, LDS Church Archives.
 

27. Sheri Dew, Ezra Taft Benson: A Biography (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1987), 219.
 

28. KBYU Interview with TSM for Fortress, October 1988.
 

29. Ezra Taft Benson, in Conference Report, April 1947, 154; see also Improvement Era, vol. 5 (May 1947): 293.
 

30. KBYU Interview with TSM for Fortress, October 1988.
 

31. Dew, Ezra Taft Benson, 226.
 

32. Monson, Faith Rewarded, vii.
 

33. KBYU Interview with TSM for Fortress, October 1988.
 

34. Monson, Faith Rewarded, 12.
 

35. Monson, Faith Rewarded, 13.
 

36. Monson, Faith Rewarded, 3.
 

37. The earliest published accounts of the February 13–14, 1945, bombing of Dresden used information gathered from the Nazi and Soviet governments. During the next forty years, death estimates for the Dresden bombing varied greatly, ranging from 18,000 to 450,000, but most frequently cited in excess of 100,000. Since the reunification of Germany and the review of newly available government files, historians now place the estimated death count between 25,000 and 40,000. See Frederick Taylor, Dresden, Tuesday, February 13, 1945 (New York: HarperCollins Publishers, 2005), 441–48.
 

38. Monson, Faith Rewarded, 3–4.
 

39. Doctrine and Covenants 112:21.
 

40. KBYU Interview with TSM for Fortress, October 1988.
 

41. KBYU Interview with TSM for Fortress, October 1988.
 

42. Monson, Faith Rewarded, 6.
 

43. Monson, Faith Rewarded, 6.
 

44. KBYU Interview with TSM for Fortress, October 1988.
 

45. “Weary Not,” Deseret Sunday School Songs (Salt Lake City: Deseret Sunday School Union, 1909), no. 158; see Monson, Faith Rewarded, 4.
 

46. KBYU Interview with TSM for Fortress, October 1988.
 

47. See Monson, Faith Rewarded, 4–5; TSM Journal, 22 October 1978.
 

48. KBYU Interview with TSM for Fortress, October 1988.
 

49. Monson, Faith Rewarded, 5.
 

50. KBYU Interview with TSM for Fortress, October 1988.
 

51. Monson, Faith Rewarded, 7.
 

52. Psalm 46:10.
 

53. Minert, In Harm’s Way, 176.
 

54. KBYU Interview with TSM for Fortress, October 1988.
 

55. TSM Journal, 8 May 1969.
 

56. Monson, Faith Rewarded, 11.
 

57. Monson, Faith Rewarded, 11.
 

58. Monson, Faith Rewarded, 11–12.
 

59. Karin Sommer, “An Account About Great Events in My Life,” unpublished manuscript in possession of TSM.
 

60. KBYU Interview with TSM for Fortress, October 1988.
 

61. KBYU Interview with TSM for Fortress, October 1988.
 

62. Monson, Faith Rewarded, 66–67.
 

63. Monson, Faith Rewarded, 66–67.
 

64. KBYU Interview with Hans B. Ringger for documentary, A Fortress of Faith, October 1988.
 

65. Monson, Faith Rewarded, 18–19.
 

66. Monson, Faith Rewarded, 109–11; Interview with Dieter Berndt, 3 July 2009.
 

67. Monson, Faith Rewarded, 15–16.
 

68. See Hall, “And the Last Shall Be First,”488–89. In the late 1980s the “uncharacteristically favorable treatment of the LDS Church” by the GDR was a benefit of the information the government gathered over many years. They concluded the members were “responsible citizens and people of high moral character” and could be trusted.
 

69. Monson, Faith Rewarded, 16.
 

70. TSM Journal, 23 October 1970.
 

71. See Monson, Faith Rewarded, 16.
 

72. KBYU Interview with TSM for Fortress, October 1988.
 

73. Monson, Faith Rewarded, 107–8.
 

74. Monson, Faith Rewarded, 26–27.
 

75. KBYU Interview with Russell M. Nelson for documentary A Fortress of Faith, 1988.
 

76. See Monson, Faith Rewarded, 84.
 

77. KBYU Interview with TSM for Fortress, October 1988.
 

78. See Monson, Faith Rewarded, 37.
 

79. KBYU Interview with TSM for Fortress, October 1988.
 

80. Monson, Faith Rewarded, 38; TSM Journal, 27 April 1975.
 

81. Monson, Faith Rewarded, 38.
 

82. See Monson, Faith Rewarded, 153; Thomas S. Monson, “Examples of Great Teachers,” Ensign, June 2007, 112.
 

83. KBYU Interview with Russell M. Nelson for Fortress, 1988.
 

84. Monson, Faith Rewarded, 48–49.
 

85. KBYU Interview with Hans B. Ringger for Fortress, October 1988.
 

86. Monson, Faith Rewarded, 62.
 

87. Letter from Harold W. Schreiber to TSM, 12 April 1989.
 

88. Monson, Faith Rewarded, 46.
 
 
 
 
 

20
 
 
 
© 2010 Heidi S. Swinton 

Printed from Gospelink.com
