# The Consummate Counselor

### The Consummate Counselor
Heidi S. Swinton, To the Rescue: The Biography of Thomas S. Monson (Salt Lake City 2010)
 
 

The Consummate Counselor
 

There was never a time when we knew of any view he had that was separate from President Hinckley. He clearly had opinions on issues; he clearly had vast experience. In those years, to not find even the slightest gap or difference of view between the President of the Church and his counselor was really quite remarkable; it was a completely united presidency.
 

Elder Quentin L. Cook Quorum of the Twelve Apostles
 

It was August 21, 2006. “We’re here for Tom’s birthday,” President Gordon B. Hinckley announced to the group of General Authorities and Church employees gathered in the west board room of the Church Administration Building for the traditional celebration. As the congratulations came to a close, President Hinckley handed President Monson a plate and motioned for him to step forward and start the buffet lunch. “Tom,” he said, “you lead out; you’re the birthday boy.”
 

Without a pause, President Monson smiled and said, “No, President, you go first. I always follow you.”
 

The example is simple but so illustrative. From 1985 to 2008, President Monson served as a counselor to three Church Presidents: second counselor to Presidents Benson and Hunter and first counselor to President Hinckley. “He’s very high energy in the best sense, intellectually vibrant,” states Elder Dallin H. Oaks, “and yet, depending on the position he’s in, that is subdued or put to work in the need of the moment.”1
 

At the solemn assembly on April 1, 1995, when President Monson proposed the name of Gordon Bitner Hinckley for a sustaining vote of the membership of the Church, he asked priesthood holders, as had been the pattern at general conference since John Taylor became the third President of the Church, to stand and raise their arms in support. Then, for the first time in Church history, the Relief Society (all women over the age of eighteen) and the Young Women (ages twelve to eighteen) were invited to participate in sustaining the prophet of God. A new tradition was established, one that President Monson would continue when he was sustained as President of the Church thirteen years later.
 

“Wherever you are,” President Monson announced, “you are invited to stand when requested and express by your uplifted hand whether you choose to sustain those whose names will be presented.”2 That sustaining of President Hinckley was hardly a perfunctory experience for the members. President Monson received a tender letter that described one man’s reaction to the “extraordinary occasion”:
 

On that particular morning, I needed to haul hay for my livestock. I was enjoying conference on my truck radio. I had picked up the hay, backed into the barn, and was throwing down hay bales from the back of the truck. When you called for the brethren of the priesthood, “wherever you are,” to prepare to sustain the prophet, I wondered if you meant me. I wondered if the Lord would be offended because I was sweaty and covered with dust. But I took you at your word and climbed down from the truck.
 

I shall never forget standing alone in the barn, hat in hand, with sweat running down my face, with arm to the square to sustain President Hinckley. Tears mixed with sweat as I sat for several minutes contemplating this sacred occasion. . . . 
 

In our lives, we place ourselves at particular places when events of large consequence occur. That has happened to me, but none more spiritual or tender or memorable than that morning in the barn with only cows and a roan horse looking on.
 

Sincerely,
 

Clark Cederlof3
 

President Monson read for sustaining vote: “Thomas Spencer Monson as President of the Quorum of the Twelve, and Boyd K. Packer as Acting President of the Quorum of the Twelve.” He also presented the members of the Quorum of the Twelve to be sustained, with the newest member, Henry B. Eyring, called to fill the vacancy created by the death of President Howard W. Hunter. He then invited Elder Eyring to take his place with the Apostles on the stand. Every time he sees a new member join the Quorum, President Monson remembers as if it were yesterday that long walk he took decades before. (It would be October 2004, another nine years, before he again would read the names of two new Apostles, Dieter Friedrich Uchtdorf and David Allan Bednar, and give a nod of welcome to them. They filled vacancies created at the deaths of Elders Neal A. Maxwell and David B. Haight. Quentin L. Cook would follow in October 2007, when Elder Eyring was called to the First Presidency at the death of President James E. Faust.)
 

That evening, at the general priesthood session, President Monson bore a powerful witness of the fifteenth President of the Church, President Hinckley:
 

“With moist eyes and tender hearts, we have said farewell to that gentle giant of a man, even a prophet of God, President Howard W. Hunter. We have sustained this day President Gordon B. Hinckley as the President of the Church and the prophet, seer, and revelator of God. I know that President Hinckley has been called of our Heavenly Father as the prophet and that he will lead us along those pathways the Savior has outlined. The work will go forward and the people will be blessed. It is an honor and distinct privilege to serve with President Gordon B. Hinckley and with President James E. Faust in the First Presidency of the Church.”4
 

President Hinckley had extended the call to President Monson to serve as First Counselor in the First Presidency, and the two would again sit side by side for the next thirteen years.
 

Upon hearing of the new First Presidency, a former member of the Sixth-Seventh Ward, Jack Fairclough, wrote to President Monson: “I am honored to call you a dear friend for these many years. Your marvelous work in the Church of the Lord does you enormous credit. The Sunday your calling to the Quorum of the Twelve was announced, I was in the old South Visitors’ Center as a guide preparing to take tourists on a tour of Temple Square. I was very gratified then that a former Sixth-Seventh Ward bishop and very caring home teacher to my mother and sister had been so honored. The feeling is much magnified today at your calling as First Counselor in the First Presidency.”5
 

President Monson fits the description in Doctrine and Cov-enants Section 81, the only revelation given—originally—to a counselor in the First Presidency. That revelation, received for Frederick G. Williams, perfectly defines President Monson’s many years of service to Presidents of the Church, whether he was on their right hand or on their left.
 

The passage of scripture identifies three important duties: “[Be] faithful in counsel . . . [proclaim] the gospel . . . succor the weak, lift up the hands which hang down, and strengthen the feeble knees.”6 Elder Quentin L. Cook suggests that President Monson has been such a counselor. “Because of the strength of his personality, there can be no question that he would have given his very best advice and counsel. He values unity, he values loyalty, he will let his voice be heard when it is appropriate to do so in that counsel. But as a decision is reached, he fully and wholeheartedly supports it. The unity of the First Presidency in their important decisions is a great example to the whole Church.”7
 

President Monson was the consummate counselor to President Hinckley, as he had been to President Hunter and President Benson. President Monson has been remarkably able, yet deferential; bold, yet humble; resolute and innovative, yet a voice for precedent.
 

Elder David A. Bednar agrees that one of the “marvelous lessons in the life of President Monson is that he was the perfect counselor. He didn’t presume to take upon himself initiatives or responsibilities that were the purview of the President of the Church.” Elder Bednar noted that in board of education meetings he attended as president of Ricks College, which became BYU–Idaho, President Monson “would express his views very appropriately and even emphatically. But whenever a decision was made, he would always sustain and support.”8
 

What the members of the Church haven’t seen is how, from his chair next to President Hinckley, he helped move the work forward with the faith and capacity of a world leader. “He is a man of great faith, great faith,” Bishop H. David Burton testifies. “When I talk to the First Presidency about issues that are very difficult, very complex, or have some implications that are very dramatic, he, more often than not, will be the first to say, ‘We’ll leave it in the Lord’s hands. Don’t worry, Bishop. We’ll leave it in the Lord’s hands.’”9
 

President Gordon B. Hinckley became the most traveled President of the Church in its history. In June 1997, at President Hinckley’s eighty-seventh birthday celebration, President Monson said of his friend, “President Hinckley is gradually circumventing the world, meeting with our members who have rarely, if ever, seen a living President of the Church.”10 While President Hinckley was gone, President Monson as First Counselor in the First Presidency carried much of the administrative burden at headquarters. The two had worked together for so many years that President Monson knew basically how President Hinckley thought and what his response would be to most matters put before him. They consulted on the phone, President Hinckley in Africa or some such place, President Monson at his office in Salt Lake City.
 

Much of President Hinckley’s travel was to dedicate temples. Each recent Church President has helped expand temple work. President Spencer W. Kimball prophesied, “We look to the day when the sacred ordinances of the Church, performed in the temples, will be available to all members of the Church in convenient locations around the globe.”11 President Brigham Young had foreseen such a day, proclaiming in 1856, “To accomplish this work there will have to be not only one temple but thousands of them, and thousands and tens of thousands of men and women will go into those temples and officiate for people who have lived as far back as the Lord shall reveal.”12
 

That day came closer when, in the October 1997 general conference, President Hinckley announced plans to construct smaller temples, built to “temple standards” in areas of the Church “that are remote.”13 The first of these was constructed and dedicated in 1998 in Monticello, Utah.
 

Since his call to the holy apostleship in 1963, President Monson has participated in dedications and rededications of more than fifty temples. At the cornerstone ceremony for the temple in Stockholm, Sweden, he said, “Each of us has a cornerstone, or two, or three, in his life, even points of reference to guide us.” As with all his messages, he shaped this message to those in the congregation. “A cornerstone in my life,” he said, “is my association with my grandfather’s sisters who came from Sweden. As a little boy, I would sit upon their knees and they would tell me stories of Sweden, stories which I have never forgotten. Then they would show me some slide pictures of the country. During the presentation of most of the pictures placed in the viewer they would speak with reverential respect. It was as though the picture portrayed holy ground. Inevitably my aunts would pause before exclaiming, ‘Here is a picture of Stockholm.’ Then there was a moment of silence and I was supposed to have the same reverence that they had.” He has never forgotten that experience, which became a cornerstone to him—a cornerstone of heritage, a cornerstone to remind him of his duties, and a cornerstone to remind him of those who went before.14
 

The Tampico Mexico Temple dedication in 2000 was for President Monson a glorious return to that part of Mexico; he had created the Tampico stake twenty-eight years earlier. That dedication was also a part of temple history: three temples were dedicated in two days. President Monson dedicated the Tampico Mexico Temple on May 20 in four sessions; that same day, President James E. Faust dedicated the Nashville Tennessee Temple. The next day, President Monson dedicated the Villahermosa Mexico Temple. Total attendance at Tampico was 5,066; at Villahermosa the next day it was 3,850. President Monson shared with the congregations his limited Spanish language ability, learned mostly in high school, commenting, “It isn’t up to par by far but at least I can understand more than I once could.”15
 

At the Veracruz Mexico Temple dedication six weeks later, he spoke of the temple helping the members there. “We all have certain talents, and the Lord knows what they are,” he said. “We all have limitations and the Lord knows what they are. Whatever our limitations may be, the Lord said this: ‘Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect.’ [Matthew 5:48.]He would not give us commandments we could not fulfill. We can become perfect in our love of God. We can become perfect in our love of our fellow men. We can become perfect in the payment of our tithing. We can become perfect in living the Word of Wisdom. We can become perfect in our home teaching. In other words, all of those degrees of perfection are within our reach. . . . We know what we must do.”16
 

He makes it simple: “Seek the Spirit of the Lord in your families. Kneel down with your children. Counsel them from your heart and be kind. Don’t take life too seriously and remember that disappointments will come and we have to recognize that and live within those parameters.”17
 

President Monson felt prompted to call young Carlos de Jesus Contreras Madrigal, who was sitting on the front row in the celestial room at the Veracruz Mexico Temple dedication, to come forward and stand by his side, that “he might represent all the boys and girls at the temple that day.” President Monson asked him how old he was and he replied that he would be thirteen the next day. With a smile, President Monson then suggested that his experience in the temple would be his birthday present and that he should make a note of it in his journal. Later, President Monson learned that the boy’s mother, Elvira Madrigal Gonzalez de Contreras, was one of the most faithful sisters in a branch in the Villahermosa stake, and that his father was not a member of the Church.18
 

“My, but the temples have blessed the people of the Church,” President Monson states. His family members have gathered in sealing rooms of the Salt Lake Temple to participate in ordinances for deceased ancestors. “There was an overwhelming feeling of binding together,” he wrote one evening when the family participated in sixty-nine sealings. The work had been for Frances’s family, which had been one of Frances’s mother’s last wishes before she passed away.19
 

“Surely this will be known as an era of temple building as we move forward under the direction of our inspired President, Gordon B. Hinckley,” President Monson wrote in his journal after the First Presidency review of an actual model of a proposed sealing room for small temples.20
 

“I have never seen a more supportive counselor as it relates to temple work than President Monson,” Bishop Burton says as he recalls the many discussions in the Temple Sites Committee meetings regarding temple construction. The Presiding Bishop’s office oversees temple construction as part of its charge. Bishop Burton notes, “The first person to make a motion about spending the resources of the Church for temple work was Brother Monson. While he has not been quite as vocal in public about that, his influence on temple construction, temple work, and family history work is pretty extensive.” When we think of temples, Bishop Burton continues, “we immediately think of President Hinckley; I think that is appropriate. But not many steps behind, if any, is our current President. He has a great testimony of why we build temples and all the work that goes on in temples.”21
 

Every Thursday, President Monson and President Hinckley rode in a little open cart along the underground tunnel leading from the Church Administration Building to the temple. “As it went under Main Street in the tunnel, and as soon as we were in the part where the temple began, Brother Hinckley took his hat off for the rest of the trip,” President Monson observed. “No one said anything, but I noticed. He’s a very spiritual President.”22 Every time President Monson sees Church members, youth in particular, coming and going to the temple, he reflects on how “they have done something of eternal value for someone else. And this is what life is all about.”23 To him, temple work is rescue work.
 

President Monson still remembers when he was a bishop counseling a couple whose disagreements were escalating. He felt inspired to ask them, “How long has it been since you have been to the temple and witnessed a temple sealing?”
 

“A long time,” they replied. These were worthy people who went to the temple and did ordinance work for other people, but they had not witnessed a sealing in many years.
 

“Will you come with me to the temple on Wednesday morning at eight o’clock?” he asked.
 

The next Wednesday the three were in one of the beautiful sealing rooms. Bishop Monson’s couple started out far apart on a little bench against the wall. As the ceremony proceeded, they drew closer and closer together; by the end, they were reunited, holding hands, their differences put aside. They had remembered their covenants made in the house of God. “When we remember our covenants, we will keep them,” states President Monson. “Covenant keepers are happy people.”24
 

“I think there is a lot to be said about his influence on where we have gone as a Church over the last forty years,” states Bishop Burton. “During that period of time Thomas Monson has certainly been a strong advocate and voice.”25
 

Another area of the Church in which President Monson’s influence has been powerful is missionary work. Elder M. Russell Ballard views President Monson as “one of the great missionaries of all dispensations. He understands missionary work, he understands the role of tying the members to the missionary effort.”26
 

As chairman of the Missionary Executive Committee, Elder Ballard took a rough draft of Preach My Gospel, then a proposed missionary guide, to the three members of the First Presidency one Sunday afternoon. At President Monson’s home, the two chatted and even took a stroll in the backyard to see the pigeons in President Monson’s lofts. Then Elder Ballard asked him to read the manuscript of several hundred pages. “I know you will read every word of it,” Elder Ballard said and encouraged his longtime friend and colleague to make any changes.
 

And then Elder Ballard added, “I need it back in two days.”
 

“You’ve got to be kidding,” President Monson replied as he felt the weight of the manuscript. To his credit, President Monson stayed up most of the night reviewing that manuscript, and two days later Elder Ballard had his corrections and suggestions.
 

One thing that was missing in that early draft of Preach My Gospel was the personal touch of real-life accounts. Elder Quentin L. Cook, who at the time was executive director of the Missionary Department, explains, “President Monson never calls them stories because he wants them always to be true accounts. He has always recognized that a vast majority of people can see and understand such accounts, whereas if you are talking in terms of concepts, people might not grasp the message.”27
 

President Monson made it clear that any such account has to teach a principle. He could have used the experience of Shelley, a member of the Sixth-Seventh Ward, to illustrate effective missionary work. Shelley had not embraced the gospel, though his wife and children were active in the Church. When Tom left for Canada to serve as mission president, he had almost given up on Shelley. “Had I been asked to name anyone I knew not likely to become a member of the Church,” he says, “I believe I would have thought of Shelley.”
 

After he was called to the Twelve, Elder Monson had a telephone call from Shelley. “Bishop, will you seal my wife, my family, and me in the Salt Lake Temple?” Shelley asked.
 

Elder Monson hesitated. “Shelley, you first must be a baptized member of the Church.”
 

Shelley laughed. “Oh, I took care of that while you were in Canada. My home teacher was the school crossing guard, and every weekday as he and I would visit at the crossing, we would discuss the gospel.”28
 

President Monson’s life is full of such examples. Another came to his attention when George Watson, who was serving in a stake presidency in 1999 in Naperville, Illinois, decided to write to President Monson to let him know what had happened to him.
 

In 1957, at age twenty-one, George Watson emigrated from Ireland to Canada, took a job in Niagara Falls, and found a room at the “ridiculously inexpensive cost of $6 per week.” The only drawback was that he had to drive his landlady, age seventy-three, to church each Sunday in St. Catherines, Ontario. She used the twenty-five-minute drive to encourage George to “see the missionaries from her church.” He resisted for more than a year, until one day she invited him to join her and “two young ladies coming to supper.” He found it very difficult to be rude to lady missionaries.
 

He “did a great deal of thinking” during the next several months, but kept dismissing the Church. By now eleven missionary companionships had taught him the gospel. It felt right but required giving up too much. The landlady persisted in inviting him to church, and finally he determined to accompany her—in “an open neck shirt, sneakers, and sports slacks,” intending to embarrass her so she would not ask him again. They were late; he sat in the hall, refusing to attend Sunday School, and talked with “a very fine man who was crippled” and who, George felt, understood him. When George told the member he was returning to Ireland in eight days, the man pressed him to be baptized before he left. He agreed. All week long George ignored the man’s phone calls to confirm the Saturday baptismal service. On Sunday, however, “after a very sleepless night,” George phoned him, apologized, and arranged for his baptism to take place on the way to the airport.
 

“I have no idea where you or the missionaries found my address in Ireland,” he wrote to President Monson thirty years later, but “I had a letter from you welcoming me into the Church.” It read, “We are thrilled to welcome you as a newly baptized member of our Father’s kingdom. Your Father in Heaven loves you deeply and desires to bless you richly with His spirit.” One Sunday in Ireland, at 9:00 A.M., there was a knock on George’s door, and “a President Lynn was on the doorstep,” saying he had had a letter from the president of the Canadian Mission, Thomas S. Monson, asking him to watch over George.29 A small act by a loving leader had helped keep a brother safely in the fold.
 

The true accounts in Preach My Gospel were included largely as a result of President Monson’s prodding, and many of them were his suggestions. Preach My Gospel came together in a short fourteen months, guided by the hand of the Lord through His servants, President Monson among them. “He was chairman of the Missionary Executive Council forever,” explains Elder Ballard. “He knows missionary work, and the fact that the manual spoke to the missionary and taught him, instead of just laying out a lesson, was one of the magical parts of it.”30 It has proven to be a divinely inspired and successful approach to missionary work.
 

Every fall, stretching into the winter, President Monson and President Faust extended calls to men whose names had been recommended by Church leaders and approved by the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve to serve as mission presidents. Some years there were as many as 135, and the two counselors each took approximately half. President Monson would prepare before each meeting, reviewing the file and checking with the Missionary Department for further detail if there were any concerns or questions. In the interviews, he rarely spent less than an hour with each couple and sometimes took longer. He personalized the interview so that when the couple left his office, they would feel as though they had received his undivided attention, as indeed they had.
 

As the missionary work went forward, and the Church continued to grow, the need for new physical facilities increased as well. April general conference in 2000 was held in the newly completed Conference Center. President Monson described the transition from the Tabernacle to the Conference Center as nothing short of miraculous. “I don’t think that many people have been moved on and off of Temple Square in the history of the Square,” he said.31 Some 6,500 usually squeezed into the Tabernacle for general conference; the Conference Center seated approximately 21,000.
 

“We have needed a much larger building to accommodate those who attend conference and other activities throughout the year,” said President Monson at the Sunday conference session in the new facility. “Workmen with finely honed skills have labored with their hearts and hands to provide a structure worthy of [the Lord’s] divine approbation.”32
 

With the construction of the Conference Center, along with technological innovations in satellite broadcasting and computer streaming, more people than ever could participate more personally in general conference. And many of them particularly loved hearing from Thomas S. Monson. One family required their children to listen to two speakers in each general conference session; the rest of the time the children were allowed to play. The mother wrote in a letter to President Monson that her son had said to his father, “Call me when the last speaker is up—or when President Monson is speaking. I’ll come in for that.”33 Another mother wrote of watching her youngest sit captivated before the television as President Monson spoke; when he was nearly finished, the child rushed forward and planted a kiss on President Monson’s smiling face on the screen.34
 

President Monson’s love for people shines through. He loves to be out among the Saints. Elder David B. Haight once commented, after the two of them attended a stake conference in President Monson’s home stake, “The 1,500 people that filled the stake center would gladly have stayed another hour listening to your wisdom and feeling of your love.”35 President Monson’s great capacity to engage the membership of the Church with his personal experiences and warm delivery prompted President Hinckley to remark, when he stood to speak after President Monson, “How would you like to follow him!”36
 

Bishop H. David Burton said: “I was on a speaking assignment [out of town], and my mom was in assisted living. My wife, Barbara, had called and said Mom had a little bit of a setback, but not to worry. Then I got a call from President Hinckley, who said, ‘I think it is important for you to come home.’ I hadn’t hung the phone up a minute when President Monson called. He’d been to see Mom a couple of days before. I don’t know if he and President Hinckley had been speaking with each other or not, but he said, ‘I think it’s time for you to come home.’ I did. I arrived about an hour before she passed away. President Monson has those kinds of tender feelings about people and their circumstances, almost like an antenna.”37
 

In May 1997, President Monson presided at a regional conference in Lyon, France. He hadn’t been to France in nearly a decade. As President and Sister Monson and Elder and Sister Neil L. Andersen made their way to the car through the throngs of members hoping to get a glimpse up close or even a handshake, Elder Andersen pointed out a couple standing in the crowd and told President Monson their touching story. Their son, Elder Richard Charrut, had died in a tragic accident after serving with the Andersens in the France Bordeaux Mission.
 

Elder Andersen had spoken at the funeral service in the little branch in Chambéry, France. This was the first time he had seen the parents since that service five years earlier. As Elder Andersen concluded the account, the couples had reached the car. Rather than climbing in, President Monson said, “Let’s go back and see them.” Nothing was more important to President Monson at that moment than expressing his love to these faithful parents whose son had perished while in the Lord’s service.
 

Worried, Elder Andersen checked his watch and looked at the members pressing in around them. But President Monson would not be dissuaded. “President Monson insisted we go back and find the Charruts,” Elder Andersen remembers. President Monson put his arms around Gerard and Astrid Charrut and said, through Elder Andersen, who was translating, “Brother and Sister Charrut, as you remain faithful, I promise you, you will have your son forever.”
 

The Charruts melted into tears. “It wasn’t so much his words as the feeling that came over all of us,” remembers Elder Andersen. Twelve years later, the Charruts’ stake president contacted Elder Andersen to report that Brother Charrut had just passed away. He added, “The love and attention President Monson showed to this couple strengthened and lifted them in a marvelous way during the years, and they have remained true and faithful.”38
 

Following a regional conference in Hamburg, Germany, President Monson insisted on visiting a former president of the Hamburg Stake, Michael Panitsch, who was seriously ill. He had been a faithful leader in the Church when times were hard. Born in the Ukraine, fluent in Russian and Ukrainian, Brother Panitsch had fought in the Second World War with the German army; he had served long and ably as president of the Hamburg Stake, with his wife at his side.
 

Elder Uchtdorf, president of the Europe area at the time, tried to dissuade President Monson from making the visit, explaining that Brother Panitsch lived on the fifth floor of his building. There was no elevator. President Uchtdorf was also aware that, only months before, President Monson had been hospitalized because of a serious problem with his left foot. But Brother Panitsch and President Monson had been friends for years; he was going. He and President Uchtdorf climbed the stairs, stopping every second or third step to rest. They found Brother Panitsch in his bed, gravely ill. He lived alone now, his wife having died years before. His family lived close by, his daughter a floor above him and his son a floor below. The longtime friends reminisced and shared testimony, and then President Monson promised Brother Panitsch that he would be remembered on the prayer roll of the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve. Brother Panitsch began to weep. “Danke, danke, mein Bruder,” he said to President Monson. It would be the last time the two would be together.39
 

To President Monson, the climb up and down the stairs had nothing to do with his feet and everything to do with his hands. He has taught from personal experience: “‘God’s sweetest blessings always go by hands that serve Him here below.’ Let us have ready hands, clean hands, and willing hands, that we may participate in providing what our Heavenly Father would have others receive from Him.”40
 

Dan and Mabel Taylor were another couple blessed by the loving hands of President Monson. They had lived in Canada when President Monson was mission president there and they knew the Monsons very well. Mabel, in fact, had served as a counselor to Frances in the mission Relief Society presidency. The Taylors had moved to California, and then-Elder Monson visited with them when he was on assignment there to divide their stake. He suggested that the Taylors might consider serving a mission. The next week the two of them showed up at his office at Church headquarters, saying, “You said we ought to serve a mission, and here we are.”
 

“Have you visited with your bishop or stake president?” Elder Monson asked.
 

“No,” the two responded.
 

He suggested they return home and let their bishop know they would like to serve. They were called to the Washington D.C. Mission, and then on a second mission to the visitors’ center in Laie, Hawaii. They subsequently moved to Salt Lake City.
 

In the fall of 2003, President Monson was notified that Dan Taylor was in a Salt Lake City hospital, having suffered a heart attack. He went to see Dan and, when they arrived at the hospital, had his driver confirm the room number. President Monson walked into the room, “looked around, and didn’t know a single soul.” Surprised, he said, “I understand this is the room of Dan Taylor.”
 

The patient responded that he was Dan Taylor.
 

Wrong Dan Taylor.
 

But before President Monson could excuse himself, the man’s wife spoke up, “We’ve been praying that someone who held the priesthood would come and give a blessing to my husband. We just concluded our prayer and here, Brother Monson, you’ve come.”
 

President Monson gave the man a blessing and expressed how happy he was to meet him. Then, explaining that he had another Dan Taylor to visit, he slipped out of the room, but not before the patient and his wife and family expressed their great appreciation for the blessing.
 

Checking with the desk, he found there was indeed another Dan Taylor in the hospital. It was his Dan Taylor, and President Monson gave him a blessing as well.41
 

When President Monson has such experiences, he knows that the hand of the Lord has guided him. He feels the mix-up with the two Dan Taylors was no mistake. So many times he has borne witness “that the sweetest spirit and feeling in all of mortality is when we have an opportunity to be on the Lord’s errand and to know that He has guided our footsteps.”42
 

As willing as he was to reach out, President Monson realized that “the desire to help another, the quest for the lost sheep, may not always yield success at once. On occasion, progress is slow—even indiscernible.”43 Fritz Hoerold, a boyhood friend of President Monson’s, was a good example. Fritz was “short in stature but tall on courage.” He enlisted in the United States Navy at age seventeen and was off to war on a large battleship in the Pacific, where the crew faced a number of bloody engagements. His ship was repeatedly damaged; many sailors were killed or wounded. Thomas Monson and Fritz Hoerold lost track of each other—for fifty years. Then one day, when President Monson was reading a magazine article featuring battles in the Pacific, he thought of his friend. Was he still alive? Did he live in Salt Lake City? With a little investigation, this years-ago president of Fritz’s teachers quorum got him on the phone and sent him the magazine. Fritz had long since stopped attending church altogether. Twice in only a few months, the two ran into each other. Both times, President Monson encouraged Fritz to qualify for the blessings of the temple. Fritz’s wife, Joyce, urged, “Keep working with this man of mine.”
 

Joyce passed away, and President Monson lamented, “How I wish that I had been more successful with my private project to get Fritz to the temple.” He went to Joyce’s funeral service. Fritz, seeing him, “made a beeline to his side.” President Monson described what happened: “We both shed a few tears. He asked me to be the final speaker. When I arose to speak, I looked at Fritz and his family and said, ‘Fritz, I am here today as the president of the teachers quorum of which you and I were once members.’ I proffered how he and his family could become a ‘forever family’ through temple ordinances—ordinances at which I pledged to officiate when that time came.
 

“Then I said, ‘Now, Fritz, to use naval terms, since we were both in the navy, our ship is about to weigh anchor, and Joyce is on it. And it is destined for the port of the celestial kingdom of God, and I don’t want you to miss that ship. The boatswain’s mate’s whistle has sounded, and now is the time.’ As I said that, Fritz jumped to his feet and saluted me, saying, ‘Yes, sir.’ I returned his salute. It was a very touching moment for all of us.”
 

Not long afterward, at the October 2001 general priesthood meeting, President Monson spoke of Fritz in his talk. The following Monday morning, Fritz called to say thank you, explaining that his home teacher had taken him to the priesthood meeting. He was shocked when President Monson told his story. His home teacher turned to him and asked, “Did you get the message?” Fritz’s son-in-law, who also accompanied him, jumped to his feet and introduced Fritz to the men gathered as the man about whom President Monson had just spoken. “President,” Fritz said, “I began to shed tears.” On August 31, 2002, President Monson sealed Fritz’s wife and children to him in the temple. Less than a year later, on March 4, 2003, President Monson ordained Fritz a high priest, with Fritz’s stake president, bishop, and home teacher standing in the circle.44
 

Reaching the one is important, but it is also important to reach everyone. To that end, on January 4, 2003, the First Presidency taped the first in an ongoing series of worldwide leadership training meetings. The program was broadcast one week later, and the training meetings have continued each year. President Monson recognizes that “there is really no substitute for being present in person, where you can provide open discussion and answer questions,”45 but the introduction of satellite sessions for priesthood leaders has great advantages. Topics are discussed, refined, correlated, and translated, which means that everyone can receive the same message at the same time throughout the world in his or her own language.
 

The worldwide expansion of the Church also made it necessary to eliminate some programs that had been in place for many years. It was President Spencer W. Kimball who announced the discontinuance of the MIA’s June Conference, with its dance and music festivals, drama presentations, and all-Church basketball and softball competitions. He stated that they were being eliminated because the Church had grown too large to bring youth to one central location for such grand activities. In their place, he recommended such activities be held on a regional basis. Unfortunately, such events were extremely scarce.
 

Years later, seeing a need for events to strengthen the youth, President Monson gave each member of the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve a copy of President Kimball’s statement concerning such festivals. “That was the genesis that sparked a rethinking of the desirability of something like a youth celebration held in multiple cities,” President Monson has explained.46
 

The Day of Celebration at Rice-Eccles Stadium in Salt Lake City on July 16, 2005, a gigantic youth program commemorating the 200th birthday of the Prophet Joseph Smith and the 175th anniversary of the organization of the Church, was the largest presentation in decades. President Monson was thrilled with the program, calling it “magnificent.” Some 42,000 youth from across the Salt Lake Valley and Wyoming performed, including 16,000 singers, 5,200 dancers, and 2,400 flag bearers. Other such extravaganzas, though on a smaller scale, have celebrated temple dedications or milestones in Church history, with great success.
 

President Monson’s love for the youth has been apparent in his addresses at many Scout gatherings. In the summer of 1996 he spoke at a jamboree at Valley Forge, Pennsylvania. Chris Rasband was a twelve-year-old Scout at the event. Earlier that summer, he had moved with his parents to New York, where his father presided as mission president. It was a hard move. There he sat in the mass of 5,000 eager Scouts as President Monson took the podium at a devotional.
 

Chris knew President Monson from the years he and his father had sat right in front of President Monson at Utah Jazz basketball games. Chris remembered cheering and exchanging “high fives” with the President when a shot would go in, so having him speak at the Jamboree was a touch of home for the lonesome Scout. As President Monson prepared to leave the jamboree, he began shaking hands with the Scouts, who all pressed forward. The President looked out over the crowd and saw Chris in his Scout uniform. He called out, “Chris Rasband, come up here and say hello!” The Scouts parted like the Red Sea, and Chris walked up as President Monson reached out to take his hand and pull him up on the podium.
 

Chris needed that attention. He needed his friend, who found him. “He is never too busy,” Elder Ronald Rasband, Chris’s father, says with emotion, “never too busy for people.”47
 

He is never too busy to pick up the phone to call a friend from high school who just lost her husband, never too busy to sit by the side of a friend as he passes on, never too busy to write a letter of encouragement to one of his friends with a note at the bottom, “It’s time to come back.” President Monson is never too busy to reach out to rescue.
 

Elder Neil L. Andersen has watched President Monson and has learned: “He doesn’t act as if he is an administrator who has to get through all of the issues. He acts more like a shepherd. That’s who he is, someone whose impact on people is more important than are his calculations or strategies for the Church.”48
 

Still, his travel schedule has always been rigorous and his Church assignments heavy. He and Sister Monson would rarely take a break—unless they were in Germany. Scenic Southern Germany has always been their favorite getaway if they were in Europe. Part of the lure is the countryside, another part is the relative anonymity afforded them so far from home. On one European trip, in August 1995, they started out in Stockholm, Sweden, where President Monson was dividing the stake he had created in 1975. It was a historic occasion, for Sweden’s royalty, His Royal Majesty King Carl XVI and Her Royal Majesty Queen Silvia, visited the LDS temple as part of their revival of a tradition dating back to the thirteenth century when the king traveled throughout the country to meet the citizens. President Monson presented the queen with a two-volume history of her family and gave His Royal Majesty a bronze statue of the “First Steps” figurine.
 

The Monsons had arranged to take two days off before they were expected in Görlitz to dedicate the new chapel that had been completed there. Gerry Avant of the Church News had been dispatched to cover the events at the last minute with a packet of airline tickets based, she was told, on President and Sister Monson’s itinerary. She didn’t take time to look through them.
 

When the ceremonies in Sweden ended, a new adventure began. Gerry explains: “I made my way to the ticket counter, and a smiling agent said, ‘I see you’re going to Munich today.’ I said, ‘No, I’m going to Dresden.’ The agent riffled through my packet of tickets and said, ‘You go to Dresden in three days; today you are going to Munich.’ I figured President Monson was going to speak at an area meeting or a fireside, or meet with missionaries. Whatever he did, I would cover it for the Church News.
 

“As we got out of the car at the hotel in Munich, I asked, ‘What time are the meetings tomorrow?’
 

“President Monson said, ‘We don’t have any meetings in Munich.’
 

“I was somewhat at a loss for words, but asked, ‘Then, why did we come to Munich?’
 

“President Monson said, ‘I don’t know why you’re here, Gerry, but Frances and I thought we would take a couple of days to sightsee.’
 

“I said, ‘That’s great! This will give me some time to meet a few members and take some photos.’
 

“President Monson said, ‘You’ve been working hard. You ought to take some time off, too. Go sightseeing.’
 

“The next morning I went to breakfast, expecting to hear that they would drop me off at some tourist site and would then be on their way. However, after breakfast, President Monson said, ‘I told Frances last night, I know Gerry; as soon as we’re gone she’ll call a bishop or a Primary president or someone and go to work. Then everyone will know we are here. We’d better take her with us.’
 

“So off I went on the most memorable ‘vacation’ of my life. We visited Berchtesgaden on a very foggy day, and went to Salzburg for lunch. The next day, we went out on Lake Königsee. It was raining, but it was a most beautiful experience. Because of the weather, few other tourists were on the boat, and no one else was in the little round chapel by the lake when we got there. We sat for a few minutes in that chapel, and I soaked up every word President Monson said. That evening, we went back to Salzburg for dinner.”49
 

They later met Elder Dieter F. Uchtdorf of the Seventy and his wife, Harriet, in Dresden, and the group visited Elder Joseph A. Ott’s grave and then went to the hill east of the Elbe River where President Monson had dedicated the land twenty years earlier. “It was the same kind of day, misty and rainy,” President Monson noted, “as we walked down the lane toward the mountain outlook. As I reminisced with those present concerning the events of that earlier period, the sun burst forth with all its splendor, as it had done on that dedication day. The Elbe River far below in the valley flowed ever onward as it has done through the years, in both good times and bad.”50
 

Elder Uchtdorf later wrote to President Monson, sharing his observations upon visiting such a sacred spot:
 

“I recognized two most significant names given to a street and a building. The street leading to the spot has the name Sonnleit, which translates into ‘guided by the sun.’ The closest building to the spot is called Friedensburg, which translates into ‘fortress’ or ‘castle of peace.’ I know that the fulfillment of your blessing has brought healing rays of sunlight and peace to our people. Harriet and I received in these two extraordinary days another testimony that, ‘Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets.’ Thank you for being a prophet of the Lord Jesus Christ.”51
 

Of his visit to Görlitz in 1968, President Monson said: “Under the inspiration of the Lord, I promised those worthy Saints who had nothing—nothing—that if they were faithful to the Lord, He, in His kindness and fairness, would provide them with all the blessings any other member of the Church in a free country received.’’52 In the intervening years, the Freiberg Temple had been built and the members in Görlitz had received all the blessings of worthy members in free nations. But they didn’t have a meetinghouse—until President Monson arrived on August 25, 1995, to dedicate the structure that, twenty-seven years earlier, he had promised would be built.
 

When the Monsons arrived in Görlitz, they were met by members thrilled with their new chapel and with the visit of President Monson, as well as a visit from Lord Mayor Matthias Lechner, a young man who had helped plan the day’s proceedings. The day stood in sharp contrast to what a young Elder Monson had encountered twenty-seven years earlier when “there were informers in the audience, fear in the hearts of all citizens, and the presence of Russian troops in full military regalia and East German police with their machine guns at their side and their Doberman dogs straining at leashes. . . . Gratitude filled my heart and soul,” said President Monson, “for the privilege of seeing the hand of the Lord in the blessing of this choice people.”53
 

Over the years, President Monson has taken every opportunity to return to Germany. In December 2003 he completed a regional conference in England on a Sunday afternoon and flew immediately to Dresden to give a fireside for “his friends.” He invited Elder Marlin K. Jensen, Area President, to join him. “As we walked into this Dresden building packed with about 1,100 people,” Elder Jensen recalls, “it was just electrifying. They all stood as he came in. He didn’t just walk to the stand like most would. He went out and circulated among the people for about ten or fifteen minutes on his way to the pulpit, embracing them and shaking hands. It was what he had done for so many years and was amazing to see.”54
 

When President Monson has tried to “lift up the hands that hang down,” as he did in Germany for so many years, he has seen the blessings of the Lord pour down into other people’s lives. Yet it often takes years for “the rest of the story” to reveal itself.
 

For example, it was a full five years after the death of prominent Church educator Rex E. Lee, who had suffered with cancer, when President Monson received a touching letter from his widow, Janet, describing “a sweet experience” she had had in the temple. She explained that she and her son had been talking about the last days of her husband’s life. Her son mentioned that one of his regrets had been that when he left the hospital for lunch one day, President Monson had come and given his father a blessing. He was so disappointed to have missed it, and mentioned that the experience was probably not as meaningful to the respiratory therapist who had been asked to assist in giving the blessing. “It would have meant a great deal to my son,” she wrote, “and as he spoke, his emotions were very close to the surface.”
 

Sister Lee continued:
 

“During a temple session last March, a lovely young woman in her thirties caught my eye. We seemed to exchange glances each time we changed rooms. When the session was over, she came to me and asked if we could talk a minute. She told me that she and her husband were heartbroken over the recent death of their seven-year-old daughter, but said that what had helped them the most was an experience her husband had had five years ago at the hospital, when he was a respiratory therapist and had assisted you [President Monson] in giving my husband a blessing. She said that the day of the blessing, her husband had shared some very spiritual insights into the passing from this world to the next of which you had spoken in the blessing. She said they had often talked about the comfort that blessing would bring them someday if they had to lose someone close to them. Little did they know it would be their young daughter! She wept when she told me how the understanding they had been given helped and sustained them in their days of sorrow. When I told my son, he wept as well, finally understanding why it was more important for the therapist to be there at that time than for him—as much as he would have liked to have been. We don’t always understand why things happen the way they do, but my heart rejoiced in the new insight I had been given.”55
 

President Monson had his own brush with potentially losing a loved one in January 2000. His daughter, Ann, had stopped by the Monsons’ home on the afternoon of January 5 to drop off some Swedish flatbread fresh from her oven for her parents. She walked into the kitchen unprepared for what she saw. Her mother lay unconscious on the floor in a pool of blood. Ann called 911 and then her father; then she started to pray. President Monson said he would meet her at St. Mark’s, the nearest hospital. He arrived before the ambulance did and watched as they brought Frances in. She had a severe laceration on the back of her head and a large lump on her forehead. When he told her, “We’re here,” she said, “I hurt.”
 

A later look at the kitchen made it clear she had gashed the back of her head on an open drawer—it was covered with blood—and then had fallen facedown on the floor.
 

The doctors quickly decided to life-flight Frances to the LDS Hospital, a larger trauma facility. Her physicians and Dr. Rich, who had cared for her nearly eighteen years before when she had suffered a serious fall, were there to meet them. The doctors worked into the night to stabilize her condition, inserting a breathing tube and a feeding tube and making her as comfortable as possible. She was heavily sedated. President Monson stayed at the hospital all night, as did his security officer, Tracy Monson (who is not related, though he has the same last name).
 

Although Frances had spoken those two words, “I hurt,” while on the stretcher at St. Mark’s Hospital, she did not utter another word for two and a half weeks. President Monson stayed close to her side. His journal entry for January 7 notes: “We were hoping that she would wake up soon, but the doctors caution that with head injuries it takes longer, particularly with one who is diabetic. . . . It is very painful to see your eternal companion suffer and feel so helpless in not being able to be of assistance to her. . . .
 

“Gordon B. Hinckley, James E. Faust, and Russell M. Nelson joined me in giving her a blessing. I asked President Faust to anoint, and President Hinckley sealed the anointing.” It was a beautiful blessing. Among other things, President Hinckley said, without equivocation, “You will rise from this affliction, you will awaken and you will be healed under the Spirit of the Lord.”
 

The hospital gave President Monson a room where he could do some paperwork, and for the next few weeks he spent most of each day with Frances, slipping out only for the temple meetings on Thursdays and to a viewing or two. The children and grandchildren were attentive but worried.
 

Son Clark recalls, “Dad demonstrated faith like I have never seen any other time from anybody. Dad was praying, and he would not admit to the possibility that she might die. I don’t think he had very often prayed for anything for himself. He was always willing to let the Lord decide what was best for him. In this case, he was determined not to lose her.”56
 

On Monday, January 10, President Monson wrote in his journal: “There is still no glimmer of recognition, and she still has not gained an awareness of where she is or what has happened, which is very disconcerting. Eyes remain closed, pain persists, and faith comes forth to bless her. The doctors say to be patient.”
 

On Friday, January 14: “Not yet regained consciousness. Ann and Carma have been attentive, as have the grandchildren.”
 

On Thursday, January 20: “We have been praying for a breakthrough in the next few days, that the coma she is in may not hold her captive.”
 

On Friday, January 21: “Frances was opening her eyes and tracking very clearly my conversation, then Tommy’s conversation. My, but it was good to see this happen. I went home a happier man than I have been for more than two weeks.”
 

On Saturday, January 22: “Frances was just wonderful today. She was alert. She smiled several times. She followed me with her eyes and held my hand. Dr. Fowles said, ‘She has turned the corner.’”
 

Her first words to her husband were, “I forgot to mail the quarterly tax payment.” He assured her he would take care of it.
 

In the midst of the crisis, President Monson prepared and presented a message for a satellite missionary broadcast, speaking on “Hallmarks of a Happy Home.” “We are responsible for the home we build,” he counseled. “We must build wisely, for eternity is not a short voyage. There will be calm and wind, sunlight and shadows, joy and sorrow. But if we really try, our home can be a bit of heaven here on earth.”57 He looked forward to that bit of heaven—Frances was coming home.
 

It was fortunate that Frances could stay in mortality longer, because her support would be particularly needed in the years ahead. On January 10, 2008, President Hinckley attended the temple meeting but asked President Monson to conduct. He did not attend the Temple Sites Committee Meeting. He was not well, but in the weeks ahead, he pushed on as he always had done. He gave a dedicatory prayer at the restored state capitol and rededicated the Garden Park Ward chapel on Sunday, January 20. He attended the First Presidency meeting on Tuesday, January 22, and seemed to be a little better. He came into the office on Wednesday, January 23.
 

On Saturday, January 26, President Monson, President Eyring, and F. Michael Watson, secretary to the First Presidency, went to the bedside of the much beloved leader. Wrote President Monson of the visit: “The doctors indicated he might not survive this illness. . . . Family members had gathered and he was sedated. I had the feeling I would probably never see President Hinckley again with his eyes open.”58
 

Returning to the office, the three were uneasy. President Monson made plans to give President Hinckley a blessing the following day—the Lord’s day—Sunday, January 27.
 

President Packer was invited to join them, and the next day at 3:00 P.M. they were again at President Hinckley’s bedside. The entire family had assembled. “After some conversation, in which his doctor mentioned the gravity of President Hinckley’s health, we joined in giving him a priesthood blessing. I invited President Packer to anoint, and I was voice in the sealing of the anointing. We were joined by all the priesthood holders in the Hinckley family and by Don Staheli [President Hinckley’s personal secretary], Michael Watson, and others present who held the priesthood.”
 

President Monson recorded, “I have known Gordon B. Hinckley for many, many years, beginning before either of us was a General Authority. Long ago I did the printing for the missionary literature and he handled the buying of the printing. Today I found him about like he was the day before. However, his breathing seemed a little deeper. I held him by the wrist and had a distinct feeling this was the last time I would see my beloved President and friend alive in mortality.”59
 

Three and a half hours later, at 7:20 P.M., Michael Watson called. President Hinckley had passed away.
 
 
 
 

Notes - Chapter 30: The Consummate Counselor
 

 Epigraph. Interview with Quentin L. Cook, 18 September 2009.
 

1. Interview with Dallin H. Oaks, 3 September 2009.
 

2. “The Solemn Assembly Sustaining of Church Officers,” Ensign, May 1995, 4.
 

3. President Thomas S. Monson, “The Call to Serve,” Ensign, November 2000, 49.
 

4. Thomas S. Monson, “That All May Hear,” Ensign, May 1995, 48.
 

5. Letter from Jack Fairclough to TSM, 2 February 2004.
 

6. Doctrine and Covenants 81:3, 5.
 

7. Interview with Quentin L. Cook, 18 September 2009.
 

8. Interview with David A. Bednar, 20 October 2009.
 

9. Interview with H. David Burton, 27 August 2009.
 

10. TSM Journal, 23 June 97.
 

11. Spencer W. Kimball, “‘We Feel an Urgency,’” Ensign, August 1980, 2.
 

12. See Richard O. Cowan, The Latter-day Saint Century (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1999), 288.
 

13. Gordon B. Hinckley, “Some Thoughts on Temples, Retention of Converts, and Missionary Service,” Ensign, November 1997, 49.
 

14. Thomas S. Monson, remarks at Stockholm Sweden Temple cornerstone ceremony, 2 July 1985.
 

15. TSM Journal, 21 May 2000.
 

16. Thomas S. Monson, address at Veracruz Mexico Temple dedication, 9 July 2000.
 

17. Thomas S. Monson, address at Reno Nevada Temple dedication, 23 April 2000.
 

18. TSM Journal, 21 May 2000.
 

19. TSM Journal, 2 August 2007.
 

20. TSM Journal 15 June 1999.
 

21. Interview with H. David Burton, 27 August 2009.
 

22. Monson, Reno Nevada Temple dedication.
 

23. Thomas S. Monson, address at Buenos Aires Argentina Temple dedication, 17 January 1986.
 

24. Monson, Buenos Aires Temple dedication.
 

25. Interview with H. David Burton, 27 August 2009.
 

26. Interview with M. Russell Ballard, 9 September 2009.
 

27. Interview with Quentin L. Cook, 18 September 2009.
 

28. Thomas S. Monson, “Home Teaching—a Divine Service,” Ensign, November 1997, 46.
 

29. TSM Journal, 20 October 2000.
 

30. Interview with M. Russell Ballard, 9 September 2009.
 

31. Interview with TSM, 15 April 2009.
 

32. Thomas S. Monson, “Your Eternal Home,” Ensign, May 2000, 52.
 

33. Letter from William R. Walker to TSM, 2 May 2006.
 

34. Letter from Joan Ellen Fox to TSM, 3 October 1975.
 

35. Letter from David B. Haight to TSM, 7 February 2003.
 

36. TSM Journal, 1 April 2006.
 

37. Interview with H. David Burton, 27 August 2009.
 

38. Interview with Elder Neil L. Andersen, 7 Oct 2009.
 

39. TSM Journal, 9 May 1999; Interview with Dieter F. Uchtdorf, 2 September 2009.
 

40. Thomas S. Monson, “Priesthood Power,” Salt Lake City Utah South Stake Conference Broadcast, 17 October 2009; poem, “Living What We Pray for,” by Whitney Montgomery.
 

41. TSM Journal, 9 November 2003.
 

42. See “Guideposts for Life’s Journey,” BYU Magazine, Spring 2008.
 

43. Thomas S. Monson, “My Brother’s Keeper,” Ensign, May 1990, 48.
 

44. See Thomas S. Monson, “Duty Calls,” Ensign, November 2001, 51; TSM Journal, 8 October 2001.
 

45. TSM Journal, 5 March 2006.
 

46. TSM Journal, 16 July 2005.
 

47. Interview with Ronald A. Rasband, 12 November 2008.
 

48. Interview with Neil L. Andersen, 7 October 2009.
 

49. Letter from Gerry Avant to Heidi S. Swinton, 30 March 2010.
 

50. TSM Journal, 27 August 1995.
 

51. Letter from Dieter F. Uchtdorf to TSM, 21 August 1995.
 

52. Gerry Avant, “Dedication of meetinghouse fulfills 27-year-old promise,” Church News, 2 September 1995.
 

53. TSM Journal, August 1995.
 

54. Interview with Marlin K. Jensen, 28 October 2009.
 

55. Letter from Janet Lee to TSM, 12 July 2001.
 

56. Interview with Clark Spencer Monson, 4 November 2008.
 

57. Thomas S. Monson, “Hallmarks of a Happy Home,” Missionary Satellite Broadcast, 20 February 2000.
 

58. TSM Journal, 28 January 2008.
 

59. TSM Journal, 27 January 2008.
 
 
 

31
 
 
 
© 2010 Heidi S. Swinton 

Printed from Gospelink.com
