# Reaching Out to the One

### Reaching Out to the One
Heidi S. Swinton, To the Rescue: The Biography of Thomas S. Monson (Salt Lake City 2010)
 
 

Reaching Out to the One
 

President Monson is warm and attentive, with a wonderful sense of humor and a spontaneous love for people. I think as a prophet he is irresistible. He goes out in the kitchen to thank the people who prepared a meal; he gives a thumbs-up acknowledging your efforts; he shakes hands with everyone he can reach and high-fives the youth. When he interacts with children, he almost always bends down so that he is at eye level. If everybody were like President Monson, we’d have heaven on earth.
 

Elder William R. Walker First Quorum of the Seventy
 

President Monson presided, conducted, and spoke at the funeral service of his “cherished friend and colleague,” President Gordon B. Hinckley, on February 2, 2008. “I cannot adequately express how much I miss him,” he said to the worldwide audience, which included more than 16,000 people in the Conference Center and many more watching via satellite, the Internet, and BYU Television. “It’s difficult to recall a time when he and I did not know each other,” President Monson continued. “We have served side by side for over forty-four years in the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles and in the First Presidency. We have shared much over the years—heartache and happiness, sorrow and laughter. . . . Wherever I go in this beautiful world, a part of this cherished friend will always go with me.”1
 

With the passing of President Hinckley, the First Presidency had been dissolved. President Monson and President Eyring, who had served as his counselors, returned to their places in the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, and that quorum became the presiding authority of the Church. On Sunday, February 3, 2008, all fourteen ordained Apostles living on the earth assembled in an upper room of the Salt Lake Temple. They met in a spirit of fasting and prayer. President Monson described, “During that solemn and sacred gathering, the Presidency of the Church was reorganized in accordance with well-established precedent, after the pattern which the Lord Himself put in place.”2
 

President Boyd K. Packer was voice in formally ordaining and setting apart Thomas S. Monson as the sixteenth President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. President Monson was eighty years old.
 

Many times he had borne his testimony of Jesus Christ to this august body of the Lord’s servants, as he had to members of the Church everywhere and would as the President of the Church in years to come: “With all my heart and the fervency of my soul, I lift my voice in testimony . . . as a special witness and declare that God does live. Jesus is His Son, the Only Begotten of the Father in the flesh. He is our Redeemer; He is our Mediator with the Father. He loves us with a love we cannot fully comprehend, and because He loves us, He gave His life for us. My gratitude to Him is beyond expression.”3
 

Those in the room remember the Spirit confirming immediately the sacred calling of President Monson. Elder Russell M. Nelson describes the moment as being “unlike any ascension to high office in any other part of life—political, academic, governmental—where there is always some striving, competition, vying for favor, but not so at that time. It is a sweet and sacred experience, one that is just such a sacred privilege.”4
 

Elder Quentin L. Cook recalls receiving “the marvelous spiritual confirmation that President Monson was to be the prophet” as he sat, the most junior member of the Twelve, in his first meeting in the temple to select—by revelation—the President to lead the Church. He noted that President Monson seemed “a very pure receptacle for divine inspiration.”5
 

In the days before the temple meeting, President Monson prayed earnestly for guidance in selecting his counselors. He studied the matter “very carefully, considering seniority, precedent, and the talents which [he] felt were needed at the time and those who would make a nice, compatible presidency.”6 And then he humbly took his selections to the Lord for confirmation.
 

President Monson named Elder Henry B. Eyring, age seventy-four, as First Counselor in the First Presidency. The calling was not a surprise. Elder Eyring had served as Second Counselor in the First Presidency since the October 2007 general conference. The two had worked together for many years, as Elder Eyring had served as Church Commissioner of Education, as a counselor in the Presiding Bishopric, and as a member of the Quorum of the Seventy before being called by President Hinckley in 1995 as an Apostle.
 

President Monson selected Elder Dieter Friedrich Uchtdorf, age sixty-seven, to serve as Second Counselor in the First Presidency. A convert to the Church and former stake president in Germany, a member of the Quorum of the Seventy since 1994 and of the Presidency of the Seventy since 2002, Elder Uchtdorf had been called to the Quorum of the Twelve in October 2004. He brought international, business, and Church experience to the new responsibility.
 

President Monson wanted to reach out into the world, Elder L. Tom Perry suggests, “and the most logical one to reach out with was Elder Uchtdorf. President Monson was showing, ‘We are a worldwide church.’”7
 

Neither counselor had much seniority in the Quorum of the Twelve, but President Monson knew he had “enough senior years to balance his counselors.” The three have vastly different experiences but, he notes, they are united, and “in unity there is great strength. We come together, united, on every major issue.”8
 

That Sunday evening, as had been tradition at the Monsons’ for decades, the family came over to the house. President Monson did not speak of what had happened in the temple that day. Not until his daughter, Ann, pressed him for the timing of the public announcement did he share the plan for a press conference the next morning.
 

On Monday, February 4, 2008, President Thomas S. Monson, sixteenth President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, with his counselors on either side of him and the members of the Quorum of the Twelve seated in full support, met with the press in the Church Office Building lobby directly in front of the mural depicting the beckoning Savior.
 

President Monson read a prepared statement, first addressing the passing of President Gordon B. Hinckley. “We shall miss him,” he said, “yet we know that he has left us with a wonderful legacy of love and goodness.” The President then promised to “continue the commitment of those who have gone before us in teaching the gospel, in promoting cooperation with people throughout the world, and in bearing witness of the life and mission of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ.”
 

True to what would become a central theme of his presidency, he spoke of reaching out “in the spirit of brotherhood which comes from the Lord Jesus Christ” and emphasized the importance of rescuing the one.
 

Someone from the press asked, “What will you do differently?”
 

Given that he and President Hinckley had met together in various meetings nearly every day for twenty-three years in three different First Presidencies, making decisions and setting future objectives, he responded, “It is inevitable that our thinking would be similar.” He identified “no abrupt change,” emphasizing a continuation of temple building around the world, further development of the Perpetual Education Fund, and emphasis on personal prayer and on helping others.9
 

Both counselors acknowledged their new leader’s commitment to people. “I’ve come to know of his goodness,” said President Eyring.10 “I know of his heart, his soul, his commitment, his wonderful love for the people,” added President Uchtdorf.11
 

As Thomas S. Monson began his presidency, there were 13.1 million members of the Church in 178 nations and territories, 2,740 stakes, 27,827 wards and branches, 348 missions, 52,686 missionaries, and 124 temples throughout the world.12
 

When the General Authorities met the next Thursday in the temple with the new First Presidency, President Monson instinctively went to his chair of thirteen years and sat down—until he realized the chair in the middle was empty. “This is going to be hard to get used to,” he quipped. For years he had stood back in support of the three Presidents of the Church he served as a counselor.
 

“We never talked at home about my dad someday becoming President of the Church,” his son Tom explains.13 “Any task he takes on, he finds a way to magnify it and to put more into it.”14
 

Words of support and congratulations poured into his office. Elaine S. Dalton, who would become the Young Women general president, viewed the new First Presidency as “a mighty force” for the Lord. “Combined, they have such a grasp of the whole; they see a bigger picture than anyone in the room can see.”15
 

One treasured note came from the Reverend Monsignor Terence Moore of the Saint John the Baptist Catholic Church in Draper: “You are such a prayerful, thorough spiritual leader. I feel so blessed by our friendship and your graciousness towards me.” This was not a form letter but a communication friend to friend. The two had worked on several of the same community causes and attended a host of formal dinners and celebrations, and President Monson would be a comfort to the Reverend Monsignor Moore in his battle with cancer.16
 

Without question, President Monson’s committee assignments over the years and his supervisory responsibilities had helped prepare him to lead every aspect of the Church organization. Over the years, he has been closely associated with correlation, printing, missionary work, temples, priesthood service, auxiliaries, youth, and welfare; he has traveled to every continent; he has addressed so many gatherings that he long ago quit counting. But his service is most often manifest in reaching out, in caring for the one in need, in being prompted by the Spirit and then acting on the prompting.
 

His first opportunity to speak to members of the Church came quickly. He recorded a message for the worldwide leadership training broadcast to be aired on February 9. The theme of the meeting, “Building up a Righteous Posterity,” was one of his favorite topics, something about which he had preached for years. He spoke with fervor and conviction, saying, “More and more the world is filled with chaos and confusion. Messages surround us which contradict all that we hold dear—enticing us to turn from that which is ‘virtuous, lovely, or of good report or praiseworthy’ and embrace the thinking which often prevails outside the gospel of Jesus Christ. However, when our families are united in purpose, and an atmosphere of peace and love prevails, home becomes a sanctuary from the world.”17
 

On February 10, 2008, he was in Rexburg, Idaho, to dedicate the Church’s 125th operating temple, an event he described as his first official act as Church President. He told news media he was “filling in” for President Hinckley, who had intended to dedicate the temple that February. The words of that dedicatory prayer were particularly poignant:
 

“We thank Thee that since the restoration Thou hast never left Thy Church alone. From the days of the Prophet Joseph Smith, Thou hast chosen and appointed a prophet to this people who has held and exercised all the keys of the everlasting priesthood for Thy children in the earth.”18
 

Many of those attending the proceedings described receiving a personal witness of President Monson as the prophet of God.
 

Members of the Church stood to sustain President Thomas S. Monson at the 178th Annual General Conference of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints on April 5, 2008. He later acknowledged, “I have felt your prayers in my behalf and have been sustained and blessed during the two months since our beloved President Hinckley left us. Once again, I appreciate your sustaining vote.”19
 

In the general priesthood meeting that evening, he issued a charge to priesthood leaders: “We who have been ordained to the priesthood of God can make a difference. When we qualify for the help of the Lord, we can guide boys, we can mend men, we can accomplish miracles in His holy service.”20
 

To the membership of the Church in his Sunday morning address, he referred to the fifteen men who had preceded him as President of the Church. Many of them he had known personally; he had served in the Quorum of the Twelve with six of them and as a counselor to three. “My earnest prayer,” he said, “is that I might continue to be a worthy instrument in His hands to carry on this great work and to fulfill the tremendous responsibilities which come with the office of President.”21
 

In the following session, on Sunday afternoon, Elder Jeffrey R. Holland said on behalf of the General Authorities and the Church as a whole:
 

“Of the many privileges we have had in this historic conference, including participation in a solemn assembly in which we were able to stand and sustain you as prophet, seer, and revelator, I cannot help but feel that the most important privilege we have all had has been to witness personally the settling of the sacred, prophetic mantle upon your shoulders, almost as it were by the very hands of angels themselves. Those in attendance at last night’s general priesthood meeting and all who were present in the worldwide broadcast of this morning’s session have been eyewitness to this event. For all the participants, I express our gratitude for such a moment. I say that with love to President Monson and especially love to our Father in Heaven for the wonderful opportunity it has been to be ‘eyewitnesses of his majesty.’”22
 

President Monson concluded the final session of that general conference saying, “My dear brothers and sisters, I love you, and I pray for you. Please pray for me. And together we will reap the blessings our Heavenly Father has in store for each one of us.”23
 

“I simply want to serve in such a way that the Lord would be pleased with whatever I do,” President Monson has said.24 His messages at general conference are a high priority in his life. “I look every day of my life for topics that might help someone,” he says. “I am thinking of general conference every day.”25
 

Six months later, at the conclusion of one session of the October 2008 general conference, as he passed along the line of the Quorum of the Twelve shaking hands, as is the custom, President Monson suddenly turned and made his way into the congregation. It was not something he had ever done before, nor had any Church President in recent times.
 

He had caught sight of his longtime friend Elder Royden G. Derrick, an emeritus General Authority, seated near the front in a wheelchair. Making his way up the aisle, the President embraced Elder Derrick and quickly spoke of their treasured past experiences, including duck hunting when they “never shot a single one!” Then he strode back to the stand, shaking a hand here and there, giving a thumbs-up to the missionaries, smiling broadly and encouragingly at everyone. It was Thomas S. Monson doing what he does best—reaching out. Elder David A. Bednar calls it “his inherent, instinctive goodness focused on ‘the one.’”26
 

Allie Derrick, sitting next to her husband, described the day when “President Monson put into action that which he has taught: ‘Never assume; we should always let them know we love them.’” Just over a year later, Elder Derrick passed away, but that special encounter and expression of love by President Monson “was cherished to the end of his mortal life.”27 President Monson spoke at his funeral.
 

“This warm, engaging giant of a man fills the room,” his sister Marilyn suggests. “It doesn’t matter how large the room is.”28
 

Elder Dallin H. Oaks suggests that “what is emerging is Thomas Monson the bishop, not Thomas Monson the manager. He is very good in both roles. His concerns are with the individual. I have seen enough Presidents of the Church to see differences. Some are very conscious of policy and procedures and so on; President Monson, of all the leaders that I have observed, is concerned for the individual. It comes out in his talks; it comes out in his meetings. He is sensitive to policy, he participated fully in making it and he often reminds us we need to follow it, but his personal creative energies are focused on the one.”29
 

General Authorities see a concerted effort on the part of the President to increase members’ awareness not only of others’ needs but also of the privilege and duty to respond. “When we go to the temple on Thursdays, and we, each member of the Twelve, give our reports as called upon by President Monson, we describe what we did with the callings and assignments we have been given,” Elder Robert D. Hales explains. “But when it comes to him, he speaks of his sweetheart and how he’s been caring for her. He speaks with appreciation of his family, his children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren. He speaks of going to care centers and homes or to hospitals or neighbors to give blessings. As we leave, we remind ourselves as Apostles what he has taught us that day about what we should be and how we should conduct our lives.”30
 

Says Elder Holland: “He will show up, probably unannounced, at the funeral of a rank-and-file employee. I can’t think of anything that exemplifies more the ministry of President Monson than that kind of individualized attention. That’s what the Savior taught, and President Monson does it and reflects it and embodies it more than anybody I have ever seen.”31
 

“Some people, if they are really prominent,” Elder Bruce D. Porter of the Seventy explains, “he will treat very kindly but he probably won’t visit their homes. But if you are the lowly of the earth, he is likely to drop in any time.” Elder Porter saw that in President Monson’s attention to a resident, Paul Tingey, living in a local care center. Paul and Elder Porter had been mission companions in Germany. Paul had married, had a family, even been a bishop. Now, severely impaired by multiple sclerosis, he was younger by decades than most of the care center’s residents.
 

President Monson was visiting the center one evening, and as he spoke to Paul, he realized that Paul was the son of his good friend Burton “Buzz” Tingey. The two struck up a friendship. They shared a natural optimism and enthusiasm for life. From then on, every time President Monson went to that facility, he talked to Paul.
 

Two or three years later, Paul passed away. Elder Porter, who attended the funeral, recalls, “I had this feeling as I sat down that President Monson would come.” Five minutes before the service was to begin, President Monson walked in. Elder Porter knew of President Monson’s busy schedule; he also knew that President Monson cares about people. The President was the concluding speaker at the funeral, and at the next general conference priesthood session, President Monson spoke about Paul.
 

“Held captive by this malady, Paul Tingey struggled valiantly but then was confined to a care facility,” President Monson explained. “There he cheered up the sad and made everyone feel glad. Whenever I attended Church meetings there, Paul lifted my spirits, as he did all others. When the World Olympics came to Salt Lake City in 2002, Paul was selected to carry the Olympic torch for a specified distance. When this was announced at the care facility, a cheer erupted from those patients assembled, and a hearty round of applause echoed through the halls. As I congratulated Paul, he said with his limited diction, ‘I hope I don’t drop the torch!’
 

“Paul Tingey didn’t drop the Olympic torch. What’s more, he carried bravely the torch he was handed in life and did so to the day of his passing. Spirituality, faith, determination, courage—Paul Tingey had them all.”32
 

“At our monthly General Authority testimony meetings in the temple,” Elder Porter explains, “President Monson shares many personal experiences with us, like his association with Paul. The more I’ve listened, the more I have thought, ‘He is teaching us how to be Christlike. He is not teaching how to be great administrators, though he is that, but how to be Christlike.’”33
 

President Monson has reiterated, “There are feet to steady, hands to grasp, minds to encourage, hearts to inspire, and souls to save.”34 He considers such actions as going “to the rescue.” He issued a challenge to the General Authorities to carry that theme to the membership of the Church. “I am pleased that the Brethren, especially the Seventy, have caught hold of that message and are teaching it everywhere they go,” Elder D. Todd Christoffersen notes. “President Monson has said it enough that there is no doubt how strongly he feels about it.”35 Quoting Jesus’ words that “whosoever will save his life shall lose it: but whosoever will lose his life for my sake, the same shall save it,”36 President Monson has concluded, “I believe the Savior is telling us that unless we lose ourselves in service to others, there is little purpose to our own lives.”37
 

At general conference in October 2009, President Monson made reference to a large, clear jar he had received, filled with little multicolored puff balls called “warm fuzzies,” each one representing a kind deed done by a Primary child. He described sitting with his wife and reading the hundreds of notes and cards sent to him on his eighty-second birthday describing acts of service performed by Church members, young and old, the world over. A year earlier, on his eighty-first birthday, he had been interviewed by the Church News and asked what he would most like for his birthday. “Do something for someone else on that day to make his or her life better,” he had responded.38 The cards, the notes, the warm fuzzies, and other creative items had been sent in response to that wish.
 

His daughter, Ann, has observed his natural interest in others for many years. “He has no inhibitions in taking the first step to strike up a conversation. And he always sees the best in people. No matter what their situation may be, he lifts them where they are and inspires them so they can lift themselves.”39
 

President Monson has always reached out to those estranged from the Church, saying, “In the private sanctuary of one’s own conscience lies that spirit, that determination to cast off the old person and to measure up to the stature of true potential. In this spirit, we again issue that heartfelt invitation: Come back. We reach out to you in the pure love of Christ and express our desire to assist you and to welcome you into full fellowship.”40
 

Many have been shepherded back to the fold by his warmth and gentle urging. One General Authority tells of an older man who, after nearly twenty years of being out of the Church, came to him and asked how to “come back.” The two talked, and the Church leader asked him, “What made you decide after all this time to want to be rebaptized?” The man pulled a letter from his pocket, unfolded it, and held it out. It read, “You have been long enough away, and it is time to come back. Tom.”41
 

President Monson’s approach is consistent and simple. “I am a people person,” he explains. “If I see someone who will be happy that I stopped or took time to talk, I do it. I find there is a little bit of sainthood in everybody, and I look for it.”42 He expects members to do no less than “befriend the new converts, to reach out to them, to surround them with love, and to help them feel at home.”43
 

No man was better prepared to engage the Church in such a concerted effort to reach out to those facing the loneliness of the self-absorbed, self-centered cultures of today. President Monson lives by the creed he teaches, says Bishop H. David Burton. He has said many times: the five most important words in the English language are “I am proud of you.” The four most important are “What is your opinion?” The three most important are “If you please.” The two most important are “Thank you.” The least important is “I.”44
 

That focus has been emphasized in materials being distributed. In 2009, with the global economy in a slump, the Church produced a DVD and pamphlet reemphasizing “Basic Principles of Welfare and Self-Reliance,” featuring messages by President Monson, Elder Hales, Bishop Burton, and Sister Julie B. Beck, Relief Society general president. “We have to teach our people thrift, frugality and industry. We have to teach them to put away for a rainy day,” asserts President Monson.45
 

The welfare system of the Church in early 2009 included 138 warehouses in the western hemisphere, with 108 of those being in the United States and Canada. It operated fourteen Church canneries, which produced 12.6 million cans of food. Its Deseret Bakery produced 453,594 loaves of bread, Deseret Pasta produced 938,505 pounds of pasta, and Deseret Soap produced 2.6 million pounds of soap; Deseret Dairy produced 9.87 million pounds of milk, 1.5 million pounds of powdered milk, and 727,251 pounds of cheese.46
 

The new Church handbook prepared for release in the fall of 2010 lists caring for the poor and the needy as one of the purposes of the Church, along with tenets from its well-recognized threefold mission: to proclaim Christ’s gospel worldwide, to perfect the Saints through their receiving ordinances and instruction en route to gaining exaltation, and to redeem the dead by performing vicarious ordinances for them.
 

“Anyone who knows President Monson,” explains Bishop Richard C. Edgley, counselor in the Presiding Bishopric, “knows his wonderful experiences and the wonderful example that he’s set for the rest of us. He has, by example, taught us in how we can reach out and help with those who are suffering.”47
 

“Our Heavenly Father has placed an upward reach in every one of us,” President Monson has said. “No problem is too small for His attention nor so large that He cannot answer the prayer of faith.”48 “There are those throughout the world who are hungry; there are those who are destitute,” he has reminded the Saints. “Working together, we can alleviate suffering and provide for those in need. In addition to the service you give as you care for one another, your contributions to the funds of the Church enable us to respond almost immediately when disasters occur anywhere in the world. We are nearly always among the first on the scene to provide whatever assistance we can.”49
 

For years, he has witnessed staggering humanitarian needs in the aftermath of earthquakes and other natural disasters that have crippled communities and even countries. On September 29, 2009, the islands of Samoa and part of Tonga experienced an 8.3 magnitude earthquake; four tsunamis roared to land. There were nearly two hundred deaths, with many more people injured and still others unaccounted for. The Associated Press reported that nearly 90 percent of residents in American Samoa were left homeless and without resources. Within a week, seventy-eight pallets containing sixty tons of food, hygiene kits, clothing, wheelchairs, and water containers were gathered from the Church’s Salt Lake City warehouses and placed on a twelve-hour charter flight to the Pacific islands of Samoa. The Church also has contributed humanitarian aid to ongoing efforts in the Philippines, Vietnam, Indonesia, Turkey, and numerous other spots around the world.
 

On January 10, 2010, an earthquake rocked the small Caribbean nation of Haiti. More than 230,000 people, twenty of them Latter-day Saints, lost their lives in the quake, which measured 7.0 and had thirty-three aftershocks. President Monson knew the nation and its people. In 1983, he had dedicated the land of Haiti for the preaching of the gospel.
 

Immediately the Church opened the doors and grounds of its half-dozen meetinghouses in the capital of Port-au-Prince, which were remarkably still standing, to anyone needing assistance. Available were food, blankets, tents and tarps, medical supplies, and teams of LDS doctors, nurses, and other health specialists who had come to the island to provide assistance.
 

President Monson became Church President at almost the exact time that a major national and international economic crisis hit. It wasn’t a tsunami, a flood, or a hurricane, but it was a wholesale global concern about employment, potential poverty, and whether people had food to eat and a roof over their heads. “We could not have a prophet better prepared and more skilled than President Monson during this period of serious welfare and humanitarian need,” explains Elder Hales, who as Presiding Bishop from 1985 to 1994 saw firsthand President Monson’s passion for helping the poor and administering relief. There is no question that President Monson finds himself on familiar ground when he encourages Church members to be involved in their communities, to don the trademark yellow T-shirts of the Mormon Helping Hands program.50
 

President Monson’s vision of the Church, Elder Marlin K. Jensen suggests, is that “we are to become not only hearers of the word but doers. He still speaks at a funeral or two a week, and still makes his visits to the individual person. He is trying through that and through his teachings to get us to be galvanized into becoming real Christians at the very personal level, one person at a time, one soul at a time.”51
 

When he called Elder D. Todd Christofferson to be the ninety-sixth Apostle in this dispensation after President Hinckley’s death, it was not a quick meeting. President Monson had issued the call to Elder Christofferson to serve in the First Quorum of the Seventy fifteen years earlier. Elder Christofferson’s account of being called as an Apostle is poignant: 
 

“It was not remarkable in the sense of there being a lot of fanfare or activity surrounding the call. I think in the simplicity of it is the power and beauty. It was like a sealing in the temple, not complicated, not a lot of ceremony, but great power in the purity of it. There was nothing to distract from what was happening, what the focus ought to be.”52
 

When President Monson extended the call to Elder Neil L. Andersen, then Senior President of the Seventy, to fill the vacancy in the Quorum of the Twelve at the death of President Monson’s dear friend Elder Joseph B. Wirthlin, those close to the process saw his interest for others in action.
 

“President Monson commented about the burden, the weight of that responsibility, a few times in our Thursday meetings in the temple,” remembers Elder Christofferson, who was observing the process for the first time. “Some of the senior Brethren commented early on, ‘We don’t have to worry—President Monson knows how to get revelation.’”53
 

President Uchtdorf described watching the selection of a new Apostle from his position in the First Presidency. “As a counselor,” he said, “I want to let you know what I am learning about our prophet. I have watched him closely during the process of selecting the next Apostle. At one time he said, ‘I haven’t got an answer from the Lord yet, but I don’t worry, because when the time comes that I absolutely need it, He will let me know.”54
 

Elder Andersen will never forget the day he was invited to President Monson’s office. First the President described his experiences being called as a mission president and later as an Apostle. “He has such a personal touch,” says Elder Andersen. “At one point he got his Kleenex for me. He said, ‘Don’t worry. This is a good time to be tearful and emotional. I am not in a hurry.’ This was Wednesday afternoon. Starting the next morning he was speaking to all the General Authorities and all the Area Seventies of the world. He had many messages in front of him in coming days, including talks for all the sessions of general conference. But he would not be rushed. This is President Monson.”55 
 

After President Monson extended a call to Elaine Dalton to serve as Young Women general president, he walked her and her husband to the door. Reaching over to his table, which had on it a bouquet of white roses, and pulling out one of the blossoms, he said, “This is for the Young Women general president.”
 

“The minute he handed me the rose,” Sister Dalton recalls, “my thoughts went back to my own experience as a young woman when we had the bandelos and we had to choose a symbol of something to sew on as our own emblem. I chose a white rose. He had handed me a white rose. The Spirit said, ‘This is how we want every young woman to be, clean and growing and blossoming and prepared to come back home to her Father in Heaven.’”56
 

President Monson has seen many men called of God as apostles and prophets. He has watched them and their wives as they have gone about doing the Lord’s work. In meetings with General Authorities, he will speak lovingly about experiences he had with President David O. McKay, President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., President Spencer W. Kimball, and President Hugh B. Brown, among others. One of his favorite experiences with President Brown, who was called as an Apostle in 1958 and served in the First Presidency from 1963 to 1970, happened one day when the two were attending a commencement at BYU; President Brown was to conduct the exercises and Elder Monson was to speak. Elder Monson stopped at the home of President Brown to pick him up. President Monson tells that as he was pulling out of the driveway, President Brown stopped him and said, “Wait a minute.” He looked toward the large bay window of his home as the curtains parted. Sister Brown, his beloved companion of more than fifty years, was at the window, propped up in a wheelchair, waving a small white handkerchief. President Brown reached inside his coat pocket for his handkerchief and returned her wave. Then he turned to Elder Monson with a smile and said, “Let’s go.”
 

Elder Monson assumed there was more to the interaction than just a friendly good-bye. He inquired of President Brown, who explained, “The first day after Sister Brown and I were married, as I went to my daily work, I heard a tap at the window, and there she was, waving a handkerchief. I found mine and waved in reply. From that day until this I have never left my home without that little exchange. It is a symbol of our love for one another, an indication to one another that all will be well until we are joined together at eventide.”57
 

A similar incident fairly characteristic of President Monson occurred at a weekday General Authority training meeting in April 2008 before general conference. All of the Brethren were seated twenty minutes before the hour the meeting was scheduled to begin, as had been the practice for years, and then they waited. President Monson arrived late—ten minutes past the hour—and explained that he had been doing something for Sister Monson. Interestingly, many of the General Authorities remember that meeting not for what was said but for what was demonstrated by a prophet of God. Commented Elder David A. Bednar, “If he focused on efficiency and timeliness, he would have said, ‘I have to be there.’ But he was taking care of his wife.”58 There was a lesson to be learned that has stayed with those who waited patiently. That morning Frances was the one on whom he needed to focus.
 

The whole Church shared in his obvious pleasure at Frances’s attendance at general conference in April 2010. So pleased was he in her recovery from a recent illness that he departed from his prepared text to welcome her with tender words that would long be remembered by those in attendance.
 

Elder Neil L. Andersen says, “He has never asked Sister Monson to be anyone different than she is. One time when we were at a regional conference in Lyon, France, I didn’t know him that well. I was a General Authority serving in Europe and had not had much exposure to the senior Brethren. ‘Is Sister Monson going to speak?’ I asked. President Monson replied, ‘I don’t know yet.’ A little more time went by, and I asked again, ‘Do you know yet if Sister Monson is going to speak?’ And finally he said, ‘We won’t know until we are in the meeting. I will pass you a note.’ I thought, ‘How thoughtful that he would not require her to speak.’ She ended up speaking and did a wonderful job.”59
 

What does it feel like to be President of the Lord’s Church on the earth? “Humbling,” President Monson says. “You immediately search your style, you search your thinking, you search your heart, and you realize you have an obligation to tell the people how you feel about things and to bear testimony. It isn’t the time for oratory. You realize you are going to need God’s help and then you live so you can earn it. He knows me. He has come to my aid before, and He will come again and again.”60 He has admonished the members to “acquire the language of the Spirit. It is not learned from textbooks written by men of letters, nor is it acquired through reading and memorization. The language of the Spirit comes to him who seeks with all his heart to know God and keep His divine commandments. Proficiency in this ‘language’ permits one to breach barriers, overcome obstacles, and touch the human heart.”61
 

Like prophets of old and others of this dispensation, President Monson has repeatedly issued a clarion call to live the gospel, to avoid sin, and to live righteously. His direction has been clear: “The philosophies of men surround us. The face of sin today often wears the mask of tolerance. Do not be deceived; behind that facade is heartache, unhappiness, and pain. You know what is right and what is wrong, and no disguise, however appealing, can change that.” With passion borne of years of experience, he said, “Be the one to make a stand for right, even if you stand alone. Have the moral courage to be a light for others to follow.”62
 

He has cautioned in particular about the degradation of pornography, “one of Satan’s enticements.” With great concern for the growing problem, he looked into the camera at general conference in May 2009 and stated, “If you have allowed yourself to become involved in this behavior, cease now.”63 Many commented that they felt powerfully the mandate of the prophet in those words, “Cease now.”
 

After addressing a combined sacrament meeting of three young single adult wards one Sunday early in 2010, he recorded: “I felt the Spirit of the Lord as I counseled this special group of young men and women, . . . showing how the Lord blesses young people in the selection of a mate and in determining what they might study or what they might become in their vocation.”64
 

The Lord’s Spirit and message were received. One sister, a returned missionary who had served in Belgium, had gone to sacrament meeting not intending to stay for the whole meeting. She was struggling with her place in life and missed desperately the spiritual environment of the mission field. That day the Lord had a message just for her. “This prophet is the one well-known for touching the one,” she later described. “I was sitting in a sea of people thinking, he has no idea that I am here and that I am struggling. Yet, the Spirit was an amazing tool, and President Monson was, literally, the conduit for the Lord. That’s how the prophet does it, that’s how he touches the one, through his ability to work with the Spirit. I felt it.”65
 

President Monson’s ability to affect individual lives is remarkable, especially considering the schedule he keeps. His typical day begins with a First Presidency meeting, and his regular schedule generally includes Thursday meetings with the Quorum of the Twelve and General Authorities, the General Welfare Committee, and the Priesthood Leadership Council. Other meetings range from the Board of Education to Budget and Appropriations, Temple Sites, Presiding Bishopric, Deseret Management Corporation, Printing Advisory, Human Resources, and many more. He also meets with many people. Some are dignitaries from around the world; others are friends he has known over the years.
 

President Monson has had vast experience in executive roles—he delegates, communicates, and organizes—but he also listens to the promptings of the Spirit. He knows that in the end, everything will work out. He has that kind of faith.
 

As an administrator, he is relaxed and inclusive. “He starts right on the dot but he’ll come in and visit before the meeting begins,” Elder L. Tom Perry explains. “He’ll talk about the BYU game or the Jazz; he’s a great sports fan. And then he’ll get down to business.” Elder Perry has appreciated President Monson’s open manner in discussing Church finances, making certain he hears what those at the table have to say. “In the Budget and Appropriations Committee I can ask questions and he’ll accept them, and we will work together in council.”66
 

“He can hear from God and does hear from God,” President Henry B. Eyring has observed. “He makes decisions in the most interesting way. He does his homework. He ponders and prays a long time. In other words, he doesn’t shoot off quickly. He is not predisposed to a particular direction or decision until he decides it is right. But I’ll tell you there will come a moment, usually after a lot of hard work—he does charts, he reads minutes, he asks for lots of opinions, he ponders and prays a long time—and then, very interesting, he’s all settled.”67
 

As Elder D. Todd Christofferson has observed, “There is always the underlying sense this is the Lord’s work and His Church and therefore He will see it through. Whatever obstacles you face, whatever unsettledness about which way to turn in a given moment, the direction is there. He exhibits this underlying confidence that things will sort out; they always have and always will because the Lord’s hand is in it.”68
 

Whatever the focus of the meeting may be, he is always open to counsel. No one is waved off. If he is choosing artwork for a temple, he takes counsel from members of the Temple Sites Committee and others who work closely with him. He sincerely wants to hear other views and perspectives and have meaningful discussions, usually before divulging his own opinion. President Eyring has seen the pattern often. “He wants your opinion, but he is very, very good at telling what your motives are. So if you shade anything for him at all, he sees it. If you hedge, he will say nicely but with a smile, ‘But you don’t help me. You don’t help me.’ He wants it absolutely straight. Most people like to win arguments. He likes to get to the truth. He is very interesting that way, very rare.”69
 

“He is not nearly as concerned about the agenda as he is about hearing people’s opinions concerning the issue at hand,” explains Elder William R. Walker, who participates in meetings with the President as executive director of the Temple Department. “He honestly wants to know what people think, and he won’t voice his own opinion until he has gone around the table. He trusts people who have assignments to do their best.”70
 

Often, in order to answer a question, to shift the direction the meeting is going, or to break growing tensions, President Monson will share a personal account from his life or from his vast experience with others. That informality invites participation. The experiences he shares are never random but rather address the very issue on the table.
 

Elder Christofferson was touched by a pre-conference leadership meeting when President Monson addressed General Authorities on the subject of audits and following the financial stipulations in the handbook. “He took what could have been a fairly dry presentation,” Elder Christofferson recalled, “and, typical of him, said, ‘We’re talking about people’s souls here.’” He described a man who was a clerk who embezzled some funds in his stake or ward and was excommunicated. It was a great hardship for the family and a trial to the man, and he committed suicide. President Monson’s words have stayed with Elder Christofferson. “The President said, ‘We cannot let that happen to a man or his family. We must follow procedures and do the audits, and we’ll prevent it. This is much more than clerical procedures; this is the worth of a soul.’” Elder Christofferson continued, “The worth of each individual always comes through, no matter what President Monson talks about. And he has lived his life that way.”71
 

Though his focus is on individuals, President Monson’s skills extend to more general concerns as well. The businessman in him has kept an eye on the City Creek project begun in downtown Salt Lake City in President Hinckley’s era and scheduled for completion in 2012. The Church undertook the City Creek project to protect the environment around Temple Square. The new urban community in the heart of downtown will cover approximately 20 acres and will create an altered cityscape and skyline with residences, offices, and retail stores. One of the first occupants of the center in 2010 was—fittingly—the flagship location of the Church-owned Deseret Book store.
 

His business acumen was again put to the test with the reorganization of Beneficial Financial Group, a company the Church had sponsored since 1905. When the economy went into a severe downturn in 2008, losses were so substantial that the company closed its doors to new business and maintained only a small force to manage its existing accounts. “Our corporations take the same bumps others do,” President Monson explains. “We are in the same competitive business, and some years are better than others.”72 Also in that difficult economic climate, Deseret Management Corporation (the Church’s holding company for business enterprises) shifted its focus to becoming predominantly a media company with its remaining businesses: Deseret Book, the Deseret News, KSL TV and radio, and a new Internet division called Deseret Digital Media.
 

In dividing up responsibilities among members of the First Presidency, President Monson chose to supervise personally the 360-voice Mormon Tabernacle Choir. He gave the choir a special send-off on June 14, 2009, in preparation for their summer tour of seven cities, during which they would travel from Ohio to Colorado in thirteen days. “You are going on a mission for the Church,” he said. “For every applause you hear, there will be applause in their hearts for the memory they will have of having heard the Mormon Tabernacle Choir sing.”73
 

If he is asked about the Choir, his eyes light up. He considers that “members of the Mormon Tabernacle Choir are the Lord’s emissaries in their singing and music.”74 He often attends Music and the Spoken Word broadcasts on Sunday mornings, and when Choir members retire, he enjoys handing out plaques to them with Choir president Mac Christensen and music director Mack Wilberg. After the April 2009 retirement ceremony, he was invited to sit down at the organ and play. He stared at the five keyboards of sixty-one keys each and the thirty-two organ pedals at his feet. When the Choir urged him to play something, he obliged with one of the “renowned” piano selections he learned as a child, “To a Birthday Party,” from the John Thompson book Teaching Little Fingers to Play. Organist Linda Margetts showed him how to use the many organ stops, but when she asked if he wanted to play the sound of the harp as one of the stops, he quipped, “I’m not ready to play the harp. Someone up there might get ideas.”75
 

In 2009, online current affairs publication Slate.com ranked President Monson number one on its list of the eighty most powerful octogenarians in America. He was ranked ahead of former U.S. Presidents Jimmy Carter and George H. W. Bush, former secretary of state Henry Kissinger, and news personality Barbara Walters, among others. Slate.com reported, “The top spot this year goes to 82-year-old Thomas S. Monson, president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and the only person on the list to rule over millions of people as a prophet of God.”76
 

There is no question that he has a high profile, but, as Elder Kenneth Johnson of the First Quorum of the Seventy has observed, “President Monson will not be influenced by popularity or press. He will know or seek to know the Lord’s will and then act on it. Courage and character stand out as two of his greatest strengths.”77
 

Courage and character have been called for as, in recent years in the United States and other countries, a movement promoting same-sex marriage has divided voters. In some cases legislation has been passed to secure that shift. This radical change, Church leaders contend, is one of the great moral issues of our time because it strikes at the very heart of the family. As traditional marriage and family—defined as a husband and wife with children in an intact marriage—have come increasingly under assault, President Monson has said, “We owe it to our people to let them know the moral issue. We stand firm for true principles in a changing society.”78
 

In letters to Church members, the First Presidency has reaffirmed the principle of marriage being between a man and a woman and has encouraged families to review the Church document “The Family: A Proclamation to the World” to more fully understand the LDS doctrine on marriage: “We, the First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve Apostles of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, solemnly proclaim that marriage between a man and a woman is ordained of God and that the family is central to the Creator’s plan for the eternal destiny of His children.”79
 

The Church joined a coalition of other religious organizations, including evangelical and Catholic leaders in California, in support of Proposition 8, the “California Marriage Protection Act,” which provided that “only marriage between a man and a woman is valid or recognized in California.” The ballot proposal was accepted by the voters but faced court challenges. In similar election contests in other communities and nations, the Church has reiterated its support of traditional marriage but has not involved itself institutionally. The Church has supported local initiatives that are “fair and reasonable” and do “not do violence to the institution of marriage,” such as protection from discrimination in hospitalization and medical care, fair housing and employment rights, and probate rights.80
 

The Church’s position has always been one of “mutual respect and civility” towards others. President Monson is “a man of remarkably good will, someone who is not interested in being divisive, who wants to further good things for the benefit of mankind,” explains Elder M. Russell Ballard.81
 

His attention to family is nowhere more apparent than in temples. President Monson has said, “Millions of ordinances are performed in the temples each year in behalf of our deceased loved ones. May we continue to be faithful in performing such ordinances for those who are unable to do so for themselves.”82 In 2008 he dedicated temples in Rexburg, Idaho; Curitiba, Brazil; Panama City, Panama; and Twin Falls, Idaho, and he rededicated the Mexico City Mexico Temple after it was refurbished. In 2009 he dedicated the Draper Utah and Oquirrh Mountain Utah Temples. In 2010 he dedicated temples in Vancouver, British Columbia; Gila Valley, Arizona; and Cebu City, Philippines, and he has continued to push forward with new temples, including structures in Kyiv, Ukraine (announced by President Hinckley); Calgary, Alberta, Canada; Córdoba, Argentina; Kansas City, Missouri; Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Rome, Italy; Brigham City, Utah; Concepción, Chile; Fortaleza, Brazil; Fort Lauderdale, Florida; Sapporo, Japan; and Payson, Utah. In 2009, 83 percent of Church members lived within 200 miles of a temple. “That percentage will continue to increase,” he has assured the Saints, “as we construct new temples around the world.”83
 

What he witnesses at temple dedications, President Monson explains, is “a renewed dedication to the gospel by those who participate.” He admonishes the children assembled, “Boys and girls, remember this day.”84 He notes, “It is a time of renewal. It is a time to consider how our lives could be improved with regard to our family unity and our service to the Lord and our fellow men. At the end of the day, one feels the strain of multiple dedication sessions but also the wonderful exhilaration that a house of the Lord will now be open for the glorious work to be performed there.”85
 

In the planning of the Oquirrh Mountain Utah Temple dedication, he did “not feel settled” with the schedule of three sessions on Saturday and three on Sunday, August 22 through 23, 2009. Meeting with the Temple Department, he directed that three sessions be added on Friday, August 21. “The Lord has not let me feel at ease about the earlier decision,” he said. “We need to have more sessions. I want more young people to be in the temple to have this experience.”86
 

As he left a session of that temple dedication, he saw at the back of the celestial room a man in a wheelchair. He realized the man couldn’t get up to greet him, so he went to the man and gave him an embrace. He then stopped at the doors of each room along the hall to greet the children gathered to see him.
 

For years, the Church has sponsored open houses prior to temple dedications. President Monson stressed the importance of well-crafted open houses at the newest temples in the Salt Lake Valley, Draper and Oquirrh Mountain. He invited countless individuals who were not members of the Church, including representatives from the national news media, to tour the temples. “What it does for them,” he explains, “is to provide them an opportunity to understand the purpose of the temple, and to help them understand that the work we do in temples is not secret, but sacred. The temple itself is a missionary.”87 Total attendance at the Draper Utah Temple open house was a staggering 684,721.
 

The tenth session of the Draper Utah Temple dedication, on Sunday at 11:30 a.m., was broadcast to all stakes in the temple district, and the twelfth and final session that afternoon was broadcast to all the stakes in Utah.
 

Dedicating a temple brings with it a “feeling of gratitude,” he explains, for the blessings made possible by the tithes and offerings of the people throughout the world. Temples are representative of great sacrifices of time, effort, and funds. “I am humbled by the fact that the worker’s mite in some countries has helped to build that house of the Lord,” he explains, “that the people might have the ultimate ordinances of the gospel now. That’s why we have temples.”88
 

“There is nothing like the dedication of a temple to bring out the best in people,” he says. “When a building is dedicated for its holy purposes, it reflects a welcome sign to all who are worthy: ‘Come, here you shall find peace, here you shall find a formula for happy families.’”89
 

As he came to the close of his first year as President of the Church, President Monson reflected on his experiences. “I have always needed the help of the Lord, and I have always asked for it. I simply put my faith and trust in Him and move along day by day and week by week.”90 He has admonished the members to do the same. “Reflect gratitude for our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ,” he has said. “He is our Master. He is our Savior. He is the Son of God. He is the Author of our Salvation. He beckons, ‘Follow me.’ [Mark 2:14.] He instructs, ‘Go, and do thou likewise.’[Luke 10:37.] He pleads, ‘Keep my commandments.’[D&C 11:6.] Let us follow Him. Let us emulate His example. Let us obey His word. By so doing, we give to Him the divine gift of gratitude.”91
 

When asked if his assignment as President were lonely, he replied, “You are never alone when you are on the Lord’s errand. The Lord is always there. I rely on Him. I know what it is like to have Him lead me.”92
 
 

Notes - Chapter 31: Reaching Out to the One
 

 Epigraph. Interview with William R. Walker, 14 January 2010.
 

1. Julie Dockstader Heaps, “He was a ‘giant’ of faith, love, vision,” Church News, 9 February 2008.
 

2. Thomas S. Monson, “Looking Back and Moving Forward,” Ensign, May 2008, 88.
 

3. Monson, “Looking Back and Moving Forward,” 90.
 

4. Interview with Russell M. Nelson, 3 September 2009.
 

5. Interview with Quentin L. Cook, 18 September 2009.
 

6. TSM Journal, 3 February 2008.
 

7. Interview with L. Tom Perry, 22 August 2008.
 

8. Interview with TSM, 19 February 2009.
 

9. Adam C. Olson, “Maintaining the Course,” Ensign, April 2008, 10–14.
 

10. Interview with Henry B. Eyring, 21 July 2010.
 

11. Interview with Dieter F. Uchtdorf, 2 September 2009.
 

12. “Statistical Report, 2008,” Ensign, May 2009, 30.
 

13. Interview with Thomas Lee Monson, 6 November 2009.
 

14. Interview with Thomas Lee Monson on “Legacy of Life,” DVD shown at Legacy of Life Awards Ceremony, 14 April 2005.
 

15. Interview with Elaine S. Dalton, 2 December 2009.
 

16. Letter from Terry Moore to TSM, 6 April 2008.
 

17. Thomas S. Monson, “A Sanctuary from the World,” Worldwide Leadership Training Meeting, 9 February 2008.
 

18. “Rexburg Idaho: ‘We come humbly,’” Church News, 16 February 2008.
 

19. Thomas S. Monson, “Abundantly Blessed,” Ensign, May 2008, 112.
 

20. Thomas S. Monson, “Examples of Righteousness,” Ensign, May 2008, 65.
 

21. Monson, “Looking Back and Moving Forward,” 88.
 

22. Jeffrey R. Holland, “‘My Words . . . Never Cease,’” Ensign, May 2008, 91.
 

23. Monson, “Abundantly Blessed,” 112.
 

24. Interview with TSM, 15 October 2008.
 

25. Interview with TSM, 15 April 2009.
 

26. Interview with David A. Bednar, 20 October 2009.
 

27. Letter from Allie Derrick to Heidi S. Swinton, 20 April 2010.
 

28. Interview with Marilyn Martin, 10 January 2008.
 

29. Interview with Dallin H. Oaks, 3 September 2009.
 

30. Interview with Robert D. Hales, 8 April 2009.
 

31. Interview with Jeffrey R. Holland, 8 October 2009.
 

32. Thomas S. Monson, “The Call for Courage,” Ensign, May 2004, 56.
 

33. Interview with Bruce D. Porter, 16 December 2009.
 

34. Thomas S. Monson, “How Firm a Foundation,” Ensign, November 2006, 62, 68.
 

35. Interview with D. Todd Christofferson, 24 September 2009.
 

36. Luke 9:24.
 

37. Thomas S. Monson, “What Have I Done for Someone Today?” Ensign, November 2009, 85.
 

38. Gerry Avant, “Ideal birthday gift for Pres. Monson,” Church News, 15 August 2009.
 

39. Interview with Ann Monson Dibb, 19 July 2008.
 

40. Monson, “Looking Back and Moving Forward,” 90.
 

41. Interview with Erich Kopischke, 20 September 2008.
 

42. Interview with TSM, 15 April 2009.
 

43. Thomas S. Monson, “Welcome to Conference,” Ensign, November 2009, 6.
 

44. H. David Burton, “What Manner of Men and Women Ought Ye to Be?” Church Educational System fireside, 2 November 2008.
 

45. Interview with TSM, 29 March 2010.
 

46. “The Journey of a Peach,” Mormons Giving Aid Globally, 17 June 2009, http://mormonchurch.org/174/the-journey-of-a-peach.
 

47. Scott Taylor, “Care for needy has been longtime emphasis for Mormons,” Deseret News, 12 December 2009.
 

48. Thomas S. Monson, “Your Celestial Journey,” Ensign, May 1999, 96.
 

49. Thomas S. Monson, “Until We Meet Again,” Ensign, November 2008, 106–7.
 

50. Interview with Robert D. Hales, 8 April 2009.
 

51. Interview with Marlin K. Jensen, 28 October 2009.
 

52. Interview with D. Todd Christofferson, 24 September 2009.
 

53. Interview with Dieter F. Uchtdorf, 2 September 2009.
 

54. Interview with Dieter F. Uchtdorf, 2 September 2009.
 

55. Interview with Neil L. Andersen, 7 October 2009.
 

56. Interview with Elaine S. Dalton, 2 December 2009.
 

57. Thomas S. Monson, address at BYU 102nd Commencement Exercises, 22 April 1977.
 

58. Interview with David A. Bednar, 9 September 2009.
 

59. Interview with Neil L. Andersen, 7 October 2009.
 

60. Interview with TSM, 15 October 2008.
 

61. Thomas S. Monson, “To the Rescue,” Ensign, May 2001, 50.
 

62. Thomas S. Monson, “Examples of Righteousness,” Ensign, May 2008, 65, 68.
 

63. Thomas S. Monson, “Until We Meet Again,” Ensign, May 2009, 113.
 

64. TSM Journal, 10 January 2010.
 

65. Interview, name withheld, December 2009.
 

66. Interview with L. Tom Perry, 22 August 2008.
 

67. Interview with Henry B. Eyring, 26 August 2009.
 

68. Interview with D. Todd Christofferson, 24 September 2009.
 

69. Interview with Henry B. Eyring, 26 August 2009.
 

70. Interview with William R. Walker, 14 January 2010.
 

71. Interview with D. Todd Christofferson, 24 September 2009.
 

72. Interview with TSM, 19 February 2009.
 

73. TSM Journal, 14 June 2009.
 

74. Interview with Mac Christensen, 6 October 2009.
 

75. Interview with Mac Christensen, 6 October 2009
 

76. “80 Over 80,” Slate.com, posted 20 October 2009.
 

77. Interview with Kenneth Johnson, 24 July 2008.
 

78. Interview with TSM, 15 April 2009.
 

79. “The Family: A Proclamation to the World,” Ensign, November 1995, 102.
 

80. Aaron Falk and Scott Taylor, “Mormon church supports Salt Lake City’s protections for gay rights,” Deseret News, 11 November 2009.
 

81. Interview with M. Russell Ballard, 9 September 2009.
 

82. Thomas S. Monson, “Welcome to Conference,” Ensign, November 2009, 4–5.
 

83. Monson, “Welcome to Conference,” 4.
 

84. Sarah Jane Weaver, “President Monson dedicates edifice, thousands celebrate,” Church News, 30 August 2008.
 

85. TSM Journal, 21 March 2009.
 

86. Interview with William R. Walker, 14 January 2010.
 

87. Interview with TSM, 19 February 2009.
 

88. Interview with TSM, 19 February 2009.
 

89. Gerry Avant, Church News, 28 March 2009.
 

90. Interview with TSM, 15 April 2009.
 

91. Thomas S. Monson, “Finding Joy in the Journey,” Ensign, November 2008, 87, 88.
 

92. Interview with TSM, 19 February 2009.
 
 
 
 
 

32
 
 
 
© 2010 Heidi S. Swinton 

Printed from Gospelink.com
