Brent A. Barlow, Twelve Traps in Today's Marriage and How to Avoid Them ( 1986)

Preface

Suppose for a moment you are the production manager in a large factory that makes farm tractors. For years you have produced tractors with a guarantee that each will last the owner's lifetime. Your tractors are superior products, highly sought after and very capable. Seldom do you have a tractor returned because it fails to meet the expectations and demands of those who utilize it.

Then, for reasons not entirely known, the owners begin to return their tractors more frequently for repairs. Large numbers of tractors begin to break down. As production manager, you become concerned and start an investigation. For years you have produced the same tractors with the same design, the same motors, and the same capabilities. Nothing as yet has had to be changed on the assembly line.

Even the most satisfied of your former customers start returning their tractors. New customers even bring back their tractors after just a few months. Tractors of the old design start breaking down in record numbers before the lifetime warranty has expired. Ultimately forty percent of the tractors you produce are returned, and reports arrive that many of the tractors remaining in the field are barely surviving. Numerous other owners are quite dissatisfied.

As production manager, what would you do? Would you continue to produce tractors of the same vintage and design with a failure rate of forty percent? Or would you redesign the tractor? Would you go into the field and watch the tractors at work? Would you carefully examine the ones that are returned to see why they have ceased to function?

After locating certain problems, would you issue an alert to other tractor owners to avoid similar difficulties? Would you examine the work demands of the tractors and calculate stress points and limitations? Would you possibly consider revising and updating your tractors? Would you determine how much demands have increased over the years and whether the owners have properly cared for their tractors and provided even routine maintenance?

Or would you ignore the forty percent failure rate and go right on producing the same old tractor?

Why We Need Information about Contemporary Marriage

Some people, particularly husbands, are reluctant to admit that we need education about marriage today. After all, our parents and particularly our grandparents did not have it and supposedly did not need it. This kind of logic has a definition. According to Dr. Clark Vincent, marriage educator and counselor, it is called the "myth of naturalism." Simply defined, the myth of naturalism implies that human beings take to marriage as naturally as little ducks take to water. It is all somehow instinctive, effortless, and automatic.

The idea that our parents and grandparents didn't have to learn about marriage, and that therefore neither do we, is also an illusion. Our ancestors had different expectations about marriage. It was just something a person did that stayed done. Furthermore, people of a few decades ago may have been willing to put up with some circumstances in marriage that few would tolerate today.

In addition, I believe marriage is much more complex today than it has been in times past. We now confront issues and situations that our progenitors may not have experienced. With these thoughts in mind, I have written Twelve Traps in Today's Marriage and How to Avoid Them. I firmly believe that many married couples today unknowingly get into situations—traps, if you will—that can be harmful to marriage. This may be out of ignorance, apathy, or innocence, or any combination of the three.

Through marriage counseling sessions and through discussions during the many marriage seminars I have conducted, I have become aware of many of these traps. Susan and I have even encountered some of them in our own marital relationship. In Twelve Traps in Today's Marriage and How to Avoid Them I have identified what I believe to be twelve major traps in contemporary marriage. Obviously, there are others, and all do not start with the letter T, but I have attempted to identify the major ones and alert others to the dangers. And to those who may be presently snared, I hope the book will help them find a way out.

Trap: Any device, stratagem, trick, or the like for catching a person unawares.
