Brent A. Barlow, Twelve Traps in Today's Marriage and How to Avoid Them ( 1986)

"Watch, . . . That Ye May Be Ready"

Doctrine and Covenants 50:46

Watch: To be attentive or vigilant; to keep guard; to keep someone or something under close observation.

WATCHING AND BEING READY: Becoming knowledgeable about our marriage and not letting either ignorance or Satan undermine it.

A few months ago a student asked if he could talk to me during my office hours. He was a handsome, intelligent young man who was planning to marry in a few months. In my office he told me that, after nearly thirty years of marriage, his parents were getting a divorce. He said that "it is one thing to get a divorce after several years of struggling with a bad relationship. But my parents had a picture-perfect marriage all the years I was growing up. We had a large LDS family, a hard-working father, a sensitive, concerned mother, and all of us regularly participated in Church activities." In fact, all the sons had served missions, and the young man's four older brothers and sisters had married in the temple.

"How could a divorce happen?" he asked.

I've had that kind of conversation more than once during the past few years. Too often young men and women who are in the transition to married life find their parents in the transition out of it. These late-life separations occur despite the fact that the parents appear to have fine marital relationships. And the question—"How could a divorce occur?"—is asked time and time again.

I told the young man that I didn't know the reasons why picture-perfect marriages sometimes come unframed and end in divorce. But I have since started to form some opinions centered around the picture-perfect marriage concept. Many believe, or are misled to believe, that they do have ideal marital relationships. Furthermore, if they believe they have such fine marriage relationships, they may think they don't have to do anything to keep them. That may just be the difference between a marriage that lasts and one that does not.

Another LDS man once sent me a letter that described a similar situation. He had been married several years and thought that he too had the picture-perfect marriage. During twelve years of marriage and five children, his wife had not said one thing to indicate that their marriage was anything less than near perfect. They had had no arguments, no complaints, no differences of opinion that had even insinuated anything was wrong; and because of this, he thought the marriage was going well. Then, on the twelfth wedding anniversary, she walked into the room and handed him an envelope. Thinking it was an anniversary card, he opened it. Much to his surprise, it was legal papers for divorce proceedings.

The man mentioned in his letter that the reason he and his wife, and perhaps many others, divorced is because they did not think divorce could happen to them. Consequently, they had let their guards down (or didn't keep them up), and the blows followed.

Someone once observed that it is better for a person to have a heart attack and then learn to take care of his health than to live on in the ignorance that he has heart problems. So it is with marriage. Working to improve a somewhat less-than-perfect marriage may be far more sound than living under the illusion that we have the ideal marital relationship. Under such an illusion, we believe we don't have to do anything for our marriage as the years pass by. Picture-perfect marriages, whatever they are, can fail, and in this book we are going to find out why and what might be done to prevent failure.

A Myth about Marriage

Susan and I spent the first three months of our marriage living in Centerfield, Utah (population then was 600). I ran my Dad's service station during that time. The first three weeks of our marriage were total bliss—just like in the movies. That was how we thought marriage should be. Then, toward the end of the first month of marriage we had a disagreement, nothing of major significance. Right now I can't even remember what it was about.

After the conflict was settled, we were thoroughly dejected. Happily married couples, so we thought, didn't have disagreements. We had both entered marriage with that belief. So after we had our "encounter of the first kind," we thought there was little hope for our marriage.

What hopes we did have were then dashed the following Sunday when an elderly gentleman stood up in church and informed us that he and his wife had lived fifty years without so much as a cross word. Susan and I had made it for only three weeks. While walking home from church we wondered out loud if any of our friends ever had any kind of confrontations or disagreements. But we didn't dare ask.

At that point we believed a seriously misleading marriage myth. We thought that if we married the right person we would live happily ever after. Like ourselves, many married couples might be led to believe that happily married couples don't experience any conflicts or disappointments in life. We thought that a successful marriage was one in which the couple did not have any problems. Later on in our marriage, we realized that a successful marriage is actually one in which the couple learn to deal with and solve the problems they inevitably have. The real test in marriage, therefore, is confronting rather than running from the daily demands and difficulties in life.

Susan and I later learned to appreciate the statement of C. G. Jung, who observed, "All those for whom marriage contains no problems are not living in the present."

No Couple Immune

When I was working on my doctoral degree in marriage counseling at Florida State University, I took a course titled "The Family in the United States." It was an excellent course taught by one of the most competent professors in family studies in the country.

During the course he once made the statement that "no couple in the United States today [that was 1970] is immune from divorce or marital failure." I was quite startled and taken aback by the statement. Certainly I felt secure in my own marriage and knew numerous LDS married couples whom I would deem "immune from divorce." After class I took the opportunity to challenge my professor on his statement, but he stood his ground. I tried to explain to him about temple marriage and its security. He already knew I was a Latter-day Saint and said his observation was true for Mormon couples as well. He rephrased his original statement to say, "No married couple, including Latter-day Saints, is immune from divorce or marital failure."

I never forgot his statement, nor did I repeat it for another ten years. I simply did not believe it. I felt there was some security in temple marriage that would put marital turmoil beyond LDS people. But during the following decade I began to be more observant and noted some interesting things happening.

In one LDS ward where we were living, there were four couples who divorced within an eighteen-month period. All the husbands had served missions, all the couples had married in the temple, all had children, and all were currently participating in Church activities. Other couples we knew also divorced, while some indicated that they were quite dissatisfied with their marriages.

I am impressed and even encouraged when I realize how well the vast majority of LDS couples are coping and getting along despite the marital disruption that surrounds us. Nevertheless, I am now convinced that my professor at Florida State University was correct: At the present time no married couple in the United States, including Latter-day Saint couples, is immune from marital turmoil.

I saw my professor at the National Council on Family Relations in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, during October 1983 and asked him if he still believed that no couple is immune. He said yes, even more so today.

On November 5, 1983, I was speaking to an LDS group in Salt Lake City on marriage. At that time I mentioned that I did not know what the divorce rate was among Latter-day Saints because the Church had not disclosed those statistics. But I stated then that the divorce rate in the United States was about 40 percent, and I estimated it could be as high as 25 percent in our church. That was on a Friday night.

The next day, on November 6, we received our copy of the Church News, which contained an article with some interesting statistics on divorce among Latter-day Saints. The article stated, according to one study, that about one-third of the Church members between the ages of eighteen and thirty will have experienced divorce by the time they reach sixty. The rate for those married in the temple, however, is much less. It was also estimated that 49 percent of all LDS women will be single before age 65. About 35 percent will divorce, 11 percent will be widowed, and approximately 3 percent will not marry. (Van Leer, p. 4. See the Ensign, July 1984, pp. 78-80, for additional statistics on Church marriage and divorce.)

The Danger of the Ditch

A few years ago my wife and I moved to a new community into a subdivision that was not yet completed. There was a large ditch full of water that ran directly in front of the home we wanted to buy. We contacted the city engineers, and they promised to put in a culvert and cover the ditch, though the project would take approximately three months to complete.

So Susan and I faced a real problem. The delay meant we would have to live with our five small children in constant fear and real danger of the ditch full of water. We had the option of renting another home until the ditch was covered; or we could purchase the home, move in, and live with the danger until it passed.

We deliberated over the options for some time. In hindsight perhaps it was a great risk, but we bought the home and moved in. By so doing we decided we would have to keep ourselves and our children constantly aware of the danger of the ditch. We had frequent discussions on how we would keep our children away from the dangerous water. We took them out by the bank of the ditch and explained how they could be harmed if they were not careful. Susan and I took turns being around the yard during that summer when our children and others were playing near, and sometimes in, the water. We asked the older children to help watch out for the younger ones. The danger of the ditch was real.

We often prayed as a family that Heavenly Father would watch over us during our daily activities and that "no harm or accident would come to any of us," words that became very significant in our lives. Susan and I prayed together too for the safety of our children. And one night at midnight I went out by the ditch and alone prayed on the bank of the ditch for the safety of everyone who might possibly be harmed by the dangerous conditions.

The days, weeks, and then the summer finally passed by. The city engineers were good on their word, and within three months the culvert was in, the ditch covered, and the danger was past.

During that summer, however, we learned an interesting and significant lesson: Those most aware of the danger are often the ones least harmed!

Since we lived right next to the bank of the ditch, we were the ones in the neighborhood most aware and fearful of it. Those who lived greater distances away seemed to be less aware of the danger and less concerned about the potential problems. Since we lived next to the ditch, we moved up to the bank and stood guard. And no one was harmed.

In August 1984 I was speaking on marriage relationships to an LDS group in Belfast, Ireland, and related the Danger of the Ditch story. I shared with them my insight that those closest to the danger are often the safest because they stand guard. After my speech a mother came up and said she also believed in that principle. Her son was a member of the Royal Ulster police and was in constant confrontation with the Irish Republican Army from the south of Ireland. She said she always felt better when he was on duty patrolling the border because he wore his flak jacket and was on guard for both himself and his buddies. She feared most for his life when he returned to police barracks in Belfast and let down his guard. She too believed that those most aware of the danger are often the ones least harmed.

I think this may be a lesson for contemporary marriages. Those most aware of factors contributing to marital failure may be the ones least affected. We must move up to the edge of the danger, put on our flak jackets, and stand guard. In the recent past I have had the opportunity to speak to two LDS groups who literally live in marital danger zones: Las Vegas, Nevada, and Orange County, California. As most readers are aware, Las Vegas is the divorce capital of the United States. Though many out-of-state couples go to Las Vegas for divorces, Latter-day Saints in that area nonetheless live in or near a city that accounts for numerous divorces each year.

The other group in Orange County lives in an area where divorce is now the norm—where more couples divorce than stay married. But as I spoke to these two groups on different occasions, I had the distinct impression that the LDS couples in these communities were safer than the groups I had addressed who lived in other areas. The Latter-day Saints in Las Vegas and in Orange County were living near the ditch, but I observed that they had moved up to the bank and were standing guard.

Two Great Messages

There are two great messages of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints related to marriage. One is that the restored gospel can bind married couples together for eternity. Of all the doctrines we teach, this has to be one of the most comforting and most reassuring. The second is implied by the first: that the restored gospel of Jesus Christ can bind couples together for mortality as well. Without the latter there is no guarantee of the former.

If an LDS couple marries in the temple and then later chooses to divorce civilly, I honestly do not know if or under what circumstances they would be together in the next life. I will leave that question to our Church leaders and theologians. But another major concern I have is about those troubled couples who do not divorce but live their marriages in quiet desperation. Though their marriages have been sealed in the temple, some couples are not necessarily happy and are doing little or nothing about their circumstances. Some mistakenly think, I believe, that even though they are not happy now, something magic will happen in the resurrection, and they will be happy there. Whether or not this is true, I do not know either.

The Book of Mormon teaches that the "same spirit which doth possess your bodies at the time that ye go out of this life, that same spirit will have power to possess your body in that eternal world." (Alma 34:34.) I hope I do not misinterpret this scripture, but it seems to me that how we end up in this life, in our personalities and in our relationships, is how we will at least begin in the next one. Moroni similarly teaches that in the hereafter "he that is happy shall be happy still; and he that is unhappy shall be unhappy still." (Morm. 9:14.) What kind of marital relationship we will have in the next life will be influenced, if not determined, in part by what kind of marriage we have here. That can either be good news or bad news, depending on one's situation.

But the definite good news is that we have time during mortality to work on our marriages. Bad marriages can become good, and good marriages can become better. LDS could also stand for LET'S DO SOMETHING! Let's do something about our marital relationships while we still have the opportunity and the time to do it. The Book of Mormon states that "this life is the time for men to prepare to meet God; yea, behold the day of this life is the day for men to perform their labors." (Alma 34:32.) Nothing could be closer to the truth than this statement in actively working on relationships that not only endure, but are also rewarding and fulfilling as well.

Weather Watch vs. Weather Warning

As a religious denomination we are doing quite well in marriage and in family matters, but we are not immune from the social turmoil of the times. The belief that we are, or will be, immune is one of the very reasons I believe we unnecessarily allow some things to happen in our midst. I appreciate now more than ever the statement of Nephi, "Wo be unto him that is at ease in Zion! Wo be unto him that crieth: All is well!" (2 Ne. 28:24-25.) I am not one to cry "All is well in Zion." On the other hand, I am not willing to cry "All is not well" either. We as a church are doing remarkably well in many respects, but my suggestion is that we can and must do better if we do not want to be swept away in the current tides of social, and particularly marital, disruption.

During the past few years we have seen some unusual weather in the intermountain area. We have experienced an abundance of water; and floods and mud slides have consequently followed. Each evening during the flooding season I turned on the television set to get the weather report on what might happen that night, the following day, or the days to follow. I gained an appreciation of the weather service and their ability to anticipate and even predict certain weather conditions. During this time I learned the difference between a weather watch and a weather warning.

A weather watch means that inclement weather is on its way, and we should be aware of what is coming. A weather warning means the turbulent weather is upon us, and we should take precautionary measures to avoid the impact.

In a way, this book is a social weather watch to describe some conditions "out there" that are causing disruption for others. These conditions are heading our way and are even, to some degree, in our midst. In the pages that follow, I wish to point out some of the current trends in marital relationships and to indicate some ways I hope will help others to avoid these troubles.

If You Fear

You may have heard the following saying concerning our testimonies: "If you fear, then fear not. If you fear not, then fear." We should not become complacent about our testimonies of the gospel because we could, over time, lose them. If we are not fearful of losing our testimonies, we should be. They are indeed pearls of great price to be not only guarded but shared.

On the other hand, if we are fearful of losing our testimonies, we will likely not do so because we will take necessary precautions to prevent such a thing from happening. If we are fearful of losing them, we should "fear not." It probably won't happen because of our caution, concern, and activity.

Whenever I speak to LDS groups on marriage, I like to apply that quote on fear to marriage. I believe that LDS couples should be fearful of or concerned about detrimental influences and marital problems. We often think of marital disruption as something that happens to someone else. The reality is that any LDS marriage can be disrupted and end in divorce. And some do, I believe, partly because the couples "fear not." We must stand guard. These things are not supposed to happen to Latter-day Saints, but they can and sometimes do.

A Sign of the Times

One of the reasons I believe that so much marital disruption exists in the world today is because it may be a sign of the times. In Matthew 24:3 the disciples of Jesus asked about his second coming. They inquired of him, "Tell us, when shall these things be? and what shall be the sign of thy coming, and of the end of the world?"

Note his response in verse four: "Jesus answered and said unto them, Take heed that no man deceive you." Thus, according to Jesus, deception among the people of the world would be one of the signs Christ mentioned first. I believe many couples, including some among the Latter-day Saints, have been deceived into believing erroneous ideas about their marital relationships.

In other verses in Matthew 24, Jesus gave some additional signs of the times that I believe refer or relate to marriage. In verse ten he states, "Then shall many be offended, and shall betray one another, and shall hate one another." And in verse twelve he adds, "Because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold."

But the verse that has the greatest significance for me is Matthew 24:24, in which Jesus states that in the last days "if it were possible, they [meaning the deceivers] shall deceive the very elect." To whom was Jesus referring when he talked about the elect? The elect are likely to be found among all groups on the face of the earth, and surely many Latter-day Saints are among the elect. (See Matt. 24:31.) It is my own opinion that most couples married in the LDS temples are among the elect or have the potential to become such.

Jesus stated that in the last days the elect would be deceived—if it were possible. Notice that he did not say it would be automatic deception. He stated "if it were possible." I believe many LDS couples have been deceived or currently are being deceived about marital and family relationships. Because of this, many are divorcing, living in quiet desperation, or experiencing family trauma.

The Great Deceiver

Like many of you, I used to watch comedian Flip Wilson and his parody of "The devil made me do it." Obviously, the devil is not responsible for all divorces or everything else that goes wrong in life. But I honestly believe that we, as LDS couples, have not given adequate attention to what Satan, the great deceiver, is trying to do to our own marriages and families.

When Susan and I lived in Eau Claire, Wisconsin, I recall an elderly gentleman who drove ninety-five miles in a blizzard to speak to our ward one night in January. His entire speech was based on the theme "you don't have to be possessed by evil to be influenced by evil." His point was well stated.

Many of us may be reluctant or unwilling to admit that Satan is influencing us in our daily lives. However, if we are willing to take a careful look at our personal lives, our marriages, and our families, many of us can see where we may have been "influenced by evil." Satan is indeed actively at work in our midst, and once we become aware of his tactics, we can become even more knowledgeable of his involvement in contemporary affairs. Latter-day revelation indicates that Satan "maketh war with the saints of God, and encompasseth them round about." (D&C 76:29.)

It has always impressed me that whenever college football or basketball teams are about to compete with each other, they often obtain video tapes of the opposition, study them in detail, and outline some strategy for the upcoming competition. Perhaps we should also make a detailed study of how Satan operates so we may be better prepared.

Sometimes when I speak to different LDS groups about marriage, I mention Satan and his possible tactics. We then play a game called "If I Were the Devil." I ask them to pretend that they are called to be on the devil's committee to disrupt or terminate marriages in their particular vicinity. What would they do? After a few minutes of discussion they report back some very effective strategies. I then indicate what I would do to disrupt married couples if I were the devil. Here are some of the ideas I've collected:

If I Were the Devil

If I were the devil and wanted to mess up a lot of marriages, I would first start with the newlyweds and try to get them discouraged early in the relationship. As the marriage progressed, I would get both husband and wife involved in so many activities that they would be constantly exhausted, physically and mentally. Couples who are too tired to do much together really have no advantage over those who won't do things together, and fatigue and exhaustion are wonderful contributors to marital disruption. It would be much easier for me then to make those couples tense, snippy, and easy to anger.

If I were the devil and wanted to disrupt a lot of marriages, I would make many think that they are very secure in their marital relationships when in actuality they are not. That way they would probably not do much for their marriages. I would make them think that divorce is something that happens to everyone else. I would discourage any and all attempts a couple might make to change any aspect of their marriage that they do not like. Growth, likewise, would be discouraged. I would try to prevent couples from obtaining counseling or any other outside help.

If I were the devil, I would invent a box about two feet square that married people, individually or collectively, would sit around and stare at for hours upon end and late into the night. This would help control any meaningful conversation that might otherwise occur. It would assure me that any potential time that might be spent together as husband and wife would otherwise be consumed by staring at my box.

I would make men and women believe that being a husband or wife is far less important than being a father or mother. Children must come first, even at the expense of the marriage. If I were the devil and wanted to mess up marriages, I would make married couples believe that if their sexual relationship is functioning well, all others will also. If that tactic did not work, I think I would go to the other extreme and get them to underestimate the importance of sexual interaction in marriage. Having a balance would then be very difficult to attain.

If I were the devil, I would also make in-laws believe that they must keep their married children very close to them in the name of family solidarity. I would have the in-laws insist that their married children visit often, whether they wanted to come or not. Then if the children, for whatever reason, did not come, I would encourage the in-laws to act offended in subtle ways. Guilt is a wonderful disrupter of contemporary marriages.

I would try to make people believe that more people are getting divorced than are staying married. I would try to make everyone believe that marriage is only for the young, that love is only for the beautiful and attractive, as defined by Madison Avenue. I would get them to feel dissatisfied with themselves and their spouses if they don't fit the image, and to think that midway through life, the best has passed them by. I'd hope that they would not only believe these things, but would also act accordingly. And maybe they would think that behavior, like age, is unchangeable.

And finally, I would try to convince married couples that I really do not exist.

After sharing the foregoing thoughts with a group one time, I received this letter in the mail a few days later:

Dear Dr. Barlow:

I don't have to think about what I would do to ruin marriages if I were the devil, because I already know what he has done to try to ruin mine. Just three weeks ago I received a phone call from a stranger informing me that his wife and my husband were seeing each other. I, who was so sure this type of thing happened only to other people, trusted my husband completely and did not believe the stranger at first. But as evidence surfaced that same evening, I began to see that I might be wrong. And I was. My husband confirmed the stranger's story only hours after the man called.

Since that night a lot has happened, both good and bad. My eyes have been opened to the small things that happened over a period of a few years. All this led up to the situation of my husband having a relationship with another woman.

The devil is sly, cunning, and intelligent. Here are three things he did to try to ruin our marriage:

Through all of our troubles, with everything working against us, we have found strength in the LDS faith. We were both humbled and chastened, but are now able to apply the principles of the restored gospel in our relationship with each other. Eternity now looks a whole lot closer and brighter since we were able to regain the love we nearly lost.

I give the devil a lot of credit for our dilemma. But I am also thankful I can trust in the Lord for our present and future happiness.

Other Tactics of Satan

As previously noted in Doctrine and Covenants 76:29, Satan is at war with the Saints. Latter-day revelation also indicates that "the devil has sought to lay a cunning plan, that he may destroy [the Lord's] work." (D&C 10:12.) Among his major tactics is to convince people that he does not exist: "[Satan] saith unto them: I am no devil, for there is none—and thus he whispereth in their ears, until he grasps them with his awful chains, from whence there is no deliverance." (2 Ne. 28:22.) I know it may not sound professional for a university professor and licensed marriage counselor to blame much of our marital turmoil on the devil, but I am convinced that he has nearly succeeded in his effort to convince us of his supposed nonexistence. In fact, he has done it so effectively that many of us are no longer aware of his influence in our lives.

Another major tactic is to make men and women miserable. Satan is a miserable person, and "he seeketh that all men might be miserable like unto himself." (2 Ne. 2:27.) I'm not saying that every time we have a bad day it is the devil's fault. But I do know that when we are miserable, he does not mind, and we are in his camp. Remember, we do not have to be possessed of evil to be influenced by evil. And if we are continually miserable, particularly in our marital and family relationships, I know that Satan is pleased about our condition and would prefer us to stay that way.

Still another tactic of Satan is that of stirring up contention, because "the devil . . . is the father of contention, and he stirreth up the hearts of men to contend with anger, one with another." (3 Ne. 11:29.) I am not implying that every little bit of discord in LDS marriages is caused by the devil. Normal family life usually contains some amount of discord—there is and will be sibling rivalry and competition among family members. My main concern is the contention that goes beyond what is normal. My wife and I have discussed this often with our children and have also talked about it in our marriage. Whenever we experience contention, we are moving away from the Lord in the direction of Satan and his plan. Married LDS couples who live in a constant state of contention ought to be aware of this particular tactic of Satan.

The Book of Mormon also gives three other tactics of Satan: anger, pacification, and flattery. Nephi, in speaking of the last days, states, "At that day shall he rage in the hearts of the children of men, and stir them up to anger against that which is good." (2 Ne. 28:20.) The topic of anger is significant enough, I believe, that I have devoted an entire chapter to it. (See "Trap 8: The Temper Trap.") But for now, suffice it to say that Satan would like to see Latter-day Saint couples become angry, particularly at their spouses. When we become angry, we say and do things we ordinarily would not—it is almost as if we become emotionally intoxicated.

Still another tactic of Satan is that of pacification or apathy. Nephi states, "Others will he pacify, and lull them away into carnal security, that they will say: All is well in Zion; yea, Zion prospereth, all is well—and thus the devil cheateth their souls, and leadeth them away carefully down to hell." (2 Ne. 28:21.) If he can't get us one way, he'll try another.

Of the two tactics, anger and apathy (or pacification), I believe Satan uses the last one most effectively. We say, as Nephi predicted, "All is well in Zion." Put in other words, people will say, "Nothing is wrong with our marriage; we're all right. It's nothing really serious." I've noted this attitude to be particularly prevalent among some LDS husbands. They are hesitant either to acknowledge that anything is wrong with their marriages or to do anything about their problems once they are known. But notice what happens: "And thus the devil cheateth their souls, and leadeth them away carefully down into hell. " How clever and cunning he is! He takes us by the hand and leads us carefully along the path of marital destruction. So sly is he that we often don't know, or won't acknowledge, what is happening to us.

This trend was significantly brought to my attention one time when I was counseling with an LDS woman. She informed me that she had decided to leave her husband. In the next appointment, which was with the husband, I finally said, "Russ, you know your wife is going to leave you if you don't change some things in your marriage right now."

I will never forget his reply: "Dr. Barlow, my wife can't leave me. She's been sealed to me in the temple." Talk about apathy! This man thought he somehow owned his wife. He even stated that she had "been given to him" through the priesthood, and because of that attitude, he felt little or no need to do anything to nurture the relationship. Three months later they were civilly divorced.

The third tactic, flattery, is even more deceiving. Nephi states that "others he flattereth away." (2 Ne. 28:22.) If the first two tactics of anger and pacification don't work, he can usually get us with the third, flattery.

I would dare say that a good many LDS marriages and families have been broken up because of flattery. It may come in one of many forms. It may come through the attention or flattery of a member of the opposite sex. Flattery may be used to get us to believe that certain employment or social or church positions are more important than being a good wife, mother, husband, or father. Or flattery may be used in more subtle ways, even when we are trying to promote righteous causes.

In all honesty, this is one area in which I met the devil, so to speak, on my doorstep. I have a Ph.D. in marriage counseling (an honor of men that sets a person up for flattery), and I write a newspaper column on marriage, teach marriage classes at BYU, conduct marriage seminars, and have appeared often on television to discuss marriage. If one is not careful, such activities can lead to false notions about oneself. I got to the point where I was doing a great deal of traveling on the weekends to do a lot of speaking on marriage. Susan didn't mind—at first. She often went with me. And I was doing the presentations with the genuine interest of trying to help others in their marriages.

The phone would ring, and the conversation would go something like this: "Hello, Dr. Barlow? You spoke in my sister's ward at such and such a place (or I heard you speak at BYU Education Week), and I would like you to come to speak to our group." I would put down the phone, look at my speaking schedule, and then reply, "It doesn't look like I'll be able to do so for the next four months. I'm all booked up." Then the flattery would begin. "Oh, we'll be so disappointed. We looked forward to hearing from you. You are (flattery, flattery)." After so much of it I would start to think, "Yes, I really should go to speak to them. They are saying such kind things about me." So I would give in and somehow find the time to go give the speech.

After several months of this hectic pace, Susan and I began to realize that something could happen to our own marriage. While we were out trying to help others, our own could be hurt. We could be "led carefully" toward the path of marital destruction. Fortunately, we became aware of what was happening in time to take effective measures. I began to turn down many of the invitations to speak, and I was released from some Church callings to devote a greater amount of time to my wife and children. While trying to juggle so many activities, we learned to appreciate Ecclesiastes 3:1: "To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose." I sometimes shudder to think how carefully and cunningly, even in the name of righteous causes, we can be duped through flattery into life's many detours. I thought I could keep doing what I was doing with no consequences to my own marriage or family. I learned well what Nephi warned us of: "Wo be unto him that is at ease in Zion! Wo be unto him that crieth: All is well!" (2 Ne. 28:24-25.)

As a Roaring Lion

I don't know if you have ever thought of the devil roaming about in our midst seeking to destroy us. But that is exactly the analogy that Peter uses. In 1 Peter 5:8 he states: "Be sober, be vigilant; because your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour." That is quite vivid imagery! Imagine a roaring lion stalking about our neighborhoods, waiting for the chance to overcome us. That particular verse had recently taken on a new significance for a man in Fort Lauderdale, Florida.

Terry Murphy; his wife, Kathie; and their two sons, Ryan, age 3, and Todd, age 7, moved to a fairly wealthy section of Fort Lauderdale. Terry admits at the time he was quite success oriented. At age 32 he was already doing well in the financial world. But he wanted more. One of his main goals was to own a white Rolls Royce as soon as he could afford it. Terry also confided that at that time he was not particularly religious. Kathie, however, was a devout Christian. He accompanied her and their two boys to church services occasionally, mostly to please Kathie. He was, in his own words, going "through the motions of trying to understand her faith."

But upon moving into the new elite neighborhood, the Murphys discovered something that concerned them. Their neighbor, a man they knew only as "Mr. B," had a real, full-grown lion on a chain in the backyard.

Several months went by with no incident involving Mr. B's lion. Then one afternoon Terry and Kathie were relaxing by the swimming pool in their backyard. Ryan and Todd were playing on the sidewalk near the front of the house. Suddenly there was a bone-chilling scream from Todd: "Daddy! Daddy! The lion's got Ryan!"

Terry jumped from his lawn chair and ran to the comer of the house. Then he froze in horror at what he saw. The neighbor's lion, obviously unchained and loose, had its jaws clamped on little three-year-old Ryan's neck. Its huge paw was also holding the little boy down. Terry stated he did not know immediately what to do. All he knew was he had to get his son away from the lion.

He ran to the beast and took hold of its jaws. Kathie soon arrived and began to pray that her husband would have the strength to pry the jaws off the neck of their little son. Kathie prayed and Terry pulled. Suddenly the lion's jaws opened, and they pulled their son away. Then Terry called the police.

Soon an ambulance arrived and rushed the young boy to the hospital. The lion's teeth had penetrated Ryan's windpipe, requiring immediate surgery. It was performed successfully, and in two weeks Ryan was released. In three months he had recovered both emotionally and physically from the incident.

How would a father feel when he saw a loved one in the jaws of a lion? Terry Murphy wrote:

I have changed in many ways. No longer have I a problem with covetousness for material things. The Bible says "Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and His righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you." (Matthew 6:33.) I have placed Him first in my life, from tithing to giving to others. And still, my family has been abundantly blessed. . . .

I have learned much about evil and how like a lion it can devour us if we are not sober and vigilant. But I have also come to know the One Who stands between us and evil, the One Who gave me the courage and strength to pry open that Lion's jaws. (Murphy, pp. 16-19.)

Limits to Satan's Powers

Even though Satan has great power among mankind at the present time, there are limits to his powers and capabilities. Lawrence R. Peterson addressed this topic in the "I Have a Question" column of the Ensign. He observed:

One of the most impressive doctrines found in the Book of Mormon is that Satan's power over a person increases as that person becomes more wicked until eventually the person is "taken captive by the devil" and bound with the "chains of hell." (Alma 12:11.) Satan's method is to influence the thoughts of men, tempting them and enticing them, always working "in the hearts of the children of men." (2 Ne. 28:20.)

But Satan's power is not unrestrained. Joseph Smith taught that Satan has no power over us unless we give it to him. And Nephi explained that the righteousness of a people deprives Satan of his power, "for he hath no power over the hearts of the people, for they dwell in righteousness." (1 Ne. 22:26.)

Between the extremes of Satan's power to captivate and of his utter powerlessness stretches the spectrum of his ability to entice or tempt. As a being of spirit, he works in the realm of spirit, counterbalanced by the Spirit of God. In this way, free agency is preserved, giving us a choice between good and evil. As Lehi taught, "Man could not act for himself save it should be that he was enticed by one or the other." (2 Ne. 2:16.) If Satan entices us to do evil, so the Holy Spirit "entices" us to virtue. (See Mosiah 3:19.) Free agency demands that neither the Holy Spirit nor the evil spirit have power to control the person against his will. (Peterson, Lawrence, pp. 30-31.)

I hope that we may all have enough courage and power to keep ourselves and our loved ones from the "roaring lion." Peter admonishes us to be sober and diligent and to "resist stedfast in the faith" that evil lion. (1 Pet. 5:8-9.) In Doctrine and Covenants 10:5, the Lord advises, "Pray always, that you may come off conqueror; yea, that you may conquer Satan, and that you may escape the hands of the servants of Satan that do uphold his work."

In describing twelve common traps in marriage, I am going to ask LDS married couples to move up to the edge of the ditch, to put on their flak jackets, to "fear" and to stand guard against the adversary. I believe that if we are alert to the dangers to contemporary marriage, we can avoid or overcome them, if we so desire. Unfortunately, too many of us are not taking enough action to reinforce our marriages.
