Brent A. Barlow, Twelve Traps in Today's Marriage and How to Avoid Them ( 1986)

Trap 2

The Tradition Trap

Tradition: The handing down of statements, beliefs, legends, customs, and behavior patterns from generation to generation, especially by word of mouth or by practice.

THE TRADITION TRAP: The insistence that marriage today must be exactly as it has been in the past.

The past holds much that is "virtuous, lovely, or of good report or praiseworthy" (A of F 13), which we should retain and seek after. Paul also admonishes us to "prove all things; hold fast that which is good." (1 Thes. 5:21.) Allow me, however, to give some examples from my own marriage of the disruption of tradition.

If you had been able to visit our house on Christmas Eve the first few years of our marriage, you would have found an interesting situation, particularly after we had our first children. We found we differed in how to celebrate this traditional holiday. In my family we had always opened our gifts from family members on Christmas Eve. I fondly remember exchanging the personal gifts on the night before Christmas and then opening the presents from Santa on Christmas morning.

But Susan's family was different. Only holiday heretics would open gifts before Christmas day (she never said that publicly, but that was how she felt). True believers would save all their gifts to be opened on Christmas morning.

The question of whether gifts should be opened on Christmas Eve or on Christmas Day should not become a national issue. But for us then, it was an issue (though not now since I have become a true believer), and for some time we had many discussions about this particular tradition. When our children became old enough to sense the difference of opinion between their parents, they played on my wife's sympathy by begging to open a present or two on Christmas Eve. They cited Dad's family tradition as the rationale. Luckily, our marriage has survived this particular collision of family traditions.

Another seemingly trivial tradition came with cookie baking. When I was a boy, my mother used to bake chocolate chip cookies every Saturday. Not only that, but she put plump raisins in them to spice them up a bit. I still become nostalgic when I reminisce about my mother's chocolate chip cookies . . . with raisins.

The first summer we were married, Susan decided one day that she was going to bake some cookies. She asked what kind I liked, and I replied chocolate chip. Later that afternoon she proudly displayed her first batch of chocolate chip cookies for me. And guess what? I was dumb enough to ask, "What happened to the raisins?" Then, to add insult to injury, I stated, "That's how my mother used to bake them."

Susan is not a violent person. She has never struck me, nor I her. But that afternoon she picked up a ripe grape on the table and threw it at me (a subtle form of nonverbal communication). Since she is a good shot, she hit me right on the forehead. Never again have I mentioned my mother's chocolate chip cookies . . . with raisins. And what's more, I didn't get any kind of cookies for a long time after that incident.

Still another collision of family traditions occurred shortly after we were married. In Susan's family her mother and father, Cecil and Alice Day, had an interesting arrangement. Alice did all the cooking, and Cecil did all the dishes! Need I say more? In my family my father helped wash the dishes on occasion, but there was no woman on earth who could wash dishes faster than my mother. When she finished eating, she would start washing dishes. With luck we were through eating by the time she was ready to wash our dishes. Well, guess what our little problem was regarding dish washing after we were married? And a dishwasher hasn't entirely solved the problem. Now we face the question of who will load and unload the dishwasher.

Opening gifts at Christmas, making chocolate chip cookies, and washing dishes may be relatively minor problem areas, but they are examples of how tradition in marriage can produce problems. We become caught in the tradition trap when we insist that marriage must be as it has been in the past. Or, worse yet, when we insist or demand that our marriage must be exactly like that of our parents.

One time I was talking to a young couple who were about to marry. The future bride expressed some misgivings and apprehensions about their future marriage. The young woman had graduated from college and was well established in a financially and personally rewarding career. But she felt that both her fiancÃ© and his family expected her to immediately cease employment after marriage and "settle down" to have a family, as his mother had done. In addition, he and his side of the family questioned whether she should work at all once they were married. The marriage was called off until the prospective bride and groom discussed and finally decided that she could work at her career at some future point in their marriage, even if his mother had not in hers.

Garbage and Tradition

The tradition of how to handle garbage has even become an issue.

Wednesday is an interesting day at our home. It is the day the city sends around the garbage truck to pick up the garbage, and someone has to take it out to the curb. Susan and I were jogging one Tuesday evening, and the thought struck me that perhaps she should now start taking the garbage out on Wednesday morning. So I said, "Susan, have you noticed who has been taking the garbage out during our many years of marriage?"

"Yes," she said, "and that is the way I want it."

We jogged along a little farther, and I said, "Why is it that you seldom take out the garbage?"

"For two simple reasons," she replied. "First, the garbage cans are heavy; and second, I don't like garbage."

I have no real love for garbage either, but still, I thought we could overcome tradition and start sharing the responsibility of getting the garbage cans to the curb on Wednesday morning.

"According to research," I said as I puffed along, "it is now the wife who takes out the garbage most of the time in contemporary marriages."

"Whose research is that?" she asked over her shoulder since she was two steps ahead of me.

I hesitated.

"Actually, it's mine," I replied. "As I drive along the streets on the way to the university on Wednesday mornings, I notice that relatively few men take out garbage cans anymore. I am one of the few remaining husbands who still takes out the garbage."

"Research and observations to the contrary, I'd rather not take out the garbage," she said as we stopped to count pulse rates.

So I tried another approach. "You know, Susan, there are many changes today in what we perceive to be husband's work and wife's work. You've heard of blended roles, shared parenting, joint housekeeping, and all that. We've got to become less traditional in our marriage. We can't be bound by those silly traditions that say men must always take out the garbage."

We ran a little more. She didn't say much and I knew she was thinking, which meant that I was knee-deep in trouble.

"You want to do away with tradition, huh?"

"Yes," I replied. "I think it is time for that."

"And you think we should be less traditional in our marriage, do you?"

Again I stated that was what I wanted.

"OK," she said, and she stopped. This time it was not to count pulse rates. "We'll do away with tradition and become more contemporary. I'll start taking the garbage out every other week."

We started jogging again, and I chuckled inside. What a blow for male liberation! But we had not gone five more strides when she continued, "And you start fixing breakfast on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday. Also, you may put the kids to bed on Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday. On Sunday, we'll flip a coin . . . for equality. Loser both fixes dinner and puts the children to bed."

We jogged on for a few more minutes. No one said anything. This time I was thinking. Maybe taking the garbage out every Wednesday morning was not so bad. There should be fixed roles so everyone knows who is supposed to do what. Order is essential in everyday life. Tradition does serve some purpose.

I ran a little ahead of Susan. "Where are you going?" she called.

"It's getting dark, and I want to get home early," I turned around and shouted back. "I'm not sure I'll have time to put the garbage cans out in the morning, so I wanted to get it done tonight."

As I quickened my pace she called ahead, "What about breakfast . . . and putting the children to bed?"

I didn't say anything. In fact I didn't even turn around to respond. I just ran home and put out the garbage cans.

Just out of curiosity, who takes out the garbage at your house? And more importantly, who do you think should? How traditional are you in your marriage?

Tarzan and Jane Roles Must Go

Many may not be aware that marriage and our expectations of it have changed dramatically during the past two decades. Some hold tenaciously to traditions of the past, only to find it difficult if not impossible to survive in contemporary times. This doesn't mean that we should give up all traditions from the past. There are many good things previously advocated that we still need today or that can enrich our lives.

Nevertheless, there are some aspects of marriage in the past that are no longer tolerable, particularly for women. This was indicated in a letter I received from a woman who recently divorced her husband. Much of their problem, she stated, was the "Tarzan and Jane" role expectations she and her former husband had of marriage and of each other. She wrote:

I have been divorced for a year now. Our marriage lasted three years, and we had known each other for several years before we were married. Our problems encompassed the familiar and perhaps the not-so-familiar. Before we were married each of us was independent and self-supporting. We admired those traits in each other and found them attractive. After marriage, however, these qualities became less attractive and led to much anger.

Our built-in stereotyped expectations of husband and wife roles got in the way. We lost sight of who and what we had been to each other as lovers and individuals before we were married. After the marriage, we held each other to rigid expectations of what we thought the other should do or be. I was supposed to be like his mother: a tender of the home fires, the supportive one, the baker of bread, something he knew I wasn't or couldn't be. He, in turn, was to become the fixer of cars, the plumber, and overall handy-man.

After our marriage each of us struggled to keep or put the other into the preassigned traditional niche. During that time I think we privately mourned the loss of the period before marriage when our self-imposed demands did not exist—when we just lived our lives and did what needed to be done. Our unrealistic expectations after marriage became a constant source of conflict as we continually negotiated our mutual and exclusive territory. Obviously, we did not survive.

Each time one of us tried to do something on the basis of skill, knowledge, or expertise instead of assigned, traditional roles, the other would be hurt. It was a matter of pride, insecurity, and a fear of losing control over our own lives or selves. When men expect their wives to be their mothers, or women expect husbands to be their fathers, no one wins. Yet we had no other models. The women's movement may have exaggerated this point, but it may have also created the possibility for a healthier life for all, both male and female.

After our marriage I chose to work because I loved my job and was uplifted by it. But even with a joint income of $80,000, I was predestined by gender to be the one to scrub the toilets. We could never get by that in our marriage. With that much income we could have afforded a housekeeper or a semimonthly maid, yet because I was the wife I was genetically ordained to push the vacuum.

We found marriage to be difficult because we were not flexible. The "Tarzan and Jane" stereotypes must give way if we are going to survive marriage at the present time. We cannot go back to the 1950s, 60s, or even 70s—those days are gone forever. And we may continue to destroy each other in marriage until we can learn to live with each other as genuine individuals with more flexible roles for today's marriage.

Is Housework Unmasculine?

If you as the wife have had a difficult time getting your husband to wash the dishes and help a little around the house, as did this woman, I can now tell you why. It is unmasculine—not manly. That is, according to one observer who also happens to be a man.

I really have nothing against Zig Ziglar personally. He is apparently an excellent speaker, and if I remember correctly, he has spoken in Salt Lake City a time or two in some of the motivation seminars. He has also written a best-selling book, See You at the Top, that has sold several hundred thousand copies.

His book, published several years ago, was particularly interesting to me because he has some advice on how to be better husbands and wives. But he writes something that concerns me and likely many others. To the wives of America, he wrote: "You do the jobs that are essentially feminine. I'm convinced that a contributing factor in many of our problems today is the lack of a clear distinction between male and female. Men should look, dress, act, think, and talk like men. Women should look, dress, act, think, and talk like women. Any time we have to pause and wonder if it's male or female, that's sad." (Ziglar, p. 143.)

So far, so good. Nothing earth-shattering yet. But now read what he advises:

I believe under normal conditions the wife should wash dishes and make up the beds. Obviously there are some circumstances which dictate that the loving husband dig in and help. Generally speaking, though, I don't believe it is a good idea for a little boy to see Dad in the dishpan, nor do I believe little girls should consistently see Mom assuming a male role and performing masculine chores. . . . Let the little boy see the male role and he will grow up to be a man with a natural affection for the opposite sex. (Ziglar, pp. 143-44.)

There you have it—with the implication that the world in general and marriages in specific are in such a mess because men have started washing the dishes. Or, as little boys, their psyches were damaged because they peered in the kitchen late one evening and caught dad helping mother. I haven't seen any of the more recent publications of See You at the Top, but I hope that the previous passage, or at least the opinion, has been omitted.

The Census Bureau recently reported that among 26.3 million married couples in the United States, 62 percent have two incomes from both spouses working. In 1960, only 40 percent of the married couples were "two-paycheck marriages," but by 1970 the figure had risen to 50 percent. It is anticipated that by 1990, 70 percent of the couples will have both husband and wife earning an income, and by 2000 A.D., the turn of the century, 80 percent or more of the married couples will have marriages in which both partners work. It has become clear that the traditional division of household tasks is changing. Although the husband may initially resist, once he has become accustomed to the economic benefits of two paychecks, he is likely to be open to negotiation and make concessions rather than lose his wife's earnings.

In adapting to the wife's employment, husbands sometimes feel that their self-esteem is threatened—they may feel embarrassment, guilt, or apprehension associated with the wife's employment or feel that their importance to the marriage is lessened. For wives, the problem oftentimes is getting the husbands to share the housework. At first, the wife may shift some of her duties onto older children or avoid work by using frozen foods, having fewer dinner parties, or simply cleaning the house less often. But once it becomes obvious that she is in the working world for good, she is likely to urge her husband to pitch in with the housework.

Generally, better-educated men do more housework than those with less schooling. Also, the higher a wife's earnings, the more likely it is that her husband will help out with the housework. However, men generally do less around the house if the husband's pay greatly exceeds the wife's. Certainly there is nothing to support Zig Ziglar's premise that a husband will never "make it to the top" if he starts helping his wife with the dishes.

The Peter Pan Syndrome

Dr. Dan Kiley, a psychologist, has written an interesting book titled The Peter Pan Syndrome—Men Who Have Never Grown Up. We all remember the story of the happy-go-lucky Peter Pan, who symbolizes the essence of youthfulness in his experiences with Captain Hook. As Peter Pan cavorts with Tinkerbell and captures the ship Jolly Roger, he awakens the child in all of us. We are drawn to him and allow ourselves to be nourished by his exuberant youth.

But according to Dr. Kiley, there is another side of the classic character created by J. M. Barrie. Kiley states: "Have you stopped to consider why Peter wanted to stay young? Sure, it's tough to grow up, but Peter Pan avoided it vehemently. What made him reject all things adult? What was he really after? Is it as simple as it sounded? Was not Peter's desire to stay young actually a militant refusal to grow up? If so, what was his problem? Or problems?" (Kiley, p. 23.)

From this well-known story, Kiley draws the analogy between contemporary adult males who will not grow up and the youthful Peter Pan—hence the term Peter Pan syndrome. What are some of its characteristics? According to the psychologist there are seven: irresponsibility, anxiety, loneliness, sex role conflict, narcissism, chauvinism, and social impotence.

Dr. Kiley also claims that there are two kinds of women who interact with men who won't grow up. He calls them "Wendys" and "Tinkers" (from Tinkerbell). He notes that one is willing to take the back seat and assume the role of a protective mother figure:

She is insecure herself, and the victim's dependency makes her feel needed. It even gives her a distorted sense of strength. Her sex with the PPS [Peter Pan syndrome] victim is ritualistic and predictable; it's also very quickly over with. She doesn't recognize that the victim is immature, and she persuades herself to believe that his problems are normal. She sticks with this mate, figuring her love life will improve. It doesn't. I call this type of woman a "Wendy."

The other type of woman wants spontaneity, growth, and mutual adaptation in her relationship with a man. She recognizes the PPS victim's immaturity but is drawn to his devil-may-care attitude. She, too, figures the guy will outgrow some of his behavior. . . . I call this woman a "Tinker." (Kiley, pp. 216-17.)

If you are a woman and think you are married to a "Peter Pan," Dr. Kiley first suggests that you determine whether or not you are a Wendy or a Tinker. If you are the former, you should stop doing Wendy-like things. Kiley has an interesting section titled "On Becoming a Tinker" with several suggestions on what to stop and to start doing to make your husband less dependent on you.

But I have a simpler suggestion. Ask your husband if he is a Peter Pan who is, among other things, irresponsible, chauvinistic, and overly dependent on women. If he says no, ask him to prove it. Ask him to take over running the house for a few days while you take a breather. If he agrees, fine. Hand him your apron and find your favorite book. But if he refuses to take over, you might buy him a copy of Dr. Dan Kiley's book, The Peter Pan Syndrome. And if he asks why you did it, just tell him it was the Tinkerbell coming out in you.

Marriage, What Kind for You?

Housework is one obvious example of tradition and change in contemporary marriage. But there are several other changes that have and are occurring that could harm our marriages if we are not aware of them. Contemporary marriage has significantly changed from the past.

In his book Close Companions, Dr. David Mace, a well-known marriage counselor and educator, describes what he calls "The Great Transition." He observes:

Imagine a human community, long settled in a narrow valley overshadowed by towering mountains. Life for those people has not been easy; but they have managed to survive, and they feel secure in their simple dwellings.

Now, word has come from an exploring party that they have discovered much better land on the other side of the mountain. They speak of fertile plains, abundant pastures, dense forests, and broad rivers. A new and better life beckons.

The migration begins. The bolder spirits go first. Then others follow. Some hesitate, then decide, pack, and set off. Now there are scattered parties on the move, taking various routes. Some go straight over the mountains, others take the longer but less arduous way round. A few grow weary of the journey and establish settlements along the route. Some even turn back.

This provides a fair picture of our cultural transition from the traditional to the companionship marriage. Families everywhere are on the move. Some have already reached the new country; some lag far behind; some are en route, struggling with unanticipated difficulties, exploring new trails and finding they lead nowhere. (Mace, Close, p. 50.)

What is the new companionship marriage of which Dr. Mace speaks? How does it differ from the traditional marriage of the past? I believe Dr. Mace has identified better than anyone else the major differences between marriages of the past and marriages of the present. The following chart lists ten of these major differences (Mace, Close, p. 16):

Of these marital trends, Dr. Mace further notes:

The difference between the old marriage pattern and the new is very clear. The first conforms to a rigid system, which provides ready-made answers to most questions that are likely to arise. The couple don't have to struggle with differences; and they don't have to be much involved in each other's inner thoughts and feelings. The second pattern, by contrast, involves husband and wife in a continuing series of interpersonal interactions and is virtually unworkable unless they can establish the kind of flexible relationship that only companionship makes possible.

The emergence of the companionship marriage was inevitable, and it represents a transition process arising out of a revolt against the rigidities of traditional marriage, in an increasingly open democratic culture. The struggle is epitomized in two highly significant words: Love and Equality. (Mace, Close, pp. 15-16.)

Latter-day Saints, along with others, will likely be interested in Dr. Mace's observations. As I review the characteristics of the two types of marriage, I believe Latter-day Saint couples will find themselves somewhere between the two. Many Church members believe, for example, that (1) the husband should assume the role of religious head of his family, (2) marriage should be a hierarchy (e.g., man "presides" over wife and family), and (3) the husband should be the primary provider and the wife the primary homemaker. On the other hand, many Latter-day Saints believe that (1) marriage should be a two-vote system in which decisions are jointly made by husband and wife, (2) the husband and the wife both should be close to their children and represent authority, and (3) further education is equally important to both spouses. On other issues, we are either uncertain, in a state of transition, or our cultural biases have become confused with our religious practices.

It is obvious to me, however, that we, like others, are undergoing change in our perceptions about marriage. Some Latter-day Saints have suggested to me that the so-called "traditional marriage" is the Latter-day Saint marriage. A few older couples have even gone so far as to suggest that the traditional marriage (all ten characteristics) is the celestial marriage. I hardly think so. In many of our church meetings we may decry the departure from "traditional marriage and family life," but after reviewing the marriage of the past in the United States, many changes are obviously warranted and even welcomed, particularly from a woman's point of view.

Traditional marriage of the past (which originated separate and apart from LDS practice or doctrine) heavily favored the male. It is little wonder, then, that as society became more democratic, some changes in marriage would likely occur. They have, indeed, and though some married couples are still in the valley avoiding the changes, others are struggling up the mountainside, and a few have arrived. Perhaps some things should remain as they are, but other changes should be welcomed. Each couple must decide.

Base Camps and Mountain Peaks

Several people have suggested that I read M. Scott Peck's book The Road Less Traveled, so I finally bought a copy and am glad I did. It is an exceptional book written by a very sensitive psychiatrist. The intriguing aspect of this book is its emphasis on building love and developing spiritual growth in today's society. The author is concerned about marital disruption and the number of divorces in the United States. He also gives his insights into what marriages will need in order to survive in these contemporary times. In particular, he makes an interesting comparison between marriage and mountain climbing:

When dealing with couples my wife and I draw the analogy between marriage and a base camp for mountain climbing. If one wants to climb mountains one must have a good base camp, a place where there are shelter and provisions, where one may receive nurture and rest before one ventures forth again to seek another summit. Successful mountain climbers know that they must spend at least as much time, if not more, in tending to their base camp as they actually do in climbing mountains, for their survival is dependent upon their seeing to it that their base camp is sturdily constructed and well stocked.

A common and traditionally masculine marital problem is created by the husband who, once he is married, devotes all his energies to climbing mountains and none to tending to his marriage, or base camp, expecting it to be there in perfect order whenever he chooses to return to it for rest and recreation. . . . Sooner or later he returns to find his untended base camp a shambles, his neglected wife having been hospitalized for a nervous breakdown, having run off with another man, or in some other way having renounced her job as camp caretaker.

An equally common and traditionally feminine marital problem is created by the wife, who, once she is married, feels that the goal of her fife has been achieved. To her the base camp is the peak. She cannot understand or empathize with her husband's need for achievements and experiences beyond the marriage and reacts to them with jealousy and never-ending demands that he devote increasingly more energy to the home. . . . [This] creates a relationship that is suffocating and stultifying, from which the husband, feeling trapped and limited, may likely flee in a moment of "mid-life crisis."

The only ideal resolution [is] marriage as a truly cooperative institution, requiring great mutual contributions and care, time and energy, but existing for the primary purpose of nurturing each of the participants for individual journeys toward his or her own individual peaks of spiritual growth. Male and female both must tend the hearth and both must venture forth. (Peck, pp. 167-68.)

Once I was giving a marriage seminar in Garden Grove, California. At the conclusion of my seminar I related Dr. Peck's base-camp-and-mountain-peak analogy. When the seminar was over, a couple came up to talk to me. Both were professional mountain climbers, and they had particularly appreciated Dr. Peck's insights. Then they made an interesting observation. Mountain climbers can scale larger mountains, they observed, if they do it with a partner. Because they are joined together with a rope, mountain climbers can help pull each other up when they tire as they climb, and mountain climbers can cushion the fall if a partner slips. These are obvious advantages to climbing mountains with a partner instead of doing it alone. Both thereby derive the benefit of the climb and the view of the summit.

Do you agree with Dr. Peck's analysis of contemporary marriage and his comparison to mountain climbing? He suggests that husbands need to devote more time and attention to the base camp and that wives need to scale more mountain peaks if marriages are not only to survive but also to thrive in these modern times.

Using Dr. Peck's analogy, let us add one last thought. Latter-day Saint husbands and wives should also remember and realize that "no success in mountain climbing can compensate for failure in the base camp."

Change

One of the games we frequently played as children was "Three Wishes," in which we could wish for any three things we wanted. Even as adults we continue to wish for things in life, including wishing for improved marriages.

Wishing or hoping for a better marriage is beneficial in that the couple recognizes the need for change. There are many married couples, however, who are insensitive to the need for an improved relationship. Furthermore, wishing or hoping for any changes may be counterproductive if that is all one does. One of the great myths regarding marriage is that it will improve spontaneously or automatically with little or no effort. Sooner or later we have to confront the reality that hoping isn't coping.

Many marriage partners often desire improved relationships in their marriage, but their expectations aren't always attained. This is frequently because they accomplish nothing constructive to bring about improvement, even though they both know and wish something could be done.

Following are a few suggestions and observations about making change:

Actively seeking to improve marital relationships rather than merely wishing they would get better takes involvement, work, and effort. Ultimately, however, such endeavors are much more satisfying and fulfilling than hoping and waiting for improvements. Perhaps marriage would be more meaningful if we made a diligent effort to do less hoping and more coping in our marital interaction.

How to Get Out of the Tradition Trap

In my opinion, you are in the Tradition Trap if you insist that (1) your marriage now must be exactly as it has been in the past; (2) your marriage must be exactly like that of your parents, relatives, or friends; or (3) your marriage has most of the characteristics of the traditional marriage. To get out of the trap, you must change your marriage relationship and attitudes toward marriage. To do so, you may need to start by changing the way you behave or act toward each other. Look over and then practice the "Showing-Love-by-Deeds Exercise" included at the end of "Trap 4: The Tenderness Trap."

Controlled and constructive change is conducive to a stable marriage. Only living things grow and change. How about your marriage? What changes might you and your spouse try to initiate in your marriage during the next few months? After the areas have been identified, let the reformation begin with you!
