Brent A. Barlow, Twelve Traps in Today's Marriage and How to Avoid Them ( 1986)

Trap 3

The Togetherness Trap

Togetherness: The quality, state, or condition of being together or in union, proximity, or contact; warm fellowship, as among members of a family.

THE TOGETHERNESS TRAP: Having either too little or too much identity and bonding as a married couple.

Most people think of togetherness as spending time with each other each day, but I will never forget the moment I realized that there is more to "togetherness" than just being in each other's presence. Susan and I had just sat down to reevaluate out marriage. Nothing was really wrong at the time—we just wanted to improve. So we decided we would both jot down on paper a few things we could work on, and then we would share lists. I wrote down one or two ideas that were not that earthshaking, something like "listen more intently when the other is talking" and "help each other with tasks without being asked."

I noticed she was very thoughtful with her writing before she finally completed her list. Then we traded. Imagine my shock when I saw at the top of her list, "Spend more time with me." I was somewhat taken aback by her request and was a little alarmed. I thought I was spending adequate time with her. So we had a very interesting discussion about time and togetherness.

I conveyed to Susan that I thought we did spend time together, and she agreed. "But," she said, "sometimes you're not all here when you're supposed to be. You're physically present but psychologically absent." I began to see what she was getting at, especially after she gave me two examples:

"When we go shopping I like to walk with you down the street or in the mall. But I'm often looking in a window at something, and you are over playing in the gutter or talking to someone else. And when we go to church, supposedly together, you sit on one end of the bench, I on the other, and our seven children all in between. Somehow I don't feel very close to you at the time. When we go to church, I want to sit by you. And I want you to hold my hand during the service.

I told my wife that sometimes when our family goes to church I feel like Snow White trying to monitor the seven dwarfs. I agreed to sit by her, but holding hands in church? I indicated that we were also supposed to listen to the sermons during the service. Susan suggested that if I practiced and had real concentration, perhaps I could do both at the same time. It might be difficult, but she felt I could do it. Now I struggle with my children each Sunday to see who is going to sit by their mother. In addition, I have found I can listen and hold my wife's hand simultaneously. Old dogs can, indeed, learn new tricks.

The trap we sometimes get into is believing that when we are in our spouses' presence, we are "together." That is obviously not always the case. Remember, we can sometimes be physically present and psychologically absent. We should strive for both physical and psychological presence—when we are there, we should be there!

Too Little Togetherness

I once had the opportunity to talk to two LDS missionaries. They had been assigned to be companions for several weeks, but they were not getting along. They wanted to write to the mission president to request a change in companions or a transfer—sort of a missionary companion divorce. The more I talked to the two young elders, the more it became evident to me that they were companions by assignment only. Even though they had been together for several weeks, they scarcely knew each other. During the few weeks they yet had together, I suggested they spend at least thirty minutes a day talking to each other, about each other, and share part of their lives and their feelings about missionary work.

Later, on the day the transfers came, I saw the missionaries again. I asked them individually how they felt about each other as companions. They both acknowledged that no miracles had occurred, but since taking at least a half hour a day to share part of themselves with each other, they had, in their own words, "grown closer" to each other. I think the missionary analogy is appropriate to marriage. Some of us are companions by definition and identity only. We live, eat, and work in close proximity, yet we are not very close. It may be that we have had a wedding but not yet experienced a marriage.

One time I was counseling with a frustrated LDS wife whose husband was a workaholic physician. He spent twelve to fourteen hours minimum a day at his work six and sometimes seven days a week. Subsequently, his wife was left home to rear the children and manage the house virtually alone. Home for him had become a convenient service station where he went to get refueled and recharged. Then he took off again.

His wife had become extremely frustrated and hostile because of the situation. When her husband was home, he had little if anything to do with their children. She couldn't remember him ever changing a diaper or getting up even once at night when a baby or some other child cried. I asked the woman if they ever went out alone together. She said they did, but it was what she called a "church date." He did it, she said, because their bishop and stake president suggested all brethren take their wives out periodically. She felt it was sort of glorified welfare work. She also believed that the infrequent outings helped ease his guilt about being an absentee father and husband even though he lived at home. The "dates," as she described them, were routine dining and movies.

I asked her if they ever took the time to talk to each other and share their lives and feelings. She began to cry. She said she had indicated to him that she would like to discuss her feelings, but he had just told her to "straighten up" because her emotional state, to him, indicated a lack of discipline and control. If things did not improve, he suggested some medication to calm her down.

This marriage, to me, was a classic case of a husband and wife spending time together, though emotionally and psychologically they were as distant as if they lived hundreds of miles apart. Physical presence in no way assures emotional closeness and it is my observation that a psychological separation always precedes a physical or literal divorce.

Togetherness, then, might be redefined as the emotional bonding marriage partners have toward each other. Too little togetherness, so defined, is a major problem in marriage.

Too Much Togetherness

The irony about togetherness is that it is a double trap. The one side of the trap is having too little togetherness—a lack of bonding or couple identity. The other equally devastating side of the trap is that we can become too close, too bound together in our marriage.

Too much togetherness can be destructive. Sometimes a husband and wife become like two porcupines in a small cage—both need more room and space to function. On this topic, Elder Hugh W. Pinnock, member of the First Quorum of the Seventy, has cautioned LDS couples against smothering each other with excessive restrictions. He noted:

A loving wife of many years shared with me one of the secrets of her beautiful marriage. She told me, "It is my duty to maintain an atmosphere in our home in which my husband can reach his full potential. And you know, he is a busy father, bishop, and businessman. In turn, he helps me reach my potential."

With her encouragement, he was an outstanding bishop. She later served as a counselor in two auxiliary presidencies and then as president of the stake Relief Society. She had her own room where she sewed, painted, and wrote beautiful poetry. He felt comfortable in going fishing, doing some painting himself, and growing in ways that interested him. Neither of these marriage partners was being smothered by a selfish mate. Both respected the other's needs and goals.

The most fulfilling of all marriages seem to be those in which the husband and wife together commit their love to the Savior's keeping. They are interested in each other, and yet set each other free to grow and mature, to take on new challenges and to pursue new interests. Of course, this freedom is not the freedom to flirt with another. Jealousy is a subtle form of bondage and is one of the most smothering of human passions.

Husbands and wives who fear the loss of a partner's love weaken their relationship by holding on too tightly. A husband who thinks to himself, "I won't let her out of my sight," is actually expressing a fear that might push her away. Husbands and wives should allow each other room for personal growth and expression. When both marriage partners are able to develop their talents and interests, the marriage is less likely to suffer from boredom and narrowness. (Pinnock, p. 35.)

Quite often the wives are the ones who have little identity apart from husband, house, and children. If they run their homes as service station models, they can wear themselves out or lose their sense of identity if they are not being nurtured while nurturing others. On occasion, wives and mothers need to pursue some additional activities.

One weekend not long ago was interesting for me and a lot of other husbands and fathers in our neighborhood. The reason was that the women in our ward went for an overnight trip together up in a canyon at a camp called Edenbrook. While they were gone, we husbands had to take over all the responsibilities of running the homes and taking care of the children. By the time the women had left, all the food stores in the area were probably sold out of frozen pizza and root beer. Seriously, I think it is appropriate that women do take a little time off together, but I have a friend who disagrees.

He and I were talking about the trip the women were taking, and during our conversation I told him tongue-in-cheek of my plight and the two-day pizza party my children had planned. I explained in a little more detail about the outing and said that Susan looked forward to going.

My friend was quiet for a few moments and then asked, "But what does it really signify when wives and mothers 'have to get away'?"

"Nothing, really," I replied. "To me it is a group of women going on an overnight trip." I didn't see any hidden symbolism in the outing.

He then went on to express concern about all the current attention drawn to the individual, for the need to "get away," as it were, from family and friends, even children and spouses. As evidence, he cited some contemporary beer commercials on television. Several depict a group of men late at night on the beach, or in the mountains, sitting around the campfire, together, and drinking beer. Then the announcer states, "It doesn't get any better than this."

Such advertisements, my friend suggested, are antifamily and undermine the importance of family life. Meaningful experiences, he went on, should be had with family members, not "away" with others.

Obviously my friend disapproved of the women in our neighborhood going up to the church camp overnight. And while we were talking of life's events and symbolism, how could I tell him that they were actually going away . . . to Eden(brook)! I returned home and shared my friend's thoughts with Susan. She said it was a good philosophy but not too practical, indicating she still needed a day or two away.

Why do wives and mothers need time away from husbands and home for a while? Perhaps poet Carol Lynn Pearson has expressed it best. In the preface of her book The Flight and the Nest, she has the following poem (Pearson, p. v):

On Nest Building Mud is not bad for nest building. Mud and sticks And a fallen feather or two will do And require no reaching. I could rest there, with my tiny ones, Sound for the season, at least. But— If I may fly awhile— If I may cut through a sunset going out And a rainbow coming back, Color upon color sealed in my eyes— If I may have the unboundaried skies For my study, Clouds, cities, rivers for my rooms— If I may search the centuries For melody and meaning— If I may try for the sun— I shall come back Bearing such beauties Gleaned from God's and man's very best. I shall come filled. And then— Oh, the nest that I can build!

Susan and her associates enjoyed the trip. But we were all pleased when they came back . . . from Eden.

Even Lovers Need Time Away

I had a conversation not long ago with a young husband who called late one night and got me out of bed. He wanted to talk, so I yawned and agreed to listen. The new groom was upset because his wife of seven months was going home to visit her parents for two weeks.

"How can she stand to be away from me that long?" he asked. The longer he talked, the more I knew why. His wife needed a little time away from the marriage. They were too close and their lives too meshed—a common problem for newlyweds.

I tried to convince the young man that a few days away from each other were not necessarily harmful, and could, in fact, contribute to a better marriage. Everyone, including lovers, needs a little time away.

The thought of spending time away from loved ones is not new. The ancient Hebrew family understood the concept as expressed in Ecclesiastes 3:1-8 where it states there is a season and a time for every purpose: "a time to embrace, and a time to refrain from embracing."

Several years ago Kahlil Gibran also wrote:

Give your hearts, but not into each other's keeping. For only the hand of Life can contain your hearts. And stand together yet not too near together: For the pillars of the temple stand apart, And the oak tree and the cypress grow not in each other's shadow. (Gibran, pp. 15-16.)

Dr. M. Scott Peck, in his book The Road Less Traveled, has a whole chapter titled "Love Is Separateness." He writes:

The genuine lover always perceives the beloved as someone who has a totally separate identity. Moreover, the genuine lover always respects and even encourages this separateness and the unique individuality of the beloved. Failure to perceive and respect this separateness is extremely common, however, and the cause of much mental illness and unnecessary suffering. . . .

Not too long ago in a couples group I heard one of the members state that "the purpose and function" of his wife was to keep their house neat and him well fed. I was aghast at what seemed to me his painfully blatant male chauvinism. I thought I might demonstrate this to him by asking the members of the group to state how they perceived the purpose and function of their spouses. To my horror the six others, male and female alike, gave very similar answers. All of them defined the purpose and function of their husbands or wives in reference to themselves; all of them failed to perceive that their mates might have an existence basically separate from their own or any kind of destiny apart from their marriage. . . .

I have come to realize that it is the separateness of the [marriage] partners that enriches the union. Great marriages cannot be constructed by individuals who are terrified by their basic aloneness. . . . Genuine love not only respects the individuality of the other but actually seeks to cultivate it. (Peck, pp. 161, 166, 168.)

Recognizing the Togetherness Trap

The togetherness trap is quite simple. You have either too little or too much identity and bonding as a married couple, and emotionally you are either too close or too distant from each other. Striking a balance, however, is sometimes difficult to accomplish.

How do you know where you are? Asking each other how you feel on this topic may help. Recognize, too, that not only do individual marriages differ, but couples change as they experience the seasons of life. At some point in their lifetimes they may desire more togetherness, and at other points, less identity and bonding with their marriage partners. Communicating by asking what the other person needs and feels is one way to find out.

Another way to find out and measure not only marital cohesion but also marital adaptability is by taking the MACES III test.

In the previous chapter we talked about tradition and the need for change or adaptability. In this chapter we have talked about togetherness and the need for a balance in marital cohesion. Dr. David Olson and associates at the University of Minnesota have put together a short test to help married couples examine the two variables of adaptability and cohesion in their marriage. The test is called the MACES III (Marital Adaptability and Cohesion Evaluation Scale).

The following 1985 version is the third version of the test. It can be quickly administered and scored. Using the two variables, they have found there are sixteen types of marriage. Which one do you have? Which one do you desire?

Marriage Wellness Test—Maces III

Instructions

Listed below are twenty questions regarding your marriage now (Part I) and twenty questions pertaining to how you would like your marriage to be (Part II).

1 = Almost Never

2 = Once in a While

3 = Sometimes

4 = Frequently

5 = Almost Always

PART I

Your Marriage As It Is Now

___ 1. We ask each other for help.

___ 2. When problems arise, we compromise.

___ 3. We approve of each other's friends.

___ 4. We are flexible in how we handle our differences.

___ 5. We like to do things with each other.

___ 6. Different persons act as leaders in our marriage.

___ 7. We feet closer to each other than to people outside our family.

___ 8. We change our way of handling tasks.

___ 9. We like to spend free time with each other.

___ 10. We try new ways of dealing with problems.

___ 11. We feel very close to each other.

___ 12. We jointly make the decisions in our marriage.

___ 13. We share hobbies and interests together.

___ 14. Rules change in our marriage.

___ 15. We can easily think of things to do together as a couple.

___ 16. We shift household responsibilities from person to person.

___ 17. We consult each other on our decisions.

___ 18. It is hard to identify who the leader is in our marriage.

___ 19. Togetherness is a top priority.

___ 20. It is hard to tell who does which household chores.

PART II

Ideally, How Would You Like Your Marriage to Be

___ 21. We would ask each other for help.

___ 22. When problems arise, I wish we would compromise.

___ 23. We would approve of each other's friends.

___ 24. We would be flexible in how we handle our differences.

___ 25. We would like to do things with each other.

___ 26. Different persons would act as leaders in our marriage.

___ 27. We would feel closer to each other than to people outside our family.

___ 28. We would change our way of handling tasks.

___ 29. We would like to spend free time with each other.

___ 30. We would try new ways of dealing with problems.

___ 31. We would feel very close to each other.

___ 32. We would jointly make the decisions in our marriage.

___ 33. We would share hobbies and interests together.

___ 34. Rules would change in our marriage.

___ 35. We could easily think of things to do together as a couple.

___ 36. We would shift household responsibilities from person to person.

___ 37. We would consult each other on our decisions.

___ 38. We would know who the leader is in our marriage.

___ 39. Togetherness would be top priority.

___ 40. We could tell who does which household chores.

SCORING

PART I

Your Marriage As It Is Now

Marital Cohesion Score (now) ___

Marital Adaptability Score (now) ___

PART II

Ideally, How Would You Like Your Marriage to Be

These scores are determined in much the same way. The odd numbers (21, 23, 25, 27, 29, 31, 33, 35, 37, and 39) represent the Ideal Marital Cohesion Score. The even numbers (22, 24, 26, 28, 30, 32, 34, 36, 38, and 40) represent the Ideal Marital Adaptability Score. These scores should be determined and marked with a box. For example, an Ideal Marital Cohesion Score of 43 and an Ideal Marital Adaptability Score of 22 would be marked with boxes around them as shown in the example. A line from each should also be drawn to see in which box these two scores meet. In our example, the two lines meet in square #11.

Ideal Marital Cohesion Score ___

Ideal Marital Adaptability Score ___

Evaluation

a. Any of the sixteen marriage types are acceptable if both husband and wife desire the same particular type. However, of the sixteen marriage types, the squares in the middle (squares #6, 7, 10, and 11) have been found to be the most balanced marriages.

b. The squares indicating midrange marriages are the ones on the outer areas of the grid (squares #2, 3, 8, 12, 14, 15, 5, and 9).

c. The squares representing extreme marriages are those in the comers (squares #1, 4, 13, and 16) representing the extremes of Cohesion (Togetherness) and Adaptability (Change).

Both husband and wife should fill out the MACES III and compare results. Is the marriage being perceived in the same way? Do the two ideal marriages differ? If so, what constructive changes might be made in the future?

Â© D. H. Olson, 1985.
