Brent A. Barlow, Twelve Traps in Today's Marriage and How to Avoid Them ( 1986)

Trap 5

The Talk Trap

Talk: To communicate or exchange ideas or information by speaking; to consult or confer.

THE TALK TRAP: The inability or unwillingness to do much more than exchange information with a marriage partner on a routine, day-to-day basis.

The story is told of two hardened prisoners who were locked in a small cell together in Alcatraz Prison for several years. During their imprisonment they got along fairly well, talked frequently, had relatively few conflicts, and endured the prison terms together. When one prisoner was about to be released, he was interviewed by the prison warden. Much to the surprise of the officer, the prisoner being released knew little, in fact practically nothing, about his fellow cell mate. They had lived together in a small cell of just a few cubic feet for years and had exchanged enough information with each other to exist and get by. Even though they had spent tens of thousands of hours together in each other's presence, they scarcely knew anything about each other's personal lives, their backgrounds, or their feelings.

The story points out the fallacy of believing that just because two people live with and are around each other for hours and hours, they will get to know each other. Often they don't because they are prisoners of a different sort, prisoners who are confined each day to their own thoughts, feelings, and ideas.

Contrast these "prisoners" with people who, for instance, meet on an airplane, and within the space of a few hours have conveyed more to each other, about each other, than they have with many other acquaintances, including spouses. Conclusion? The actual amount of time a couple spends together is no measurement of their ability to communicate with each other.

An Irish Divorce

The inability or unwillingness of a married couple to share their lives and their feelings might have another name. It could be called an "Irish divorce."

One summer I was in Ireland representing Brigham Young University and giving a few speeches on marriage and family. I spoke in both the north and south of the Emerald Isle.

While I was in the Irish Republic, I had the opportunity of traveling around with President Vernon Tipton and his wife, Norma, who were presiding over the Ireland Dublin Mission. One afternoon I also met John Connolly, president of the Irish District, who lived in Dublin.

During our conversation I asked President Connolly what the divorce rate was in the south of Ireland. Imagine my astonishment when he replied, "Zero."

"You mean to say that there are no divorces in the Irish Republic?" I asked in amazement.

"That's correct."

I thought for a few moments. I was aware of the strong family solidarity in Ireland because I had observed it when I served an LDS mission there several years ago. But no divorces?

"Do you want to know why there are no divorces in Ireland?" President Connolly asked.

"I have been wondering."

"It's illegal . . . against the law. There are no provisions in the law for divorce in the Irish Republic."

I had heard that divorce was still illegal in some European countries but had no idea that such was the case in Ireland.

After a few more moments of thought I asked, "But what do you do in this country when a husband and wife can't get along? When they won't talk to each other or when they fight and argue a lot?"

President Connolly again replied, "Those situations do occur on occasion. Not often, but on occasion. And then we have what we call an Irish divorce. That's when a man and woman can't get along in marriage but they continue to live together . . . miserable though married. They don't talk much to each other, and they seldom go anywhere together. Publicly, few may know the condition of the marriage. There is no legal separation, but psychologically and emotionally they leave each other. That is what we call an Irish divorce."

The week I was in Ireland divorce legislation was introduced in the government of the Irish Republic. It will likely be a matter of time before divorces are legal there. In the meantime, those who can afford to travel to England, Scotland, or some other country can get a divorce if they want one. And if they want to remarry, they have to go to another country for that as well. But the few who desire to end their marriages do not travel elsewhere to legally separate. They just remain at home and live with the "Irish divorce"—married, but miserable; together, but separated; talking to each other, but not communicating.

As I flew over the Atlantic Ocean a few days later, I thought about my conversation with President Connolly concerning the "Irish divorce," and I came to the conclusion that we also have "Irish divorces" in the United States.

Differences in Communication

One root of communication problems in marriage may be that husbands and wives might perceive the function of communication differently. Casey Peterson, editor of Marriage Encounter Magazine, has recently made these observations:

Mark Sherman and Adelaide Haas are both associate professors at the State University of New York in New Paltz (psychology and communication respectively). [They] recently did a study of communication between the sexes which sheds some light on our differences. Their research ["Man to Man, Woman to Woman," Psychology Today, June 1984] concludes that "these (communication) problems are particularly resistant to solution. Not only do men and women like to talk about different topics, spoken language serves different functions for the sexes."

The least important problem in the study was that of topics of interest. Most men surveyed preferred to discuss music, current events and sports. Most women generally talked about relationship problems, family health, reproductive concerns, weight, food and clothing. Both sexes were interested in talking about work, movies and television.

Isn't it interesting that, in general, men prefer to talk about things outside of themselves, whereas most women would rather discuss topics of a personal nature? When I think about that, I see it's very easy for me to advise Tom Landry on offensive strategy on a Sunday afternoon. What am I risking? It's also very easy to discuss the merits of a Carter versus a Weber carburetor, but the thought of telling someone how I feel makes me feel uncomfortable. Why do you suppose that is?

The more serious potential problem in intimate male-female relationships is the difference in the function of conversation between the sexes. According to the survey what men enjoy most in conversation with friends is freedom, playfulness, camaraderie and practicality. While many women mentioned these items, what they valued most was empathy or understanding in their conversations. Furthermore, women not only liked, but truly needed this. . . .

I think [my wife and I] had a rather typical background. We had had most of our conversations with friends of the same sex. I was used to fast-paced conversations that were practical, pragmatic or fun, and usually stayed on the surface with respect to emotions. Debbie [my wife] had practical and fun conversations too, but they were also a major source of emotional support and understanding. So I tended to be direct and practical and Debbie wanted a sympathetic listener. I wanted to fix all her problems and often said, "Here's what ya do. " The same thing I'd say to all my friends. In short, I was an advice-giver, not a listener.

We struggled along like that for several years until I learned to ask for what I needed, and to really listen to what Debbie was saying. Most of the time what Debbie wants and needs is emotional support and understanding, not advice. . . . Once in a while she does ask me for some advice and that makes me feel good that she values my opinion. . . . What we've both learned is to state our needs—if I want support I ask for it. If I want advice I ask for that. (Peterson, Casey, pp. 4-5. Italics added.)

One of the first steps we must take in communicating effectively is to realize that husbands and wives may talk and listen for different reasons. Certainly not all communication is for the exchange of information only.

Differences in communication also occur because talking usually takes place on one of four levels: (1) things, (2) people, (3) ideas, and (4) feelings. Most of our conversations deal with levels one and two: things and people. These are the safest and take the least amount of involvement. We talk about the weather, the ball game, our yard and garden, our neighbors and friends, our children and relatives because we usually have something to say about them. But moving to levels three and four—ideas and feelings—is much more difficult. Nevertheless, discussion in these two areas is what typically forms the strongest bonds. Discussion about things and people usually does not.

Discussing ideas and feelings may sometimes be difficult to do. It would be fairly safe to say that most readers of this book are honest people, yet in many ways the same people are dishonest when it comes to being open about feelings and ideas. Most people who would not cheat, steal, or knowingly tell lies would not hesitate to answer "Fine!" when their spouses ask them how they are. Burdening other people with our burdens, complaining, disagreeing in public—these are things we think should be avoided, but we may be carrying the principle of avoidance too far.

If we are burdened by financial problems, keeping them from our spouses may only increase the weight of the burden and prevent necessary support. Reporting praise we've received at work but neglecting to talk about some problems we've been having with the boss may increase our stress and deceive our spouse into thinking everything's perfect at work. Most of us can probably attain a better balance between honesty and tactfulness about our feelings and ideas. That is, we can still avoid overcomplaining and burdening people with petty details but be more open about the things that really matter.

Two Important Communication Skills

Whenever I discuss communication with married people in classes or seminars, I like to first ask them what they think are important communication skills. The responses usually range from "Use I messages and speak for self," or "Be aware of your nonverbal communication or body language." These are important in effective communication, but I think they are secondary to two other very important communication skills. One is caring, and the other is listening.

Caring. Think for a moment about people who care about you. With them you are much more likely to open up, to relate your innermost thoughts and feelings. Think about one of your best friends, a family member, or perhaps a concerned teacher or coach. Are you not much more likely to be willing to talk to these trusted individuals than to the numerous people you interact with daily who show little or no personal interest in you?

Think for a moment too about people you really care about. With them aren't you more likely to take the time and effort to communicate accurately and avoid misunderstandings? Don't you find yourself interested in their lives and what they have to say? Even with young children who don't yet know how to talk well, most parents listen carefully far more often than they refuse to listen.

If caring is the key to effective communication, and I suggest it is, then we would improve our communication skills by becoming more caring people. It is no accident that the chapter on tenderness and caring precedes this one on communication.

Listening. Another way to dramatically improve communication in marriage is to improve our listening skills. Many of us believe we are good listeners just because we keep quiet when someone is speaking. Even so, our attention may be elsewhere or may be divided between what is being said and what happened a few hours earlier. Or perhaps the television is on, or the newspaper is spread out. In those cases, is our attention undivided? The Japanese have an interesting custom when they talk. The one listening will intermittently interrupt with the words hai or eh. The interruptions let the speaker know the other person is listening. When we listen we might try rephrasing what is said to let the speaker know where our concentration is.

Married couples may also get into a peculiar habit of conversing about two different things at the same time. The wife may talk about a luncheon date, while the husband may talk about the upcoming football race. Each is more intent on what he or she is saying than on what the spouse is saying. The spouses may even end the conversation without knowing what their partners have discussed. Paying attention to our spouses when they are talking is not only a courtesy but is also an important key to sharing and understanding.

Hearing or Listening?

Anyone wishing to improve his or her communication skills may want to read Mortimer Adler's book How to Speak; How to Listen. He has some very practical suggestions, particularly on listening. He notes that of the four major communication skills—reading, writing, speaking, and listening—we spend approximately nine percent of our time writing, fifteen percent reading, thirty percent speaking, and forty-six percent listening. Even though we spend nearly half of our communicative efforts in listening, it is the area in which we have the least training. Adler notes: "If asked why this is so, one response may be that instruction in writing played a part in his schooling and that some attention, though much less (to a degree that is both striking and shocking) was paid to developing the skills of reading and speaking. Almost no attention at all was given to skill in listening. Another response may be forthcoming from the person who reveals the mistaken impression that listening involves little more than keeping quiet while the other person talks. Good manners may be required, but not much skill." (Adler, pp. 88-89.)

Adler offers these insights and notes the importance of concentration in effective listening:

The ears have nothing comparable to eyelids, but they can be as effectively sealed as eyelids can be closed. Sometimes both close at the same time, but it is often the case that the ear is turned off while the eyes are open. That matters little if, in either case, the mind's attention is turned to other matters than what is being heard or seen. What the senses register are then sounds and sights that lack significance.

Listening, like reading, is primarily an activity of the mind, not of the ear or the eye. When the mind is not actively involved in the process, it should be called hearing, not listening; seeing, not reading. (Adler, pp. 85-86.)

Dr. Adler suggests that a major mistake most people make in listening is in regarding it as passive reception rather than as active participation. He then gives a vivid analogy of his observation:

The catcher behind the plate is just as active a baseball player as the pitcher on the mound. The same is true in football of the end who receives the forward pass and the back who throws it. Receiving the ball in both cases requires actively reaching to complete the play. Catching is as much an activity as throwing and requires as much skill, though it is a skill of a different kind. Without the complementary efforts of both players, properly attuned to each other, the play cannot be completed. . . .

Of course, the fault may not always lie with the reader or listener. The failure to catch a wild pitch is not the catcher's fault. So, too, some pieces of writing and some spoken utterances are either so devoid of meaning and coherence or so befuddled and confusing in their use of words that the best reader and listener can make little sense of them. Some are such defective presentations of what is in the mind of the speaker that they are not worth paying much attention to, if any at all. (Adler, pp. 86-87.)

To assist two people to become better speakers and listeners, Mortimer Adler has devised what lie calls the "Meeting of the Minds." The first rule he gives is "Do not disagree—or, for that matter, do not agree—with anyone else unless you are sure you understand the position the other person is taking. To disagree before you understand is impertinent. To agree is inane." (Adler, p. 159.) Here is the "Meeting of the Minds" exercise:

This process continues until Partner A and Partner B clarify the areas of agreement and disagreement.

Couples may want to practice this exercise by having one person, Partner A, state an opinion on a particular matter and then give reasons for the particular point of view. The second person, Partner B, would then repeat not only Partner A's opinion but also the stated reasons. When this has been done to Partner A's satisfaction, Partner B may then either agree or disagree. If he or she agrees, a meeting of the minds has occurred. If he or she disagrees, Partner B would state the differing opinion and give the reasons for so believing. Then Partner A would repeat Partner B's position and the stated reasons. This process continues until both partners know the exact position of the other on a given issue and can give the other's reasons for belief. At this point, too, a meeting of the minds has occurred.

How to Get Out of the Talk Trap

As a married couple you are in the talk trap if you seldom take the opportunity to discuss anything other than the routine and mechanics of day-to-day living (levels 1—things and 2—people). To get out of the trap, start sharing a little more of your thoughts on the third and fourth levels, ideas and feelings.

Following is an exercise to help you do this. Many couples have tried it and reported excellent results in having more in-depth conversations with a marriage partner.

COMMUNICATION ON SPIRITUAL MATTERS

Instructions: The incomplete sentences in the list below are designed to help you and your partner talk about your religious feelings, attitudes, and beliefs. Look over the list and decide together which sentence you will discuss. Then take turns completing the sentence. (You may want to do so first by writing rather than by talking.) After you have discussed one sentence, select another and do the same. Do not, however, try to discuss all the topics in one sitting. Save some for another in-depth communication experience.
