Brent A. Barlow, Twelve Traps in Today's Marriage and How to Avoid Them ( 1986)

Trap 7

The Turmoil Trap

Turmoil: A state of extreme confusion, agitation, or commotion; turbulence or disorder.

THE TURMOIL TRAP: The inability of a married couple to deal constructively with marital conflict.

It has been observed that contemporary marriage presents more opportunity for conflict than almost any other interpersonal relationship. Yet many still cling to the concept that marriage should be free of conflict and that only conflict-free marriages can be considered successful. We are gradually coming to understand, however, that most couples experience adjustments and conflicts in marriage. The problems of conflict actually seem to arise more in how couples confront and deal with disagreement: conflict in marriage is common; dealing adequately with the conflict is not.

How Common Is Conflict in Marriage?

Upon arriving at Brigham Young University in 1977, I began teaching classes on marriage. I had taught similar classes at four other universities before going to BYU. During one of my first classes at BYU, I made the observation that most of the students would probably experience some degree of conflict with their marriage partner once they married.

One young returned missionary was very irritated with my comment on conflict and after class even questioned whether I should be teaching at BYU. It was interesting to me that at no time at any of the other four universities where I had taught, had any student, married or single, questioned the likelihood of conflict in marriage. The young man said he had never observed his parents in any kind of conflict. He said his mission president and his wife appeared to have a conflict-free marriage (though what self-respecting mission president and wife will hash over differences in front of the missionaries?). And what was more, the student said he had talked to married neighbors and not one indicated they had ever experienced any conflict in their marriages.

Such was my introduction to BYU. I found that many students were idealistic when it came to marriage and family matters. Should I tell them "what it is really like," or should I relate the ideal? This is a problem not only for marriage counselors and teachers at BYU but all over the nation. How does one deal with "what should be" compared to "what is"?

My own experience has been that when the ideal becomes so far removed from the real, people become discouraged. We must always keep the ideal before us for goals and growth, but we should never put the ideal so far in front of us that we quit trying. I was somewhat relieved later in that same course when a student wrote a paper about idealism vs. realism at BYU. She concluded her paper with the statement, "What we need in LDS marriages is idealism tempered with realism." Perhaps she said it best

For married couples to believe that their marriages will be free of conflict is, in my opinion, naive. It is also a myth to believe that the presence of conflict indicates a bad marriage. Marriage counselors have noted that many husbands and wives believe so strongly in such traits as politeness, consideration, and benevolence that they attempt to practice them unremittingly. Small failures then become big failures in their eyes. Obviously, spouses also have different interests, different ways of using time, different biological rhythms, and so on—they cannot always have the same desires, needs, or wishes at the same time.

There may be marriages that have little or no conflict, though many marriages that appear to be free of conflict may be far from ideal. A married couple may have little in common, deriving most of their satisfaction in life from sources outside the marriage. They see each other so infrequently that they have little time to talk, let alone fight. Other than their children and a few daily routines, they find they have little to discuss when they do talk. Since they seldom interact, they rarely differ.

In still another type of marriage a husband and wife may have worked out a dominant/submissive relationship, in which one dominates and controls the other. In other words, one is master, the other is slave. Obviously, a slave rarely disagrees with a master, so they experience little conflict until one or the other tires of the relationship and tries to change things.

Some older couples, much to the amazement of many younger couples and single adults, claim they have never had an argument. And perhaps they have matured to the point where they have worked through most, if not all of the conflicts. During their earlier years of marriage, however, there likely was some conflict that they have now forgotten or downplayed.

There are couples, too, who avoid public displays of conflict. These couples avoid letting their children know of their differences, settling their disputes privately. Children of such marriages grow up believing that their parents never had arguments.

In the book Sex and the Significant Americans, John Cuber and Peggy Harroff have identified what they call utilitarian and intrinsic marriages. In utilitarian marriages the couples are uninvolved with each other because they are highly committed to other endeavors. Couples in the intrinsic marriages have each other as their first priority, are highly involved with each other, and are deeply committed to their marriage. In comparing and contrasting the two marriage types, the authors observe: "Men and women in Intrinsic Marriages experience conflict too. Some of these pairs actually have had more conflict than typically occurs for couples in Utilitarian Marriages. Partly it is simple mathematics. There are more numerous points of contact, hence more potential for conflict. Couples in Utilitarian Marriages often avoid conflict simply because so many important matters are considered private and not even exposed to the spouse." (Cuber, p. 143.)

One of my favorite quotations about conflicts in relationships comes from Luke 17:1-4. It simply states, "It is impossible but that offences will come" and then goes on to give a beautiful rule about forgiveness. Perhaps, then, we should not be overwhelmed that conflicts do occur in marriage. The key is what we do with them when they arise.

Horribilizing

Sometimes when we do encounter what may be only minor conflicts in marriage, we make more out of them than we should. Dr. Albert Ellis calls this "horribilizing." Do you "horribilize" in your marriage? Most of us do, placing unnecessary tensions and burdens on our relationship. What is horribilizing? Simply put, it is making a difficult or bad situation worse by irrational thought. It is making mountains out of molehills.

You recall the story of the traveling salesman who had a flat tire on his car one night out in the country. He got out of his car to change the flat tire, only to discover he had left his jack at home. The salesman saw a farmhouse in the distance and decided to go there to borrow a jack from the farmer.

While he was walking to the farmhouse, he began thinking, "It's late at night, and the farmer will probably be upset that I got him out of bed." The salesman walked a little ways farther and thought, "He'll probably think I'm really stupid traveling without a jack in my car." As he approached the farmhouse, he muttered to himself, "The farmer is probably stingy and won't loan me a jack even for a few minutes."

With that in mind he angrily knocked on the door. A light came on in the kitchen, and the farmer in pajamas opened the door. Without warning, the salesman reached in and punched the farmer in the mouth, shouting, "Keep your blankety-blank jack!"

The salesman may not have known it, but he was a horribilizer. Through irrational thought he made a difficult or bad situation worse, both for him and the unsuspecting farmer. Carlfred Broderick states, "To horribilize is to translate the undeniable fact that it is disappointing not to have things go your way into the idea that it is awful, terrible, and horrible that things are not different. Once you have convinced yourself that some situation is unfair, unbearable, and intolerable, you are all set up for depression, headaches, ulcers, and other symptoms of anxiety and tension. Being a horribilizer is not very rewarding." (Broderick, Marriage, p. 83.)

Susan and I found this out not long ago when we faced a very difficult day. We knew it was coming because of the list of things we had to do: We both had extremely busy schedules the next day; our children had to be taken places; people were coming to do some last minute touch-ups on our new home; and two of our children were ill. In order to meet the heavy demands, everything would have to fit into a tight schedule. Everyone would have to meet their obligations on time, with no additional infringements on our time and energy.

The day arrived. I woke up at 5:30 A.M. and groaned, "It's here. The day has begun!" I moaned and rolled over in bed. "Nothing will probably go right. It will just be one of those days."

Susan was now awake. "You're probably right," she said. "Today is going to be exhausting. The repairmen will probably be late, and I won't get to my appointment on time." She paused and then asked, "Have you checked with the children to see if they're any better?"

"No, they're probably worse. That will complicate the day even more."

"I just don't know how we're going to make it," Susan commented as she went to shower. I lay in bed trying to figure out how to survive what obviously would be a difficult and trying day.

By 6:30 A.M. we were both dressed . . . and fatigued—and the day hadn't even begun. We continued to commiserate for a few more minutes. Then we stopped.

"Do you know what we're doing right now?" I asked.

"No, what?" she responded.

"We're horribilizing."

"We're what?"

"We are making a difficult day worse. The day hasn't even begun, yet here we are nearly out of energy."

We thought over our past hour, and then we began to laugh. Yes, we did have a busy and hectic day ahead, but by allowing our thoughts, attention, and conversation to wander aimlessly and dwell upon our troubles, we had made our day infinitely worse than it might have been. Our day turned out to be hectic, to say the least, but it was much less so than if we had continued to horribilize.

Remember the salesman, the farmer, and the jack the next time you begin to horribilize. Bad situations are often made worse by irrational and uncontrolled thinking.

Marital Pinches

When was the last time you pinched your husband or wife? Did you hurt them? Did it cause some irritation on their part? There are some experts on marriage today who believe that many marital problems arise over marital "pinches"—not the kind involving physical pain but the small or minor irritations that often arise in relationships between husbands and wives.

One article in the November 1984 issue of Marriage Enrichment newsletter talks about marital "pinches." ("Act on a Pinch," p. 5.) The editors believe that a major crisis in marriage almost always results from a series of small irritations (marital pinches) that are not dealt with when they arise. The article suggests that these minor areas of stress be confronted and discussed as they arise before they become major events. Perhaps the quality of the marital relationship is largely determined by whether, and how, married couples regularly and faithfully "act on a pinch."

What are some examples of marital pinches? The article lists quite a few of them as developed by Marcy and Ralph Reed:

—You forgot to tell me about the meeting you have at 7:30 P.M.

—You talk to me while I am on the telephone.

—You leave a mess in the bathroom.

—You talk to me from another room.

—You don't ask me what is wrong when you know that something is wrong.

—You make light of a problem I tell you about.

—You use up all the gas in the car.

—You come home from work and yell at the children because you are tired.

—You remind me of something stupid I did five years ago.

—You are often not ready on time.

—You sometimes pay more attention to the newspaper or the TV than to me.

—You repeat something which I have told you in confidence.

—While I'm talking, you walk away and do something else.

—You forget to do something I asked you to do.

—You start a job but you don't finish it.

—You tease me about my cooking in front of others.

—You keep putting off that weekend alone you promised we would take.

—You question my judgment in front of the children.

Have you been or do you become slightly irritated over these or other seemingly minor matters? If so, you were pinched.

The article on marital pinches suggests the following exercise. When you are both feeling relatively well and calm, talk about your marital pinches. You may want to review the preceding list together to see if some of these occur in your marriage. Take turns talking and listening. Then develop a policy for dealing with these pinches when they occur in the future.

Perhaps infrequent, accidental pinches should be tolerated and forgotten, but many pinches, particularly in the same area, should be discussed. Several small pinches can hurt and be highly irritating. Would your marriage improve if you learned to deal with the pinches? If you did, you would be following some seasoned advice given hundreds of years ago: "Moreover if thy brother [or spouse] shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone: if he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother." (Matt. 18:15.)

The Four Cs of Conflict Resolution

Marital conflict might be simply defined as "a clash of wishes," for it is nearly impossible to imagine any couple who would always want or wish for exactly the same thing in their marriage, no matter how much they love each other. But what do you do when conflict occurs? There are at least four approaches, the four Cs, that a couple can use to deal with marital conflict. They are (1) coexist, (2) capitulate, (3) compromise, and (4) collaborate.

Simply put, a couple should learn to live with some conflicts in marriage. Not all conflicts can or should be resolved—a couple just agrees to disagree. A couple may differ in their food preferences, political philosophy, or hobbies and yet not have those differences affect their marital relationship negatively. One time I spoke to a group and made the statement that a good marriage is not determined by how much a husband and wife are alike but by how many differences they can tolerate in each other. After I had finished, one woman came up and said the thought was quite interesting. She said she had struggled for years with the concept of being one. Because she and her husband had so many differences, she felt they would never attain the goal of oneness. During our seminar, however, we had discussed how two people who tolerate each other's differences can actually become emotionally closer than those who constantly fight the differences.

Some conflicts in marriage are minor and do not merit massive amounts of time, emotion, or money in trying to resolve them. Coexistence is a good strategy in these cases. Each election year Susan and I have gone to the voting polls and cancelled each other's vote by voting for different candidates. Seldom have we agreed. Somehow, though, our marriage has managed to survive this and other areas of differences.

In this method of conflict resolution one person "gives in" or adopts the other's position or point of view. He or she simply yields. This approach is obviously disadvantageous if one person is continually yielding or acquiescing to the other. However, when both marriage partners are willing to yield on occasion for the sake of the marriage, capitulation is a useful and effective approach.

There are two types of capitulation. In one, a spouse gives in because of coercion or forced submission. In the other, a spouse gives in because of caring, persuasion, long-suffering, gentleness, meekness, or love unfeigned. (See D&C 121:41.) The latter type of capitulation is the desirable one.

Susan and I, for example, differ in our likes and dislikes of movies. She likes the more romantic, emotionally involving stories while I like the action-packed stories. When we decide to go to a movie, we usually have to use the second C, Capitulate, by one giving in to the other. I must admit that I have slept through more than one tearjerker, but I do enjoy going with her. And as the occasion arises, she goes with me to the more adventure-filled movies. During our marriage we have found we both like James Bond films, and lately I have stayed awake long enough to shed a tear or two during her movies. But neither one minds giving in, on occasion, to the other because we know that our marriage is more important than what movies we go to see.

With the third C, Compromise, spouses yield or give in until they find a middle ground or devise an alternative solution. I honestly feel that almost all differences that cause conflict in marriage can be negotiated. An example might be which parents a newly wedded couple will visit on Thanksgiving or Christmas. Sometimes visiting both sets of parents is difficult if not impossible, so a couple will arrange to visit one set of parents one year and the other the next. Or they might go to one place for Thanksgiving and the other for Christmas. (The example may sound trite, but it is a common situation with recently married couples.)

I remember my mother and father had one minor conflict over food. Dad enjoyed eating beef liver, but Mom literally became ill at the smell of it being cooked. So they negotiated the conflict. On the day—usually a Saturday—that Dad wanted beef liver, Mom would go shopping. Dad agreed to cook it himself, have all the dishes done, and air out the kitchen sufficiently before she returned. Minor conflict—excellent negotiation.

Other areas of conflict that might be negotiated are recreational and musical preferences (bowlers married to opera buffs, for example), amounts of personal spending money, household tasks, and even some aspects of sexual relationships. Negotiation and compromise have their advantages and disadvantages. Among the latter is that neither spouse totally receives what he or she wants. But the advantage is that both get some of what they want. Through skilled negotiation, most marital conflicts can be resolved or significantly modified.

To collaborate means "to work with another or others" and, I would add, "until both derive their major goals." In all other methods of conflict resolution mentioned thus far, at least one spouse, and sometimes both, needs to give in to some extent. In the collaboration approach both husband and wife would state their desires, goals, or ambitions. Then, if possible, both would set out to assist the other in attaining their desires. Suppose the husband wants a relatively expensive camera and the wife wants a new, also expensive, grandfather clock for the hallway. They could (1) coexist with each other's desires and do nothing; (2) capitulate so one gives in to the other—either the husband gets the camera, or the wife gets the grandfather clock; (3) compromise so the husband gets a less expensive camera and the wife settles for a clock for the fireplace mantle; or (4) collaborate so both work for what the other desires—he gets the camera he wants, and she gets her grandfather clock.

Perhaps they could collaborate by selling something they own. Maybe they could earn the extra money through a second job for one or through a joint money-raising project. Whatever the strategy, both would work, plan, and persist until the joint goals are reached. Granted, the collaboration approach to conflict has its limitations and may not be practical in all marriage situations, but it is one that can satisfy both partners fully and bring them closer together. Couples should consider using collaboration whenever the situation allows.

How to Get Out of the Turmoil Trap

In my marriage enhancement classes at BYU, I give the students an assignment titled "Dealing with Differences." We first discuss the following sequence: Differences > Disagreements > Conflict > Anger. During the week that follows, married couples are to write down all the differences they can think of in their marriage. Then, after they have both contributed to the list, they are to put them into two separate categories: essential and nonessential differences.

Nonessential differences are those differences that arise in marriage that really should not affect the stability of the marriage or the satisfaction of the marriage partners. Essential differences are those differences that do matter, in which one or both have some vested interest.

We then discuss the following statement by B. H. Roberts: "In essentials let there be unity; in non-essentials, liberty; and in all things, charity." (Roberts, p. 30.)

By this time we have found some interesting results. Most of the differences they have identified usually turn out to be nonessential differences, and only a few can be identified as essential differences. In addition, I point out to the students that differences need not lead to disagreements if we can agree to disagree and realize that some differences are normal in any given marriage. We also talk about anger (the topic of the next chapter, "Trap 8: The Temper Trap").

Finally, we look over our list of differences, both essential and nonessential, and determine how the four Cs might be applied to each of the areas of potential conflict.

Where can we coexist and just practice tolerance and patience? In what areas might we capitulate, simply acquiescing to our husbands or wives by giving in? Which areas of conflict could we settle if we compromise, that is, negotiate or bargain for a mutually agreeable solution? And finally, when will, it be possible to collaborate, or try for the win-win strategy in which both spouses work to help each other attain what he or she is seeking?

By applying the four Cs of conflict resolution, we can deal with marital conflict adequately and constructively when it does arise. And by working to resolve the conflicts in our marriages, we will hopefully never have to encounter or even discuss the fifth C of conflict resolution . . . that of cancellation, or divorce.
