Brent A. Barlow, Twelve Traps in Today's Marriage and How to Avoid Them ( 1986)

Trap 8

The Temper Trap

Temper: State of feeling or frame of mind usually dominated by a single strong emotion; heat of mind or emotion, proneness to anger, passion.

THE TEMPER TRAP: The inability or unwillingness of marriage partners to control, modify, or possibly eliminate anger in their relationship.

One of the interesting paradoxes in marriage is that marriage partners who love each other sometimes become highly irritated or annoyed with each other. On occasion there may be outright anger. It would be meaningless to debate whether a person should or should not become angry at someone they love; the fact is, they often do. Sometimes a spouse will do something over which his or her marriage partner becomes upset. On occasion, the absence of action or words may also irritate the spouse. There are both sins of omission and sins of commission in provoking anger.

Recall for a moment the last time you became angry at your spouse or someone else you dearly love. What was the situation? What happened to trigger your anger? What did the other person say or do? Most important, how were you feeling about yourself before the incident occurred?

Apparently anger and irritation are frequently linked to one's self-esteem. Husbands or wives often become irritated and upset with their spouses when they are angry at themselves. In this regard, Dr. Albert Ellis and Dr. Robert Harper, psychotherapists from Washington, D.C., and New York have reported in their book, A Guide to Successful Marriage, that "there is an all too human tendency for us to get irritated with others in direct proportion to our irritation with ourselves." (Ellis, p. 79.)

If the observation of Drs. Ellis and Harper is correct, and I believe it is, we learn at least two important concepts about anger and marriage. First, if our spouses are angry or upset, they may not be living up to their expectations at that time, and their self-esteem may be low because of some supposed or real failures. Their anger or hostility may have nothing to do with the marriage even though it is vented on the nearest person available. Thus realizing this, we could check our first assumption that the anger is directed at us, and we would be better able to keep ourselves from retaliation. Realizing the cause of anger should make us more capable of controlling our own responses.

Second, we should be more careful about not projecting our hostility toward our loved ones. If we find ourselves misdirecting our anger, we should retract our angry statements immediately and apologize for our behavior, admitting that we are actually upset with ourselves and not with our spouses.

I have a friend who once told me about a large tree a few blocks from his home. Each evening as he drives home, he stops by the tree and examines his emotional state. He does not want to bring the problems of work to his marriage and family, and stopping by the large tree is a reminder not to do so. This has helped him avoid the Farmer-in-the-Dell syndrome, a phenomenon in many marriages and families that deals with displaced irritations and anger.

The Farmer-in-the-Dell syndrome works like this: A person has a bad day, and self-esteem approaches zero. Suppose the husband is experiencing this. He arrives home in a discouraged state and says something to his wife that reflects his irritation. She then assumes he is angry at her, and her ill feelings mount. The wife then says something to the oldest child that indicates her annoyance, and the oldest child then crabs at the next oldest. This irritation is passed from child to child until it reaches the youngest one, who, having no one else to turn on, attacks the family cat. Such is displaced anger, which we have all seen or noticed in one form or another in our marriages and families.

What Is Your I.Q.?

Both the Bible and the Book of Mormon admonish that we should not be "easily provoked." (1 Cor. 13:5; Moro. 7:45.) But are we easily irritated? And more importantly, are we easily angered? Here is a little test to help you determine your I.Q., or Irritability Quotient. The test and scoring method have been adapted from the Novaco Provocation Inventory developed by Dr. R. W. Novaco.

Read over the list of twenty-five potentially upsetting situations. Then, in the space provided, estimate the degree of your response with the following measurement:

0 - I would feel very little or no annoyance.

1 - I would feel a little irritated.

2 - I would feel moderately upset.

3 - I would feel quite angry.

4 - I would feel very angry.

For example, on question 4, "You get your car stuck in the mud or snow," if you believe "I would feel moderately upset," you would write a 2 in the space provided.

Scale

___ 1. You unpack an appliance you have just bought, plug it in, and discover that it doesn't work.

___ 2. You are overcharged by a repairman who has you in a bind.

___ 3. You are singled out for correction when the action of others go unnoticed.

___ 4. You get your car stuck in the mud or snow.

___ 5. You are talking to someone who doesn't answer you.

___ 6. Someone pretends to be something he or she is not.

___ 7. While you are struggling to carry four sodas to your table at a cafeteria, someone bumps into you, spilling the sodas.

___ 8. You have hung up your clothes, but someone knocks them to the floor and fails to pick them up.

___ 9. You are hounded by a salesman from the moment you walk into a store.

___ 10. You have made arrangements to go somewhere, but the person backs out at the last minute and leaves you all alone.

___ 11. You are being joked about or teased.

___ 12. Your car is stalled at a traffic light, and the guy behind you keeps blowing his horn.

___ 13. You accidentally make the wrong kind of turn in a parking lot. As you get out of the car, someone yells at you, "Where did you learn to drive?"

___ 14. Someone makes a mistake and blames it on you.

___ 15. You are trying to concentrate, but a person near you is tapping his or her foot.

___ 16. You lend someone an important book or tool, and he or she fails to return it.

___ 17. You have had a busy day, and the person you live with complains that you forgot to do something you agreed to do.

___ 18. You are trying to discuss something important with your mate or partner, who isn't giving you a chance to express your feelings.

___ 19. You are in a discussion with someone who persists in arguing about a topic he or she knows very little about.

___ 20. Someone intrudes and interrupts an argument between you and someone else.

___ 21. You need to get somewhere quickly, but the car in front of you is going 25 mph in a 40 mph zone and you can't pass.

___ 22. You step on a wad of chewing gum.

___ 23. You are mocked by a small group of people as you pass them.

___ 24. In a hurry to get somewhere, you tear a good pair of slacks on a sharp object.

___ 25. You use your last coin to make a phone call, but you are disconnected before you finish dialing, and the money is lost.

After completing the evaluation, you can determine your Irritability Quotient. Make sure you answered all the questions, and then simply add up the score for the twenty-five situations.

The lowest score would be 0 while the highest would be 100. Few attain either of these scores. Here is a possible explanation of your I.Q.

0-45 The amount of anger and annoyance you generally experience is remarkably low.

46-55 You respond with less anger than most people in irritating situations.

56-75 You respond about average to life's annoyances.

76-85 You respond with substantially more anger than average to irritating experiences in life. You are a fairly irritable person.

86-100 You have a very high I.Q. and frequently encounter intense reactions that do not go away quickly. You probably harbor negative feelings and likely experience frequent headaches and high blood pressure. Relatively few people respond to anger as intently as do you.

Anger Is Controversial

I have found the topic of anger to be somewhat controversial with some couples, particularly among Latter-day Saints. I often ask the question, "Do you ever become angry at your husband or wife?" Some will say "yes." Others will not reply. I then rephrase my question, "Do you ever become irritated with your marriage partner?" At this point, most couples will nod their heads in agreement. Many married couples feel that people who love each other should never be angry with each other. If they do become angry, they supposedly do not love each other. Hence, many are unwilling to admit anger or even slight annoyances with their spouses.

Several years ago I had the opportunity of talking to Dr. David Mace at a family life conference in Portland, Oregon. He and his wife, Vera, were then in their seventies and about to retire from full-time involvement in marriage enrichment and counseling. They were also about to take semiretirement from the management of a group they had started called ACME: Association of Couples for Marriage Enrichment. They had been involved in these areas for over fifty years and have probably done more good than any other couple to promote stability and satisfaction in contemporary marriage in the United States.

On the occasion of their semiretirement, Dr. Mace made an interesting observation. After more than fifty years of counseling and marriage enrichment involvement, he said that if he had only one hour to help a couple do something to improve their marriage, he would help them learn to deal with anger. He said that when people are angry, they usually are not loving. Anger conceals, even if momentarily, loving and caring feelings. If couples allow themselves to be continually angry, they will not allow themselves or their spouses the opportunity to be loving. Love and anger, he claimed, are two sides of the same coin in human relationships. The irony is that we often become the most angry or irritated with those individuals we love the most.

Since that time Dr. Mace has written a book titled Love & Anger in Marriage (Grand Rapids, Michigan: Zondervan Publishing House, 1982.) It can be purchased in many Christian bookstores or may be ordered from ACME, 459 S. Church Street, P.O. Box 10596, Winston-Salem, N.C. 27108. I highly recommend the book.

Here is one of Dr. Mace's observations from Love & Anger in Marriage:

During a lifetime of working as a professional in the field of marriage and the family, I have eagerly sought to understand the immense complexity of close interpersonal relationships. And I have often asked myself whether there might be one key issue that would explain why so many marriages, embarked upon with such high hopes, finally falter and fail. In time an answer began to emerge. First in my own marriage, and then in the marriages of many other couples whom I sought to help, the management of anger seemed to be especially important. As I continued to explore what I called the love-anger cycle, I became convinced that I had tracked down the critical issue. (Mace, Love, pp. 9-10.)

Here are four of his premises:

Dr. Mace describes several ways individuals deal with anger. There is (1) fight, the physical and emotional confrontation or attack on the perceived source of threat; (2) flight, the running away from an opponent or situation that seems to be overpowering; (3) freeze, the "do nothing" or "play dead" approach where those confronted see the situation as hopeless; and (4) relax, the relaxation of muscles and physical tension after the brain sends the message to the body that the threat is over. This might be done spontaneously (a false alarm) or by conscious choice when the threat is less than that originally perceived. (See Mace, Love, pp. 33-37.) He notes that many couples, particularly newlyweds, often are disillusioned to find that they do become angry at someone they love.

Three Perspectives of Anger

To help understand the topic of anger better, let's assume there are three different perspectives toward anger:

Perspective 1: Anger is an instinctive response to threat. Therefore, neither the onset nor the consequences of anger can be controlled.

Perspective 2: Anger is an instinctive response to threat, but we are in control of what we do about our anger.

Perspective 3: We can choose whether or not we are going to become (or remain) angry, and we may therefore choose not to experience the consequences of anger.

Let's examine each perspective more closely. Perspective 1 (no control of origin or consequences) is something like a temper tantrum. It gives one an excuse for becoming angry because the individual is supposedly not responsible for the anger. When we say things like "you make me so angry that I . . ." we are operating from Perspective 1. Those who advocate this belief claim our physical makeup is such that we spontaneously respond to threatening situations. Anger, therefore, supposedly protects both body and ego.

Perspective 2 suggests that, while we cannot on occasion help becoming angry, we can do something about it once we do become angry. This philosophy is suggested in the biblical verse, "Be ye angry, and sin not: let not the sun go down upon your wrath." (Eph. 4:26.) Latter-day Saints may be interested in Joseph Smith's revision of that scripture, "Can ye be angry, and not sin?" which has a different connotation. Dr. Mace, in Love & Anger in Marriage, takes a Perspective 2 position. He claims that we will, on occasion, become angry even with loved ones. His approach is that anger is normal, and normal people become angry.

Perspective 3 is a little more difficult but, I believe, mature approach to anger. It simply views anger as a choice. We can decide or choose whether or not we become angry. By choosing not to become angry, we can avoid all the negative consequences that attend anger.

Burton C. Kelly, in the February 1980 Ensign, discusses Perspective 3. He claims that, though we will not all immediately develop the ability to choose or refuse anger, as long as we know it is possible, it becomes attainable. Brother Kelly states, "Few of us reach adulthood without experiencing anger—our own or someone else's. In fact, society seems to tell us that occasional anger is inevitable and normal, even healthy. I believe, however, that anger is not only unhealthy and harmful, but can be eliminated. A few basic ideas about the nature of anger can help us see the gospel answer to purging anger entirely from our lives, thus taking a giant step toward the charity and self-control we all seek to develop."

Burton Kelly then states and gives a rationale for each of four basic principles:

Brother Kelly also defines the difference between the Lord's anger and that of mortals. In addition, he gives several "gospel cures" for anger, such as dealing with it quickly, having faith in our capability not to become angry, and developing knowledge—through awareness, self-discipline, and forgiveness. He says that many people ask him if he still becomes angry. His reply:

Unfortunately, yes. But not as often, not as intensely, and not for as long. When I stop and consider these principles, my anger fades away. . . . I try to remember that my anger is a signal that I need to correct some of my thoughts (those that induced it), that it is a reminder of weaknesses I need to overcome.

I realize that the goal of eliminating anger is a tremendous challenge—and not one to be conquered in a single step—but I testify that as we strive to do so we will not only markedly improve our own relationships with others and increase in joy and happiness, but also enjoy better health, more energy, and more vitality. Further, as we conquer anger we will prepare ourselves to help others eliminate the destructiveness of anger from their lives. . . .

I also believe that we will not really know the blessing nor the purpose of living this commandment until we have lived it. The full blessings and understanding come after having lived the commandment, not before (see Moses 5:6-8). (Kelly, pp. 9-13.)

The Gospel Is the Key to Resolving Anger

Terrance D. Olson, in the August 1982 Ensign, states, "I am convinced that the gospel of Jesus Christ is the solution—a very practical one—to problems in marriage. Even though some husbands and wives see scriptural counsel as too "abstract" or too "idealistic," I see continually how the gospel is the source of personal and marital happiness and that it has the answers to solving problems in marriage."

He then gives a specific example:

Our hostile feelings toward another person are more fundamental to our problems than that person's behavior. What others do to us does not render us uncompassionate or unforgiving. We do that to ourselves by refusing to forgive. Our road to personal peace requires our own repentance of those feelings of resentment. Consider Doctrine and Covenants 64:10: "I, the Lord, will forgive whom I will forgive, but of you it is required to forgive all men."

An attitude of forgiveness toward our companion is an important beginning. By having faith in the first two commandments, we are blessed by them. By loving the Lord with all our heart, we see our situation differently. By loving our husband or wife as ourselves, we see him or her more compassionately, and are no longer in despair. We are traveling on a gospel road, rather than on a path which denies the gospel . . .

The gospel teaches us that we are free to "act for [ourselves] and not be acted upon . . . . and all things are given [us] which are expedient." (2 Ne. 2:26-27.) In other words, whatever our spouse's attitudes or sins might be, his or her behavior is not sufficient to render us incapable of living as we feel we should.

Terrance Olson's article, "The Compassionate Marriage Partner," which relates the gospel to marriage, should be read in its entirety. (Olson, pp. 14-17.)

Tim LaHaye and Bob Phillips have also written a fine book on Christian methods of resolving anger, Anger Is a Choice (Grand Rapids, Michigan: Zondervan Publishing House, 1982). This book is available in most Christian bookstores. Latter-day Saints will appreciate its scriptural insight into anger through numerous references to biblical verses. Particularly helpful are the chapters "Is It Ever Right to Be Angry?" "Anger and Forgiveness," "Anger in the Bible," and "How to Deal with Your Anger."

How to Get Out of the Temper Trap

Like other traps described in this book, the temper trap is not easy to escape. The first step, however, is to realize that you are in it. Do you have a high Irritability Quotient? Then do a lot of study of articles and books such as those suggested—give yourself to much introspection and praying, and discuss the problem with your spouse. Professional counseling might also be sought. If we are, as the scriptures say, "easily provoked" (1 Cor. 13:5 and Moro. 7:45), we do not yet have the pure love of Christ.

In my marriage classes and seminars I suggest that married couples closely examine the three perspectives of anger and decide two things: (1) which perspective are they now using, and (2) which perspective would they like to use? I feel successful if we move any person or couple from Perspective 1 to Perspective 2 or 3. I also suggest that they keep an Anger Log for two weeks and experiment with the idea that anger can be a choice. Can we actually choose to be or to not be angry?

An Anger Log is a notebook or journal that a person keeps for fourteen days. During that time he or she records all the "opportunities" for anger and the attendant results. Did he or she respond with Perspective I, 2, or 3 in each of the situations? If the person is one of my students, at the end of the two-week period, I collect the log with its personal comments and observations.

Interestingly, few couples ever make it for the full two weeks without becoming angry (or "very annoyed" as they put it) at their marriage partners. But they report that they are amazed how often they do exercise control over situations when they heretofore would have just let themselves go emotionally.

During a marriage enhancement course at BYU one semester, I gave the Anger Log assignment and then volunteered to do it myself for two weeks. I was to report back to the students my successes or failures. The class ended, and the students left. My car was being repaired that afternoon, so I phoned Susan and asked her to pick me up at a designated location outside my office. She said she would be there at 4:30 P.M.

I went outside my office about that time and began waiting. It started raining but I decided to wait because she surely would be by soon. Five minutes went by. Then ten and fifteen. Soon it was 5:00 P.M. and no Susan. During that time I started fuming inside. Why would she leave me waiting in the rain? Surely I had a reason to be angry. She was late and had no reason to make me stand there in the rain and wait. I felt the anger starting to mount. A young married couple from my marriage class walked by. Even though it was raining, they stopped to say they had enjoyed the discussion on anger. They also reminded me of the assignment we had all agreed upon little more than an hour earlier. They added that they were interested in hearing about my Anger Log.

I decided I should not fail within sixty minutes of the assignment, so I resolved not to become angry!

Susan finally arrived at 5:05 P.M. I wish I could have photographed the look on her face as I climbed into the car, glasses foggy and water dripping off the rims.

"Go ahead and say it," she said as she bristled.

"Say what?" I replied in a mild-mannered Clark Kent voice.

"Say something about my being 35 minutes late."

"Well, I really didn't enjoy standing in the rain that long."

"I thought a college professor would have enough sense to go back inside the building once it started raining," she said, still on guard.

"I simply decided not to become angry," I revealed rather flamboyantly. I then told her about the assignment and my agreement to participate.

Susan sat in the driver's seat, car motor still running, and then exclaimed, "This is nothing short of a miracle!"

I soon found out that a real estate agent had brought by a couple to look at our home for sale. She knew, and we both agreed, that the wait was warranted, and the incident was soon set aside.

In case you are wondering, no, I didn't make it for the full two weeks without becoming angry. I did survive a cracked window that week. (I congratulated our nine-year-old son on his enthusiasm for baseball.) But then during the second weekend, our family of eight (at that time six children) decided to take a long drive in the family station wagon. The afternoon got hot, the kids started fighting over space, my nerves wore thin, and . . . need I say more? I forgot about my assignment and the Anger Log and let myself retrogress to Perspective 1 during one of their encounters. But neither their fight nor my anger lasted long, so perhaps there is still hope.

During education week at BYU one summer, I challenged nearly one thousand people to try the Anger Log for only one week. A wife later wrote and told me what miraculous things had happened in their marriage. Her husband, a construction supervisor, angered easily but decided he would try the Anger Log for one week. She said it was marvelous while it lasted. But he, like myself, didn't make it the full time. She said he worked at it for six days, but on the seventh he rested.

Try the Anger Log for two weeks. See if you can do any better than her husband or yours truly.

Can anger be a choice? Interesting thought, and worthwhile pursuit.
