Brent A. Barlow, Twelve Traps in Today's Marriage and How to Avoid Them ( 1986)

Trap 9

The Tension Trap

Tension: Mental or emotional strain; suspense, anxiety, or excitement; pressure.

THE TENSION TRAP: Participation in too many stress-producing projects or activities.

I don't know if your marriage is like ours, but it seems that my wife and I undergo a great deal of tension.

Some of it is external and comes from without with little or no control over its origin. We can only try to counter it when it occurs. Perhaps we all need to better understand the admonition that "it is not requisite that a man should run faster than he has strength." (Mosiah 4:27. See also D&C 10:4.)

Susan and I often experience stress when we begin projects and take a long time in finishing them. But we are learning. One of the most stressful experiences in our marriage occurred several years ago. We were living in Wisconsin and decided that our house needed a coat of paint. A paint contractor gave us a bid of $500 to complete the job. We later figured that if we painted it ourselves, we could save about $200. So with very good intentions we set about to do so.

Spring arrived as we began our house-painting project. It was warm weather, so we cheerfully began painting. There was a pitcher of iced Kool-Aid on the patio table. It was a scene worthy of a Norman Rockwell painting. But about that time the pleasant part ended. After starting, we learned that the old paint had to be scraped off, which took much more time and work than we had anticipated. We would also have to apply a primer coat, which we had not known about.

About that time we found out that Susan was pregnant with our fifth child. Consequently, she became nauseated with the smell of paint. In addition, at the university where I was teaching summer school, some unexpected projects developed that also required a great deal of time and effort.

Very quickly, our house-painting project to save $200 began to drag on and on, and the tension started to build. We started scraping and painting one end of the house, and as time passed on, the unfinished work remained as a monument to our inability to finish a major project we had started. Our painting project, or the lack of it, became the object of many good-natured jokes with our neighbors.

As the spring weather began to disappear, so did our patience, first with our project, then with each other. Each afternoon as I arrived home from the university, the unfinished, unpainted house stood there to greet me defiantly as I drove in the driveway.

After dinner one evening, I knew I was supposed to go out and either scrape, prime, or paint. But I was exhausted. So Susan and I sat down and reexamined the situation. We recalled the original bid of $500 for the professional painter to come and paint our house. We had been sincere in wanting to save $200 by painting it ourselves. But in the process we realized that the project had become a major source of contention in our marriage. We both agreed that our marriage was worth more to us than $200.

So the next day we went down to the credit union, borrowed the $500, and called the painter. It was one of the wisest things we ever did, and one of the best investments we ever made in our marriage. We were able to go on and enjoy what otherwise would have been a very frustrating summer. Plus, the professional painter did a much better job on our house than we would have done.

It often amazes me how much money people will justify for borrowing or spending on items of personal interest, but when it comes to borrowing or spending money to avoid something that is a source of contention in a marriage, what penny-pinchers we become. Exactly how much money is a marriage worth anyway?

Learn a lesson from Brent and Susan Barlow. Be careful not to begin projects you can't finish. Does that sound like original advice? It isn't. We read it first in the Bible. Several hundred years ago Jesus Christ taught, "For which of you, intending to build a tower, sitteth not down first, and counteth the cost, whether he have sufficient to finish it? Lest haply, after he hath laid the foundation, and is not able to finish it, all that behold it begin to mock him, saying, This man began to build, and was not able to finish." (Luke 14:28-30.)

A Time of Chaos

Children can also be a source of tension in contemporary married life. About the time we think we have everything under control, life becomes more hectic.

In 1983 I sat down with paper and pencil in hand and began to outline the history of our marriage. It seemed to fall into distinct periods, and I thought if I ever wrote about it, the outline would be something like this:

Chapter One: "Beginnings, 1965-1968." We were married on June 5, 1965, and during the first year I attended BYU to complete my bachelor's degree. Susan taught at Cherry Hill Elementary School in Orem while I finished my senior year. The following two years we lived in Kaysville, Utah, where I taught LDS Seminary at Davis High School and finished my master's degree. Doug was born in 1967.

Chapter Two: "Preparation, 1968-1971." During this time we moved to Tallahassee, Florida, where I worked on my Ph.D. at Florida State University. Tammy was born in 1969 and Brian in 1971 in Florida. The pace of life picked up.

Chapter Three: "Establishment, 1971-1977." For the next three years we lived in Carbondale, Illinois, and then in Eau Claire, Wisconsin, for another three years. I taught at Southern Illinois University and then at the University of Wisconsin-Stout. Jon was born in Illinois in 1973, and Jason was born in Wisconsin in 1976. We were into parenthood full swing.

Chapter Four: "Chaos, 1977-1983." During these six years we moved to Utah, where I began teaching at Brigham Young University. Kris was born in 1980, the three older children moved into their teens, Susan began teaching part-time, and I began to write a newspaper column and books about marriage. It seemed like we were all going a hundred miles an hour in different directions. About this same time we realized that our house was too small, so we commenced plans for a new, larger house.

After outlining chapter four, "Chaos," I became a bit philosophical. We had all our children, I thought, with the oldest nearly seventeen and the youngest moving up on four, so the worst of the hectic pace was behind us. Perhaps things would settle down, so I outlined the next chapter. Chapter Five, "Stability, 1983 and on." I was quite proud of my outline and called to Susan as she entered the house, "Please come here. I have something to show you."

"Yes, and I have something to tell you," she said as she came in and took off her coat.

"Look," I boasted as I showed her the outline history of our marriage, "don't you like the "way I've divided it into five chapters?"

"What is this chapter five, 'Stability'?" she asked. "And what does it mean?"

"Well," I leaned back as I began, "I think that we are through the most difficult parts of parenting. We have our six children, and now all we have to do is let them grow up." Susan was quiet as she reviewed my outline.

"By the way, where have you been?" I asked.

"Oh, I had an appointment with the doctor."

"Is anything wrong?"

"No, not really." Then she paused. "We're going to have another baby!"

We were both quiet and reflective. After a few more moments of silence I said, "Maybe we had better cancel chapter five, 'Stability,' and continue chapter four, 'Chaos.'" She laughed and left the room.

It was Thanksgiving time, and I continued to reflect. We could still be thankful. We could still count our many blessings and name them one by one: Doug, Tammy, Brian, Jon, Jason, and Kris.

The following year, June 6, 1984, we added our seventh blessing. Brandon James Barlow was born. And at the time of the writing of this book, we are still in chapter four, "Chaos," with our many blessings, fast-paced life, and responsibilities.

Children Contribute to Tension

Since we were going to have another child, I realized I should be more supportive of Susan.

Not long ago I was talking to a friend of none in Salt Lake City, Dr. Val MacMurray. Val shared with me an article he had recently co-authored with David C. Spendlove, M.S.W., and James R. Gaveleck, Ph.D., all of whom are affiliated with the University of Utah Medical Center. The article was titled "Learned Helplessness and the Depressed Housewife." The authors pointed out in their article that (as of 1978) 47 percent of the mothers in the United States who have children under the age of 18 do not work outside their homes for a salary. This figure "represents approximately 14.3 million women whose foremost responsibility is probably managing a household." Their research has particular relevance for married couples. They noted:

One of the primary stresses on most housewives that helps account for both dependence and depression is child rearing. For several reasons, the demands of caring for children for most of the day leave the housewife more vulnerable than her employed husband to feelings of dependence. Having small children often means that a woman does not have time for adult contacts or time for being alone; moreover, the housewife who usually spends the majority of the day with her children may find them demanding of her time and effort in a manner that is not intellectually stimulating. Her husband, on the other hand, has the dual role of father and wage earner and not only receives emotional support at home, but often obtains a degree of intellectual stimulation at work. In addition, he has access to a network of social supports within the context of his job.

A study by Brown and Harris recently found that women who had more than two children under the age of 14 were significantly more depressed than women who had fewer than two children, but that if the variable of number of children in the home was controlled . . . , women who worked were less depressed than those who did not. Merely working outside the home reduced by 50 percent the incidence of depression among the women included in the study who did not have a supportive relationship with a male companion. In the case of women who had such a relationship, the number of children at home did not influence the development of depression. The implication one can draw from these findings is that women at home with more than two children need to have a supportive relationship with a male companion if they are to be relatively free from depression. Furthermore, the greater the number of young children a woman has, the more dependent she becomes on this key relationship. If a woman lacks such a relationship or is involved in a relationship that is not functioning well, the likelihood increases that she will feel depressed. (Spendlove, pp. 474-79.)

I once read a sign that said "A mother's place is in the home . . . and so is the father's!" And now we know why.

The Patti Perfect Syndrome

It is true that children contribute to tension and stress in a home. But many women, sometimes unknowingly, contribute to their own feelings of stress by trying to live a life-style that is unrealistic. Margaret B. Black and Midge W. Nielsen have, with tongue in cheek, noted this phenomenon among some LDS women in their article titled "Patti Perfect."

Many LDS women unconsciously compete with an idealized image of the already-perfect wife and mother who successfully incorporates all the demands of family, church, and society into her life. Although we have never met such a woman, we persist in believing she's out there somewhere. We can just imagine what she must accomplish in a day . . .

Patti gets up very early and says her personal prayers. She zips her slim, vigorous body into her warm-up suit and tiptoes outside to run her usual five miles (on Saturday she does ten). Returning home all aglow, she showers and dresses for the day in a tailored skirt and freshly starched and ironed blouse. She settles down for quiet meditation and scripture reading, before preparing the family breakfast. The morning's menu calls for whole wheat pancakes, homemade syrup, freshly squeezed orange juice, and powdered milk (the whole family loves it).

With classical music wafting through the air, Patti awakens her husband and ten children. She spends a quiet moment with each and helps them plan a happy day. The children quickly dress in clothes that were laid out the night before. They cheerfully make their beds, clean their rooms, and do the individual chores assigned to them on the Family Work Wheel Chart. They assemble for breakfast the minute mother calls.

After family prayer and scripture study, the children all practice their different musical instruments. Father leaves for work on a happy note. All too soon it is time for the children to leave for school. Having brushed (and flossed) their teeth, the children pick up coats, book bags, and lunches which were prepared the night before and arrive at school five minutes early.

With things more quiet, Patti has story time with her pre-schoolers and teaches them a cognitive reading skill. She feeds, bathes, and rocks the baby before putting him down for his morning nap. With baby sleeping peacefully and the three-year-old twins absorbed in creative play, Patti tackles the laundry and housework. In less than an hour, everything is in order. Thanks to wise scheduling and children who are trained to work, her house never really gets dirty.

Proceeding to the kitchen, Patti sets out tonight's dinner: frozen veal parmigiana that she made in quantity from her home-grown tomatoes and peppers. She then mixes and kneads twelve loaves of bread. While the bread rises, Patti dips a batch of candles to supplement her food storage. As the bread bakes, she writes in her personal journal and dashes off a few quick letters: one to her Congressman and a couple of genealogy inquiries to distant cousins. Patti then prepares her mini-class on organic gardening. She also inserts two pictures and a certificate in little Paul's scrapbook, noting with satisfaction that all family albums are attractive and up-to-date. Checking the mail, Patti sees that their income tax refund has arrived—a result of having filed in January. It is earmarked for mission and college savings accounts. Although Patti's hardworking husband earns only a modest salary, her careful budgeting has kept the family debt-free.

After lunch, Patti drops the children off at Grandma's for their weekly visit. Grandma enjoys babysitting and appreciates the warm loaf of bread. Making an extra call, Patti takes a second loaf to one of the sisters she is assigned to visit teach. A third loaf goes to the non-member neighbor on the corner.

Patti arrives at the elementary school where she directs a special education program. A clinical psychologist, Patti finds this an excellent way to stay abreast of her field while raising her family. Before picking up her little ones, Patti finishes collecting for the charity fund drive.

Home again, Patti settles the children down for their afternoon naps. She spends some quiet time catching up on her reading and filing. As she mists her luxuriant house plants, the school children come through the door. Patti listens attentively to each one as they tell her about their day. The children start right in on their homework, the mother supervising and encouraging them. When all schoolwork is done, Patti and the children enjoy working on one of their projects. Today they work on the quilt stretched on frames in a corner of the family room.

Dinnertime and father arrive, and it is a special hour for the whole family. They enjoy Patti's well-balanced, tasty meal, along with stimulating conversation. After dinner, father and the children pitch in to clean up so that mom can relax. She enjoys listening to the sounds of laughter and affection that come from the kitchen.

With the teenaged children in charge at home, mother and father attend an evening session at the Temple. During the return trip, they sit close together as in courting days. "Well dear," says Paul Perfect, "did you have a good day?" Patti reflectively answers, "Yes, I really did. But I feel I need more challenge in my life. I think I'll contact our Family Organization and volunteer to head up a reunion for August." (Black, p. 15.)

Although such a superwoman really does not exist, we recognize the model in the story because we have encountered many of the expectations Patti Perfect meets. The danger for many of us is in setting too many expectations for ourselves—expectations that are unrealistic and oftentimes trivial. Such expectations, coupled with failure to meet them, create undue stress for ourselves and our family.

The Gandhi Syndrome

What should we do when the stress and tensions of life begin to mount? What could a married couple do when one or the other experiences mental exhaustion? Suppose a wife, for example, needs professional help for her mental condition. Why is it that husbands are often hesitant to encourage, or in some cases, to allow her to obtain it? It may be because of what Dr. Mace calls the Gandhi Syndrome.

Like many other couples, Susan and I went to see the movie Gandhi. It was the story of Mahatma Gandhi, the Indian statesman. Millions remember him as a kind and gentle man, even a saint. Yet there is another aspect of Gandhi's life that is generally unknown. Dr. Mace relates that aspect in his book Close Companions:

The Gandhis were married at age 13, a marriage that was arranged by their parents. They had four children. Eventually in their marriage, Mrs. Gandhi became seriously ill. "The doctors diagnosed an infection that was spreading rapidly. Antibiotics were available, and preparations were completed for the necessary injection.

"At that point, however, Gandhi intervened. He believed that the body took responsibility for its own healing, and that no alien materials from outside must be allowed to invade it. All injections were taboo. He would not give his permission.

"The doctors argued, friends pleaded. But Gandhi could not yield. For him, a vital principle was at stake." That principle was that no outside help was necessary, no matter how great the need, when self-healing was possible. This philosophy might be called "The Gandhi Syndrome."

"So, while the doctor stood by with his syringe in readiness, waiting only for Gandhi's nod of approval, the infection spread and Gandhi's wife died." (Mace, Close, pp. 227-28.)

Gandhi's belief that the human body was always self-healing was sincere. But it was also erroneous. Help and possible recovery were available, but because of his belief, he was at least partially responsible for his wife's suffering and death.

Is there a similarity between the Gandhi Syndrome and attitudes held by some contemporary couples? I think so. We frequently read of individuals who refuse medical treatment for various reasons. But the same is also true with regard to mental health. Many people mistakenly believe that most mental problems are self-healing.

On this very matter I recently had an interesting conversation with one of my students at BYU. She was concerned not only about the physical health of her mother, but also about her mother's mental health. In fact, she believed that her mother's physical health was deteriorating because of mental depression. My young student was even fearful that her mother was near the point of harming herself and might even take her own life.

I asked my student if the family had sought professional help. She said her father was apprehensive about "allowing" his wife to seek help for depression. He thought it was a sign of weakness or "not living right," and that it might affect his standing as a leader in his civic and church groups.

The husband, you see, was one of those who believed that mental problems, in time, are self-healing. Even though competent professional help was nearby and available, he was willing to allow his wife to suffer. He ignorantly assumed that mental problems, unlike physical ailments, do not need professional treatment unless the people involved are weak."

Perhaps the husband and Gandhi were correct in believing that some physical and mental impairments are, in time, self-healing. But many are not and are often fatal. When stress and tension become excessive, I think we are under obligation to "bear one another's burdens." (Gal. 6:2.) This may mean seeking necessary help.

How to Get Out of the Tension Trap

Are there ways we can learn on our own to reduce tension in life? I believe there are and would like to briefly discuss two. They are (1) develop a sense of humor and (2) cut back on some of our present activities.

Sense of Humor. If I were to list some characteristics of a healthy marriage, high among those on the list would be having a sense of humor. This does not mean becoming first-rate nitwits or engaging in the cutting sarcasm often depicted on television sitcoms. I simply mean we need to have the ability to laugh at the inconsistencies of life and not take ourselves too seriously.

I have recently read a fascinating book, Laugh after Laugh: The Healing Power of Humor, written by a physician, Dr. Raymond Moody, Jr., who is also the author of the widely read book Life After Life. In Laugh After Laugh, Dr. Moody gives an interesting account of how humor has implications for the medical profession.

In his chapter "Healing by Humor," he cites numerous case studies in which humor has either cured or helped to cure various types of physical and mental diseases and ailments. Most notable is the documented ability of professional clowns to help children and adults who are ill. Clowning, he notes, is a socially acceptable form of regression in which observers can revert back to the happier, more carefree days of childhood.

Dr. Moody gives a historical review of how humor and laughter have been viewed by various cultures. He quotes Proverbs 17:22: "A merry heart doeth good like a medicine: but a broken spirit drieth the bones." He also points out the destructive use of humor and laughter used by mankind to humiliate and degrade others. This kind of humor is debilitating. The physician notes that only when people can laugh together do communication bonds form. People are then often able to take a different and perhaps less serious perspective of life and its many problems. (Moody, pp. 17-27.)

Cutting Back on Activities. Many of us have been brought up on the philosophy of never giving up on challenging tasks. We remember our high school and athletic events when we chanted, "When the going gets tough, the tough get going," and we often transfer this attitude to all areas of life.

We also remember the story of the two frogs that fell into the bucket of cream. One thought, "I'll never get out of here," and rolled over and drowned. The other frog kept on kicking and repeating, "I can do it. I can do it." With all his kicking and effort, he finally churned the cream to butter, and he hopped out.

It is an inspiring story . . . for frogs . . . who might fall into a bucket of cream. But have you ever stopped to realize that many people are consumed physically and mentally by constantly expending effort on difficult tasks they may never change? Or they ruin their health by working arduously on complex situations they may never overcome.

I am not an expert on trees, fruit, or pruning. But I understand one reason for pruning is so the fruit that is produced will be of better quality. Not only are the dead branches pruned, but often when there is too much growth, limbs producing fruit will also be pruned. Of this phenomenon Jesus noted, "Every branch in me that beareth not fruit he taketh away: and every branch that beareth fruit, he purgeth it, that it may bring forth more fruit." (John 15:2.)

Perhaps some of us need to prune the activities in our lives. Not only the "dead" or unproductive activities, but other endeavors may also have to be pruned so we can concentrate on just a few activities. Our time and energy can then be channeled to those few things we really want to achieve. As has been noted, a great challenge in life for Latter-day Saints is to not only choose between good and evil, but to also choose between good and good. There are so many good causes we can and often try to champion in life, but we may need to prune some of them out of our lives.

By pruning our lives, we can reduce tension and generate time and energy for a few activities, such as our discipleship of the Savior and our time for loved ones. This gives a new insight to the related scripture "By their fruits ye shall know them." (Matt. 7:20.) Perhaps one of the great challenges in life is deciding what activities to prune back or out of our lives. In essence, when do we hang on and when do we let go?

If you are of the "never give up" persuasion, consider the following facts about the Danube River around Vienna. The Danube is beautiful and warm in the summer, and many Viennese go upstream and swim down the river through the pleasant countryside. But every year several people drown because they get caught in the river's whirlpools.

Drowning in the Danube River could be avoided if the swimmers only knew that all they need to do is hold their breath while the whirlpool pulls them down. In a few seconds the water will spin them out again. Instead, the unfortunate swimmers struggle against the current until they lose their strength and drown. The moral of this story reinforces the fact that we must learn in life when to hang on and when to let go. We must learn when to be like frogs that keep kicking in a bucket of cream and when to be like swimmers sucked into a whirlpool who must let go. We should not struggle against circumstances that could consume us.

Yet, a lack of knowledge of ourselves and our capabilities often drives us to do the opposite. We struggle when we should wait, and we wait when we should struggle. We waste energy trying to do what cannot be done and fight against facts of life that cannot be changed. If we do not become preoccupied with or resent the conditions in which we find ourselves, we can then focus on the areas of life in which change and improvement are possible.

In determining where we are going to expend our efforts and reduce tension, let us remember the prayer adopted by Alcoholics Anonymous:

God grant me the serenity To accept the things I cannot change, The courage to change the things I can, And the wisdom to know the difference.
