Brent A. Barlow, Twelve Traps in Today's Marriage and How to Avoid Them ( 1986)

Trap 10

The Touch Trap

Touch: The act of bringing a bodily part into contact with something so as to feel it; handling or feeling gently, usually with the intent to understand or appreciate.

THE TOUCH TRAP: The absence of touch in a marital relationship other than for routine sexual relationships.

Some time ago Ann Landers wrote a column that caught the attention of many readers. Ann asked her women readers to respond to the question, "Would you be content to be held close and treated tenderly, and forget about 'the act'?" The women were asked to answer either yes or no and also to indicate if they were over or under forty years of age.

Much to her surprise, Ann received nearly 100,000 letters from women throughout the United States. She found that 72 percent, or approximately 72,000 women, said yes, if they had to choose between the two, they would be content to only be held close, touched, and treated tenderly. Of those 72 percent who said yes, 40 percent were under forty years of age, which was surprising to Ann and many of her readers.

Ann's survey was of particular interest to me because of a similar survey I did a few years ago and reported in my book What Wives Expect of Husbands. The result of that survey, "Profile of a Loving Husband," listed as #3, "He expresses affection by touch without sexual overtones." Rated much lower was #10, "He helps me attain sexual satisfaction in our relationship." (Barlow, What Wives, p. 148.) This is precisely what 72,000 women wrote and told Ann Landers.

It seems that a great many wives feel that intimacy, touch, and closeness may be more desirable than sexual relationships. A great many husbands today, however, can only be intimate through sexual interaction. Such men would do well to rethink and relearn their concept of touch and closeness. By so doing, they would be taking an important step out of the touch trap.

Why Is Touch So Difficult?

Each semester at Brigham Young University I teach a course on preparation for marriage. We have a unit on self-esteem, and one of the assignments is to build the self-esteem of another person for seven days. Most students choose a roommate, friend, co-worker, family member, or fiancÃ©. They are to avoid criticism, put-downs, and sarcasm during the week. They are also supposed to pay genuine compliments, do good deeds, smile, and generally be helpful for the seven-day period.

Then there is what has become for many the most difficult part. Each day they are to touch the person in a nondemanding way. The students report that they can do everything else with ease except the touch. I explain that it does not have to be an embrace or even a hug. It might simply be just a gentle gesture of touching on the arm or shoulder. Even at that, some students have great difficulty in touching another human being.

One of my students, a muscular BYU football player, did everything in the self-esteem exercise quite well except for the touch part. He told me he was doing the exercise on his roommate, who was also on the football team. Finally, he said, the only way he could touch was to give a playful slap on the back as they left for school each day. I informed my student that he had completed the assignment. Even a friendly slap on the back was a form of touch.

Other students who have a difficult time with touch have developed something similar. They call it the "love punch." They will, in a jovial manner, give the other person a punch or jab as a gesture of saying "I care."

The tendency to be nontactual is both interesting and understandable with single LDS students. During the engagement and the early years of marriage, however, many of us touch our partners and feel comfortable doing so. But I am interested in the trend of marriages becoming nontactual after several years of matrimony. Many couples seldom touch each other more than what is needed for routine sexual relationships.

If I could encourage married couples to do just one thing to maintain or improve their relationships, I think I would suggest developing the skill of touch. Touch is one of the most significant forms of communication we have. Obviously, the absence of touch often communicates disinterest or lack of caring.

Many studies have observed that young infants in institutions can actually die from lack of touch. The phenomenon is known as marasmus. If young children literally need touch to stay alive, perhaps we never outgrow our need for touch as adults. The lack of touch between marriage partners is one of the contemporary traps in marriage, and marital marasmus can be deadly. One physician, Dr. Ed Wheat, has noted: "A tender touch tells us that we are cared for. It can calm our fears, soothe pain, bring us comfort, or give us the blessed satisfaction of emotional security. As adults, touching continues to be a primary means of communicating with those we love, whether we are conscious of it or not. Our need for a caring touch is normal and healthy, and we will never outgrow it." (Wheat, p. 183.)

Touch Is Also a Part of Sex

While many women, according to Ann Landers' survey, enjoy touch without sexual overtones, touch is obviously an important part of the sexual act as well. Perhaps a few thoughts on sexuality from an LDS perspective would be appropriate.

Several years ago when I was a young missionary for the LDS Church, I received a new companion right from the mission home in Salt Lake City. A few days later we were tracting and met a Protestant minister who invited us in. After exchanging points of view on various topics, he asked us, "And what is the Mormon attitude towards sex?"

I choked on my cup of hot chocolate, but my new companion seemed unmoved. "Well," said the minister after a few more sips of his tea, "could you please tell me the Mormon philosophy toward sexuality?" I was tongue-tied and believed my new companion knew next to nothing on the matter. There were a few more moments of silence, and finally my companion said, "Sir, we believe in it."

It has been more than twenty years since that time, and I have been asked the same question by numerous students, friends, professional people, LDS members, and nonmembers. Still, I haven't yet been able to find a better answer than the one given by the missionary: "We believe in it."

We believe in it inasmuch as we know of the sorrow and misery that come from the inappropriate use of sexuality outside the realm of marriage. We are acutely aware of what the prophets, past and present, have warned in these matters. As Alma declared to his son Corianton, "Wickedness never was happiness." (Alma 41:10.)

But we also believe in the good that can be derived from the appropriate use of sexuality in marriage. We are well aware of the love, intimacy, and joy that can come to a married couple when this particular dimension of the marital relationship is nurtured. An inquiry concerning the LDS philosophy toward sexuality seems more relevant today that it was when I served my mission several years ago. Much more is being said, and Latter-day Saints are being confronted with many issues on this topic.

In the United States today approximately 40 percent of marriages now terminate in divorce, and the inability of married couples to sexually relate to each other may be one of the major causes. Even in our own church, President Kimball has noted:

If you study the divorces, as we have had to do in these past years, you will find there are one, two, three, four reasons. Generally sex is the first. They did not get along sexually. They may not say that in court. They may not even tell that to their attorneys, but that is the reason. . . . Husband and wife . . . are authorized, in fact they are commanded, to have proper sex when they are properly married for time and eternity. That does not mean that we need to go to great extremes. That does not mean that a woman is the servant of her husband. It does not mean that any man has a right to demand sex anytime that he might want it. He should be reasonable and understanding and it should be a general program between the two, so they understand and everybody is happy about it. (Kimball, Edward, p. 312.)

The sacred nature of the sexual act in marriage is noted in the book of Genesis. The first commandment to Adam and Eve was "Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth." (Gen. 1:28.) This commandment, and possibly an awareness of the process by which it would be accomplished, was given before sin entered the world. And this, along with all his other creations, was called "very good." (Gen. 1:31.)

A second commandment was also given that was related to the first. In Genesis 2:24 we read, "Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife: and they shall be one flesh." Of the two commandments originally given, (1) to multiply and replenish the earth, and (2) to become one flesh, President Kimball, quoting the words of Billy Graham, has observed: "The Bible celebrates sex and its proper use, presenting it as God-created, God-ordained, God-blessed. It makes plain that God himself implanted the physical magnetism between the sexes for two reasons: for the propagation of the human race, and for the expression of that kind of love between man and wife that makes for true oneness. His command to the first man and woman to be 'one flesh' was as important as his command to 'be fruitful and multiply.'" (Graham, p. 118. As quoted by Kimball, Spencer, "Guidelines," pp. 7-8.)

The commandment to become "one flesh" is of particular interest to Latter-day Saint couples because it is mentioned at least six other times in LDS scriptures. (See Matt. 19:5; Mark 10:7-8; Eph. 5:31; D&C 49:16; Moses 3:24, and Abr. 5:18.) Husband and wife are encouraged to become intimate with one another. This intimacy or oneness might be described as a shared closeness that may be attained in a variety of ways, which includes, but is not limited to, sexual intimacy. For a broader perspective on the topic of intimacy, see Human Intimacy: Illusion and Reality by Victor L. Brown, Jr.

Some have believed that the only justification for sexuality in marriage is reproduction. While this may be the primary function, it is not the only important one. Another Church president, Joseph F. Smith, observed: "The lawful association of the sexes is ordained of God, not only as the sole means of race perpetuation, but for the development of the higher faculties and nobler traits of human nature, which the love-inspired companionship of man and woman alone can insure." (Smith, Joseph F., p. 739.) Similarly, President Kimball also noted, "We know of no directive from the Lord that proper sexual experience between husbands and wives need be limited totally to the procreation of children, but we find much evidence from Adam until now that no provision was ever made by the Lord for indiscriminate sex." (Kimball, Spencer, "The Lord's," p. 4.)

In a recent devotional at Brigham Young University, President Gordon B. Hinckley also addressed these matters, counseling husbands and wives to respect, appreciate, and love one another. (Hinckley, pp. 8-11.) "There can be nothing of inferiority or superiority," he said, "between the husband and wife in the plan of the Lord." He also emphasized that marriage is for having children as well as for companionship: "Much has been said on this campus about birth control. I like to think of . . . the meaning and sanctity of life, of the purpose of this estate in our eternal journey. . . . of the joy that is to be found only where there are children in the home, of the blessings that come of good posterity. When I think of these values and see them taught and observed, then I am willing to leave the question of numbers to the man and the woman and the Lord."

He also gave this rhyme of his:

If I were you, what would I do? I'd live with my love with integrity true— And welcome our children, many or few.

Since our Heavenly Father created the human body and instigated the processes of reproduction and becoming one, it is obvious that both are sanctified by Deity and very sacred. But the fact that they are sacred does not necessarily mean they have to be secret. In reality, if LDS marriages are going to survive contemporary times, these matters should be discussed by couples who are married or those who are contemplating marriage. In this regard Elder Hugh B. Brown has noted:

Many marriages have been wrecked on the dangerous rocks of ignorant and debased sex behavior, both before and after marriage. Gross ignorance on the part of newlyweds on the subject of the proper place and functioning of sex results in much unhappiness and many broken homes.

Thousands of young people come to the marriage altar almost illiterate insofar as this basic and fundamental function is concerned. The sex instinct is not something which we need to fear or be ashamed of. It is God-given and has a high and holy purpose. Through the union of the sexes God provided for the perpetuity of the race. . . .

We want our young people to know that sex is not an unmentionable human misfortune, and certainly it should not be regarded as a sordid but necessary part of marriage. There is no excuse for approaching this most intimate relationship in life without true knowledge of its meaning and its high purpose. This is an urge which more insistently than others calls for self-control and intelligence. (Brown, Hugh, pp. 73, 76.)

To young couples about to marry, the LDS leader counseled: "If they who contemplate this most glorifying and intimate of all human relationships [marriage] would seek to qualify for its responsibilities; . . . if they would frankly discuss the delicate and sanctifying aspects of harmonious sex life which are involved in marriage; . . . much sorrow, heartbreak, and tragedy could be avoided." (Brown, Hugh, pp. 21-22.)

Interestingly, Elder Brown suggests that sexuality to some has become an "unmentionable human misfortune" or "a sordid but necessary part of marriage." This attitude is obviously derived from a variety of sources that, unfortunately, may include mistaken interpretations of a few biblical quotes.

In Genesis 3:16, for example, the Lord said unto the first woman, Eve, "I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception; in sorrow thou shalt bring forth children." The present denotation of the word sorrow is distress, affliction, disappointment, grief, sadness, or regret. The word sorrow, however, had other meanings at the time of the King James Translation of the Bible. The Oxford English Dictionary lists care, anxiety, and pain as other common meanings. In fact, the Latter-day Saint edition of the King James Translation gives as a footnote the alternate translations of "increase thy discomfort and thy size" for "multiply thy sorrow and thy conception." In Genesis 3:17, where Adam was told he would obtain food "in sorrow," the footnote gives the meaning as "travail, pain."

The Lord indicated to Eve that with pain she would bear her children, not that conception or birth was to be a distress or time of grief. My wife and I have found, along with almost all other couples, that the time of birth is a time of joy and rejoicing. Yet, the mother must go through pain and anxiety to bear the child.

Another scripture that may be misunderstood in these matters is Ephesians 5:22, in which women are encouraged to "submit" to their husbands. Some have erroneously believed that women are to submit or yield themselves sexually to their husbands even if they do so unwillingly. Under these conditions, neither the thought nor the act does much to promote marital oneness.

It is also of interest to note that the words sex or sexuality do not appear in the scriptures. Yet the same process is described in holy writ with the words know or knew. It is recorded in Luke 1 that the angel Gabriel appeared to Mary and informed her that she was soon to have a child. Mary was obviously aware of the process of conception and logically asked the angel, "How shall this be, seeing I know not a man?" (Luke 1:34.) We are also informed that Joseph "knew her [Mary] not till she had brought forth her firstborn son: and he called his name Jesus." (Matt. 1:25.)

Elsewhere in the scriptures this same wording is used. It is recorded, "And Adam knew Eve his wife; and she conceived, and bare Cain. . . . And Cain knew his wife; and she conceived, and bare Enoch. . . . And Adam knew his wife again; and she bare a son, and called his name Seth." (Gen. 4:1, 17, 25.) The biblical wording of "knowing" or "becoming acquainted with" is a beautiful way to describe the oneness that a husband and wife may attain in marriage through the sexual act.

Another example of a positive scriptural passage on sexuality in marriage was expressed by Paul in 1 Corinthians 7:2-5. Of this particular scripture, Dr. Homer Ellsworth has commented:

Prophets have taught that physical intimacy is a strong force in strengthening the love bond in marriage, enhancing and reinforcing marital unity. Indeed, it is the rightful gift of God to the married. As the Apostle Paul says, "The wife hath not power of her own body, but the husband; and likewise also the husband hath not power of his own body, but the wife." Paul continues, "Depart ye not one from the other, except it be with consent for a time, that ye may give yourselves to fasting and prayer; and come together again, that Satan tempt you not for your incontinency." (1 Cor. 7:4-5, Joseph Smith Translation.) Abstinence in marriage, Paul says, can cause unnecessary temptations and tensions, which are certainly harmful side effects. (Ellsworth, p. 24.)

It has sometimes been suggested that highly religious people are so rigid or confused about sexual matters that their religious beliefs undermine their sexual relationships in marriage. This assumption now appears to be questionable.

Tim LaHaye and his wife, Beverly, surveyed 1,705 deeply committed Christian women with a 95-item questionnaire pertaining to sexuality in marriage. In their book, The Act of Marriage: The Beauty of Sexual Love, they reported that 81 percent of the Christian wives indicated they were "very happy" or "above average" in their marital sexual satisfaction. This was comparable to 71 percent of women who so indicated in another national study involving more than 100,000 women. This finding came as no surprise to the LaHayes. They wrote:

A Christian's relationship with God produces a greater capacity for expressing and receiving love than is possible for a non-Christian. The fruit of the Spirit (love, joy, peace, kindness, etc.—Gal. 5:22, 23) removes the specter of resentment and bitterness that devastates an exciting bedroom life. In addition, people who genuinely love each other will strive harder to please one another, become better informed, and treat each other more unselfishly. This will naturally enrich their love life.

We are quite satisfied that our survey has established that over the long years of matrimony, Christians do indeed experience a mutually enjoyable love relationship and that they engage in the act of marriage more frequently and with greater satisfaction than do non-Christians in our society. . . . It is a sad paradox that so many of those who have rejected or neglected God in their pursuit of sexual freedom and happiness often live miserable lives, whereas the Christian, whom they tend to despise or ridicule as being too "straight," enjoys the very things the non-Christian is seeking. It is our prayer that many who have not previously considered Jesus Christ will begin to realize the fact that He does make a difference in one's life. (LaHaye, Tim and Beverly, p. 196.)

I am also intrigued with a little book published more than forty years ago by Roy A. Welker titled Preparing for Marriage. It was one of the books used in the LDS Institutes of Religion for their course on courtship and marriage instigated some three years earlier in 1939. Under the topic of "Sane Sex Knowledge Important to Marital Happiness," Roy Welker observed:

Men and women engaged in human welfare work know full well the devastating effects of ignorance in sex matters. Fear, sorrow, a sense of guilt, often groundless, and sometimes disease have been the companions of ignorance. It is encouraging to know now, however, that schools, institutes, counsellors, and some families are recognizing, more and more, the need of sane sex knowledge as a preparation for future marital happiness. Reason and common sense are coming to take the place of prudery and false modesty in dealing with the question. (Welker, pp. 90-91.)

Under the heading of "The Normal Functioning of Sex," Roy Welker notes at least three purposes of sexual expression in marriage:

The question is often asked, "Is there a normal functioning of sex?" A negative answer would imply misunderstanding of the question, lack of appreciation of the purposes of sex, or a wilful desire toward sex perversion. Wherever there are normal persons there may be normal sex functioning. Evidently the first such functioning must be that of procreation. Likely no other means for perpetuating the race was ever considered. Did man institute it? No. Then God must have done so. This makes it a divine process. Should it not be so regarded?

The next normal functioning is that of enhancement of personality. God has declared "man is not without the woman nor the woman without the man in the Lord." [See 1 Corinthians 11:11.] Men and women who have lived normally and happily together for years can testify to the personality contributions of each to the other in normal sex relationship. Those who have failed can testify to the personality deterioration they have suffered.

In the previous section mention was made of spiritual values stimulated by the single standard. Another normal function of sex is that of spiritual unfoldment. This is a natural conclusion of personality enhancement and of thoughtful and purposeful procreation. A sane approach to the subject can find no other conclusion. All the enduring values of life are heightened, taking on an added significance, when sex functions in its normal ways. (Welker, pp. 93-94. Italics added.)

How to Get Out of the Touch Trap

You are caught in the touch trap if there is little or no spontaneous touch in your marriage other than for routine sexual relationships. To get out of the touch trap, try touching your spouse, as the opportunity arises, on a day-to-day basis.

It may simply be a touch as you pass by your partner; it may be a kiss, it may be holding hands, or it may be a hug or caress. It could also be part of sexual intimacy. For the importance of learning to be tender, reviewing "Trap 4: The Tenderness Trap" may help. Trying the "Three Ts" exercise discussed in "Trap 1: The Time Trap" may also help—along with time and talk, one of the three parts is touch.
