Brent A. Barlow, Twelve Traps in Today's Marriage and How to Avoid Them ( 1986)

Trap 11

The Temptation Trap

Temptation: Enticement or inducement, often through the promise of pleasure or gain, to do something regarded as unwise or wrong.

THE TEMPTATION TRAP: Secret or questionable relationships with a member of the opposite sex that can lead to infidelity or adultery.

One of the most unusual trends in the area of marriage and family studies has to do with extramarital sex. In several surveys, 80 percent or more of those questioned indicated that sexual relationships with someone other than the spouse is "always" or "almost always" wrong, inappropriate, or sinful. Yet, even though the vast majority indicate it is wrong, a large number of husbands and wives become involved in affairs eventually leading to extramarital relationships—adultery, in other words.

How many married people become involved in extramarital sex? It is difficult to determine, but several studies have been done, with surprising results. In the early 1950s Kinsey reported that approximately 50 percent of husbands and 25 percent of wives had participated in extramarital relationships. During the 1960s 60 percent of husbands and 40 percent of wives were estimated to have strayed beyond the marital fold. Some researchers believed these estimates were high. Others thought them to be low. It is estimated by some today that in at least 50 percent of the contemporary marriages in the United States, one or both marriage partners will have sexual experiences after marriage with a person other than a spouse.

Do we know anything about those who do become involved in extramarital sex? Yes, we do. For men, it tends to be during their 20s. For women it is during the late 30s and early 40s. These years, respectively, tend to be the periods of intense sex drive and interest for many men and women. In addition, a woman is more likely to become sexually involved with a man other than her husband after the childbearing and nurturing years of children are over. The incidence of extramarital sex for males has also been found to be greater among the less educated during the early years of marriage. After many years of matrimony, however, the rate is greater among the more highly educated males.

Extramarital sex tends to be more common among the less religiously devout and among children of parents with very permissive moral values. People who have a number of sexual partners before marriage have a difficult time limiting themselves to one person after marriage. Most importantly, those couples with low marital and sexual satisfaction are more likely to look for other sexual partners.

How do extramarital relationships begin? Curiosity and desire for sexual variety, boredom, a need to reinforce self-image, a search for emotional intimacy, and a desire for retaliation against a marriage partner may all lead to adulterous situations.

What are the effects of extramarital relations on a marriage? We don't really need research to tell us, but one study of unfaithful wives indicated that 85 percent divorced their husbands within five years. Another study found that in over 90 percent of the marriages where extramarital sex occurred, the incident had caused emotional estrangement and lessened the sexual satisfaction within the marriage. (Stinnett, pp. 463-68.)

Flint and Steel

I was invited one time to speak to some BYU business management graduates and their spouses. I gave a few of my stirring remarks about the importance of balance between occupation and family life. (One fellow on the front row slept through the whole speech.)

At the end of my talk I asked if there were any questions or comments. One young man said he was a little perplexed about his forthcoming entry into the business world. He explained that his particular field of business management included many working women. As a married man, both he and his wife were concerned how a married man could or should relate to other women on the job. A married woman in the audience voiced similar concerns. How should a married woman conduct herself around her male co-workers?

We had a very interesting discussion of how the work world has changed. Though men and women have always worked together in limited numbers in the factories, farms, or offices, the number has greatly increased in our present society. In earlier times, too, women usually worked in subordinate positions to men, but many of the men in the audience now acknowledged that they would be working with single and married women as coequals and that in some cases the women would be their superiors or bosses. In their business management training they had heard different opinions on how to cope with the new male/female relationships in the work world.

One philosophy was very cautious: Don't ever be caught working alone with a member of the opposite sex. That logic, extreme as it seems, does have some merit. I remember when I was a Boy Scout in Troop #561. Scoutmaster Mariel Hansen used to tell us that if we wanted to avoid fire, we should keep our flint in one pocket and our steel in the other. We followed his advice, and I can't remember any of us ever getting burned. There is a message there somewhere for men and women in today's work force.

The BYU graduates were also advised by others that times have changed. To succeed in today's business world, men and women have to learn to work together as peers and coequals. They wanted to know what I thought of that advice. I replied there was logic to that thought as well.

I shared an experience I had a few years ago when I was teaching at the University of Wisconsin-Stout. We had thirty faculty and staff members in the Family Life Department, divided nearly equally between men and women. We worked well together, and frequently groups of three, four, or five would walk over to the student union building for breaks or for lunch.

There were two young single women on the faculty. Both were in their late twenties, intelligent, attractive; and both also happened to be Latter-day Saints. The three of us often found ourselves going to lunch.

Then the thought occurred to me. Should I, as a married man in my middle thirties, be going out to lunch with single women even if it is job related? I thought about it and did what I believed was the only sensible thing to do. I talked it over with my wife, Susan. She suggested we invite the two women over to our home so we all could become friends, and that would solve the problem for her. We did that, and I told the BYU group it solved the problem for me also.

To this day the two women (and now their husbands) are among our best friends. You see, I also remember something else Scoutmaster Hansen told us: Flint and steel can be carried in the same pocket if they don't get too close to each other.

Dousing the Spark of an Old Flame

If and when infidelity does occur in a marriage, it is often with another person known prior to the marriage, perhaps a former boyfriend or girlfriend. A young wife once wrote to me on this very topic.

Dear Dr. Barlow:

We have been married for about a year, and everything has been going fine except for one thing. I keep thinking about a young man to whom I was engaged before I met my husband. I find myself thinking about my former boyfriend from time to time and even dream about him on occasion. Is this normal, or is there something wrong with me? Does it mean anything about my present relationship with my husband?

Here is how I responded:

You are quite normal, and your situation is fairly common since the vast majority of us usually become involved in one or two love relationships that do not lead to marriage. The impact of a former relationship on marriage, other than a divorce, is one of the most neglected areas in marriage and family studies. I have seen some young people become so devastated from breaking off an engagement that it takes them months to recover. Some never recover at all and choose to remain single the rest of their lives rather than risk the pain of separation again. After breaking up, some will quickly get into another relationship to show themselves, their former boyfriend or girlfriend, and often family members that they are quite capable of loving and being loved. Some of these off-the-rebound relationships lead to marriage and frequently end up with disastrous consequences.

After marriage, some husbands and wives find themselves still attracted to other men and women. Whatever the cause, they feel that if they are attracted to members of the opposite sex other than their spouses, they are not now in love. Some have naively terminated their marriages only to find after another marriage that they still continue to be attracted to others. Rather than chase butterflies and seek happiness elsewhere, many of us should examine our present situations, learn to be content, and seek happiness in our present relationships.

Many married women, and I suppose married men too, retain mementoes from their former boyfriends and girlfriends. And if they do not retain the mementoes, they retain the memories. Some keep old love letters, pictures, rings, or gifts for sentimental reasons. When the present relationship becomes shaky, out come the items as a means of solace and a reminder that "someone out there once loved me, and perhaps still does."

While it may be normal to retain pleasant thoughts of a former relationship, we should be careful not to let them interfere with our marriages. The thoughts are usually harmless unless one chooses to constantly dwell on them. This phenomenon, known as psychic infidelity or mental wanderlust, can be highly disruptive to a marriage if one is frequently thinking about the former friend or wondering how a marriage to them may have been if things had worked out differently.

You need not try to totally forget your former boyfriend, nor need you feel guilty or ashamed because of him. The time you spent together was not a lost cause even though you did not marry. You both matured a little and contributed to each other's lives at that particular time.

But since you did not marry each other you should reexamine your present commitment to your husband and remember your wedding vows to forsake all others, mentally as well as physically. The combined efforts of both husband and wife are needed in contemporary marriage to meet the daily demands. Interests and energy invested in relationships with other members of the opposite sex can undermine your marital relationship.

If necessary, burn your old love letters from him if you still have them. Perhaps gifts and other mementoes should also be discarded if they are interfering with your marriage.

Be careful not to fan the spark of an old flame. While fire may provide warmth and comfort, it can also be consuming.

Love Must Be Tough

Dr. James Dobson from the University of Southern California has written an interesting book to husbands or wives whose marriage partner wants to leave the relationship. The title of the book is Love Must Be Tough.

According to Dr. Dobson, numerous husbands and wives face the possibility of losing a spouse through divorce, oftentimes for the reason of infidelity. Eventually about 40 percent of marriages do terminate in divorce. Many other married couples, however, consider separating without actually doing so.

What should one do when a marriage partner is giving undue attention to a member of the opposite sex? Many spouses become "clingers" or doormats and find themselves saying things like, "I'll do anything to keep you." Or they will allow, or at least tolerate, many clandestine relationships with the hopes that the wayward spouse will soon come to his or her senses and return to the marriage. This strategy, according to Dr. Dobson, seldom works. (See Dobson, chapter 5, pp. 44-50.)

No one can be forced to be in a relationship, particularly marriage. It should be started and maintained on some basis of spontaneity. People should be in marital relationships not because they have to, but because they want to. Begging someone to stay, or threatening certain behavior if they attempt to leave, only adds pressure to an already tense situation.

Many relationships operate on the principle of least interest; that is, the one least interested in the relationship usually controls the relationship. Telling spouses that you will do anything at any cost to keep them only puts them in control.

They then can do anything they wish, at any time, knowing they may return at their whim and at their discretion. Unfortunately, spouses in such marriages will take advantage of the situation.

So what does Dr. Dobson suggest to a person whose spouse is being unfaithful? Just as the title of the book states, he believes that love must be tough in that it has some parameters of what is and what is not acceptable. He suggests that a husband or wife living with a partner who wants out, or at least is not sure if he or she wants in, do some confronting. (See Dobson, chapter 7, pp. 58-69.)

First, declare to your wayward spouse your dissatisfaction with the present condition of the relationship. Be specific in pointing out what he or she is doing that you can no longer tolerate. This might include such things as dating or carrying on affairs with members of the opposite sex, excessive drinking into the early hours of the morning, staying out late at night, or not returning at all for several days. All these actions indicate a lack of caring on the part of the guilty party.

Second, declare your intent to stay in the marriage and indicate your willingness to work at the relationship under terms that specify a change in his or her behavior. By confronting your negligent spouse with the behavior you can no longer tolerate, you may think there is the danger of pushing him or her right out of what is left of the marriage. To the contrary, your willingness to work on the relationship under the new terms creates a situation with less tension and greater possibilities of staying together.

You also indicate your willingness to let go of the person if that is what he or she desires. Dr. Dobson believes in the old proverb "If you love something, set it free. If it comes back to you, it's yours. If it doesn't come back, it never was yours in the first place." (Dobson, p. 76.)

If you are facing the situation of a potential divorce because of infidelity, you may want to read Love Must Be Tough, It is available at most Christian bookstores.

The 3 R's of Infidelity

So much for what to do when your spouse is caught in the temptation trap. What about yourself? Like all other traps, this one is very subtle, and we often do not know when we are near it. But there are some indications when we are getting close.

In his book Couples, Dr. Carlfred Broderick, marriage counselor at the University of Southern California, noted, "Over the years, I have listened to the explanations of dozens of individuals who, despite such a commitment [for fidelity], found themselves involved in adulterous relationships. Again and again, their stories revolve around three issues which I have come to think of as the 3 R's of infidelity: Resentment, Rationalization, and Rendezvous." (Broderick, Couples, p. 161.)

Resentment. Dr. Broderick reports that most married couples who become involved in infidelity are resentful in one way or another toward their spouses. Typically, they have not found a way to adequately deal with marital problems or resentments. The marriage counselor notes that the most important single prevention for infidelity "is a developed and well-oiled mechanism for dealing with strain in the marriage." (Broderick, Couples, p. 162.)

Another frequent source of resentment in marriage comes from the sexual relationship itself. Too often people enter marriage with high expectations, realistic or not, and when the expectations go unfulfilled over an extended period of time, resentment builds. Dr. Broderick suggests a married person then becomes a prime candidate for seeking a new relationship to find what he or she believes to be lacking in the present one.

Rationalization. If a married person committed to fidelity becomes involved outside of marriage, it necessitates some degree of rationalization. He or she first of all may simply deny or refuse to acknowledge the possibility of getting involved. A wife may flirt with another man and yet tell herself and others it means nothing. Or, states Broderick, a husband may be high on drugs or alcohol, or may become inhibited and deny that anything will or could happen, even though it is already occurring. But the most interesting form of rationalization, according to Carlfred Broderick, is involved with virtue rather than vice. He notes, "I am convinced that more people get themselves into the pain of infidelity through empathy, concern and compassion than through any base motive. . . . With a little help from rationalization, the sympathy leads smoothly into tenderness, the tenderness to the need for privacy, the privacy to physical consolation and the consolation straight to bed." (Broderick, Couples, p. 163.)

Rendezvous. A rendezvous is a private meeting or an appointment to meet, and infidelity depends on a rendezvous if it is to occur. There are, however, some intermediate steps. Most extramarital relationships begin, interestingly enough, as friendships that "just happen." Two people meet at unplanned places such as work, parties, or even church. From these unstructured meetings they proceed to systematic associations that appear to be legitimate. There are more frequent meetings where they find excuses to be together for lunch "for business reasons." If the association involves two neighbors who find their friendship escalating, one may finally invite the other over when the spouse is gone. From these systematic associations, couples then plan and seek the private or secret rendezvous that is often associated with infidelity. And that is when it usually occurs.

Dr. Broderick concludes, "If you [as a married person] find yourself in a situation involving a delicious privacy with an attractive member of the opposite sex, you should begin to look for ways to restructure the situation. No doubt you will think of a dozen reasons why it is unreasonable to go out of your way to avoid perfectly legitimate and innocent companionships; but then, that may simply mean you need to review the three R's of infidelity one more time." (Broderick, Couples, p. 166.)

How to Get Out of the Temptation Trap

As a married person, you may be in the temptation trap if you repeatedly find yourself alone with a member of the opposite sex to whom you are romantically and sexually attracted. To get out of the trap, we have two role models in the Bible: David and Joseph. Both were confronted with potential temptation traps, but each one responded differently.

Pertaining to David, Elder Dean L. Larsen has noted:

As a young man, David demonstrated a courage and a strength and power that likely has not been equaled in all of the great characters of the scriptures. He fought with wild beasts and overcame them, defeated the giant Goliath . . . , and then served many years as the leader of Israel. . . . The greatest enemy he had . . . was the man Saul. Yet on several occasions when David could have removed this threat by taking the life of Saul, who was in his hands, he withheld and controlled those impulses. That demonstrated tremendous power and control.

Then later in his life, as a mature man with all the strength that kind of life had brought him, David was unwise. It was not because David was weak that he fell. He was unwise. I suspect that David had reached the point where he felt he was strong enough to indulge the entertainment of some enticing possibilities. On the day he stood on his rooftop and observed the wife of one of his officers, instead of taking himself by the nape of the neck, so to speak, and saying, "David, get out of here!" David remained. David thought about the possibilities, and those thoughts overcame David and eventually controlled him. (Larsen, "Thoughts," p. 121.)

Now contrast that with a similar situation involving Joseph and Potiphar's wife. We read the story in Genesis 39:7-12. Many are fairly familiar with all but one part of the account of Joseph's temptation. Most think it was just a one-time thing . . . that Potiphar's wife enticed him once and that he resisted. But in verse 10 we read, "And it came to pass, as she spake to Joseph day by day, that he hearkened not unto her, to lie by her, or to be with her." (Italics added.) Joseph's temptations were an ongoing occurrence. Because of his political and occupational appointment as overseer in Potiphar's house, Joseph could not just walk away at the first attempt of his master's wife. But when they were finally alone (a set-up she had probably arranged), Potiphar's wife made one last, desperate, inviting plea to Joseph. At that point he had no choice. He left his outer cloak, and as the scripture states, "fled, and got him out."

To those presently in the temptation trap, I recommend the "Joseph of Egypt" action: leave your coat and flee. Do what you must—if necessary, sever the relationship and refuse to see the person anymore. You may be strong and think you can continually resist . . . but then so did David.

It's your choice, your marriage, your consequences: Will you be like David? Or Joseph?
