Brent A. Barlow, Twelve Traps in Today's Marriage and How to Avoid Them ( 1986)

A Marriage Of Lasting Value

Value: Relative worth, utility, or importance; degree of excellence.

MARRIAGE OF LASTING VALUE: A marital relationship that takes time to build, lasts through tribulation, and brings joy and satisfaction to the couple.

Like many other husbands, though I have good intentions to be a better husband, I don't always follow through. So one weekend I decided I had better practice what I preach. One of our favorite performers was giving a concert with the Utah Symphony Orchestra in Salt Lake City at Symphony Hall. I obtained tickets for Susan and me and made reservations in the Marriott Hotel across the street from Symphony Hall.

We had only minimal problems getting away. Tammy, our oldest daughter, agreed to watch the younger children. Brian and Jon said they would protest by riding their bikes up the canyon and spending a day shooting their BB guns. Jason and Kris agreed we could go if we would leave an ample supply of peanut butter and honey so they would not starve during our two-day absence. Our only major concern was our oldest son, Doug, who had recently received his driver's license. After a few white-knuckled rides, he had proven to me that he could, indeed, drive, and during our absence he offered to drive the rest of the children downtown in our other car for ice cream cones. Doubting his sudden altruism, we finally agreed, said prayers both vocal and silent, and left.

We arrived at the Marriott in time to change clothes and walk across the street to the beautiful Symphony Hall in Salt Lake City. We enjoyed immensely the performer and the numbers by the Utah Symphony Orchestra. Getting away as husband and wife is something we wait too long to do, and then we don't do it often enough. Perhaps other husbands are like myself: long on promise but short on delivery.

After the concert we returned to the hotel. Our room at the Marriott was on the 14th floor facing north. We had a spectacular view of downtown Salt Lake City late at night. Most impressive to me was the view of the beautiful LDS Temple on Temple Square, a building that represents to me the beauty and sanctity of marriage. As I looked at the temple late that night, I wondered why it was that the construction took forty years to complete. The temple that night also came to represent another important concept to me: It usually takes time to build things of lasting value.

Few people are aware of the destitute condition of the few thousand Mormon pioneers who started building the temple in 1853. Not many are aware that the pioneers had to start over on the construction project at least twice. The first time they had to start over was during the Utah War of 1857 when Johnson's Army threatened to enter the Salt Lake Valley. Brigham Young ordered the workmen to cover the foundation and encouraged the Saints in Salt Lake City to vacate the valley and move south. After the Utah War crisis was over, the soil was removed from the foundation, and construction of the temple was started again. Not long afterward, Brigham Young determined the foundation was insufficient and once more ordered the workmen to reset the foundation. He announced that the temple must stand for a thousand years, even through the Millennium. So they started over.

Building things of lasting value takes time and effort, whether we are talking of temples or marriages. If they are to endure, they should be built on a solid foundation, and their construction will require skill, time, effort, knowledge, and patience.

It may be that after a few years of marriage, we may face difficult times and be tempted to give up. But like the Mormon pioneers and the Salt Lake Temple, we may have to start over by working together again on the marriage. We must remember that things of lasting value usually take a long time to build, and things of eternal value may take even longer.

Diamonds in the Rough

I received a letter once from a distraught LDS wife. The letter from this particular wife asked a common question: Should I give up on my marriage?

To her and other married couples contemplating such a decision, I often ask another question: Would you be able to recognize a diamond in the rough?

There is an actual account of an African farmer who heard of the fortunes others were making mining diamonds. So he sold his farm and went in search of greener pastures. The farmer, however, was not very perceptive. He could not recognize diamonds in the rough. The man who purchased his farm did. The farmer had sold a farm covered with acres of diamonds that were still in the rough, uncut and unpolished.

There is also the true story of R. U. Darby, who was caught up with "gold fever" during the gold rush days. After weeks of mining he finally discovered a vein of gold in his Colorado mine and began to prosper. Then something happened. The vein of gold started to disappear. He had come to the end of the rainbow, and his pot of gold was vanishing before his eyes. Finally, he decided to quit and sold the mine to another miner for a small sum of money.

The new miner would not give up so easily. He called in an engineer to do some calculating. The engineer later advised the miner that the project had failed because the previous owner was not familiar with "fault lines" (an interesting analogy to marriage). The engineer's calculations indicated that the gold vein would continue just a few feet from where R. U. Darby had stopped digging. The new miner dug three more feet and found one of the largest deposits of gold ever discovered—worth millions of dollars.

Perhaps too many contemporary marriages are ended prematurely by divorce. I am aware of one recent marriage that lasted only twenty-seven days! In some instances divorce is not only an option but the only feasible choice remaining. Not all uncut stones turn out to be diamonds. But numerous married couples, particularly newlyweds, become easily discouraged and give up too soon on their marriage. With some more work and effort, their marriage may turn out to be something of immense value.

When you are tempted to look elsewhere for greener pastures, just remember someone else is probably looking at yours. And if another pasture looks greener, perhaps it is getting better care and attention. Grass is always greener . . . where it is watered.

What Matters Most in Life?

There seem to be a few times in life when we seriously reexamine our priorities. We determine what is and what is not essential. Those times often come when our own life or that of a loved one is in peril or jeopardy. I had my own moment of truth a few years ago.

During the early part of December 1970 I was asked to speak in Sacrament meeting during the Christmas season. At the time Susan and I, with our two small children, were living in Tallahassee, Florida, where I was working on a graduate degree at Florida State University. For my Christmas talk, I related a story contained in a book I had found at the university library. The book, Precious Jeopardy, A Christmas Story, was written by Lloyd C. Douglas.

The story is about a man named Phil Garland; his wife, Shirley; and their two children, Polly and Junior. Phil was disgruntled as he was driving home on Christmas Eve. He had just lost his job. As he arrived home, Shirley greeted him in her usual pleasant manner. But she, too, became discouraged as Phil told her he had lost his job. Their financial situation had been difficult even when Phil was working.

That evening Shirley tried to include Phil in some of the Christmas Eve activities with Polly and Junior. But Phil just grumbled at the price of the gifts. He reminded Shirley that in their tight financial condition they really couldn't afford any gifts. He said Christmas was overly commercialized anyway. Eventually Shirley helped Polly and Junior get ready for bed. Then tearfully she retired to their bedroom.

A few minutes later she heard Phil calling from the hallway. He yelled for her to get the pliers. "I've stepped on a needle!" he groaned.

Shirley brought the pliers, and Phil used them to tug on the needle protruding from his bare foot. Out came half of the needle! "That means," he muttered, "that the other half is still in my foot." He and Shirley discussed the possibility of his going to the hospital that night to have the piece removed. But Phil assured her it could wait until morning.

The next day, Christmas, Phil drove toward the hospital but then paused outside. Somewhere he had heard that if a tiny piece of metal gets lodged in the body and is not removed, it would eventually move to one of the vital organs and cause death. In his negative mood and after serious thought, Phil decided to leave the other half of the needle in his foot and experience the consequences. He drove home and told Shirley that everything had been taken care of.

From that moment Phil believed his life was in jeopardy, and he really didn't know if he would live from one day to the next. So he decided to make the most of life on a day-to-day basis. On that same Christmas Day there was a marked change in Phil as he treated Shirley with kindness and spent time playing with Polly and Junior. Phil had a pleasant Christmas Day with his family, but he didn't know if he would be alive the following day.

The following day did come, and Phil Garland found himself alive. For the second day in a row he was especially considerate to his wife and children because it might be the last day of his life. Each day thereafter, as Phil discovered that he was still alive, he was careful to treat Shirley, Polly, and Junior with love and kindness. He also took daily odd jobs in the community to financially support his family.

Precious Jeopardy ended, as it began, on Christmas Eve, only one year later. It was a sharp contrast to the previous Christmas Eve because Phil was so happy. He had lived long enough to celebrate another Christmas with Shirley and their children.

On Christmas Eve Phil played a few games and romped with the children. Before putting them to bed, they exchanged a few small gifts they had made during the year. During the last several months Phil had also made a lovely walnut sewing cabinet for Shirley. He took her to his work area and presented his gift to her. Shirley was again tearful, but this year it was due to Phil's thoughtfulness.

As the clock struck midnight, Shirley informed Phil that she also had a gift for him. She handed Phil a small box, which he opened. There, pierced through red velvet, was a tiny fragment of steel. It was the other half of the needle Phil thought was in his foot. Shirley said she had found it while vacuuming.

As I finished the talk, I emphasized the importance of people rather than presents at Christmastime. The Church members in Tallahassee seemed to have enjoyed the story. On other occasions in Florida I also related the story of Precious Jeopardy, pointing out the importance of commitment to and enjoyment of life with family members on a day-to-day basis.

After graduating from Florida State University during the summer of 1971, I accepted a teaching position at Southern Illinois University, and we moved to Carbondale. As the next Christmas season approached, I went to the university library, checked out Precious Jeopardy, and again reread the dramatic Christmas story. My appreciation of Lloyd Douglas and his story increased. But a few months later I had an unusual experience that would bring the message even more vividly to mind.

It was Saturday, March 4, 1972. I had gotten up about 5:00 A.M. to grade a few student papers. Later on that morning I was supposed to drive to St. Louis, Missouri, to a Church leadership meeting. Unknown to me, Susan had been sewing the night before for our little daughter, Tammy. Evidently Tammy had taken her new dress down the hall to hold it up before her in the mirror. She had unintentionally dropped a needle on the carpet floor in the process.

As I reached the end of the hall that early morning hour, I felt first a dull, then a sensational pain on the forepart of my left foot. The pain was so intense I dropped to the floor and grabbed my foot. Much to my alarm I found I had stepped on the needle! I called for help. Susan and the children rushed from their bedrooms and gathered around me as I sat wincing with pain and holding my foot.

The whole event was painfully familiar. Susan got the pliers, and I pulled on the needle. It wouldn't come out. We agreed that I should go immediately to Doctor's Memorial Hospital in Carbondale a mile or so from our house. I found I could drive our station wagon even though I had a needle in my foot. Unlike Phil Garland in Precious Jeopardy, however, there was no question whether the needle should stay in or come out.

Still in my bathrobe and pajamas, I drove directly to the hospital emergency entrance. About 6:00 A.M. I limped into the emergency room and told the nurse on duty what had happened. She took me to an operating room and notified one of the physicians. The doctor arrived a few minutes later and did some preliminary examinations. Through X-ray negatives, he found the needle so deeply imbedded in my foot that he would have to call a surgeon to remove it.

The physician on duty instructed me to lie on the operating table until the surgeon arrived. "This is not a real emergency, Mr. Barlow," he said. "Maybe to you, it's not," I replied. He then left me waiting on the operating table for nearly forty-five minutes with no one else in the operating room.

During that time I got to do some serious thinking about the things that matter most when one believes his life is in peril. I immediately recalled my Christmas speech in Tallahassee just a year previous. What irony! I was living Phil Garland's experience! I thought that life is indeed precious, yet I had been so complacent. I had taken so many things for granted, including my children and my dear wife, Susan.

The surgeon finally arrived and began his examination of the needle in my foot. I asked, "Is it true that a tiny piece of metal in the body can eventually cause you to die if it's not removed?" The doctor smiled. "I think I've heard that before. . . but I'm not certain it's true. Anyway, you don't have to worry—yours will be out in just a few minutes." He then went to work to remove it.

Since the surgeon gave me a local anesthetic, I was conscious during the operation. I continued to think on the incident and couldn't help become a little philosophical about the bizarre experience, thinking that symbolically we all have a tiny piece of metal in our bodies called mortality. A biblical passage I had read many times again came to mind: "As in Adam all die . . ." (1 Cor. 15:22.) At that moment I fully realized for the first time that I, too, would eventually die.

After the surgery I returned home. My wife and children meant more to me than they had ever meant before. During that day and those that followed I began thinking more seriously about life: What were my priorities? To what causes and individuals was I committed? Where did I spend most of my time?

My foot eventually healed, but the vivid impression of that experience has never left me. Since that time several thoughts have helped me arrive at a philosophy, not so much about dying, but more importantly about living. Three thoughts have been particularly helpful.

The first is by Henry David Thoreau about the reason he went to the woods surrounding Walden Pond: "I wished to live deliberately, to front only the essential facts of life, and see if I could learn what it had to teach, and not, when I came to die, discover that I had not lived. I did not wish to live what was not life, living is so dear." (Masters, p. 405.)

The second, by Albert Schweitzer, has had great impact on my thinking: "The tragedy of man is not that man dies but what dies within man while he is living." (West, p. 216.)

The third is from the Book of Mormon. Amulek testifies that "this life is the time for men to prepare to meet God; yea, behold the day of this life is the day for men to perform their labors." (Alma 34:32.)

Our children are growing up, their grandparents are getting older, and we realize that we are getting older too. We hope we will be able to spend many more years together, for there are indeed many opportunities for rejoicing, renewal, reflecting, and recommitting.

I have located and purchased a copy of Lloyd Douglas's book Precious Jeopardy from a used bookstore in New York City. I read the book each Christmas season and think about my experiences, both those that are past and those that I hope lie ahead.

My needle is mounted on velvet and placed on our dresser as a constant reminder of the uncertainty of life and the importance of priorities and commitment in life. I have decided that foremost among my priorities is my marriage. Next is my family. And my most important commitment in life to a single, mortal person is to my wife.

Susan and children, I love you.
