Brent A. Barlow, Twelve Traps in Today's Marriage and How to Avoid Them ( 1986)

Seeking Additional Help

In Traits of a Healthy Family Delores Curran identifies one important trait of a happy family that many families overlook: "The healthy family admits to and seeks help with problems." (Curran, p. 257.) Many couples, including some Latter-day Saints, are hesitant to admit that they have problems and are even more hesitant to seek help in dealing with the problems.

For Latter-day Saints, LDS bishops are a vital resource in seeking assistance, and a vast number of families have been strengthened through their counsel. Usually the bishop can give the help the couple needs, but on occasion the couple should seek the help of a professional marriage counselor.

If outside professional help is sought, to whom should a couple go? Who is best qualified to serve as a marriage counselor? How much will it cost? At what point should consultation be sought? These and other questions are answered in a brochure entitled "What Is Marriage and Family Therapy." It is about the American Association for Marriage and Family Therapy (AAMFT), and much of the following information is based on that brochure.

A couple should first realize that not everyone who claims to be a marriage counselor has the training or qualifications. In states that do not license marriage and family counselors (Utah is among the eleven states that do license counselors), untrained, insufficiently trained, or totally untrained "lay counselors" are allowed to offer their services to the public. Unfortunately, in many communities outright charlatans and quacks prey on gullible and troubled couples.

Before starting consultation with a counselor, a married couple should seek one who is trained, and if possible, licensed; is willing to discuss fees in advance; will provide, upon request, his or her credentials as a marriage counselor; and is qualified and willing to counsel within the couple's perspective and value system. (Counseling by untrained personnel has been described as a process that often transfers biases from counselor to client.)

What Do Marriage and Family Counselors Do?

Marriage and family counselors today do more than merely deal with troubled marriages. Some specialize in family counseling, working with problems that confront not only husband and wife, but also parents and children. Other counselors specialize in premarital counseling to help young men and women prepare for the realities of contemporary married life as well as resolve differences that may already exist between the couple. An increasing number of counselors now offer divorce counseling, helping those whose marriages have ended to deal with their emotional wounds and to face the future with renewed confidence and hope.

Most people think that a marriage counselor will tell them what to do about their problems. A professional counselor, however, does not offer ready-made solutions or prescribe standby remedies. Seldom will he or she take sides or judge who is right or wrong. A counselor tries to help both partners deal with their own difficulties the best way they can and work out their own solutions.

When couples understand that a marriage counselor is not a wizard who has a magic formula for transforming imperfect marriages into perfect ones, they are likely to put more of their own effort into making their marriage better. To accomplish this, a marriage counselor may encourage the couple to look at their marriage more realistically and objectively, act as a neutral "sounding board" for complaints and dissatisfactions, help the couple identify the real rather than the reported problems, help a husband and wife realize how each contributes to the conflict and understand also that neither is solely to blame for the troubles, and act as a "mirror" to the marriage so that the couple learns to see it and themselves from a new perspective.

How Do I Know When I Need Marriage Counseling?

As a general rule, problems should be dealt with as early as possible. When couples wait too long to get help, conflicts have escalated and attitudes have become more rigid and hostile, sometimes to the point where a major overhaul of the marriage is needed. Though timing varies from couple to couple, there are certain key times in a marriage when prompt counseling or therapy is vital. Some of these are (1) when a couple does not know why they are in conflict, or does not know how to change their ways of behaving toward each other, (2) when a marital problem is deeply rooted in a negative, personal pattern of one spouse, such as severe depression, chronic drinking, or acute anxieties, (3) when communication between a couple becomes almost entirely hostile, (4) when a couple cannot reach out to each other with love and understanding except with the support of a third party, and (5) when a marriage has deteriorated to the point where a spouse feels he or she must make a dramatic gesture, such as leaving home.

It is never too late to make constructive changes in a marriage as long as a couple want to make their relationship work.

Quite often, however, one of the partners doesn't want to see a marriage counselor. If one partner is reluctant, the counselor of the spouse after a visit to the counselor can often convince the partner to join in the process. When the counseling begins to produce positive changes in one person, the reluctant spouse often decides to find out what is happening by joining the sessions. And even if the reluctant spouse never becomes part of the counseling process, the support and guidance the other spouse receives is often helpful.

Counseling itself may take anywhere from a few weeks to a year or more even though there is a trend toward short-term treatment (six to eight weeks). Counselors in private practice usually set their fees on a per-session basis between $30-75 per session. Sessions may last anywhere from forty-five minutes to an hour and a half, and usually occur on a weekly basis. Counselors who work for social or tax-supported agencies may charge nominal fees, or none at all, based on family income.

Whether counseling will help resolve marital difficulties depends on several factors: how soon help is sought, whether both spouses are willing to cooperate for the necessary length of time, and how determined a couple is to make their marriage work. Experts estimate that about two-thirds of all couples are helped by marriage counseling, about twenty-five percent show little or no change, and the remaining eight percent report their marriage worsened. The measurement of "success" is difficult to ascertain and involves more than avoiding divorce. Couples have differing expectations of counseling and how effective it is. If a couple delays marital consultation too long, much of the counseling becomes little more than combat surgery.

How Can I Locate a Trained Marriage Counselor?

For over forty years the American Association for Marriage and Family Therapy has been the leading clinical professional organization in the field, with over 8,000 members. To obtain the names of those in your area affiliated with the association, write AAMFT, 1717 K Street, N. W. #407, Washington, D.C. 20006.

To find out whether an individual is licensed as a marriage or family counselor in the state of Utah, write to State of Utah, Business Regulation, Registration Division, 330 East 400 South, Salt Lake City, Utah 84111; or call 801-530-6633.

Counseling services for Latter-day Saints are available through LDS Social Services. LDS bishops and stake presidents have the names and locations of people providing these services. Further information may be obtained by writing to LDS Social Services, 50 East North Temple, Salt Lake City, Utah 84150 or by contacting a local LDS Social Services office.
