Dana M. Pike, Donald W. Parry, LDS Perspectives on the Dead Sea Scrolls ( 1997)

Introduction

Latter-day Saints love ancient religious records. We have dozens of them in the Bible under such names as Genesis, Judges, Ruth, Isaiah, and John. Through the Prophet Joseph Smith a great number of other ancient records were restored-the books of Nephi, Alma, Mormon, and Moroni in the Book of Mormon, as well as Abraham and selections from the book of Moses in the Pearl of Great Price. In addition, we anticipate the coming forth of the "words of the lost tribes of Israel" (2 Ne. 29:13) and other ancient texts that have been authored by such individuals as Adam, Enoch, and Joseph.

It is no wonder, then, that since the discovery in 1947 of a large collection of scrolls along the shores of the Dead Sea, many Latter-day Saints have developed a particular interest in what are now known as the Dead Sea Scrolls. The scrolls, of course, do not contain the lost records we await, but they do provide new information about the transmission of the Bible, the Hebrew and Aramaic languages, and the variety of beliefs and practices of the Jews in the late Second Temple period (200 b.c. to a.d. 70).

Interest in the scrolls continues into the 1990s. During the past few years, several LDS scholars have become directly involved in the translation, study, and electronic preservation of the scrolls. In response to LDS interest in the scrolls Brigham Young University's College of Religious Education and the Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies (FARMS) jointly hosted a conference entitled "LDS Perspectives on the Dead Sea Scrolls," held 23 March 1996 on the BYU campus.

The conference featured seven presentations, versions of which are published in this volume. They discuss the Dead Sea Scrolls and the Messiah, the Book of Mormon, the Bible, the plan of salvation, prayer and worship, and a DNA analysis of the scrolls. With the exception of the keynote address, delivered by world-renowned scrolls scholar Professor Florentino GarcÂa MartÂnez, all the presentations were delivered by Latter-day Saints who are BYU or FARMS scholars. An additional article, authored by Andrew Skinner of BYU and written especially for this volume, provides a general introduction to the discovery and contents of the scrolls and related matters.

The various opinions expressed in this volume do not necessarily reflect the views of the editors, Brigham Young University, FARMS, or the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Scroll Terminology

Scroll terminology is not complicated, just abbreviated. The Num. 1-11 designate the cave in which the document was found, the Q stands for Qumran, and the last number indicates the fragment number. For example, 4Q161 was found in Qumran Cave 4 and is fragment number 161. Over the history of scroll scholarship, the same scroll has sometimes been known by various names. This numbering system attempts to clarify the scroll designations, and in this volume we have tried to cross reference each scroll name to avoid confusion.

Qumran it its greater geographical context. (Map by Jeff Jolley.)

The Dead Sea Scrolls are very fragmented, and scholars often have to calculate what was written because sections of text both large and small are missing or illegible. In this volume, several different symbols indicate certain types of text restorations. Following is a list of those symbols and their meanings: [^1]

[xxx] Text restored by the translator

[. . .] Lacuna of unspecified length in the manuscript

/xxx/ Legible text inserted between the lines by the copyist

/. . ./ Illegible text inserted between the lines by the copyist

Blank Space left blank in the manuscript, either unintentionally (new paragraph) or by mistake

(xxx) Editorial insertion by the translator

{xxx} Editorial insertion by the author in this volume

Overview of Recent Involvement of Latter-day Saints with Dead Sea Scrolls Scholarship

As information on and photographs or transcriptions of the Dead Sea Scrolls slowly became available in the years following their discovery in 1947, many people interested in the historical and cultural background of the Bible began to actively investigate the contents and to consider the significance of these two thousand-year-old documents. Chief among Latter-day Saints who began to study the scrolls that were available in the 1950s and 1960s was Hugh Nibley (see the following list of publications by Latter-day Saints). Since that time, Latter-day Saints with varying degrees of training have studied, written, and spoken about the value of the scrolls and the interest they have for Latter-day Saints.

Publication of the scrolls slowed considerably in the mid-1960s through mid-1980s. Scholarly and public outcry about the delay in making all of these documents available increased in the late 1980s. In response to this pressure, the Israel Antiquities Authority decided in 1993 to release all the official photographs of scrolls and scroll fragments on microfiche and to take measures to increase the number of scholars working on the official publication of the scrolls in order to hasten the completion of this project. These events have created a renewed interest in the Dead Sea Scrolls around the world. They have also provided an opportunity for several Latter-day Saints associated with BYU and FARMS to participate in research on and in the official publication of some of the Dead Sea Scrolls. The following overview provides highlights of the recent professional activity of Latter-day Saints in research relating to the scrolls. [^2]

In the fall, Truman G. Madsen, who was then the director of the BYU Jerusalem Center for Near Eastern Studies, was invited to serve as a member of the advisory board of the Dead Sea Scrolls Foundation (DSSF).

In the early months of the year, Truman Madsen and William Hamblin, a BYU professor of history teaching at the Jerusalem Center, discussed the possibility that an electronic database of the Dead Sea Scrolls could be created and contacted the Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies (FARMS), headquartered in Provo, to discuss how that might be accomplished.

Later in the spring, Noel B. Reynolds, president of FARMS and a BYU professor of political science, introduced the possibilities of such a project to Bruce Hafen, then provost of BYU, and a decision was formally made that BYU and FARMS would cooperate on the creation of an electronic database. BYU provided WordCruncherÂª computer software necessary for search capabilities, as well as legal and other types of support, and FARMS provided funding, management, electronic versions of the texts, and accepted the responsibility to produce and market the database to the academic community.

In the fall, a preliminary demonstration of WordCruncherÂª for Windows using a few Dead Sea Scroll texts was shown to Emanuel Tov, editor in chief of Discoveries in the Judean Desert (hereafter DJD, published by Oxford University Press), the multi-volume series that is the official publication of the Dead Sea Scrolls. Tov was pleased with the possibilities and encouraged the development of the database.

In January, while Donald W. Parry, BYU professor of Hebrew and a member of the FARMS board of directors, was living in Jerusalem, Emaunel Tov invited him to become a member of the international team of editors of the Dead Sea Scrolls. Parry is assisting Frank M. Cross, emeritus professor at Harvard University, with work on two Samuel scrolls from Cave 4 at Qumran.

In the spring, David R. Seely, BYU professor of ancient scripture, was invited to become a member of the international team of editors of the Dead Sea Scrolls. Seely is assisting Moshe Weinfeld, a professor at Hebrew University in Jerusalem, with work on the Barki Nafshi texts from Cave 4 at Qumran. The results of all their work will be published in DJD. Dana M. Pike, BYU professor of ancient scripture, was also invited to become a member of the international team of editors of the Dead Sea Scrolls, and is presently working on miscellaneous and unidentified fragments of scrolls from Cave 4 at Qumran. Steven W. Booras was hired at this time by FARMS as electronic projects manager and specifically assigned to manage the creation of the scroll database.

In the fall, Scott R. Woodward, BYU professor of microbiology, began an academic year at Hebrew University in Jerusalem, with support from the DSSF and FARMS. He helped to establish a lab there to analyze the DNA of scroll fragments and other archaeological artifacts.

(Left to right) BYU Professors Scott R. Woodward, Dana M. Pike, and David Rolph Seely, and Steven W. Booras, FARMS electronic projects manager, in front of the cliffs where Cave 1 is located.

Early in the year, Andrew Skinner, BYU professor of ancient scripture, was invited to become a member of the international team of editors of the Dead Sea Scrolls to work with Pike in preparing miscellaneous and unidentified fragments of scrolls from Qumran Cave 4 for publication in DJD.

In the spring, BYU and FARMS sponsored a Dead Sea Scrolls conference at the BYU Jerusalem Center for Near Eastern Studies that included the Latter-day Saints that were then actively involved in work on the scrolls. Israeli and other international scroll scholars were invited and a preliminary demonstration of the electronic database was given.

During the first few months of the year, FARMS began scanning the negatives of photographs of the Qumran documents held by the Ancient Biblical Manuscripts Center (ABMC), located in Claremont, California. FARMS provided a copy of the digitized images to ABMC in exchange for permission to use the photographs in the database. E. Jan Wilson was at this time hired by FARMS to supervise the electronic formatting of the textual material in the database.

In the spring, BYU's College of Religious Education and FARMS sponsored a one-day conference at BYU that was open to the general public to discuss the scrolls from an LDS point of view. Most of the presentations were by Latter-day Saints actively involved in work on the Dead Sea Scrolls. This volume contains the results of that conference.

In the summer, BYU and FARMS hosted a three day international scholarly conference in Provo on the Dead Sea Scrolls. The program again included presentations by Latter-day Saints actively involved in Dead Sea Scroll research. Another demonstration of the electronic database, still in the process of development, was given.

Also in the summer, David A. Arnold and David G. Long, BYU professors of electrical engineering, used ground-penetrating radar in the area of the Dead Sea to help archaeologists look for more caves that might contain more scrolls or related material. The results of these tests are not available at press time.

In the summer, an international conference will be held in Jerusalem to commemorate the fiftieth anniversary of the discovery of the Dead Sea Scrolls. Latter-day Saint scholars working on the scrolls will be making presentations. It is expected that the electronic database produced by FARMS and BYU will be ready for distribution about this time.

Select Publications by Latter-day Saints Relating to the Dead Sea Scrolls

The following is a list of publications on the Dead Sea Scrolls by Latter-day Saints during the past four decades. We have listed works by individuals whose scholarship is generally accepted as reputable, although we do not necessarily agree with every point made in all the publications cited. Be aware that since more scrolls have become available for study, it is evident that some of the older publications on the scrolls contain suppositions and pronouncements that are now considered dated or inaccurate. In general, this list does not include comments made about the scrolls in church magazines or the Church News, nor publications by Latter-day Saints who have an interest in the scrolls but who are not trained in ancient studies.

1950s

Nibley, Hugh W. "More Voices from the Dust." Instructor 91 (March 1956): 71-2, 74. Reprinted in Old Testament and Related Studies, 239-44. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1986.

---. "The Dead Sea Scrolls and the Book of Mormon." In An Approach to the Book of Mormon, 135-80. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1957. Reprinted 1964, 1988.

1960s

Rogers, Lewis M. "The Dead Sea Scrolls: Qumran Calmly Revisited." BYU Studies 2/2 (1960): 109-28.

Nibley, Hugh W. "The Dead Sea Scrolls: Some Questions and Answers." Instructor 98 (July 1963): 233-5. Reprinted in Old Testament and Related Studies, 245-52. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1986.

---. "Qumran and the Companions of the Cave." Revue de Qumran 5 (April 1965): 177-98. Reprinted as "Qumran and the Companions of the Cave: The Haunted Wilderness." In Old Testament and Related Studies, 253-84. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1986.

---. Since Cumorah. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1967. Reprinted 1988.

Tvedtnes, John A. "The Dead Sea Scrolls." In The Church of the Old Testament, 75-105. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1967. Reprinted 1980.

1970s

Nibley, Hugh W. "From the Dead Sea Scrolls." Appendix 1 of The Message of the Joseph Smith Papyri, 255-62. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1975.

---. "Churches in the Wilderness." In Nibley on the Timely and the Timeless, 155-86. Provo: BYU Religious Studies Center, 1978. Reprinted in The Prophetic Book of Mormon, 289-327. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1989.

1980s

Brown, S. Kent. "The Dead Sea Scrolls: A Mormon Perspective." BYU Studies 23/1 (1983): 49-66.

1990s

Cloward, Robert A. "Dead Sea Scrolls: LDS Perspective." In The Encyclopedia of Mormonism, edited by Daniel H. Ludlow et al., 1:363-364. New York: Macmillan, 1992.

Nibley, Hugh W. "Apocryphal Writings and Teachings of the Dead Sea Scrolls." In Temple and Cosmos, 264-335. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1992. (Previously unpublished presentation given in 1967 at a seminary graduation.)

Ricks, Stephen D. "Who Wrote the Dead Sea Scrolls?" FARMS, 1993.

Garcia Martinez, Florentino, and Donald W. Parry, eds. A Bibliography of the Finds in the Desert of Judah 1970-95. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1996.

Parry, Donald W. "4QSama and the Tetragrammaton." In Current Research & Technological Developments on the Dead Sea Scrolls, edited by Donald W. Parry and Stephen D. Ricks, 106-25. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1996.

Parry, Donald W. "Retelling Samuel: Echoes of the Books of Samuel in the Dead Sea Scrolls." Revue de Qumran 17 (1996): 293-306.

Parry, Donald W., and Steven W. Booras. "The Dead Sea Scrolls CD-ROM Database Project." In Current Research & Technological Developments on the Dead Sea Scrolls, edited by Donald W. Parry and Stephen D. Ricks, 239-50. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1996.

Pike, Dana M. "The Book of Numbers at Qumran: Texts and Context." In Current Research & Technological Developments on the Dead Sea Scrolls, edited by Donald W. Parry and Stephen D. Ricks, 166-93. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1996.

Pike, Dana M. "The 'Congregation of YHWH' in the Bible and at Qumran." Revue de Qumran 17 (1996): 233-40.

Seely, David R. "The Barki Nafshi Texts (4Q434-439)." In Current Research & Technological Developments on the Dead Sea Scrolls, edited by Donald W. Parry and Stephen D. Ricks, 194-214. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1996.

Seely, David R. "The 'Circumcised Heart' in 4Q434 Barki Nafshi." Revue de Qumran 17 (1996): 527-35.

Woodward, Scott R., et al. "Analysis of Parchment Fragments from the Judean Desert Using DNA Techniques." In Current Research & Technological Developments on the Dead Sea Scrolls, edited by Donald W. Parry and Stephen D. Ricks, 215-238. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1996.

Suggestions for Further Reading: Select Recent Publications by non-Latter-day Saint Scholars

Renewed interest in the Dead Sea Scrolls has produced a plethora of publications of varying quality relating to these wonderful documents. The following short list of recent publications written by scholars for the general public contains books that we consider to be of generally high quality.

Translations of the Dead Sea Scrolls

GarcÂa MartÂnez, Florentino, trans. The Dead Sea Scrolls Translated. Translated into English by W. G. E. Watson. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1994.

Vermes, Geza. The Dead Sea Scrolls in English. 4th ed. New York: Penguin, 1995.

Wise, Michael, Martin Abegg Jr., and Edward Cook. The Dead Sea Scrolls: A New Translation. San Francisco: Harper, 1996.

Introductions to Qumran and the Scrolls

Cross, Frank M. The Ancient Library of Qumran. 3rd ed. Minneapolis: Fortress, 1995.

Fitzmyer, Joseph A. Responses to 101 Questions on the Dead Sea Scrolls. New York: Paulist, 1992.

Schiffman, Lawrence H. Reclaiming the Dead Sea Scrolls. Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society, 1994.

VanderKam, James C. The Dead Sea Scrolls Today. Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1994.

Related Studies of Potential Interest

Collins, John J. The Scepter and the Star: The Messiahs of the Dead Sea Scrolls and Other Ancient Literature. New York: Doubleday, 1995.

Scanlin, Harold. The Dead Sea Scrolls and Modern Translations of the Old Testament. Wheaton, Ill.: Tyndale House, 1993.

Acknowledgments

As the editors of this volume, we acknowledge the work of numerous individuals who assisted us in both the organization of the conference and the preparation of this volume. We appreciate the support and direction of Robert L. Millet, dean of religious education at BYU, and Noel B. Reynolds, president of FARMS. We are grateful to Brent Hall, FARMS director of operations and development, Margene Jolley, assistant to the director, others on the FARMS staff, and to Becky Schulties, a BYU graduate student in Near Eastern studies, for taking care of the numerous details involved in the planning of the conference. We express our thanks to Erik Swanson for assistance in gathering and organizing data for this introductory material. We also thank Sandra A. Thorne and Mary Mahan, the FARMS editors assigned to this volume, for their careful and accurate work.

Donald W. Parry

Dana M. Pike

Notes

Map of the eleven Qumran caves in which the Dead Sea Scrolls were discovered. (Map by Jeff Jolley.)

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. See Frank Moore Cross, The Ancient Library of Qumran, 3rd ed. (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1995), 55-6.
[^2] 2. See Eusebius, The History of the Church from Christ to Constantine, trans. G. A. Williamson (London: Penguin Books, 1989), 6:16. See also Charles F. Pfeiffer, The Dead Sea Scrolls and the Bible (New York: Weathervane Books, 1969), 11-2.
