I was in despair and needed strength beyond my own.

I had recently gotten divorced from my husband and still had an unhealthy relationship with him. I had also just given birth to a baby girl, but after praying and pondering about my unique circumstances, I made the difficult decision to put her up for adoption because I felt like I wouldn’t be able to raise and support her on my own.

My self-worth was at its lowest point.

Grieving the loss of my marriage and baby girl at the same time was almost unbearable. I believed in eternal families, but my divorce and adoption placements were final, and there was no hope of being a family with these two people in the eternities. The pain felt truly overwhelming.

Through all the pain, I stayed active in the Church, being the best disciple of Christ I knew how to be. Nevertheless, I could not seem to break my unhealthy relationship with my ex-husband, which often occurs in a cycle of emotional abuse (like the one I was in). I knew logically that I needed to set stricter boundaries for myself with him, but I could not make myself do it.

I talked to my bishop about my situation and how I felt like my ex-husband had an unseen hold on me. In his attempts to support me, my bishop asked questions like, “Are you going to church every week?” “Are you faithfully magnifying your callings?” “Are you saying your prayers daily?”

I was able to answer yes to all these questions.

But then he asked, “Are you reading the Book of Mormon regularly?”

I admitted I was not.

He challenged me to start reading it, and I did.

When I got to Jacob chapter 2, the messages really started to resonate with me.

Jacob’s soul was burdened because of the strict commandment he had received from God—to admonish his brethren according to their crimes. Jacob 2:7 says, “It grieveth me that I must use so much boldness of speech concerning you, before your wives and your children, many of whose feelings are exceedingly tender and chaste and delicate before God, which thing is pleasing unto God.”

Jacob 2:35 says, “Ye have broken the hearts of your tender wives, and lost the confidence of your children, because of your bad examples before them; and the sobbings of their hearts ascend up to God against you.”

As I read, the Spirit testified to me that God was aware of my situation. God knew I was one of the tender wives whose hearts were broken. I shed many tears over my situation.

I experienced increased hope and fortitude as I continued to study the Book of Mormon faithfully. I journaled my thoughts and the truths I learned as I read. Within just a few weeks, I felt stronger than I had ever felt in my life! I found the strength and power to see clearly and begin to let go of my grief, and I was able to start moving forward. I knew this power came from studying the Book of Mormon.

President Russell M. Nelson recently taught: “Few things build faith more than does regular immersion in the Book of Mormon. No other book testifies of Jesus Christ with such power and clarity. Its prophets, as inspired by the Lord, saw our day and selected the doctrine and truths that would help us most. The Book of Mormon is our latter-day survival guide.”

When I heard our prophet say this, I realized we receive strength from reading the Book of Mormon because it testifies of Jesus Christ with more power than any other book. Jesus Christ is the source of strength! And regular immersion in the Book of Mormon builds our faith, which gives us the power to face and overcome challenges.

I am so grateful I was blessed with the strength to break the unhealthy cycle with my ex-husband. It took a while for me to forgive him, but as I continued to study the Book of Mormon, I learned it was possible for me to forgive through the power of Jesus Christ’s Atonement.

I felt a huge weight lifted from me as I learned to completely trust that God would judge righteously knowing all the facts of our circumstances. I realized I was hurting myself by holding on to pain and resentment toward my ex-husband. I needed to forgive him in order to heal myself.

Elder Tad R. Callister, an emeritus General Authority Seventy, once wrote:

“One of the blessings of the Atonement is that we can receive of the Savior’s succoring powers. …

“… His spirit heals; it refines; it comforts; it breathes new life into hopeless hearts. It has the power to transform all that is ugly and vicious and worthless in life to something of supreme and glorious splendor. He has the power to convert the ashes of mortality to the beauties of eternity.”

I know this is true, because I experienced it.

I am so blessed that I have been able to experience the succoring power of the Savior. He healed my heart so I could forgive. He transformed all that was ugly into a glorious experience. I have been filled with joy, and I can honestly say I’m grateful for this trial because it helped me become a stronger, better disciple of Christ.

Years later, I am still saddened at times about my divorce, but it is no longer a painful memory. It is merely an experience in my life that taught me so much about myself and helped me gain a closer relationship with God. And my ex-husband and I have remained cordial, thanks to the Savior’s healing power.

As for the grief I experienced after placing my baby girl for adoption, I’ve learned that Jesus Christ can truly heal us from anything when we rely on Him. That was one of the most heart-wrenching experiences of my life, but the Savior healed my heart as I immersed myself in studying His gospel. When the grief was hard, I would ask myself, “Do I trust that Heavenly Father wants me to be happy eternally?” And my answer would always be yes!

I always held on to hope and faith, and the truth stated in Doctrine and Covenants 122:7, that “all these things shall … be for [our] good,” has been my reality. As I have relied on Christ and Heavenly Father during deep challenges, I have learned and grown so much. And I’m grateful to know that the girl I placed for adoption is happy, successful, and part of a wonderful eternal family.

I have been able to gain power to face many challenges in my life by continuing to study the Book of Mormon daily and accessing the healing power of Jesus Christ. I have a strong testimony that regular immersion in the Book of Mormon gave me strength beyond my own to heal and helped me experience a change of heart that filled me with the exquisite joy the gospel of Jesus Christ can bring to us all.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="146334142" id="aside1_p1">You can find more articles about healing in the Young Adults section of the June 2021 <cite>Liahona.</cite></p> <p data-aid="146334145" id="aside1_p2">Check out <a href="https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/audiences/young-adults/ya-weekly?lang=eng">YA Weekly</a>, located in the Young Adults section under Audiences in the Gospel Library, for new, inspiring content for young adults each week.</p> [/SIDEBAR] [SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="146334148" id="aside2_p1">You can submit your own article, ideas, or feedback at <a href="https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/liahona?lang=eng">liahona.ChurchofJesusChrist.org</a>. We can’t wait to hear from you!</p> [/SIDEBAR]
