Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1980)

Section 4

Jesus Begins the Great Galilean Ministry

We believe that through the Atonement of Christ, all mankind may be saved, by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the Gospel. (Article of Faith 3.)

Jesus—a Preacher of Righteousness, a Mighty Minister, a Man of God—now goes forth into Galilee, where, on their streets and in their synagogues, he preaches the gospel of the kingdom: that salvation comes by him and is gained by those who believe and obey.

He brings forth a new gospel dispensation; calls sinners to repentance; applies the Messianic prophecies to himself; and calls Peter, Andrew, James, John, and Matthew to follow him.

He heals a nobleman's son; casts an evil spirit out of a demoniac; cleanses a leper; forgives sins; heals a paralytic, and an impotent man, and one with a withered hand.

Above all—while at the Passover in Jerusalem—he proclaims his divine Sonship; makes himself "equal with God"; promises to take the gospel to the dead; announces that men are resurrected, judged, and assigned their glory, by the Son; and expounds the divine law of witnesses.

He is rejected by his own in Nazareth, and because he says God is his Father, and because he violates the rabbinical sabbath rules, the Pharisees spy upon him and join with the Herodians to plot his death.

Our Lord's ministry is now well under way, and the proceedings of the present are a precursor of the future. The Son of God ministers among men, and the sons of Lucifer seek to destroy him.

Chapter 33

Jesus Preaches the Gospel in Galilee

This is the gospel which I have given unto you—that I came into the world to do the will of my Father, because my Father sent me. And my Father sent me that I might be lifted up upon the cross; and after that I had been lifted up upon the cross, that I might draw all men unto me. . . . Now this is the commandment: Repent, all ye ends of the earth, and come unto me and be baptized in my name, that ye may be sanctified by the reception of the Holy Ghost, that ye may stand spotless before me at the last day. Verily, verily, I say unto you, this is my gospel. (3 Ne. 27:13-14, 20-21.)

"Repent Ye, and Believe the Gospel"

(Mark 1:14-15; Matthew 4:17; Luke 4:14-15; JST Luke 4:15, John 4:43-45)

We come now to the three verses in the Synoptic Gospels that set the tone for everything that came from the pens of the synoptic authors: Matthew, Mark, and Luke. The message they contain applies also to all that is recorded in the gospel of the Beloved John.

We were with Jesus at Bethabara when he was baptized by John. We saw the heavens open and the Holy Spirit of God descend in bodily form to rest upon him. We went with him into the wilderness when he fasted and communed with his Father for forty days, and then overcame the wiles of the archtempter. We saw angels minister to him; heard John identify him as the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world; and heard him call Andrew and Simon, Philip and Nathanael, and John to follow him.

We attended the wedding celebration in Cana, drank the sweet wine that once was water, and then went with him to the Feast of the Passover in the Holy City. There, in thunderous yet righteous indignation, wielding a whip made of small cords, he drove the moneychangers from the Court of the Gentiles, overturned their tables of greed, and freed the animals and fowls that desecrated his Father's House.

We sat in reverent awe as he taught Nicodemus about spiritual rebirth and the salvation that results therefrom, and heard him say with his own lips that he was the Only Begotten of the Father and that whosoever believeth in him should not perish but have everlasting life.

Then we traveled and tarried with him for about nine months, through all the cities and villages of Judea, as he proclaimed his own divine Sonship and poured words of eternal life into the ears of his Jewish hearers. We are aware of John the Baptist's great pronouncement, made at Aenon near Salim, that all who believe in the Son shall have everlasting life; and we know that our Lord's Forerunner is now languishing in a vile and evil dungeon in a fortress near a palace where Herod Antipas revels in lustful splendor.

Only a few days ago we arose early to walk with him through rugged hill country, from northern Judea to Sychar in Samaria, where Jacob's Well is found. There, at the well and in the city, we continued to hear the words of wisdom and truth that none but he have ever spoken, and then we traveled on with him into his own Galilee.

Except for the accounts of his baptism and the temptation that followed, all that we have seen and heard and felt has come to us from John's Gospel. In all of it John was either present in person or received firsthand accounts from others, including the Lord Jesus himself. But now, after nearly a year of his active ministry, and with only about three months left before his Second Passover, we are turning also to the synoptic accounts to learn of him of whom we are already so much in awe.

And for the first time we find recorded, in plain and clear language, exactly what Jesus is doing as he goes forth to do the will of him whose servant he is. We come to the three verses that set the tone and give meaning and perspective to all that is written in all of the Gospels.

Jesus is going back to his homeland, to the land of his childhood and youth and maturing years, to the place of which he himself "testified, that a prophet hath no honour in his own country." But he is going back "in the power of the Spirit" to a people who "received him, having seen all the things that he did at Jerusalem at the feast: for they also went unto the feast." This time "a fame of him" will spread "through all the regions round about"; and as he teaches in their synagogues, he will be "glorified of all who believed on his name." Whereas he was once without honor in his own country, now, for a season at least, many will flock to him, and all will know of the wonderful works he is doing.

In the three verses of which we speak, Matthew says: "From that time Jesus began to preach, and to say, Repent: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand"; and Mark says: "Jesus came into Galilee, preaching the gospel of the kingdom of God, And saying, The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand: repent ye, and believe the gospel."

In these verses we find the key that opens the door to an understanding of all of Jesus' teachings. In Galilee—and elsewhere and everywhere—he invited men to believe and repent; to believe in him as the Son of God and to repent of their sins; to accept the gospel that he preached and to become members of his earthly kingdom. Jesus preached the gospel; and unless and until this dawns upon us, we will not and cannot understand his ministry among men. Jesus preached the gospel—nothing more and nothing less.

What is the gospel? The gospel of the kingdom? And what is the kingdom of heaven that is now at hand?

The gospel is the plan of salvation, the plan ordained and established by the Father to enable his spirit children to advance and progress and become like him. It is all of the laws, truths, rites, ordinances, and performances by conformity to which men can save themselves with eternal exaltation in the mansions on high. It is the system that enables the sons of God to become gods. "It is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth." (Rom. 1:16.)

The gospel is the glad tidings of great joy that salvation is in Christ; that a gracious God has provided a Savior for his children; that fallen man can be ransomed from temporal and spiritual death. It is: "That he came into the world, even Jesus, to be crucified for the world, and to bear the sins of the world, and to sanctify the world, and to cleanse it from all unrighteousness; That through him all might be saved whom the Father had put into his power and made by him." (D&C 76:40-41.) It is: "That the Son of God hath atoned for original guilt," so that little children "are whole from the foundation of the world" (Moses 6:54), and that all who will repent and become as their little children shall be saved.

The gospel "is the plan of salvation unto all men, through the blood of [God's] Only Begotten." It recognizes that "all men, everywhere, must repent, or they can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God, for no unclean thing can dwell there, or dwell in his presence." (Moses 6:57-62.) It consists of hearkening unto the voice of God and believing in his Only Begotten; of forsaking the world and repenting of one's sins; of being baptized in water for the remission of sins; of receiving the gift of the Holy Ghost, so that the newly born saint may be sanctified and become pure and spotless; and of then enduring to the end and working the works of righteousness all one's days. "And this is my gospel—repentance and baptism by water, and then cometh the baptism of fire and the Holy Ghost, even the Comforter, which showeth all things, and teacheth the peaceable things of the kingdom." (D&C 39:6.)

Such is the gospel, the gospel of the kingdom of God, the gospel which admits men to the kingdom of God on earth—which is the Church—and to the kingdom of God in heaven—which is the celestial kingdom. When Jesus said, "The kingdom of heaven is at hand," he was announcing that the kingdom of God on earth, which is the Church of Jesus Christ, was then organized again among men. [^1]

When Jesus preached the gospel, over and over again he said such things as these: 'The God of your fathers, who was worshipped by Abraham and Moses and all the holy prophets, hath sent me; I am his Son, by whom salvation comes. As I said unto Nicodemus, I am the Only Begotten; and as I said unto the woman of Samaria, I am the Messiah. Come unto me; believe in me; keep my commandments; join my church; be baptized and I will give you the Holy Ghost; walk in the paths of righteousness and my blood shall cleanse you from all sin. And having enjoyed the words of eternal life in this world, ye shall be inheritors of eternal life, even immortal glory in the world to come.'

Jesus did not come among men simply to teach ethical principles, to give parables, to present a higher and better way of life to downtrodden humanity. That he did all this, and more, none doubt. But Jesus came among men to atone for the sins of the world, to make salvation available through the shedding of his blood, and to teach those gospel laws by obedience to which all men can be saved in the kingdom of God. Jesus preached the gospel; so it is written, and so it is.

The Gospel accounts are not, and do not pretend to be, definitive expositions of the saving truths that comprise the gospel, nor do they pretend to record the doctrinal teachings of the Lord Jesus. Rather, they are fragmentary accounts of selected sayings and a few of his doings. "The Synoptic narratives"—Matthew, Mark, and Luke—are, as Edersheim expresses it, only brief historical summaries, with here and there special episodes or reports of teaching inserted." (Edersheim 1:422-23.)

With these realities before us, we will be able to put the episodes and reports in their proper perspective and to learn why each one has been preserved for us. Parables, healings, teachings, sermons—all that our Lord said and did—can only be understood when considered in their relationship to that gospel—the fulness of the everlasting gospel—which Jesus came to teach.

Jesus Heals the Nobleman's Son

(John 4:46-54; JST John 4:55-56)

Miracles are part of the gospel. Signs follow those that believe. Where the doctrines of salvation are taught in purity and perfection, where there are believing souls who accept these truths and make them a part of their lives, and where devout souls accept Jesus as their Lord and serve him to the best of their ability, there will always be miracles. Such ever attend the preaching of the gospel to receptive and conforming people. Miracles stand as a sign and a witness of the truth and divinity of the Lord's work. Where there are miracles, there is the gospel, the Church, the kingdom, and the hope of salvation. Where there are no signs and miracles, none of these desired blessings will be found. These realizations prepare us to consider the episodes and reports that have been preserved for us in the Gospels.

And so Jesus, coming back into Galilee, to a people many of whom are for the moment receptive and friendly, goes to Cana. His fame has preceded him; indeed, part of his fame had its beginning in this very Galilean village, for it was here that water became wine at his word. But now the Galileans also have in mind what he had done at the Feast of the Passover; and we cannot discount the possibility—shall we not say probability—that the glad tidings of his doings, of nine months' duration, through all Judea, have also come to their attention. He is being hailed by many for what he says he is, the One sent to teach and heal.

While Jesus was in Cana, perhaps staying at the home of Nathanael, there came to him from Capernaum, some twenty miles away, a nobleman whose son "was at the point of death." That this nobleman was an officer, either civil or military, in the court of Herod Antipas is reasonably certain; at least the word used by John to describe him is the same one Josephus and others used repetitiously to refer to officers in the service of that evil tyrant. In any event, the nobleman besought Jesus "that he would come down, and heal his son." What words of earnest entreaty were used we do not know. Their import must have been to induce the Master to travel to the bedside of the dying son, a thing that Jesus had no intention of doing.

To this assumption that the personal presence of the Healer was required to effect a cure, Jesus said: "Except ye see signs and wonders, ye will not believe." 'Except ye see me come and lay my hands on the head of your son, as ye are aware I have done to others, ye will not believe that he shall be healed. Do ye not know that it is written of me, "He sent his word, and healed them"?' (Ps. 107:20.) In spite of this gentle rebuke, the nobleman continued to plead: "Sir, come down ere my child die."

Having thus tested the growing faith of the influential suppliant, and finding that he knew in his heart that Jesus had power to heal those who lay at death's door, our Lord said: "Go thy way; thy son liveth." There was to be no gradual cure; distance meant nothing where the exercise of healing power was involved. Jesus spoke, and the event transpired. Without further assurance, knowing only that this Man's words must all be fulfilled, the nobleman "believed the word that Jesus had spoken unto him, and he went his way."

Whereas he had come in haste, anxious and perturbed, importuning and pleading that Jesus travel to Capernaum and heal his son, now, at peace within himself, he remained overnight in or near Cana. The next day as he traveled homeward he met his servants, who said, "Thy son liveth," and he learned that the fever had left him at the very hour when Jesus had spoken those same blessed words.

This is the first healing miracle that is set forth in detail in the Gospels. Those performed at the Feast of the Passover and throughout all Judea are not described or explained. This miracle—the second performed in Cana—adds a new dimension to Jesus' healing ministry that we have not seen up to this point. It is in fact a dual miracle: one that healed the body of the absent son, and one that cured unbelief and planted faith in the heart of the present father.

With reference to the dying boy, it bears witness that the Divine Healer is not limited by geographical location; that he speaks and disease flees; that the whereabouts of the suffering suppliant is of no moment; that God governs all things; that his power is everywhere. With reference to the father who sought the divine intervention, it bears witness that the growth of faith in the heart of an earthbound pilgrim, and the healing, as it were, of the soul of man, is as great a miracle as—nay, a far greater miracle than—the healing of the physical body.

Having heard the gospel taught, and believing that the Teacher could work miracles, the father came to Jesus. 'Come down to Capernaum and heal my son,' he pleaded. By declining to go down—as though his personal presence was required for a miracle!—Jesus tested the faith of the father; and finding that it remained unshaken, he healed the child at a word. The father, without more and before word came from his servants, knew that the healing power had operated and that his son lived. When this was confirmed a day later, John says: "Himself believed, and his whole house." We have seen, thus, the miracle of healing a disease-ridden body and the healing of a truth-seeking soul; we have seen a physical cure that raised a boy from the doors of death, and a spiritual cure that enabled a man to shake off the disease of unbelief that leads to spiritual death. Truly the Master Healer uses his power in a perfect way for the blessing and benefit of his mortal brethren!

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] These are the words of Abinadi, spoken 150 years before our Lord's mortal birth.
