Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1980)

Chapter 34

Jesus Fulfills the Messianic Prophecies

Did not Moses prophesy unto them concerning the coming of the Messiah, and that God should redeem his people? Yea, and even all the prophets who have prophesied ever since the world began—have they not spoken more or less concerning these things? Have they not said that God himself should come down among the children of men, and take upon him the form of man, and go forth in mighty power upon the face of the earth? (Mosiah 13:33-34.) [^1]

To him give all the prophets witness, that through his name whosoever believeth in him shall receive remission of sins. (Acts 10:43.) [^2]

Messianic Prophecies: Their Nature and Purpose [^3]

We stand in old Jerusalem—the Holy City—the chosen spot where prophets teach Jehovah's word, and where, all too often, they die for the testimony of Jesus that is theirs. Isaiah is here—it is seven and a half centuries before Christ—and we hear him say: 'Rejoice, O Israel, for unto us a Child is born; unto us a Son is given. He is the Messiah, the Mighty God, the Prince of Peace. Behold, a virgin shall conceive; she shall bear this Son; and his name shall be called Immanuel, which means, God is with us, for God himself shall dwell as a Mortal Man.' This we hear and much more.

Then we stand on a Judean plain, a few short miles from the Holy City, where we see and hear such marvelous things that our bosom burns with living fire. We hear an angel, free from sin, announce the birth of David's kin. We hear the heavens resound as angelic choirs give glory to God and sing of peace among men of good will on earth. A Child is born; a Son makes flesh his tabernacle. His mother is none other than the Blessed Virgin of whom Isaiah and Nephi prophesied. It is as though we are seeing again what we saw before through prophetic eyes. Such is the nature of Messianic prophecies.

Again we mingle with the saints of old and hear their prophets speak in loving tones of the Messiah who is to come. Micah pictures for his hearers the little town of Bethlehem. 'Thou, Bethlehem Ephratah,' he says, 'out of thee shall come the Promised Messiah; though thou art little and insignificant among the cities of Judah, yet thy name shall be forever linked with the Lord Omnipotent, the Eternal God, for he shall be born in thee.'

We hear Jeremiah foretell the sorrow and lamentation that will be when Rachel weeps for the slain innocents in the days of Herod; we hear Hosea tell of the flight into Egypt so the Blessed Child will escape the sword that seeks his life; and we hear another prophetic voice testify: 'When he comes out of Egypt, he will go to Nazareth of Galilee, there to mature and grow and prepare; and ever thereafter he shall be called a Nazarene.'

Then we go to Bethlehem find the caravansery where the Eternal One lies in a manger, in that part of the camping place where the cattle are tethered. We see the flight into Egypt; and we rejoice at his return to the sacred home provided by Joseph and Mary among the Nazarenes. Again it is as though we had seen it all before; and so we had, for we had heard the Messianic utterances and known their meaning. And such is the nature of Messianic prophecies that those who go before know as surely and fully of the truth and divinity of that which is to be as do those who come after.

We see Jesus baptized at Bethabara in Jordan; we behold the heavens open and the Holy Spirit of God descend upon him, in bodily shape, with all the serenity and calmness of a dove. We hear his Forerunner's testimony: 'This is the Lamb of God, the Redeemer of the world, he who shall take upon himself the sins of all men on conditions of repentance'—and with it all we are not in Palestine; we are not standing on the banks of the Jordan; it is not January in A.D. 27. All that we see and hear is shown to us more than six hundred years before its destined occurrence, for we are with Nephi. We have been carried by the Spirit into an exceedingly high mountain where we behold in vision the very things that one day shall be when he who is the Spirit Lord shall become a mortal man.

Nor are we in any way surprised when we see it all over again, when Jesus comes to John to be baptized of him to fulfill all righteousness. The preview is the same as the performance. And such, be it known, is the nature of Messianic prophecies.

By the spirit of prophecy and revelation, as the visions of eternity rolled before them, and with a seeric insight known only to those who walk in the light of the Spirit, the ancient saints and their prophets and seers were as well informed about Christ and his ministry, as are those of us who have come after. Their Messianic prophecies were as powerful and persuasive, and as filled with the doctrines of salvation, as are our Messianic testimonies. The only difference is that they spoke of what was revealed to them in advance, and we speak of what has been revealed to us after the events.

Messianic prophecies foretell all things that men must know concerning the Lord Jesus and his mortal ministry; all things concerning his birth and ministry and death; all things concerning his teachings and miracles and healing power; all things concerning the ransom he paid and the atonement he wrought; all things concerning all of these matters which men must know to cleanse their souls through his atoning blood. Messianic prophecies reveal Christ and his ministry and the salvation that is in him—before his coming.

We speak thus, with the illustrations here recited, to lay a foundation for the gracious words Jesus is about to speak in the synagogue in Nazareth of Galilee. Our Lord has come out of Judea, through Samaria, to Cana. While there he healed the son of the nobleman, though the dying boy was twenty miles away in Capernaum. Everywhere he has preached the gospel, and now he is in the synagogue on the Sabbath, and he is about to apply, in effect, all of the Messianic prophecies to himself.

Jesus Applies the Messianic Prophecies to Himself

(Luke 4:16-22)

Now we are with Jesus in Nazareth—a place of blessed memory to him—the Galilean city where he was subject to Joseph and Mary; the city founded in the hills and mountains of Galilee, from whose heights the Light of the World is now sending forth his rays; the city where he is known, where he learned the carpenter's trade, where he went to school and sat in the synagogue on the Sabbath.

He has come from Cana, where he turned water into wine and where, at his spoken word, a boy in Capernaum received life and vitality and retreated from death's open door. His fame has preceded him; his fellow Nazarenes know of the Cana-Capernaum miracle, of what he did at the Feast of the Passover, of the miracles that were part of his early Judean ministry. He is no longer just one of a motley crowd; he has stepped forth as the Leader of men; he has disciples who follow in his footsteps and testify of his divinity; and he has begun to assume prerogatives that not even the great High Priest would dare to assume. None but he—none who came before, and none who followed after—had with violence driven the priestly courtiers from the temple courts, as though he himself were greater than the temple and all its ministers. None but he controlled the elements with such ease and had such wondrous power over disease and life and death. Nothing that Jesus shall do hereafter can be done in a corner; his light can never be hidden under a bushel; the eyes of all men shall be upon him as long as he lives; and his words are those which shall be prized above all others.

With Jesus we go to the synagogue on the Sabbath. Such is his custom, such is ours, and such is the custom of all the faithful in Israel. Synagogue worship is as mandatory as anything can be in the lives of the chosen people in this meridian day. Synagogues are sacred places where Jewish Israel resorts to pay their devotions to the Most High and to praise his name in sermon and prayer. In them we do not joke or laugh or eat or do aught that is irreverent or that detracts from the true spirit of worship. And it is worthy of note that what prevailed in synagogues anciently is what should prevail in our houses of worship today, for the Christian practice of frequent worship—of sermon and song and prayer and scriptural reading, in buildings set apart for such purposes—grew out of the Jewish dispensation that preceded ours. The apostles built upon the foundations of the past as they devised the procedures for their new day.

As we enter the stone synagogue, we admire the ornamentation over the lintel; perhaps it is "a seven-branched candlestick, an open flower between two Paschal lambs, or vine-leaves with bunches of grapes, or, as at Capernaum, a pot of manna between representations of Aaron's rod." [^4] We observe the holy chest—a movable ark, as it were—in which the sacred rolls of the Law and the Prophets are kept. The holy lamp is burning, "in imitation of the undying light in the Temple." Before the ark are the seats of honor where the rulers of the synagogue sit, facing the people. There is a place for the one who is to lead the devotions and a desk from which the Law is read. It is all familiar and well suited to the needs and circumstances of the day.

As we seat ourselves, it is with full anticipation that the ruler of the synagogue will call on Jesus to deliver a discourse. Whenever "some great Rabbi, or famed preacher, or else a distinguished stranger, is known to be in the town," it is the custom to invite him to preach to the people. The "institution of preaching" is a way of life among the Jews, and popular preachers are sought for, and are given complete freedom to expound and teach, using "parables, stories, allegories, witticisms, strange and foreign words, absurd legends, in short, anything that might startle an audience." We anticipate that, as is the custom, "at the close of his address, the preacher" will refer "to the great Messianic hope of Israel," but little do we realize the power and import of the Messianic proclamation that is to be made this day.

The synagogue service commences. There are two prayers, then the reciting of the Shema—the three passages from the Pentateuch, in which the worshippers take upon themselves the yoke of the kingdom—and then another prayer. Then come eighteen eulogies or benedictions and yet other prayers. After these liturgical formalities, the minister takes out a roll of the Law, and seven persons are called upon to read successive portions. "A descendant of Aaron was always called up first to the reading; then followed a Levite, and afterwards five ordinary Israelites. . . . The reading of the Law was both preceded and followed by brief Benedictions."

It is now time for the reading of a section from the Prophets and for the discourse of the day. This is the portion of the service that we know that Jesus personally participated in. He "stood up for to read," Luke says, "And there was delivered unto him the book of the prophet Esaias." After the reading came the sermon. If, however, he followed the practice of the day, his participation involved more than reading from the Prophets and discoursing as he chose. "The person who read in the synagogue the portion from the Prophets, was also expected to conduct the devotions, at least in greater part," meaning, "part of the Shema, and the whole of the Eulogies."

If Jesus, as was the custom, and as other readers of the Prophets and preachers of the sermon would have done—if Jesus participated in full, he would have read such expressions as: "Thou art Jehovah, our God, and the God of our fathers, our King, and the King of our fathers, our Saviour, and the Saviour of our fathers, our Creator, the Rock of our Salvation, our Help and our Deliverer. The name is from everlasting, and there is no God beside Thee." "Blessed art Thou, Jehovah, Who quickenest the dead!" "Thou art Holy, and Thy name is Holy. Selah. Blessed art Thou Jehovah God, the Holy One." Such a participation on his part would in fact have fitted perfectly into the Messianic pronouncement he was about to make, for Jehovah was the Messiah, and the salvation promised Israel and all men by the One was the salvation that would be brought to pass by the Other.

But this we do know. Standing before the people, Jesus read from Isaiah one of the greatest of the sayings of that Messianic prophet. Probably he read in Hebrew—such was the practice—and then translated or "targumed" the passage into Aramaic. The targums were the oral translations or paraphrases of the written Hebrew. This would also account for the differences between Isaiah's record in the Old Testament, and the statements as given by Jesus and recorded by Luke.

The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor; he hath sent me to heal the brokenhearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised, To preach the acceptable year of the Lord.

Such were the words he read. Then he sat down—as the custom was—to deliver the discourse. All eyes were upon him, and he began by saying unto them:

This day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears.

Thereafter, many "gracious words . . . proceeded out of his mouth," to which all present bore witness. What these words were we do not know, but in the very nature of things we can rest assured that they were a sermon on the text he had read. Providentially, we do know what Isaiah's words mean and how they apply to the One who read them that day in Nazareth, in the synagogue where he had worshipped as a youth, and among the people whom he knew and whose faces were familiar to him.

The Spirit of the Lord is upon me. Isaiah said: "The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me." [^5] Being pure and without sin, Jesus always and ever possessed that Spirit which will not dwell in an unclean tabernacle, but which, conversely, always abides with those whose houses of clay make a fit abode for such a celestial presence. Further, the Holy Spirit descended upon him, like a dove, when he was baptized by John, which John was the one who also testified, as we have seen, that "God giveth not his Spirit by measure unto him." It is no wonder, then, as we have also seen, that when he came into Galilee it was "in the power of the Spirit."

He hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor. Isaiah has it: "The Lord hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek." The Messiah comes in power; he is anointed, commissioned from on high; he comes in his Father's name, to do his Father's will, because his Father sent him; he speaks, not of himself, but of his Father. And his glorious message—it is the everlasting gospel, the plan of salvation; it is the glad tidings of great joy that salvation is in Christ, that man shall gain the victory over the grave, that he has power to gain eternal life. And to whom does the message go? To the meek, to the God-fearing, to those who seek righteousness; and they, in general, are the poor among men.

He hath sent me to heal the brokenhearted. "He hath sent me to bind up the brokenhearted," Isaiah says. 'I am come to heal and to save. Let those whose spirits are depressed come unto me, and I will give them peace. Are there those who are crushed with the weight of their sins, who carry burdens of despair—let them come unto me. I will bear their burdens if they will repent. Though my own heart be broken, yet shall all those who believe in me be healed. I shall heal men spiritually even as you have seen me heal them physically.'

He hath sent me . . . to preach deliverance to the captives. "He hath sent me . . . to proclaim liberty to the captives." Messiah is a preacher; his words deliver men from the captivity of sin and the bondage of iniquity. He proclaims liberty to the sin-shackled soul. By his word—the everlasting gospel that he preaches—men in mortality and those in the spirit prison are made free.

He hath sent me . . . to preach . . . recovering of sight to the blind. There is no parallel passage in Isaiah, although the thought fits into the over-all sense and meaning acclaimed by ancient Israel's Messianic seer in the utterance he made. That is to say: Jesus, as he "targumed" Isaiah's meaning from Hebrew to Aramaic, did what only inspired interpreters can do: he expanded the words and interpreted the meaning of the original utterance. 'I am sent by the Father—not only to proclaim how deliverance from sin may be found, but to preach the recovering of spiritual sight to those who are blind spiritually. Through me they shall see out of obscurity, and out of darkness.' If a parallel passage for these added words is needed, it may be found in Isaiah's prophecy about the latter-day coming forth of the Book of Mormon, for the promise is that through "the words of the book . . . the eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity, and out of darkness." (Isa. 29:8.)

He hath sent me . . . to set at liberty them that are bruised. "He hath sent me . . . to proclaim . . . the opening of the prison to them that are bound." The prisoners shall go free! Messiah shall make it possible. Those who are bruised and bound and beaten and shackled in the dungeons of hell shall come forth. The word has gone forth; the prison doors shall open—be it for the prisoners of sin in this life, or, as another prophet has called them, the "prisoners of hope" in the life to come. (Zech. 9:12.) "Let the dead speak forth anthems of eternal praise to the King Immanuel, who hath ordained, before the world was, that which would enable us to redeem them out of their prison; for the prisoners shall go free." (D&C 128:22.)

He hath sent me . . . to preach the acceptable year of the Lord. "He hath sent me to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord." The acceptable year of the Lord! It is the year and the time when Messiah comes; when salvation is made available; when men have opportunity to learn what they must do to be saved in his everlasting kingdom. 'I now proclaim to you: This is the year; this is the set time; salvation is near; I am he; my word is truth; come and walk in the light of the Lord. Now is the time and the day of your salvation; this is the acceptable year.'

Then, by way of climax, having taught the doctrine with gracious words that could not be refuted, Jesus attests:

This day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears.

That is to say: 'I have read from Isaiah; I have set forth the meaning of his words; I have taught the doctrine. Now I testify that these words—and therefore all Messianic prophecies—are fulfilled in me; they apply to me; I am the one of whom the prophets spoke; I am he; I am the Messiah.'

Where such a witness is born, there are only two possible responses. One is complete acceptance, the other complete rejection. No one can argue with a testimony; it is not a debatable issue. It is there to be accepted or to be rejected. Jesus taught and testified, and as the full meaning of his gracious words sank into their hearts, his Nazarene friends made their choice. This Jesus they knew and had known from his infancy and youth. How can he be the Son of God? How can he be the Messiah? Their voice—to their eternal sorrow—was one of rejection, which they summarized in these words: "Is not this Joseph's son?" 'How then can he be the Messiah? We know him; he is one of us.'

The word fell on stony ground and found no soil in which to grow, and the seeds died without sprouting. It was a sad, dark day for Nazareth.

Jesus Is Rejected at Nazareth

(Luke 4:23-30)

As the spirit of rejection contained in their words—"Is not this Joseph's son?"—became the consensus of the synagogue throng, Jesus, feeling their reaction, turned from his proclamation of joy and deliverance to a proclamation of sorrow and damnation. That which might have been theirs was passing them by. And yet, opposed as they were to his claim of Messiahship, they could not explain away the reports of the wonders he had performed in Cana and Capernaum and Judea. 'We know he cannot be the Messiah—for he is Joseph's son—but what of the miracles? Can it be that he has performed them? And if the reports are true, why doesn't he show us, his friends and associates of many years, the same signs and wonders he has shown others?'

Jesus, reading their thoughts and feeling the sense of the meeting, yet remaining in complete command of the situation, continued his sermon. "Ye will surely say unto me this proverb, Physician, heal thyself: whatsoever we have heard done in Capernaum, do also here in thy country," he said. 'You have performed miracles in Cana and Capernaum, but none here, and yet you are a native of Nazareth. Why can't we see a sign, some great exhibition of your purported power? Don't you know that charity begins at home, that unless the physician heals himself of his own diseases we cannot believe he has power to heal others?' (Commentary 1:162.)

With bitter irony Jesus responds to the thoughts in their minds. "No prophet is accepted in his own country," he says. And as illustrations of blessings being withheld from the chosen people (the Nazarenes, as it were) and given to foreigners (those of other cities in Palestine, in this case), he referred to two accounts from Israel's history: that of Elijah, who blessed the Phoenician widow of Zarephath, and that of Elisha, who cleansed a Gentile of Syria.

After Elijah sealed the heavens that there was neither dew nor rain, but according to his word; after the brook Cherith, whereof he drank, failed for want of water; and after the ravens no longer brought him bread and flesh to eat, the Lord sent him to Zarephath in Zidon, to a widow woman, who was commanded to sustain him. Traveling thence, Elijah found the woman gathering two sticks for a fire, that she might take her last handful of meal and her last drops of oil and make them into a cake for herself and her son. Then she and her offspring faced certain death by starvation.

"Make me thereof a little cake first, and bring it unto me, and after make for thee and for thy son. For thus saith the Lord God of Israel, The barrel of meal shall not waste, neither shall the cruse of oil fail, until the day that the Lord sendeth rain upon the earth." The woman obeyed. Elijah's words were fulfilled. "And the barrel of meal wasted not, neither did the cruse of oil fail," and they all ate thereof for many days. And as though this were not enough, when the woman's son died, Elijah called him back from death, and his spirit came into his body again. All this was done for a woman of Phoenicia—who probably was not even of the house of Israel—because she had faith. (1 Kgs. 17.)

Naaman, a mighty man and captain of all the armies of Syria, was a leper. His wife had a servant, an Israelite maid who had been taken captive from her homeland. She said: "Would God my lord were with the prophet that is in Samaria! for he would recover him of his leprosy." Naaman in due course went down to Israel and was told by a messenger sent by Elisha: "Go and wash in Jordan seven times, and thy flesh shall come again to thee, and thou shalt be clean." Doing so, he became clean—a miracle wrought at a distance, as it were, somewhat like the healing of the nobleman's son by Jesus. (2 Kgs. 5.)

Elijah the prophet, who was taken up into heaven without tasting death, and Elisha, who poured water upon the hands of Elijah and upon whom his master's mantle fell—these mighty prophets, whose works were known to every Jew in Jesus' day—their miracles were performed selectively, for special individuals, not for the suffering hosts of their day. Where there is faith, there is the miracle; where there is no faith, no miracle is wrought. And if the prophets of old went outside the fold of Israel to find those worthy of their ministry, so Jesus would go outside Nazareth to find receptive souls who would believe in him and receive the blessings that he came to bestow. Should the people of Nazareth desire to see the wondrous works done elsewhere, then let them accept Him who now preached in their synagogue, and they too would receive the blessings of heaven. These things, in his infinite wisdom, Jesus taught them that day; from his more extended remarks, Luke has preserved for us these words:

But I tell you of a truth, many widows were in Israel in the days of Elias, when the heaven was shut up three years and six months, when great famine was throughout all the land; But unto none of them was Elias sent, save unto Sarepta, a city of Sidon, unto a woman that was a widow. And many lepers were in Israel in the time of Eliseus the prophet; and none of them was cleansed, saving Naaman the Syrian.

Anger welled up in the hearts of his fellow Nazarenes. Lucifer, not Jehovah, was their lord, as Jesus would one day tell the Jews in Jerusalem. Though they had given lip service—that very day, in that very synagogue—to the worship of Jehovah, yet they now, "filled with wrath," as Luke says, cast that very Jehovah out of their midst. They "thrust him out of the city"; they "led him unto the brow of the hill whereon their city was built." Why? "That they might cast him down headlong." The spirit of murder was in their hearts, and they sought the death of Jesus. His words they could not answer, his testimony they could not refute, but his voice—as they supposed—his voice they could silence.

Jesus had come unto his own, and his own received him not! The leaders of the people rejected his words when he preached in the temple at Passover time. The common people of Nazareth hardened their hearts against his words when he spoke to them in their synagogue. And so it would be throughout his whole ministry; save for a few believing souls, he was "despised and rejected of men" (Isa. 53:3); and eventually his own would lead him before Roman overlords, as they raised their voices in chants of "Crucify him, Crucify him."

How he escaped the wrath and murderous designs of the Nazarene mob is not recorded. Luke says simply: "But he passing through the midst of them went his way." "Perhaps His silence, perhaps the calm nobleness of His bearing, perhaps the dauntless innocence of His gaze overawed them. Apart from anything supernatural, there seems to have been in the presence of Jesus a spell of mystery and majesty which even His most ruthless and hardened enemies acknowledged, and before which they involuntarily bowed. It was to this that He owed His escape when the maddened Jews in the Temple took up stones to stone Him; it was this that made the bold and bigoted officers of the Sanhedrin unable to arrest Him as He taught in public during the Feast of Tabernacles at Jerusalem; it was this that made the armed band of His enemies, at His mere look, fall before Him to the ground in the Garden of Gethsemane. Suddenly, quietly, He asserted His freedom, waved aside His captors, and overawing them by His simple glance, passed through their midst unharmed. Similar events have occurred in history, and continue still to occur. There is something in defenseless and yet dauntless dignity that calms even the fury of a mob. 'They stood—stopped—inquired—were ashamed—fled—separated.' " (Farrar, p. 175.)

But now the Son of God would go elsewhere to continue his ministry.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The marginal reading for the introductory portion of this Messianic prophecy is: "In the former time he brought into contempt the land of Zebulon and the land of Naphtali, but in the latter time hath he made it glorious," meaning that in the coming day when the Lord Jesus would dwell there, it would be glorious because the light of his countenance would shine upon the people.
[^2] 2. This is the testimony of Peter, gained shortly after the crucifixion.
[^3] 3. An extended analysis of the Messianic prophecies is found in The Promised Messiah: The First Coming of Christ, a companion volume to this work.
[^4] 4. This data on synagogues is digested from Edersheim 1:430-50. See also chapter 10 of The Mortal Messiah (Book 1).
[^5] 5. All of the quotations are taken from Isa. 61:1-2.
