Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1980)

Chapter 35

The Galilean Ministers in Galilee

The land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, by the way of the sea, beyond Jordan, in Galilee of the nations. The people that walked in darkness have seen a great light: they that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon them hath the light shined. (Isa. 9:1-2.) [^1]

Jesus Dwells in Capernaum

(Matthew 4:13-16; JST Matthew 4:12; Luke 4:31-32)

Palestine—Old Canaan—the Holy Land—the land where Jesus dwelt!

We find the Holy One of Israel, now dwelling in mortality, living among his Israelite kinsmen in the chosen land, the land promised them by Abraham their father. We find the Son of God dwelling among the chosen seed; among those to whose fathers the prophets had ministered in olden times; among those to whom the Law and the Prophets were as well known as is the light of the sun or as is the falling of the rain to men in general. We find the Holy Messiah dwelling and doing and speaking and being—all as recorded in the Messianic utterances of the prophets who went before.

And how fittingly it all falls into place. Jesus' every word and act and movement weaves itself into a majestic tapestry, a work of art that was before planned by his Father, and whose beauty was revealed—a segment here and a golden thread there—to the prophets and saints who preceded our Lord in life.

He was born in Bethlehem—the City of David, the spot beloved by Israel's greatest king—for he was the Son of David, heir to his throne, the one on whose shoulders the government would rest. He was the King who should reign in righteousness, the one who should open and no man shut, and upon whom the Lord would hang all the glory of his Father's house. His birth must be where kings are born, in the City of David.

He grew to maturity, subject to Joseph and Mary, in an obscure Galilean village. In his youth he was exposed to the wholesome rugged life of the farm and the pasture and the shop. Obscure Nazareth preserved his obscurity until the time of his showing to Israel arrived. The manners and ways of a village set apart from the marts of trade and the centers of civilization enabled him to learn the way of the swallow and to rejoice in the beauties of the lilies.

Now his ministry is upon him. With a zeal scarce hinted at in the lives of others, he must now be about his Father's business. Where shall his dwelling be? Nazareth no longer serves his needs; the obscurity of the past must flee before the light he now sheds forth. He cannot live in Jerusalem, where priests and scribes and Pharisees and Sanhedrinists—whose influence is great—seek his life and plot his death. He will visit that Sodom-like city from time to time and testify to its people; and finally, he will go there, deliberately and consciously, to suffer many things of the elders and chief priests and scribes, and to be killed, and to rise again the third day. But for the next twenty-seven months or so of his life, he needs a home base from which he can work and whence his word can go forth.

And so—rejected at Nazareth—he now turns, as the Messianic prophecies foretold, to Capernaum, that city of sin on the shores of the Sea of Galilee. He leaves the ancient land of Zebulon, where Nazareth is, to live in the land of Naphtali. He has there a nobleman friend whose son he healed; it is the city of Peter's in-laws, and the future chief apostle himself has a home there. But what is more important, it is a logical center from which to travel to the cities and villages that must hear his voice and see his face; and the throngs of travelers who pass through it will hear of his words and his miracles and carry back to their home peoples the wondering queries of earnest truth-seekers.

Matthew tells us that "leaving Nazareth, he came and dwelt in Capernaum" to fulfill the Messianic word, which promises that a great light shall shine upon those who dwell in that part of "Galilee of the Gentiles." Luke says he went to Capernaum, entered their synagogue, taught them on the Sabbath day—perhaps precisely as he had done in Nazareth—and that "they were astonished at his doctrine: for his word was with power." His doctrine was the gospel; he spoke by the power of the Holy Ghost; and it was the light of his everlasting word that was shown forth, in Galilee, in all of Palestine, and in all nations and among all peoples where he or those sent of him should teach and minister.

"I Will Make You Fishers of Men"

(Luke 5:1-11; JST Luke 5:2, 10; Matthew 4:18-22; JST Matthew 4:18-21; Mark 1:16-20; JST Mark 1:18)

About one year has passed since Andrew and Peter and the Beloved John (as well as Philip and Nathanael) all came to know that Jesus was the Christ, the Son of the living God. It was Andrew who then said to Peter: "We have found the Messias." It was Philip who then said: "We have found him, of whom Moses in the law, and the prophets did write." And it was Nathanael who then testified: "Rabbi, thou art the Son of God; thou art the King of Israel."

Since then all of these brethren have been with Jesus in much of his ministry. They saw the water become wine, the moneychangers flee from the temple, the miracles wrought at the Passover and throughout all Judea. They know what Jesus said to Nicodemus and the woman of Samaria, nor is the episode involving the nobleman's son hidden from them. They were present or at least know what he said in the synagogue in Nazareth. By now they have spent hundreds, perhaps thousands, of hours conversing with and listening to the Master.

How much does a zealous convert learn about the gospel during his first year in the Church? How much would these brethren of apostolic stature learn as they ate and slept and walked and lived with the Master Teacher for weeks and months at a time? How many miracles had they witnessed? How many times and in what variety of ways had they heard him say he was the Messiah? We do not know when James (the brother of John) joined the group, but it is clear his knowledge and testimony was like that of the others.

These brethren were not novices; the gospel message was not new to them. They had testimonies of the truth and divinity of the work, and the resultant desires to serve God and keep his commandments were firmly planted in their hearts. But with it all, they still needed bread to fill their own bellies, fish to fill the mouths of their wives and children, money to support their families. They had not as yet been called into a full-time ministry; they were not yet living the law of consecration, under which all that they had and were was dedicated to the building up of the kingdom and the rolling forth of the work of Him whose special witnesses they would soon become.

It is in this setting, then, and with this understanding, that we find the brothers Andrew and Peter, and the sons of Zebedee, James and John, plying their trade as fishers of fish on the Sea of Galilee. Jesus their Lord comes into view on the shore. Seeing Peter and Andrew "casting a net into the sea," he said: "I am he of whom it is written by the prophets; follow me, and I will make you fishers of men." Probably he said more—perhaps much more; no doubt it would have recalled their numerous experiences with him of the past year. As to what happened, the inspired account says, "And they, believing on his words"—no doubt meaning all the words he had spoken to them over the months—"left their net, and straightway followed him."

Soon thereafter, he came upon James and John, in their father's ship, mending their nets. Jesus issued the call, "and straightway they left their father Zebedee in the ship with the hired servants, and went after him." These four apostles-to-be were preparing for their holy calling. No doubt they already were elders in the Melchizedek Priesthood—at least we know that at a much earlier time they were performing baptisms, which requires at least the Aaronic Priesthood, but now they were forsaking all to follow the Master. They were going forth on full-time missions; they were consecrating their time and means and talents to a greater work. They were to be fishers of men.

Luke gives us either a more amplified account of these calls or a recitation of a miraculous event that occurred immediately thereafter. Each of the two sets of brothers, in their own ships, had fished all night, as the custom was, and had caught nothing. It was morning; the ships were anchored, and the fishermen were ashore, washing their nets. Crowds so pressed in upon Jesus that he entered Peter's ship and asked him to "thrust out a little from the land." Then Jesus "sat down, and taught the people out of the ship." Again we do not know what he said, only that he preached the gospel.

When his sermon was ended, Jesus instructed Peter: "Launch out into the deep, and let down your nets for a draught." This Peter did, though he had toiled all night and caught nothing. Immediately, miraculously, the nets were so full that they broke; with the help of James and John, both ships were filled, "so that they began to sink." Those who live by the law of consecration have their just needs and wants supplied, by divine power if need be.

Peter, falling at Jesus' knees, said: "Depart from me; for I am a sinful man, O Lord," so great was his astonishment "at the draught of fishes which they had taken." It was as though he had said: 'I am unworthy of this honor. A sinner such as I is not fit company for "the King, the Lord of hosts." Depart from me, that another more deserving may see thy countenance and behold thy person.' (Commentary 1:166.)

Jesus' response was kind and encouraging: "Fear not; from henceforth thou shalt catch men." A new day had dawned for Peter, James, John—the future First Presidency of the Church—and for Andrew, one of the Twelve. "And when they had brought their ships to land, they forsook all, and followed him."

That Glorious Sabbath in Capernaum

(Mark 1:21-34; Luke 4:31-41; JST Luke 4:38; Matthew 8:14-17)

A day in the life of our Lord: one glorious, wondrous day in Capernaum, his own city; a Sabbath day—a day of mighty preaching, of doctrine that astonished, of casting out an unclean devil in the synagogue; a day when Peter's mother-in-law was raised from her sick bed, and when a congregation of persons, possessed by evil spirits and suffering from divers diseases, came to partake of the goodness of Him who "took our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses"!

It was the Sabbath. He entered into the synagogue. No doubt Simon and Andrew, and James and John, the two sets of brothers, were with him; as devout Jews they all knew their Sabbath place, and that place was in the synagogue of the Lord, the place where Jehovah was worshipped according to the best light and knowledge then found among mortals. What a favored and choice congregation assembled here in Capernaum, in the house of worship where archaeologists have found the ornamentation over the lintel, consisting of a pot of manna between representations of Aaron's rod; in the stone building where four future apostles and their families paid their devotions. And on this particular Sabbath the Son of God himself was to address the congregation. Word most assuredly had spread through the city of the claims he had made and the gracious words he had spoken so recently in the synagogue in Nazareth. Who would not have crowded into the rectangular building to hear the word of truth and breathe the spirit of worship on such a day?

After the liturgical and formal parts of the day's worship, Jesus speaks. Neither Mark nor Luke tell us what he said, though they both recount the effect of the sermon on the hearers. They tell us "his word was with power"; that the congregation was "astonished at his doctrine"—as well they might be when one of such stature and fame arises to announce he is the Messiah and that salvation comes by him, as he had done in Nazareth; and that he "taught them as one that had authority, and not as the scribes." Many believing souls must have been in the congregation, as witness what happened that evening in Capernaum; at least no tumult of opposition arose, and no one sought to put him to death, as had been the case among those of the city where once he dwelt.

Yet there was one in the synagogue upon whom the sermon had an astonishing effect; one who was so filled with animus and hatred that he welcomed into his body an unclean devil from the blackness of hell; one who was possessed by an unclean spirit who took complete control of all mortal functions. By the mouth of the man, the demon who hated both the truth and Him who is its author cried out: "Let us alone; what have we to do with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth? art thou come to destroy us? I know thee who thou art, the Holy One of God."

Jesus' response was immediate, authoritative, unbending. He rebuked the devil. "Hold thy peace, and come out of him," he said, for the Son of Man neither sought nor accepted testimony of his divinity from an evil source. What matter it if "the devils also believe, and tremble"? (James 2:19.) What converting power attends the witness of Lucifer that Christ is the Holy One? Testimony should be borne by the power of the Holy Ghost or remain unspoken. What does it matter what the rebels from Sheol think or know about the laws of righteousness? Can a fountain bring forth both sweet and bitter water at the same place?

When the command came, this angel of the devil, this son of perdition, this unclean spirit, who like Lucifer his master was in opposition to all righteousness—this unclean spirit had no choice but to obey. With one final burst of hatred and venom, the unclean devil tore the man, threw him in agony in their midst, cried out with a loud and defiant voice, and then came out of his ill-gotten tenement.

The man was left limp and weak, but in a state to receive strength and light. The devil joined his fellow rebels who are continuing on earth the war commenced in heaven. And the people were amazed. Questioning among themselves, some asked: "What thing is this? what new doctrine is this? for with authority commandeth he even the unclean spirits, and they do obey him." Others acclaimed: "What a word is this! for with authority and power he commandeth the unclean spirits, and they come out." Is it any wonder that "the fame of him went out into every place of the country round about," and that all Galilee heard of his doctrine, his Messianic claims, and his power even over unclean spirits?

However much it may run counter to the carnal mind to read of men possessed of devils, and of other men who cast them out, such is one of the realities of mortal life. One-third of the hosts of heaven—all spirit children of our Eternal Father who is God—were cast out of heaven for rebellion. As angels of the devil and as sons of him who is Perdition, they stalk the earth, seeking whom they may destroy. Their condemnation: they are denied bodies; for them there is no further progression; they are miserable and seek the misery of all mankind; they are damned souls, without hope, forever. If, as, and when—subject to the restrictions and laws of our gracious God—they can gain temporary tenancy in a tenement of clay, they take up their habitation in the bodies of others.

We do not know how or under what circumstances such tenancy is permitted. That all things are governed and controlled by law, we do know; and we are left to suppose that in the day when the Incarnate Jehovah came among men, there must have been more persons who were susceptible to spirit possession than has been the case in other days. Perhaps somehow many of the Jews of that day—zealous, religiously inclined, yet going beyond the mark where spiritual things are concerned—got themselves into a state where evil spirits could enter their bodies. We do know from the Messianic utterance—"And he shall cast out devils, or the evil spirits which dwell in the hearts of men" (Mosiah 3:6)—that Jesus was destined, as he did, to cast out devils, and that this power was given to his apostles and seventies and, of course, is in the true church today.

After the synagogue service, He who had not where to lay his head, who—during the days of his active ministry at least—had no home of his own, went with Simon and Andrew to their abode to partake of the festive Sabbath meal. Such feasts at family gatherings were the most joyous occasions of the week. James and John were also guests in Peter's home on this memorable day.

Mark tells us that "Simon's wife's mother lay sick of a fever, and anon they tell him of her." Luke says she "was taken with a great fever; and they besought him for her." Jesus' specially selected disciples were married men with wives and children and families of their own, as his specially called servants should be in all ages. This is a household of faith; it is Peter's dwelling place; and all who dwell with him love the Lord and seek to walk uprightly before him. That they should importune the Master to heal one of their number is the most natural thing in the world.

And that Jesus should respond is what we all expect. He stood over her, rebuked the fever, took her by the hand, and lifted her up. "Immediately the fever left her, and she ministered unto them." What a joyous occasion this must have been. As the little group partook of the bounties of life, they also feasted spiritually; as they ate bread and fish, they rejoiced in the spiritual food set forth in the sermon of the morning; as they thought about the healed demoniac, there stood ministering to their every need a woman whose body but moments before had burned with fever. What marvels were being wrought in Israel!

Nor were the day's labors completed. From the morning session in the synagogue to the going down of the sun, the word went forth; all Capernaum heard what Jesus had preached; all learned that even the unclean devils departed at his word.

People began assembling at Peter's home. "All the city was gathered together at the door." Included with them were their sick and afflicted and diseased. Some were carried on litters; others were supported by loving arms; those with diseases of every sort came in faith, assured that miraculous cures awaited them. At evening after sunset, Jesus "laid his hands on every one of them, and healed them." And at his word, the devils came out of many, saying, "Thou art Christ the Son of God," and he rebuked them and "suffered them not to speak: for they knew that he was Christ."

Jesus Tours and Preaches in Galilee

(Matthew 4:23-25; JST Matthew 4:22; Mark 1:35-39; Luke 4:42-44; JST Luke 4:42)

When the night came the labors of the day ceased; the wise words and healing power stopped for a moment. Needed sleep and rest were sought, but not for long. "In the morning, rising up a great while before day, he went out, and departed into a solitary place, and there prayed."

How often Jesus prays! If it were not a basic tenet of true religion that private prayers are personal; that they are between the earthly suppliant and the Divine Father; that they should be known only by him who speaks and Him who hears—if it were not for these things, we would covet a knowledge of what the Son of the Father said to the Father of the Son on this and numerous other occasions. We can suppose that the voice of prayer poured out words of thanksgiving for the grace and guidance of that Capernaum Sabbath, which is scarcely over, and sought wisdom and direction for the continuing labors that lay ahead.

Jesus did not remain long in the desert solitude. Simon and the disciples followed after him. "All men seek for thee," Peter said, as the multitudes came pleading and importuning that he remain with them.

They, however, had heard the word. His voice had testified in their synagogue; the witness of his divine Sonship bad been borne in their presence; he had preached the gospel, opened the door to further investigation, and demonstrated his power by the healings and the miracles. The responsibility was now theirs to obtain baptism, to join the sheepfold of the Good Shepherd, and to live as becometh saints. Jesus must go elsewhere and give others a like opportunity.

"I must preach the kingdom of God to other cities also," he said, "For therefore am I sent." And preach it he did, in Galilee (except for a brief attendance at his second Passover), for almost two years, for about twenty-one months. By then it will be October, A.D. 29, and he will go to the Feast of Tabernacles to commence his later Judean ministry. But now he is starting his first tour of Galilee, preaching, healing, doing good, and working righteousness. Those with diseases and torments are healed; the lunatics and the paralytics are made well; devils are cast out; and multitudes follow him, "from Galilee, and from Decapolis, and from Jerusalem, and from Judaea, and from beyond Jordan." His fame knows no limit, and men flock to him from every political jurisdiction.

Truly this is that which Nephi foresaw. "I . . . beheld the Lamb of God going forth among the children of men," he said. "And I beheld multitudes of people who were sick, and who were afflicted with all manner of diseases, and with devils and unclean spirits; and . . . they were healed by the power of the Lamb of God; and the devils and the unclean spirits were cast out." (1 Ne. 11:31.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Though Canon Farrar wrote these eloquent words with reference to the multitudes who came to Peter's home to be healed on that glorious Sabbath evening in Capernaum, they apply in principle to all of our Lord's healings. Isaiah's actual Messianically spoken words were: "Surely he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows" (Isa. 53:4); and what Matthew said was: "Himself took our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses" (Matt. 8:17). Isaiah's clear meaning is that the Messiah takes upon himself the sins—and hence the griefs and sorrows, for these come because of sin—of all men on condition of repentance. Matthew simply assumes his apostolic prerogative to give added meaning to Isaiah's words by applying them—properly—to the physical healings that are a type and pattern of the spiritual healings wrought through the infinite and eternal atonement of Him who ransoms men both temporally and spiritually.
