Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1980)

Chapter 36

Jesus Uses Miracles to Spread the Work

Jesus was touched with a feeling of their infirmities. Those cries pierced to His inmost heart; the groans and sighs of all that collective misery filled His whole soul with pity. His heart bled for them; He suffered with them; their agonies were His; so that the Evangelist St. Matthew recalls in this place, with a slight difference of language, the words of Isaiah, "Surely He bore our griefs and carried our sorrow." (Farrar, p. 182.) [^1]

A New Dimension to Jesus' Miracles

Miracles stand out as one of the chief identifying characteristics of the mortal ministry of the Messiah. His Messianic witnesses—Isaiah, Nephi, King Benjamin, and others—spoke plainly of the throngs who would be healed by his word. We have now seen these throngs in Judea and throughout all Galilee. All of Palestine knows that here is a man who heals the sick in such a measure as was never before known in Israel. The raising of great multitudes from their beds of affliction and the casting out of many unclean spirits from many contorted and abused souls cannot be hidden from the people. Nor was it intended that it should be. Jesus' miracles bore testimony of his divinity and to the truth of the words he spoke.

Primarily, however, our Lord in his ministry is preaching the gospel of the kingdom; he is announcing to all men what they must do to gain peace in this life and eternal life in the world to come; he is proclaiming that a gracious Father ordained and established a plan of salvation that will enable the whole family of earth to advance and progress and become like their Creator; he is testifying that he is the Promised Messiah, the Savior and Redeemer, through whom salvation comes. "Whoso believeth in me, and is baptized, the same shall be saved; and they are they who shall inherit the kingdom of God. And whoso believeth not in me, and is not baptized, shall be damned." (3 Ne. 11:33-34.) This is his message; this summarizes what men must believe and what they must do. Jesus came to save sinners, and salvation comes through repentance and baptism and continued devotion to the truth. Unless we keep this perspective clearly before us, we will not and cannot keep in their perspective the disjointed collection of episodes from his life that have been preserved in the inspired writings now extant.

The miracles he is constantly performing are visible evidences in the eyes of all, believers and nonbelievers alike, that he has more than mortal power. They are proof, as it were, that his words are true. Can a deceiver and false teacher open blind eyes and unstop deaf ears? Miracles and true teachings always go hand in hand; signs follow those that believe—in their purity and perfection—the truths of the everlasting gospel.

We have little conception of the number of healings Jesus wrought. Multitudes thronged his way day after day, bringing their diseased and deformed, their lame and decrepit, their deaf and their blind. All these were healed as faith and desire warranted. Even their dead were subject to Jesus' will.

No attempt is made by the Gospel authors to record Jesus' many miracles. Only selected samples are set forth in the scriptures. The obvious plan of the inspired authors is to preserve illustrations of his purposes and powers, and surely the wide variety of healings and miraculous performances that they chose to record do attest to his power and control over all things.

After that glorious Sabbath in Capernaum when he cast out devils and healed all manner of diseases and torments, we find him touring throughout all Galilee "healing all manner of sickness and all manner of disease among the people." About three months pass, during which period the synoptists select, for analysis and exposition, only two of his miracles. These are the healing of a leper somewhere in Galilee and the healing of one sick with palsy when Jesus comes back to Capernaum.

Both of these manifestations of divine power add a new dimension, not so far seen, to his miraculous performances: the healing of the leper because of the nature of the disease, the secrecy he enjoined upon the recipient of his blessing, and the stipulation that the healed person conform to the provisions of the law of Moses; and the curing of the paralytic because it was preceded by a forgiveness of sins, showing that Jesus was Jehovah, who alone can forgive sins. Each of these miracles was performed not alone for the benefit and blessing of the suffering Israelite whose body was affected, but as a witness to the growing group of opponents that he whom they opposed came from God and had divine power. The wicked and rebellious in Israel, word upon word and miracle after miracle, were being left without excuse; their sins were being bound securely upon their own heads; the Light they were rejecting was shining forth everywhere in word and in deed.

He Heals a Leper

(Mark 1:40-45; JST Mark 1:40; Luke 5:12-16; JST Luke 5:14; Matthew 8:2-4; JST Matthew 8:2)

Healings there have been in profuse abundance, but none—up to this point and as far as we know—has involved a leper, "a man full of leprosy." None has dealt with a body and soul plagued with a living death, one whose body was in process of rotting, decaying, and returning to the dust to gain merciful surcease from the torments of the flesh. Before the Second Coming, "the Lord God will send forth flies upon the face of the earth, which shall take hold of the inhabitants thereof, and shall eat their flesh, and shall cause maggots to come in upon them; . . . and their flesh shall fall from off their bones, and their eyes from their sockets." (D&C 29:18-19.) Before and at the time of his First Coming, there were many in Israel who were lepers, possessors of such a vile and degenerating disease that they were anathema to everyone and a curse to themselves. Except for the extent of the coming latter-day plague, it can scarcely be worse than the hell and torment and physical affliction suffered by the lepers of Jesus' day.

Leprosy is an evil and wicked disease. "The symptoms and the effects of this disease are very loathsome. There comes a white swelling or scab, with a change of the color of the hair . . . from its natural hue to yellow; then the appearance of a taint going deeper than the skin, or raw flesh appearing in the swelling. Then it spreads and attacks the cartilaginous portions of the body. The nails loosen and drop off, the gums are absorbed, and the teeth decay and fall out; the breath is a stench, the nose decays; fingers, hands, feet, may be lost, or the eyes eaten out. The human beauty has gone into corruption, and the patient feels that he is being eaten as by a fiend, who consumes him slowly in a long remorseless meal that will not end until he be destroyed. He is shut out from his fellows. As they approach he must cry, 'Unclean! unclean!' that all humanity may be warned from his precincts. He must abandon wife and child. He must go to live with other lepers, in disheartening view of miseries similar to his own. He must dwell in dismantled houses or in the tombs." [^2]

"It began with little specks on the eyelids, and on the palms of the hand, and gradually spread over different parts of the body, bleaching the hair white wherever it showed itself, crusting the affected parts with shining scales, and causing swellings and sores. From the skin it slowly ate its way through the tissues, to the bones and joints and even to the marrow, rotting the whole body piecemeal. The lungs, the organs of speech and hearing, and the eyes were attacked in turn, till, at last, consumption or dropsy brought welcome death." (Geikie, pp. 390-91.)

Leprosy in biblical times, in addition to its desolating physical effects, was looked upon as the symbol of sin and uncleanness, signifying that as this evil disease ate away and destroyed the physical body, so sin eats away and corrupts the spiritual side of man. This did not mean that the disease borne by any individual attested that he was a worse sinner than his fellows, only that the disease itself was a symbol of the ills that will befall the ungodly and rebellious. It had been chosen as such a symbol, however, because it was considered to be the worst of all diseases, one that could not be cured except by direct divine intervention. There were instances in the Old Testament—Miriam, Gehazi, and Uzziah—in which rebellious persons were cursed with leprosy as a punishment for their evil deed.

And so we find the Galilean, preaching the gospel in his beloved Galilee, in an unnamed city, when a man "full of leprosy"—one in the last stages of the plague; one who is affected from head to toes, in all parts of his body; one for whom a dropsical death is not far distant—who, seeing Jesus, falls on his face, worships him, and says: "Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean."

Here is a man of faith. There is no question as to whether Jesus can heal him—only will the Great Healer use his power in this case. Indeed, here is man of great faith, for it would take an almost unbounded spiritual assurance to have the confidence of a restoration of health from a disease so dread. And was it not the recognized teaching of all the Rabbis of the day that leprosy was incurable? For such an affliction to leave the flesh of man had scarcely been heard of since the day of Naaman the Syrian.

Jesus is compassionate. With no thought of the Levitical uncleanness that results from touching a leper, he reaches forth his hand, touches the suffering suppliant—which physical contact is mentioned by all three of the synoptists—and, almost as the echo of the entreaty, says: "I will; be thou clean." [^3] Immediately, instantaneously, as it were, the leper is cleansed, his leprosy departs, and the miracle is wrought. Nothing is too hard for the Lord.

There were times when Jesus deliberately performed miracles to attract attention and to force, as it were, unbelieving hearers to give credence to his words. On this occasion, for reasons not recited, he chose to give a pointed charge to the cleansed leper to "tell no man" of the healing that had come to him. "See thou say nothing to any man," he commanded, "but go thy way, shew thyself to the priest, and offer for thy cleansing those things which Moses commanded, for a testimony unto them."

It may be that at this time, when men were flocking to him in such great numbers, further fame and notoriety would have hindered him in his travels and preaching; or that such a notable miracle would fan the flames of persecution that already were beginning to burn with an intense flame; or that if the priests in the temple in Jerusalem—whence the cleansed leper must now go to seek Levitical cleanness—knew the source of the healing power, it would have been difficult to obtain the ceremonial absolution required.

Jesus, at this point, was still requiring his converts to keep the law of Moses. After his passion and crucifixion it would be different; then "the law of commandments contained in ordinances" would be "abolished in his flesh" (Eph. 2:15); then "the handwriting of ordinances," or better, "the bond written in ordinances," would be nailed "to his cross." (Col. 2:14.) But now the healed leper must report to the priest, be shaved and examined, be quarantined for seven days, wash his clothes, offer the required sacrifices, and have the blood sprinkled and all the rites performed as set forth in Leviticus 14.

But the great thing that had happened to him was too good to keep. "He went out, and began to publish it much, and to blaze abroad the matter, insomuch that Jesus could no more openly enter into the city, but was without in desert places: and they came to him from every quarter." He, however, "withdrew himself into the wilderness, and prayed."

He Forgives and Heals One Sick with Palsy

(Mark 2:1-12; JST Mark 2:1-3, 7, 9; Luke 5:17-26; JST Luke 5:19-20, 23-24; Matthew 9:2-8; JST Matthew 9:2, 4-6, 8)

Jesus is now back in Capernaum after a long Galilean tour of teaching and healing. The flames of his fame—fanned by his words, fed by the flow of miracles—are blazing forth in every part of Palestine. Never was a man's name on as many Palestinian tongues as is this Man's. His doctrine, his deeds, his doings—all that he says and every good thing that he does—are discussed in every home, at every festive meal, in every synagogue. The believing among the sick and the penitent among the afflicted seek him with a hope of being healed; those who hunger and thirst after righteousness hang on his every word and find peace to their souls as they live in harmony with his teachings; the rulers and the rebellious rate him as an evil troublemaker and seek ways to entrap and defame and even to slay him.

In Capernaum he stays with Peter, and he is now in the home of that chief of his apostolic witnesses. Throngs crowd around. The house, apparently a large one, is filled; the living quarters, the guest chamber, the bedrooms, all are crowded with people; and throngs of others are massed around the door and out into the street. Scribes and Pharisees and "doctors of the law" have assembled there "out of every town of Galilee, and Judea, and Jerusalem." Jesus is seated, as the custom is, and is teaching his hearers. Mark, who records what he learned from Peter, and whose account of the wondrous happenings we are about to witness is the most complete, says: "He preached the word unto them." Jesus is preaching the gospel; he is speaking of his Father, of the plan of salvation, of the atoning sacrifice upon which all else rests; he is setting forth the need to repent and be baptized and receive the Holy Ghost and to work the works of righteousness. He is preaching the everlasting word, the word of truth and salvation, the word of the gospel. Such is the course he will follow everywhere.

Four men approach the house. They are carrying a litter or pallet whereon lies one sick of the palsy, one who is paralyzed, who cannot speak, and who of himself is helpless; yet he is a man of faith who has made known his desire to be deposited in the Divine Presence that perchance the one in whom his faith is centered will exercise his healing power in the paralyzed one's behalf. Unable to pass through the throng with their human burden, the four men ascend to the roof, probably by the usual outside stairs found on nearly every house. On the roof they do what is neither difficult nor uncommon; they make an opening in the thatch-type roof, and through it they lower the suffering suppliant into the presence of Jesus.

Our Lord ceases his sermon; all eyes are upon him and the paralytic, whose eyes make the entreaty that his voice cannot. Here, as planned by a Providence that foreknows all things, is a teaching situation seldom equaled in the annals of the Lord's dealings with his people. Before Jesus lies one sick of the palsy who has faith to be healed, and who seeks the blessed word that will make him well. The scribes and the Pharisees and the doctors are all present to see and become witnesses of the power of God. Shall our Lord go forward with the healing, as he has done in many other instances, and as we might suppose he would do now?

Jesus' choice is not to do so. Here also is a man, lying on a litter, who is qualified and entitled, by faith, to have his sins remitted. No verbal request, either for healing or for forgiveness, has been made to the Master; yet the desire of the incapacitated one is apparent. Jesus knows exactly what ought to be done. The man should be healed and forgiven; his faith has prepared him for both blessings. If Jesus should say to him first, 'Be thou made whole,' and then, 'Thy sins are forgiven thee,' the miraculous performance would be another example of his divine power—of which there already was an uncounted number—and the physically decrepit person would, of course, be healed physically and spiritually. Such is a possible course of procedure.

On the other hand, if Jesus should first forgive the man's sins—since none but God can forgive sins—such an act would be an announcement that he was God; then, if he commanded the sick person to rise up and walk, it would be proof that his claim to divinity was true. The teaching situation is ideally prepared, and the Master Teacher knows the course to pursue.

"Son, be of good cheer," he says. And what greater cheer and joy can come into a human heart than that which results from a remission of sins, from an assurance that one is free from earth stains, free from the bondage and sorrow that binds all sin-shackled souls? Then come the glad tidings: "Thy sins be forgiven thee," which act in itself is a greater blessing than to be made whole physically, for all men will attain physical perfection in the resurrection, but only those who are free from sin will go on, in that day, to eternal life in the kingdom of God. As part of the announced freedom from sin for the paralyzed one, Jesus then commands: "Go thy way and sin no more."

The great drama is being acted out by the greatest Dramatist of them all. Jesus has forgiven a man's sins. Luke's account puts the blessed words in the present tense: "Man, thy sins are forgiven thee." Immediately rebellion wells up in the hearts of the ever-present rebels. "Why doth this man thus speak blasphemies?" they think. "Who can forgive sins but God only?"

In part, their thinking is correct. None but God can forgive sins, and if this man is not God, then the words he has spoken are blasphemy, and according to divine law, the penalty for such is death. If, however, this man is the Messiah, then the prerogative he has assumed is proper, and it is within his province to loose on earth and have it loosed eternally in the heavens. Messiah can forgive sins because Messiah is God.

Before viewing the remainder of the drama here opening to our view, we must remind ourselves of how the law of forgiveness operates, for the Lord, who himself ordained the laws, is also himself bound to uphold and sustain and conform to them. The Lord forgives sins, but he does it in harmony with the laws he ordained before the world was.

All men sin and fall short of the glory of God; all need repentance; all need forgiveness; and all can become free from sin by obedience to the laws and ordinances that comprise the cleansing process. For those who have not accepted the gospel—the everlasting word that Jesus was this day preaching in Peter's house—the course of forgiveness is to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, to repent, to be baptized by immersion for the remission of sins, and to receive the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands. The Holy Ghost is a sanctifier, and those who receive the baptism of fire have sin and evil burned out of their souls as though by fire.

For those whose sins have thus been remitted and who sin after baptism—as all baptized souls do—the path to forgiveness consists of repenting and renewing the covenant made in the waters of baptism. Godly sorrow for sin, complete abandonment of the wrongful acts, confession to the Lord and to the church officers where need be, restitution if such is possible, and renewed obedience—these are all part of the cleansing process for those who, after baptism, fall from the strait and narrow path leading to eternal life. By doing these things and by then partaking worthily of the sacrament, so that the Spirit of the Lord will come again into the lives of the penitent persons, members of the kingdom gain forgiveness of sins.

We are not told whether the paralytic here forgiven by Jesus was a member of the Church or not. The overwhelming probability is that he was, and that Jesus was now forgiving his sins anew, as he did many times to Joseph Smith and the early elders of his latter-day kingdom. [^4] "Where members of the Church are concerned, there is a very close connection between manifestations of healing grace and the forgiveness of sins. When the elders administer to faithful saints, the promise is: 'And the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up; and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him.' (James 5:15.) The very fact that a member of the kingdom has matured in the gospel to the point that he has power through faith in Christ to be healed, means that he also has so lived that he is entitled to have his sins remitted. Since all men repeatedly sin they must all gain successive remissions of their sins, otherwise none would eventually stand pure and spotless before the Lord and thus be worthy of a celestial inheritance." (Commentary 1:179.)

Now let us return to the worldly wise who reasoned in their hearts that Jesus' act of forgiveness was blasphemy. For that matter, they reasoned, how could anyone know if the paralytic's sins were remitted? Forgiveness of sins is not something that can be seen or felt or tasted by an outside observer. And weren't the only provisions for forgiveness accomplished by the priests through the sin offerings, the trespass offerings, and the other sacrificial performances, especially those on the day of atonement?

"Wherefore is it that ye think evil in your hearts?" Jesus asked, for he knew their thoughts. "Why reason ye these things in your hearts? Is it not easier to say to the sick of the palsy, Thy sins be forgiven thee; than to say, Arise, and take up thy bed and walk?" His logic was perfect. 'Does it require more power to forgive sins than to make the sick rise up and walk?' Then came the healing word: "But, that ye may know that the Son of Man hath power upon earth to forgive sins, I said it. And he said unto the sick of the palsy, I say unto thee, Arise, and take up thy couch, and go unto thy house."

Thereupon strength came into the limbs and legs and organs of the paralyzed one. Speech returned; full physical capacity, for his age and circumstances, came again. He obeyed the divine counsel, took up his couch, and went his way, rejoicing and glorifying God.

And what of the others who were present? The proof of Messiahship could not be controverted. He who claimed to forgive sins—which all agreed none but God could do—had proved his divine power by turning the living death of palsy into the joyous life of physical health and spiritual cleanness. Following this display of power, the polarization of the people increased. All were amazed; the doctors of the law were, as such lawyers almost always are, unconvinced, disbelieving, rebellious. Yet "many glorified God, saying, We never saw the power of God after this manner."

Jesus had accomplished that which he set out to do.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] This is a revelation given to the Prophet Joseph Smith in April 1830, just after the organization of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Some persons who had already been baptized in the sectarian churches of the day desired to enter the newly established church and kingdom of God on earth without rebaptism. This is the Lord's answer to them. The new kingdom was being established, "even as in days of old," and the same principles as applied then were still in force. There must be new revelation, new divine authority, new officers, just as it was when Jesus came to replace the old Mosaic order in his day.
[^2] "Private fasts would, of course, depend on individuals, but the strict Pharisees were wont to fast every Monday and Thursday during the weeks intervening between the Passover and Pentecost, and again, between the Feast of Tabernacles and that of the Dedication of the Temple. It is to this practice that the Pharisee in the parable refers [Luke 18:12] when boasting: 'I fast twice in the week.'" (Edersheim, The Temple, pp. 197-98.)
[^3] "He told them, in words of yet deeper significance, though expressed, as so often, in the homeliest metaphors, that his religion is, as it were, a robe entirely new, not a patch of unteazled cloth upon an old robe, serving only to make worse its original rents; that it is not new wine, put in all its fresh fermenting, expansive strength, into old and worn wine-skins, and so serving only to burst the wine-skins and be lost, but new wine in fresh wine-skins. The new spirit was to be embodied in wholly renovated forms; the new freedom was to be untrammelled by obsolete and long meaningless limitations; the spiritual doctrine was to be sundered for ever from the elaborate externalism of cancelled ordinances." (Farrar, p. 267.)
[^4] D&C 29:3; 36:1; 50:36; 60:7; 62:3; 64:3; 108:1; 110:5.
