Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1980)

Chapter 37

Jesus Brings a New Gospel Dispensation

Behold, I say unto you that all old covenants have I caused to be done away in this thing; and this is a new and an everlasting covenant, even that which was from the beginning. Wherefore, although a man should be baptized an hundred times it availeth him nothing, for you cannot enter in at the strait gate by the law of Moses, neither by your dead works. For it is because of your dead works that I have caused this last covenant and this church to be built up unto me, even as in days of old. Wherefore, enter ye in at the gate, as I have commanded, and seek not to counsel your God. (D&C 22:1-4.) [^1]

Jesus Calls Sinners to Repentance

(Mark 2:13-17; JST Mark 2:11; Luke 5:27-32; JST Luke 5:27; Matthew 9:9-13; JST Matthew 9:10, 13)

Jesus is in process of restoring the gospel for his day and dispensation. So far we have seen him reveal new doctrine, call and ordain new officers, approve the baptism of John, and perform like baptisms of his own. We are aware that his new converts have the promise that in due course they will receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, which will guide them into all truth. We know that he will continue to reveal doctrine, to expound eternal truths, and to call officers to govern the affairs of his earthly kingdom. In due course he will call his Twelve special witnesses and give them the keys of the kingdom, so they can regulate all things incident thereto, to say nothing of having power to bind on earth and seal in heaven.

At the moment, however, we are with him as he calls Matthew, attends a feast in that publican's home, and speaks of his mission to call sinners to repentance. As an outgrowth of this episode we shall hear him tell why the wine of new revelation cannot be poured into the old bottles of Mosaic formalism. The place of our present happening is near Capernaum, on the Sea of Galilee.

Matthew is a publican, and publicans, as a group, are a vile, corrupt, and evil lot. They are classed with sinners and harlots. Even Jesus, in speaking of a brother caught in trespass who rebels against the discipline of the Church, says: "Let him be unto thee as an heathen man and a publican." (Matt. 18:17.) And a famous Gentile rejoinder to the question "Which are the worst kind of wild beasts?" is: "On the mountains, bears and lions; in cities, publicans and pettifoggers." The Jews had a proverb: "Take not a wife out of the family where there is a publican, for they are all publicans." (Farrar, p. 188, n. 1.)

Publicans are tax collectors; they represent Rome and are a symbol of the tyranny and oppression of the Gentile yoke. Partiality, avarice, greed, exacting more than is lawful, and petty oppression are deemed, in the public mind, to be a way of life with them. "The rabbis ranked them as cutthroats and robbers, as social outcasts, as religiously half-excommunicated." (Commentary 1:181.) It is assumed their wealth comes from rapine and their business is the business of extortioners.

It is to this class of people that Matthew belongs. Manifestly the claims made against them are exaggerated and do not apply to all individual tax collectors. And we know nothing of Matthew's way of life before he forsook all to follow Jesus. It is assumed that he forsook great wealth, even as Lehi and his family did when they went out from Jerusalem to be led of the Lord to their promised land, now known as America.

Matthew may have been a bright light among associates, most of whom were greedy and extortionate, or, if there were faults in his character, we must assume he repented in sackcloth and ashes before his call to the ministry. The earlier calls, also on the shores of the Galilean sea, of Simon and Andrew and of James and John were calls of men whose association with Jesus had extended over a long period. Those brethren were probably as well versed in the new theology and the new way of life as any then living in Galilee. It is natural to assume that Matthew had a similar background; his association with the Master must have been considerable before his call. Was he present that day in the synagogue when the demoniac was healed? Had he traveled with Jesus through the cities and towns of Galilee, hearing his words and seeing his miracles? Was he crowded into Peter's home when the Son of Man chose to remit the sins of the paralytic and then commanded him to take up his bed and walk? All we know is that after Jesus left the home of Peter, having there taught the word and healed the paralytic, he went to the seaside. The multitude followed, and he continued to teach; precious words yet poured forth from his lips to find lodgment in receptive ears.

There on the seashore he saw Matthew the publican, called also "Levi the son of Alpheus, sitting at the place where they receive tribute, as was customary in those days." Jesus said, "Follow me. And he left all, rose up, and followed him." Truly, as the scripture saith, "the gifts and calling of God are without repentance" (Rom. 11:29), meaning the Lord takes a Paul, an Alma, or a Matthew, as he chooses, because that called servant was prepared and foreordained from the premortal eternities to perform the labors to which the call extends. Manifestly all such do repent and make themselves worthy in all respects for the divine labor that is then theirs.

Sometime after his call, Matthew appoints a great feast in his house in honor of Jesus; perhaps also it is a farewell feast for his fellow publicans, for they are there in great numbers. Matthew himself says "many publicans and sinners came and sat down" with Jesus and his disciples. The social outcasts of society are celebrating—sinners being among them—and the Son of God and his newly called disciples sit in their midst, eat the food, and partake of the hospitality. Beholding such a scene, the scribes and Pharisees murmur. Why, they query, do Jesus and his disciples eat and drink with publicans and sinners? The questions are put to the disciples, but the answers come from Him who sets the tone of those festivities which we must believe he found enjoyable.

"They that be whole need not a physician, but they that are sick," he says. Such is the proverb of the day, which Jesus here uses with a veiled sarcasm, as though he had said, 'You self-righteous Pharisees think you have no need of my healing doctrine, and so I go to these sick publicans and sinners to make them whole.' Actually, of course, no one needed a physician more than the spiritually sick Pharisees.

"But go ye and learn what that meaneth, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice: for I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance." The Pharisaic religion was one of ritualistic forms, of rules and ceremonies, of rites and sacrifices; it was a religion that held them aloof from publicans and sinners. Jesus is here telling them that if they knew that mercy, love, charity, and all the attributes of godliness were more important than their ritualistic performances, they too would eat and drink with sinners and seek to do good to all men.

Truly, Jesus came to save sinners; and if he can take a Paul, an Alma, and a Matthew from their lowly spiritual states and raise them to apostolic and prophetic stature, surely he can pour out good things on the spiritual publicans of the world, to the end that all who will repent shall find salvation in his Father's kingdom.

Jesus Brings New Revelation to a New Church

(Matthew 9:14-17; JST Matthew 9:15, 18-21; Mark 2:18-22; JST Mark 2:16-17; Luke 5:33-39; JST Luke 5:36)

At this point, as the feast continues in the home of the now spiritually refreshed publican Levi-Matthew, the disciples of John the Baptist add their voices of complaint to those of the scribes and Pharisees. "While he was thus teaching"—that is, at the very moment when Jesus asserted that he had come to call sinners to repentance; to call them from their old Mosaic way of life to a new gospel order—the disciples of John, who also had preached a new order of repentance and a new baptism for the remission of sins, came to him and asked: "Why do we and the Pharisees fast oft, but thy disciples fast not?"

Fasting was a fetish with the Pharisees. There were times when they fasted twice a week, regularly, religiously, and with holy zeal, as they supposed. [^2] They paid tithes with such scrupulous attention to detail that they even gave a tenth part of the herbs that grew in pots on their windowsills. They attended to every sacrificial detail with such ritualistic attention that scarcely a single drop of blood was sprinkled other than at the appointed place. And John's disciples—for their master was cut in the Pharisaic mold, and had in fact been sent to wind up the affairs of the dying dispensation of Mosaic formalisms—partook of some of the characteristics of their Pharisaic kinsmen. They fasted—perhaps as religiously as the Pharisees themselves, for the last accepted adherents to the old order were expected to live that law to the full, that it might be fulfilled in glory as the day approached when it would be replaced in full by the new gospel order.

Fasting as such is not to be condemned. In its place, and within the bounds set by Him who incorporated it as part of his eternal system, it is to be commended. Mortals can never attain the unity with Deity that it is their privilege to gain without fasting and prayer. Whether the Pharisaic fasts met with divine approval is quite another thing, however. Their fathers had been condemned for fasting for evil purposes. "Behold, ye fast for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedness," Isaiah had said to them. "Ye shall not fast as ye do this day, to make your voice to be heard on high," he had said. "Is it such a fast that I have chosen?" the Lord Jehovah asked of his people.

And that they might know the standards attending the true law of the fast, Jehovah had said to them: "Is not this the fast that I have chosen? to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke? Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast out to thy house? when thou seest the naked, that thou cover him; and that thou hide not thyself from thine own flesh?" (Isa. 58.) How far removed the Pharisaic fasts were from these standards is clear to all who have studied the gospel accounts.

How apt, then, was Jesus' reply to John's disciples, disciples who were devout, who had been properly baptized, and who should now be following Jesus rather than John, as John himself had taught them. "Can the children of the bridechamber fast, while the bridegroom is with them?" he asked. His answer: "As long as they have the bridegroom with them, they cannot fast." Jesus, the Bridegroom, is with them; why should they mourn or fast? Is it not, rather, a time to rejoice? And are not Jesus' words a needed reminder and a gentle rebuke to John's disciples? Do they not remember that John himself—knowing that Jesus baptized more disciples than did the Baptist—had said that he, John, was the friend of the Bridegroom, whose joy was full because he heard the Bridegroom's voice? Have they forgotten that John testified that he must decrease while the Bridegroom increased? Why then—and this is the rebuke, if such there be in Jesus' reply—why then did not John's disciples forsake the imprisoned Baptist and follow the One whose way their master had prepared?

Then, with seeric insight—seeing what was to be more than two years hence; seeing what would be when one without sin hung on a cross between two sinners—Jesus said: "But the days will come, when the bridegroom shall be taken away from them, and then shall they fast in those days." But their fast will not be to smite with the fist of wickedness, but, rather, to draw near unto that Lord who has gone, for a moment, from them, but who will return in power and great glory at the appointed time.

At this point, the Pharisees interjected themselves again into the discussion. Knowing that John—who fasted as they did, and who to that extent was a man who followed their system—had baptized for the remission of sins, they assayed to make themselves the equal or superior of John by asking: "Why will ye not receive us with our baptism, seeing we keep the whole law?" They did all that John did, as they supposed, and they did more; they had all the rites and ordinances and performances and rituals handed down from Moses of old; and they kept them, so they thought.

"But Jesus said unto them, Ye keep not the law. If ye had kept the law, ye would have received me, for I am he who gave the law." No man can truly keep the law of Moses without believing in Christ, for that was the whole intent and purpose and design of the law. Jehovah gave it to help his people believe in the Messiah who was to come, who would, as the Lamb of God, sacrifice himself for the sins of the world. Men may go through the rites and performances of the law; they may exalt its letter and kill its spirit; they may think they keep the law of Moses—but they do not and cannot unless and until they know that all that they are doing centers in Christ and that he is the Savior. In that event they would receive him when he comes, for he is the Lord Jehovah who gave the law. How pointedly and expressly, without reservation or qualification, over and over again, the Lord Jesus testifies of his Messiahship!

"I receive not you with your baptism, because it profiteth you nothing," he continues. "For when that which is new is come, the old is ready to be put away." 'I have come with the new order; all old covenants have I caused to be done away; the new baptism of John and the baptism which I perform is a new and an everlasting covenant, even that which was from the beginning. Your baptism profiteth nothing because it is now performed without authority; John is the legal administrator of your dying dispensation. Though you should be baptized an hundred times, it availeth you nothing, for you cannot enter in at the strait gate by the law of Moses, neither by your dead works. When the new law comes the old law leaves. When the gospel, which was from the beginning, is restored, the law of Moses is fulfilled. It is because your works are dead works that I am bringing a new covenant. I am come to build up my church as in days of old, for my church has been on earth, from time to time, even before Moses. Wherefore, enter ye in at the gate, as I have commanded, and seek not to counsel your God.'

These things spoke Jesus in plainness. Then he added this parable: "No man putteth a piece of a new garment upon an old; if otherwise, then both the new maketh a rent, and the piece that was taken out of the new agreeth not with the old. And no man putteth new wine into old bottles; else the new wine will burst the bottles, and be spilled, and the bottles shall perish. But new wine must be put into new bottles; and both are preserved."

"What, new baptism in an old church, new revelation in a dying kingdom, new doctrine in an apostate organization! Could Jesus add Christian ordinances, with their spirit and power, to the dead formalism and ritual of the Mosaic procedures? Could new wine be put in old bottles (animal skins used as containers) without breaking the bottles and losing both the old and the new?" (Commentary 1:186.) [^3] Jesus came to restore, not just to reform. His mission was to fulfill the old order and commence the new; he came to tramp out the dying embers of Mosaic performances and ignite the living flames of the gospel fire in the hearts of men.

We suppose that Jesus now said something more to John's disciples about their obligation to leave the dead past and come to the living present; yet he spoke to them with more tenderness and compassion than he did to the Pharisees, for John's followers were in process of preparing themselves to receive the One of whom John had testified. "No man also having drunk old wine straightway desireth new," Jesus said to them, "for he saith, The old is better." That is: 'In following John, who was sent of my Father to prepare the way before me, you have conformed to the law of Moses. Now, however, a greater than Moses is here, even the Messiah, and as John taught, you must now follow him, even though it is difficult for you to "straightway" turn from your old teachings and accept the new.' (Commentary 1:186.)

Thus Jesus called a lowly publican to a station of apostolic excellence; thus he taught that he came to call sinners to repentance; thus he rejected Pharisaic baptisms and claims of righteousness-born-of-the-law; thus he invited John's disciples to complete their conversion and follow him; and thus he testified that as the Messiah he had come to restore the gospel and build the city of salvation on a new foundation, not within the crumbling walls of an ancient order whose sun had set.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The views of the modern religious-atheists—who profess to believe in Christ but say he never personally claimed to be divine—to the contrary notwithstanding, we find Jesus, everywhere and always, as in this case, attesting to the personal relationship between him and the great Elohim.
[^2] The great concept set forth in John 5:19-20 is beyond human comprehension. It is the doctrine that "Jesus is the replica of his Father—thinking, saying, doing, achieving, attaining, as the Father has done before." (Commentary 1:191.) That all of this is infinite in scope and universal in application is seen from the Prophet Joseph Smith's Spirit-guided utterances in the King Follett sermon. "It is the first principle of the Gospel to know for a certainty the Character of God," the Prophet said, "and to know that we may converse with him as one man converses with another, and that he was once a man like us; yea, that God himself, the Father of us all, dwelt on an earth, the same as Jesus Christ himself did; and I will show it from the Bible. . . . "What did Jesus say? . . . The Scriptures inform us that Jesus said, As the Father hath power in Himself, even so hath the Son power—to do what? Why, what the Father did. The answer is obvious—in a manner to lay down His body and take it up again. Jesus, what are you going to do? To lay down my life as my Father did, and take it up again. Do we believe it? If you do not believe it, you do not believe the Bible. . . . "What did Jesus do? Why; I do the things I saw my Father do when worlds came rolling into existence. My Father worked out his kingdom with fear and trembling, and I must do the same; and when I get my kingdom, I shall present it to my Father, so that he may obtain kingdom upon kingdom, and it will exalt him in glory. He will then take a higher exaltation and I will take his place, and thereby become exalted myself. So that Jesus treads in the tracks of his Father, and inherits what God did before; and God is thus glorified and exalted in the salvation and exaltation of all his children. It is plain beyond disputation, and you thus learn some of the first principles of the Gospel, about which so much hath been said." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 345-48.)
[^3] "Two exalted personages, the Father and the Son, are one—one in purpose, plan, and power; one as to character, perfections, and attributes; one in all things; and therefore one in the receipt of worship and honor. In the true sense no one can believe in or know the one without having the same belief and knowledge of the other; nor can one be accepted and the other rejected. They are one." (Commentary 1:192-93.)
