Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1980)

Chapter 38

The Second Passover of Jesus' Ministry

My Father worketh hitherto, and I work.... God was his Father.... The Father loveth the Son.... All men should honour the Son, even as they honour the Father.... The Father hath ... given to the Son to have life in himself.... the Father hath sent me.... I am come in my Father's name. (John 5:1-47.) [^1]

Jesus Heals a Man on the Sabbath

(John 5:1-16; JST John 5:3, 6, 9)

We are with Jesus in Jerusalem. It is Passover time, the second such feast of his ministry, and his disciples are with him, for they, like he, are under obligation, imposed by Jehovah, to appear three times each year before the Lord in the temple. Our Gospel author, John in this case, does not name the feast, and many volumes have been written to sustain one view or another as to what feast it is.

And we repeat that no one is able to make a harmony of the Gospels or to list chronologically the events of Jesus' life. Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John did not do it, and the accounts they have left us do not agree among themselves. Every reputable scholar who has made an independent study of the issues involved has found himself at loggerheads, in large or small part, with every other analyst. In this present work we are following—primarily but not entirely—the chronology of President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., who often disagrees with Elder James E. Talmage, just as Edersheim does with Farrar, or as Mark does with Luke, or as every independent analyst does with some or all of his fellows. Choices must be made; every writer must make his own, and it is doubtful if any author—nay, it is a surety that no author—has made right choices in all cases.

As to the present feast, suffice it to say that it fits as well into the chronology here as elsewhere, and it is logical to assume that Jesus—as yet not subject to the total harassment of scribes, Pharisees, and Sanhedrinists—would appear again in the Passover crowds to make the doctrinal declarations relative to him and his Father that we are about to hear.

It is the Sabbath, that holy day when servile work ceases and the children of Jehovah—those who have become his sons and his daughters through the waters of baptism—assemble to worship the Lord and renew their covenants. But worship of the Father, in spirit and in truth, is almost a thing of the past among them. Those who use the sacred Sabbath to gain spiritual refreshment are few in number. In the true and eternal sense, the Sabbath is universally desecrated among them through disuse, through failure to use it as a day for confessing their sins in the holy convocations, and through neglecting to partake of the spiritual food prepared on that day, by a gracious God, to give to all those who hunger and thirst after righteousness.

But oh, how the rigid religious formalists have compensated for their Sabbath failures and desecrations! In place of the holy and hallowed day that should have been, theirs is a Sabbath of ritualistic restrictions that defy sense and mock reason. The absurdities of Sabbath observance—shall we call it a temporal observance that replaced the spiritual worship that should have been?—these absurdities, referred to in chapter 11 herein, all were assumed to center in the decree of Deity: "In it thou shalt not do any work." (Ex. 20:10.) This was something the scribes and Pharisees could get their teeth into. Worship in spirit and in truth might be beyond their spiritual capacity, for the things of God are known only by the power of the Spirit, but carrying no burden on the Sabbath day—that was another matter. Burdens could be seen and weighed and defined and anathematized. If a man picked up sticks on the Sabbath, he could be stoned. If he carried his couch of affliction, he could be damned. Man was made for the Sabbath, and for the Sabbath he must live. This was what set the Jews apart from all mankind, and so set apart they would remain; or, at least such was what they assumed and how they felt.

And so on this particular Passover Sabbath, we see Jesus near the sheep market, at the side of the pool Bethesda, which means "House of Mercy." By this pool—evidently a mineral spring of some sort whose waters bubbled intermittently as escaping gases broke the surface—there stands a large structure with five porches. "In these lay a great many impotent folk," some blind, others halt, paralytic, or withered, all "waiting for the moving of the water." No doubt these waters had—as hot mineral springs do in our day—some curative and healing powers, which gave rise to a legend, among the superstitious and spiritually illiterate Jews, that "an angel went down at a certain season into the pool, and troubled the water," and that "whosoever then first after the troubling of the water stepped in was made whole of whatsoever disease he had."

On a pallet on one of the porches lies an impotent man, lame with paralysis, who has so suffered for thirty-eight years, almost as long as the whole history of Israel from the going through of the Red Sea to the crossing of Jordan. Jesus sees the paralytic sufferer, knows how long he has been thus, and picks him out from all the rest—for reasons best known to himself, but unquestionably involving the man's faith and spiritual stature—as the object of his divine healing power. With a heart full of compassion, our Galilean Friend asks: "Wilt thou be made whole?"

Not knowing the source of the inquiry; unaware that it was the Son of God who spoke; not realizing that the questioning voice came from Him who had cleansed lepers, cast out devils, and healed all manner of diseases, the impotent man answered: "Sir, I have no man, when the water is troubled, to put me into the pool: but while I am coming, another steppeth down before me."

Without more ado, Jesus says: "Rise, take up thy bed, and walk." "It was spoken in an accent that none could disobey. The manner of the Speaker, His voice, His mandate, thrilled like an electric spark through the withered limbs and the shattered constitution, enfeebled by a lifetime of suffering and sin. After thirty-eight years of prostration, the man instantly rose, lifted up his pallet, and began to walk. In glad amazement he looked round to see and to thank his unknown benefactor; but the crowd was large, and Jesus, anxious to escape the unspiritual excitement which would fain have regarded him as a thaumaturge alone, had quietly slipped away from observation." (Farrar, p. 286.)

A miracle is thus wrought, such a one as is seldom seen. After thirty-eight years of paralytic impotence, a man known to have spent long hours on a pallet in the porches by the pool of Bethesda—desiring and hoping and praying to be healed—in an instant arises; full strength comes into his whole body; he walks—yea, more: he carries his bed. He is seen by the multitude, many of whom no doubt rejoice with him at the new vigor and vitality exuding from every pore of his once pain-ridden flesh.

But what do the leaders of Jewry see? Is it a wondrous work of manifest goodness? No, not in any manner of speaking. What they see is a man, unlearned and ignorant in the niceties of their legalistic restrictions attending Sabbath life, desecrating that holy day, as they suppose, by bearing a burden thereon. "It is the sabbath day," thunders the Pharisaic voice, "it is not lawful for thee to carry thy bed." 'Let it lie in the street; discard it; sit thou here until the morrow; no matter the inconvenience—but carry this bed of straw, this blanket, upon which you are wont to lie, never!'

And their words spoken not so much against the healed one as against the One who healed, shall testify forever, before the judgment bar, of the degeneracy and baseness of their religion. How awful it is when true religion sinks into superstition; when the witch hunters in search of heresy find it—not in a departure from the ancient doctrinal moorings, but in the breaking of their own petty formalisms.

In reply, rejoicing in his newfound health, the packer of the pallet says: "He that made me whole"—he who wrought this wondrous miracle; he who is a great prophet and has such wondrous power with God that at his word I walk—"the same said unto me, Take up thy bed, and walk." 'Come, rejoice with me, for a great miracle has been wrought.'

But they, as part of their inquisitorial machinations, pried still further: "What man is that which said unto thee Take up thy bed, and walk?" Not: 'Who has worked this miracle? Who has such power with God? What mighty prophet is in our midst? Is he not the Messiah; or, will he not lead us to the Deliverer?' No; nothing of this sort; only—'Who hath counseled thee to break the Sabbath, for which offense our law says a man is worthy of death.'

Strangely, at the moment, the healed one knew not who his benefactor was. Only after Jesus found him in the temple later—we suppose worshipping and thanking the Lord for his new health—did the man from Bethesda's porches learn the source of his blessing. Jesus then said to him, "Behold, thou art made whole: sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee"—not meaning to teach that disease and affliction are always the result of sin, only that in this case the man had disobeyed some law that caused his affliction of long standing to imprison his body.

Thereafter the man told the Jews it was Jesus who had healed him—not, we assume, out of any malice toward the Master, but in the hope that the name of Jesus would be revered for the good deed he had done. After all, it was Jesus who selected, from among many blind and halt and withered and diseased persons, the single one to be healed; and surely he would have chosen the one whose spiritual worth caused him to merit the blessing. And it is not too much to suppose that the man and others whom he could influence joined the Church and were true to all subsequent trusts.

At this point in his account, John tells us: "Therefore did the Jews persecute Jesus, and sought to slay him, because he had done these things on the sabbath day."

What had he done? He had spoken a few words—perhaps a dozen in all—which in itself was certainly no more work than the long sermons delivered each Sabbath in the synagogues by the Rabbis. What work had Jesus done, unless the fact of healing itself was to be construed as work because divine power was exercised to change the body of the afflicted person?

The Sabbath healing of the impotent man clearly was an excuse, not a reason, for the forthcoming persecution. When men thirst for the blood of the prophets, it is not because of a reasoned judgment, arrived at by judicial deliberations. Persecution is carried out under the spell of emotion and hatred. And the voice of emotion on this day is crying: 'Here is the Son of God. Satan knows it, and he is our master. We must rid the nation of this menace at all costs; he will destroy our craft. Slay him. Crucify him. His blood be upon us and our children.'

Jesus Proclaims His Divine Sonship

(John 5:17-24)

What answer will Jesus give to the charge—absurd and unrealistic as it is—that he, the Lord of the Sabbath, has violated his own holy day by working thereon? In fact, he has carried no burden nor performed any servile service; he has not even overstepped any of the rigid rabbinic restrictions, not so much as the lifting of a finger on that day when men must cease from their labors. If it is a Sabbath violation to exercise the power of faith—and such is done by words and mental exertion only; if he is an accessory to the offense of another in that he said, "Take up thy bed, and walk," thus defying the scribal code of Sabbath formalisms, then, yes, he is showing contempt for the legalisms of the lawyers and the prohibitions of the doctors.

But, no matter, his concern is not to debate Sabbath rules. He has healed a man and gained a congregation of hearers; now he will bear to them a testimony that will open or close the door of salvation, depending upon its acceptance or rejection. For the purposes at hand, we will assume, as he himself seems to have done, that he has worked on that day when no work is to be done. To the charges of the Jewish leaders that he has violated their Sabbath, he says: "My Father worketh hitherto, and I work."

'True, this is the Sabbath; true, I have worked on this holy day. I have spoken healing words; and my Father, who is God, has done the work—it is his power by which the impotent man is healed. I have worked on the Sabbath, and my Father has worked on the Sabbath; is it not proper to do the Lord's work on the Lord's day? There is an eternal and unending law of work that is greater than the Sabbath. My Father and I both work everlastingly; our creative and redemptive labors go on forever for innumerable hosts on worlds without number. Why should the mere healing of one suffering soul cause such consternation among you?'

There was no misunderstanding on anyone's part as to this bold proclamation. Jesus is admitting Sabbath disobedience and adding blasphemy (as they suppose) to his arraignable offenses. "Therefore the Jews sought the more to kill him, because he not only had broken the sabbath, but said also that God was his Father, making himself equal with God."

"Equal with God!"—awful blasphemy or awesome truth!—one or the other. There is no middle ground, no room for compromise; there are no principles to compose: either Jesus is divine or he is blaspheming!

"Equal with God!"—not, as yet, in the infinite and eternal sense, but in the sense of being one with him, of being his natural heir, destined to receive, inherit, and possess all that the Father hath.

"Equal with God!"—not that he was then reigning in glory and exaltation over all the works which their hands had made, but in the sense that he was God's Son, upon whom the Father had placed his own name and to whom he had given glory and honor and power.

Then in solemn tones came words of infinite import, words whose full meaning can only be understood by the power of the Spirit—and shall we not suppose that one of the purposes of the Bethesda healing was to gain a congregation and set the stage for such a heaven-inspired statement as this?—then came from the lips of Jesus, who had a perfect knowledge of his divine paternity, this proclamation:

"The Son can do nothing of himself" ('I am come in my Father's name; aside from him I have no power; it was his power that healed the impotent man; all that I do has his approval') "but what he seeth the Father do" ('and further, I do only what I have seen the Father do, for he has revealed all his doing to me; I have seen his works') "for what things soever he doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise" ('and I do what he does, he heals the sick and so do I; I tread in his tracks for I am his Son.') [^2]

"For the Father loveth the Son" (because the Son obeys the Father) "and sheweth him all things that himself doeth" ('I have seen in vision all the works of the Father; I have seen what he did in ages past; what he does even now; and he has manifest to me his future works, even "all things that himself doeth') "and he will shew him greater works than these, that ye may marvel" ('and the Father will manifest, through me, greater works than the healing of the impotent man, causing you to marvel that one who ministers among you can perform such infinite and eternal works').

Then Jesus alluded to these greater works which he would do in his Father's name—the atoning sacrifice, the resurrection, the very day of judgment itself—by saying: "For as the Father raiseth up the dead, and quickeneth them; even so the Son quickeneth whom he will." 'By the power of the Father all men shall come forth in immortality, but it is I who shall bring it to pass. It is I who shall call the dust from the graves to form again a habitation for the spirits of men; I shall quicken whom I will, when I will; by me the resurrection cometh; I am the Resurrection and the Life.'

"For the Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto the Son." 'And when all men have passed from death to life, they shall stand before me—before the pleasing bar of the Great Jehovah—to be judged according to the deeds done in the flesh; for the Father hath committed all judgment into my hands. He, himself, judgeth no man; but my judgment shall be his judgment.'

And all this is to be "that all men should honour the Son, even as they honour the Father. He that honoureth not the Son honoureth not the Father which hath sent him." 'Beware therefore how ye treat me. Because I shall work out the infinite and eternal atonement; because I shall break the bands of death and gain the victory over the grave; because all men shall stand before me to be judged, you should honor me as you honor the Father, whose Son I am, and whose power makes all this possible. And if you do not honor me, you do not honor the Father, who you say is your God, because the Father hath sent me: I am his Son, and I do Only what he commands—all in his name and by his power.' [^3]

Jesus' proclamation of his divine Sonship; his plain statements that God is his Father; his witness that he and his Father both work, he doing the Father's work here on earth; his acts and words that made him equal with God; his declarations that the Father had revealed all things to him, and that he of himself could do nothing; his assertion that the Father loved him; his doctrinal teachings that the resurrection itself comes because of him, and that he it is who shall judge all men; his command to men to honor him as they honor the Father, coupled with the decree that those who do not honor the Son do not honor the Father—all this leads to one glorious conclusion. It is: Salvation is in Christ. He is the One to whom we must look to gain eternal life. He is the Author and Finisher of our faith. He is our Redeemer, Savior, Lord, and King.

And so, having taught all that we have here recited, and no doubt much more to the same effect—for the Gospel authors only give extracts and digests of his numerous sayings—this blessed Lord Jesus then said: "He that heareth my word, and believeth on him that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation; but is passed from death unto life." 'He who believes and obeys my words, who believeth in me and my Father, shall have exaltation and shall not be damned; yea, such already have passed from spiritual death to spiritual life, for they have been born again.'

Jesus Saves the Living and the Dead

(John 5:25-30; JST John 5:29-31)

We have heard such a sermon as seldom has been preached on earth or in heaven; our ears have caught the words spoken by the Son of God that he is the Savior of all men. Jesus has announced his divine Sonship and centered the whole plan of salvation in his person. All men who believe in him shall be saved; those who reject him shall be damned. But what of those who never hear a whisper of his name while they dwell as mortals? What of the nations and kingdoms of the past whose inhabitants never heard of Christ and the salvation that is in him? Is there no hope for those who have not been privileged to listen to a prophet's voice and hear the word of God?

Having assured the living that eternal life is theirs if they believe his word and live his law; having announced his status as the Judge of all, this Jesus, to whom nothing is impossible, enlarges the vision of all who will see and announces how even the dead can obtain an inheritance with him and his Father. "The hour is coming, and now is" (it is to be in this very age in which you live, he says), "when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear shall live." 'I shall preach the gospel to the dead, to those in the spirit prison; I shall visit them; they shall hear my voice; and those who believe and obey shall be saved. They shall be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit. My Father is no respecter of persons; those who do not have opportunity to hear the word of truth in this life shall get it in an appointed time between death and the resurrection.' [^4]

We suppose that our Lord's Jewish detractors by this time are completely overawed. How could it be otherwise, so comprehensive are the concepts of which he speaks, so infinite their application! But Jesus continues: "For as the Father hath life in himself; so hath he given to the Son to have life in himself." 'The Father is an immortal, exalted, resurrected being, who cannot die. He is the Creator of the lives of men. Life dwells in him independently; he has life in himself; all things live because of him. He is the source of life, and the one who upholds, preserves, and continues it. And he has given this same power to the Son; the Son inherits from the Father; an immortal Father passes on to his mortal Son the power of immortality; it comes as a natural inheritance.'

"And hath given him authority to execute judgment also," Jesus continues, "because he is the Son of man." Why will Jesus be the Judge of the living and the dead? Because he is the Son of Man of Holiness—the Son of an Immortal Man, a Holy Man, who is God—because he is the Son of God who has received the power to do all things, from his Father whose right it is to grant such infinite power.

Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, And shall come forth; they who have done good, in the resurrection of the just; and they who have done evil, in the resurrection of the unjust. And shall all be judged of the Son of Man. For as I hear, I judge, and my judgment is just; For I can of mine own self do nothing; because I seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father who hath sent me.

Strong doctrine this! 'I, Jesus, shall call forth all that are in their graves, but every man in his own order. All shall live again; the resurrection is as universal as death; as all men die, through Adam, so all shall live again, through me. But some shall come forth in the resurrection of the just to receive eternal life; others shall come forth in the resurrection of the unjust to receive eternal damnation. All shall be judged by me and assigned their places in the realms that are prepared, and my judgment shall be just because I shall conform to the will of my Father who sent me.' [^5]

Jesus Obeys the Divine Law of Witnesses

(John 5:31-47; JST John 5:32-35, 37-39, 41, 46)

Seldom, if ever, has such plain and powerful and persuasive witness been borne of the divine Sonship of the Lord Jesus as has just fallen from his own lips. 'God is my Father; I am his Son; I am equal with him. I give eternal life to those who believe in me. Even the dead shall hear my voice and be judged by my law. I have life in myself and shall atone for the sins of the world. I shall open the graves of all men, call them forth in immortality, judge them, and assign them an inheritance in the worlds to be. I do the will of my Father who sent me, and all men should honor me as they honor my Father.'

Seldom, if ever, has so much been said in words as few as the Mortal Messiah is here saying to his own nation. The word has been given; the truth has been spoken; the testimony has been borne; and now—in the providences of the One who sent his Son to say these very things—the responsibility rests with the hearers to believe or disbelieve, to obey or disobey, to come unto Christ or continue in their "Gentile" ways.

How shall these Jews who hear his voice and see the wonders wrought by his hand—how shall they know if he has spoken the truth? Are they at liberty to consider him to the a confused babbler whose mind is deranged? Or an unfortunate soul possessed by demons who speak by his mouth? Or a sincere—though deluded and deceived—false prophet who speaks without divine approval? Are they bound to believe the words of this Galilean troublemaker who breaks their Sabbath and castigates their priests and scribes? Must they believe his message simply because he says it is so?

Jesus has delivered his message; a spirit of disbelief envelops the whole congregation of hearers. He has spoken by the power of the Spirit, but their souls have not been quickened by that same divine influence. Now he must tell them that pursuant to their own law—the divine law of witnesses given by Jehovah to their fathers—they must either accept his words or be damned. This law, as they well know, is that the Lord always sends his word by witnesses who testify of its truth and divinity; that one witness alone, though he speaks the truth, is not enough to bind his hearers; that two or more witnesses always unite their voices to make the divinely borne testimony binding on earth and sealed everlastingly in the heavens; and that, thus, in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word shall be established. [^6]

If I bear witness of myself, yet my witness is true. For I am not alone; there is another who bearest witness of me, and I know that the testimony which he giveth of me is true. Ye sent unto John, and he bare witness also unto the truth. And he received not his testimony of man, but of God, and ye yourselves say that he is a prophet, therefore ye ought to receive his testimony. These things I say that ye might be saved. He was a burning and a shining light, and ye were willing for a season to rejoice in his light.

John and Jesus—missionary companions, as it were—both taught the same truths and bore the same witness. Jesus was not alone. There was another, the son of Zacharias, who received his own testimony from God, and who bore it, unequivocally, with fire and fervor, for he was a burning and shining light. There was nothing hidden or secret about John's witness. "Behold, the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world," he said. (John 1:29.) These very Jews had received John as a prophet. How then can they reject his testimony? And if that testimony was the same as Jesus bore, how can the words of Him of whom John testified be rejected? Jesus did not stand alone; John was his companion, and the Jews, by their own law, were bound to believe the message and accept the Messenger.

But I have a greater witness than the testimony of John; for the works which the Father hath given me to finish, the same works that I do, bear witness of me, that the Father hath sent me. And the Father himself who sent me, hath borne witness of me. And verily I testify unto you, that ye have never heard his voice at any time, nor seen his shape; For ye have not his word abiding in you; and him whom he hath sent, ye believe not.

But there is more. The Father himself—that Holy Being whose shape they have not seen; that Holy Man who has a body of flesh and bones—has also borne witness of the Son. By his own voice, heard on the banks of Jordan, the Father had said, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Hear ye him." (JST Matt. 3:46.) By the power of the Holy Ghost, shed forth upon Anna and Simeon and Nathanael and Philip and a host of others, the Father had planted his witness of the divinity of his Son in receptive human hearts.

All these testimonies—borne by Jesus, by John, by the Father, by those upon whom the Holy Spirit rested, and by the miracles that Jesus wrought—all were current and up to date; they were the living witnesses, borne by living persons, in the living present. To them Jesus now added all the testimonies and all the witnesses found in holy writ.

Search the scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life: and they are they which testify of me. [^7]

That is to say: 'Ye think ye shall inherit eternal life because of Moses and his law, but search the scriptures and learn that they testify of me and the salvation which I bring. I am the Messiah. Learn what is said about me in the Psalms and the prophets; know that all the prophets spoke of me and my ministry.' [^8]

Prejudice and passion and pettiness, these three—born of unreasoning emotion—are the things that destroy men's souls. "And ye will not come to me that ye might have life, lest ye should honor me," Jesus said.

'Lest ye should honor me!' How petty; how childish; how unworthy of the seed of Abraham! Forsake salvation rather than rise above the emotional prejudices that say: 'A Galilean Carpenter cannot be the Son of God. Everyone knows he is Joseph's son; and further, no good thing cometh out of Galilee.'

"I receive not honour from men."Think not that ye can honor me; who among you can add to what my Father has already given me? What wealth can you give to the One whose all things are? What degrees can you confer that will add educational luster to the Author or Truth who knows all things by the power of the Spirit? What political power or influence can men add to him who already sways the universe by his voice?'

"But I know you, that ye have not the love of God in you." Jesus knew their hearts; also, they had not the love of God in them', because they did not love his Son. 'He that loveth the Father loveth also the Son; none love either the Father or the Son unless they keep their commandments.'

"I am come in my Father's name, and ye receive me not: if another shall come in his own name, him ye will receive." Jesus bears his Father's name and is empowered, thus, to speak in the first person as though he were the Father. [^9] Carnal men who come in their own name, having no divine message to deliver, find ready acceptance from other carnal men.

"How can ye believe, which receive honour one of another, and seek not the honour that cometh from God only?" A desire to know the truth precedes a testimony. Men must seek the honors—revelations, visions, companionship of the Holy Spirit, and the like—which it is the Father's good pleasure to confer; otherwise such are not obtained. As long as men's hearts are centered on the things of the world and the honors of men, they never seek the blessings of eternity with that fervor and devotion which leads to the receipt of spiritual gifts. What greater honor can a man receive than that which comes from God? Is it not glory and honor in the celestial kingdom that all true believers seek?

Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father; there is Moses who accuseth you, in whom ye trust. For had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me: for he wrote of me. But if ye believe not his writings, how shall ye believe my words?

The Lord and his prophets are one, and no one can believe in Christ and reject his prophets. "Believe in Christ and deny him not," Nephi said, "for by denying him ye also deny the prophets and the law." (2 Ne. 25:28.) And those who truly believe the words of the prophets believe also in Christ, for it is he of whom all the prophets testify. [^10]

And all these things spake Jesus in Jerusalem, at the Feast of the Passover, after he healed the impotent man at the pool of Bethesda; and many other things did he say that bore witness that he is the Son of God by whom salvation comes, and that all men must come unto him and worship the Father in his name if they are to gain eternal life and sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of God.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] It should come as no surprise to find that an apostate people, with this and numerous other Old Testament sabbatical injunctions before them—being devoid as they were of the Spirit of the Lord—had turned the worship of a holy being into the worship of what they esteemed to be a holy day. Jewish Sabbath observance in Jesus' day—founded upon and growing out of prophetic utterances, such as this one from Jeremiah—was not all bad; within it lay the potential of true worship; its fault came because of the quenching of the Spirit and the igniting of the fires of rigid formalism. "The Judaism of that day substituted empty forms and meaningless ceremonies for true righteousness; it mistook uncharitable exclusiveness for genuine purity; it delighted to sun itself in the injustice of an imagined favouritism from which it would fain have shut out all God's other children; it was so profoundly hypocritical as not even to recognize its own hypocrisy; it never thought so well of itself as when it was crushing the broken reed and trampling out the last spark from the smoking flax; it thanked God for the demerits which it took for virtues, and fancied that He could be pleased with a service in which there was neither humility, nor truthfulness, nor loyalty, nor love." (Farrar, p. 330.)
[^2] See chapter 11 (Book I) for a brief summary of Jewish Sabbath practices. "The Sabbath was a Mosaic, nay, even a primeval institution, and it had become the most distinctive and the most passionately reverenced of all the ordinances which separated the Jews from the Gentiles as a peculiar people. It was at once the sign of their exclusive privileges, and the centre of their barren formalism. Their traditions, their patriotism, even their obstinacy, were all enlisted in its scrupulous maintenance. . . . They had suffered themselves on that day to lose battles, to be cut in pieces by their enemies, to see Jerusalem itself imperilled and captured. Its observance had been fenced round by the most painfully minute, the most ludicrously insignificant restrictions. . . . According to the pedantic school of Shammai, no one on the Sabbath might comfort the sick or enliven the sorrowful. Even the preservation of life was a breaking of the Sabbath; and, on the other hand, even to kill a flea was as bad as to kill a camel. Had not the command to 'do no manner of work upon the Sabbath day' been most absolute and most emphatic? had not Moses himself and all the congregation caused the son of Shelomith to be stoned to death for merely gathering sticks upon it? had not the Great Synagogue itself drawn up the thirty-nine abhoth [primary rules] and quite innumerable toldoth [derivative rules], or prohibitions of labours which violated it in the first or in the second degree?" (Farrar, pp. 330-32.)
[^3] "Two exalted personages, the Father and the Son, are one—one in purpose, plan, and power; one as to character, perfections, and attributes; one in all things; and therefore one in the receipt of worship and honor. In the true sense no one can believe in or know the one without having the same belief and knowledge of the other; nor can one be accepted and the other rejected. They are one." (Commentary 1:192-93.)
[^4] This visit of the Messiah to the spirits in prison—which occurred while his body lay in the Arimathean's tomb—was one in which he preached the gospel, organized his church, and sent forth his representatives to teach the truths of salvation to the hosts of the dead. There is scarcely a more glorious doctrine than that of salvation for the dead. All those who die without a knowledge of the gospel, who would have received it with all their hearts, shall receive it in the spirit world, and, having obeyed its laws, shall be heirs of full salvation. In reality, " 'God is not the God of the dead, but of the living' (Matt. 22:32), for all live unto him; all are alive in his eyes, whether their spirits are temporarily housed m mortal tabernacles or imprisoned in the spirit sphere awaiting the day of the resurrection. And the salvation of all men—living or dead (as men count death)—is centered in and comes because of the Son." (Commentary 1:193.)
[^5] "John 5:29 is the verse Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon were studying and pondering—in the course of their work on the Inspired Version of the Bible—when the eyes of their understanding were opened and they received the vision of the degrees of glory (D&C 76). This vision and other revelations teach that "salvation grows automatically out of the resurrection, and the coming forth in the resurrection constitutes the receipt of whatever degree of salvation has been earned. By one degree of obedience or another, all men, in this life, develop either celestial, terrestrial, or telestial bodies (or in the case of those destined to be sons of perdition, bodies of a baser sort). In the resurrection all men receive back again 'the same body which was a natural body,' whether it be celestial, terrestrial, or what have you. That body is then quickened by the glory attending its particular type, and the person receiving the body then goes automatically, as it were, to the kingdom of glory where that degree of glory is found. (D&C 76; 88:16-33; 1 Cor. 15:35-38; Mormon Doctrine, pp. 573-79.)" (Commentary 1:196.)
[^6] 6. 2 Cor. 13:1; Deut. 17:6; 19:15; Matt. 18:15-16; John 8:12-29.
[^7] 7. "Man's hope of gaining salvation is in direct proportion to his knowledge of God and the laws of salvation. No man can be saved in ignorance of Jesus Christ and the laws of the gospel. Man is saved no faster than he gains knowledge of God and the saving truths recorded in the scriptures. A fountain cannot rise above its source; a people cannot live laws of which they are ignorant, nor believe in a Christ about whom they know little or nothing. The Lord expects his people to learn the doctrines of salvation. 'Search these commandments' (D&C 1:37), is a decree which applies in principle to all revelations of all ages." (Commentary 1:201.)
[^8] 8. "Who bears testimony that Jesus is indeed the Christ? "(1) Jesus himself, repeatedly, bluntly, plainly, over and over again testified of his own divine Sonship; "(2) His Father, by his own voice out of heaven, by personally coming to earth to introduce the Son, and by sending the Holy Ghost to speak to the spirits of the contrite; "(3) The Holy Ghost, the Spirit member of the Godhead, whose mission is to bear record of the Father and the Son; "(4) The works performed by Jesus in his mortal ministry, including his miracles, teachings, resurrection, and atoning sacrifice which made immortality and eternal life a reality; "(5) Prophets and apostles of all ages—Moses, John, Peter, Nephi, Joseph Smith, the elders of Israel, a great host which no man can number; and "(6) The scriptures and recorded revelations of the past and present." (Commentary 1:198-99)
[^9] 9. It is on this basis—that of divine investiture of authority—that some scriptures call Christ the Father. Other passages call him the Father in the sense of Creator or of being the Father of those—born again as they are—who believe the gospel. See Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed., p. 130.
[^10] 10. "Though the Jews trusted in Moses, they were damned for rejecting the great lawgiver's testimony concerning the Messiah. Similarly, though modern sectarians trust in Peter, falsely supposing they believe what that ancient apostle taught, they shall be damned for refusing to accept Peter's testimony about the restoration of all things in the last days. (Acts 3:19-21.) In the same sense that Moses stands as the accuser of the Jews, so Peter, James, and John and the apostles of old will stand as the accusers of an apostate Christendom. . . . Similarly, if men today believed in Christ and the apostles of old, they also would believe in Joseph Smith, the Book of Mormon, and the restoration of the gospel. (Mormon Doctrine, pp. 75-77.)" (Commentary 1:202.)
