Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1980)

Chapter 39

Jesus: "Lord . . . of the Sabbath"

Thus saith the Lord; Take heed to yourselves, and bear no burden on the sabbath day, nor bring it in by the gates of Jerusalem; Neither carry forth a burden out of your houses on the sabbath day, neither do ye any work, but hallow ye the sabbath day, as I commanded your fathers. . . . And it shall come to pass, if ye diligently hearken unto me, saith the Lord, to bring in no burden through the gates of this city on the sabbath day, but hallow the sabbath day, to do no work therein; Then shall there enter into the gates of this city kings and princes sitting upon the throne of David, riding in chariots and on horses, they, and their princes, the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem: and this city shall remain for ever. . . . But if ye will not hearken unto me to hallow the sabbath day, and not to bear a burden, even entering in at the gates of Jerusalem on the sabbath day; then will I kindle a fire in the gates thereof, and it shall devour the palaces of Jerusalem, and it shall not be quenched. (Jer. 17:21-27.) [^1]

"The Sabbath Was Made for Man"

(Matthew 12:1-8; JST Matthew 12:4; Mark 2:23-28; JST Mark 2:22, 26-27; Luke 6:1-5)

Jesus is back in Galilee with his disciples; the Passover is past; the little band has walked the wearisome miles from Jerusalem to the rugged hill country where he loved so much to be. Behind them in the capital of Jewry are the rulers of the people—the leading Rabbis, the scribes, the Sanhedrinists—smarting under the rebukes received from Jesus at the Passover; debating the doctrines delivered in the Bethesda sermon; and stirring up animosity and hatred against him, both on the pretext of Sabbath desecration and because he made himself equal with God.

Again, here in Galilee, the Sabbath issue arises to plague Jesus and his disciples and to hinder the spread of truth. 'How can this man be a true prophet if he and those who follow him violate our sacred Sabbath laws? Many among our fathers laid down their lives rather than raise the sword, even in self-defense, on the Sabbath. If a man breaks our laws, defies our traditions, desecrates our holy day, how can he be a leader, a light, or a guide among us?' So went their reasoning. No matter that he went about doing good and working miracles! This matter of Sabbath observance was of overriding import; it took precedence over all else; had not the scribes and Pharisees so ordained? [^2]

Thus we see Jesus and his friends walking "through the corn fields on the sabbath day." They are hungry; his disciples pluck the ears of corn, rub them in their hands, and eat the grains of barley. In Palestine the barley harvest begins immediately after the Passover. Jesus himself makes no attempt to satisfy his own hunger; only the disciples are engaged in the act, which on any other day would have been proper in the Pharisaic eye. "When thou comest into the standing corn of thy neighbour, then thou mayest pluck the ears with thine hand; but thou shalt not move a sickle unto thy neighbour's standing corn." (Deut. 23:25.) It was the divine intent that any in Israel—for they were all brethren, and all things were the Lord's—might freely satisfy his hunger by eating his neighbor's grain.

By this one Sabbath-performed act, our Lord's fellow travelers were guilty of two violations, not of biblical, but of Rabbinic law. They had both reaped and harvested. The plucking of the ears of corn constituted reaping, and the rubbing off of the husks fell under the sabbatical prohibition against sifting in a sieve, threshing, sifting out fruit, grinding, or fanning. Each of these sins merited punishment and required a sin offering on the great altar in the house of the Lord in Jerusalem.

Spying eyes—viewing, we suppose, with prosecutorial pleasure—observed the two sins, which they could argue were capital offenses. Perhaps these peering Pharisees were following to see if the disciples of the New Order would walk more than the two thousand cubits allowed by the Rabbinic restrictions on the Sabbath day; perhaps they hoped to witness the sins of harvesting and threshing. Seeing what they did, they complained to Jesus: "Thy disciples do that which is not lawful to do upon the sabbath day."

The charge was lodged, not against Jesus, but against his friends. When they had accused him of violating the Sabbath by healing the impotent man at Bethesda, he admitted the charge and testified that both he and his Father worked on that day, and that without God's approval he could not have commanded the man, who for thirty-eight years had taken no step and lifted no burden, to arise, carry his couch, and walk. But this time his response was one of defense and vindication. His disciples had done no wrong, he said. Even by their own traditions Sabbath observance was superseded by a higher law in proper cases.

"Have ye not read so much as this"—'with all your learning has it not come to your attention'—"what David did, when himself was an hungered, and they which were with him; How he went into the house of God, and did take and eat the shewbread, and gave also to them that were with him; which it is not lawful to eat but for the priests alone?" 'Surely even you know'—is there not a touch of irony here?—'even you know that your law calls for men to eat on the Sabbath, and that danger to life and being on the Lord's errand supersede the Sabbath law. Since David was guiltless in taking the very Bread of the Presence from off the holy table, think ye that my disciples will be condemned for rubbing a few grains of barley in their hands to make them more palatable?'

And further: "Have ye not read in the law, how that on the Sabbath days the priests in the temple profane the Sabbath, and [even] ye say they are blameless?" 'Do not the priests labor for many hours in offering sacrifices on the Sabbath day? And yet ye yourselves say they are blameless. "But I say unto you, That in this place is one greater than the temple." 'As the priests who serve in the temple are blameless because their labors on the Sabbath day are for the salvation of men, so are my disciples, who serve me, blameless, for I am the Living Temple, through whom salvation comes.'

"If their own Rabbis had laid it down that there was 'no Sabbatism in the Temple;' that the priests on the Sabbath might hew the wood, and light the fires, and place hot fresh-baked shewbread on the table, and slay double victims, and circumcise children, and thus in every way violate the rules of the Sopherim about the Sabbath, and yet be blameless—nay, if in acting thus they were breaking the Sabbath at the bidding of the very Law which ordains the Sabbath—then if the Temple excuse them, ought not something greater than the Temple to excuse these? And there was something greater than the Temple here." (Farrar, pp. 336-37.)

"But if ye had known what this meaneth," Jesus continued, drawing his quotation from Hosea, "I will have mercy, and not sacrifice, ye would not have condemned the guiltless."

To ancient Israel—bound down with tradition; buried in formalism; following the letter and not the spirit of the law; not envisioning the meaning, nor the symbolism, nor the purport of their sacrifices—the Lord Jehovah, by the mouth of Hosea, proclaimed: "I desired mercy, and not sacrifice; and the knowledge of God more than burnt offerings." (Hosea 6:6.)

Micah, struggling to combat the same "form of godliness" that was devoid of the true spirit of worship, was even more severe in his denunciations—not, of course, of the true order of sacrifice, but of its perverted substitutes. A denunciation of false baptisms performed without authority is no condemnation of true ones done at the Lord's behest. "Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow myself before the high God?" Micah asks. "Shall I come before him with burnt offerings, with calves of a year old? Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten thousands of rivers of oil?" Is it sacrifices performed as an end in themselves that please him? "Shall I give my firstborn for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?" he asks, alluding to the knowledge had by the ancients that the Firstborn of the Father, the fruit of the body of the great God, would be offered as a sacrifice for sin. "He hath shewed thee, O man, what is good; and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?" (Micah 6:6-8.)

There is a higher law. Mercy is greater than sacrifice. The "letter," as it were, of sacrificial performances, or of Sabbath observance, or of tithe paying, or of keeping the Word of Wisdom, or of any act or performance, "killeth"; only the spirit giveth "life." Sabbath restrictions are not to be compared with Sabbath acts involving mercy and goodness and grace. The lesser law is superseded by the higher. "The Sabbath was expressly designed for mercy, and therefore not only might all acts of mercy be blamelessly performed thereon, but such acts would be more pleasing to God than all the insensate and self-satisfied scrupulosities which had turned a rich blessing into a burden and a snare." (Farrar, p. 337.)

"In truth, the reason why David was blameless in eating the shewbread was the same as that which made the Sabbath-labour of the priests lawful. The Sabbath-Law was not one merely of rest, but of rest for worship. The Service of the Lord was the object in view. The priests worked on the Sabbath, because this service was the object of the Sabbath; and David was allowed to eat of the shewbread, not because there was danger to life from starvation, but because he pleaded that he was on the service of the Lord and needed this provision. The disciples, when following the Lord, were similarly on the service of the Lord; ministering to Him was more than ministering in the Temple, for He was greater than the Temple. If the Pharisees had believed this, they would not have questioned their conduct, nor in so doing have themselves infringed that higher law which enjoined mercy, not sacrifice." (Edersheim 2:58.)

Wherefore the Sabbath was given unto man for a day of rest, and also that man should glorify God and not that man should not eat;

For the Son of man made the Sabbath day, therefore the Son of man is Lord also of the Sabbath.

The Sabbath day—wondrous, glorious day! A day of rest; a day of peace; a day of worship; a day to glorify God! The Sabbath day—a time to offer to the Lord the sacrifice of a broken heart and a contrite spirit; a time to pay our devotions to the Most High, to offer up our sacraments, and to confess our sins! "And on this day thou shalt do none other thing, only let thy food be prepared with singleness of heart that thy fasting may be perfect or, in other words, that thy joy may be full." (D&C 59:13.)

"For the Son of man made the Sabbath day." 'I am the God of Israel, the great Jehovah, your Messiah, the one who made the Sabbath day, giving it to Moses on Sinai; therefore, I am Lord also of the Sabbath and can specify in my own name what constitutes proper Sabbath observance.' (Commentary 1:204-5.)

Thus, Jesus tied the Sabbath into his own divine Sonship. And we must know—as the scribes, Pharisees, and Sanhedrinists who opposed him knew—that by objecting to his Sabbath conduct, or that of his disciples, they were in fact objecting to his Messiahship.

Jesus Heals a Withered Hand on the Sabbath

(Matthew 12:9-15; JST Matthew 12:13; Mark 3:1-6; Luke 6:6-11)

On yet another Galilean Sabbath, Jesus enters a synagogue, as is his wont, and teaches the people. Would that we knew what words he spoke! Spies are present. "Henceforth, at every turn and every period of His career—in the cornfields, in synagogues, in feasts, during journeys, at Capernaum, at Magdala in Perea, at Bethany—we find Him dogged, watched, impeded, reproached, questioned, tempted, insulted, conspired against by these representatives of the leading authorities of His nation, of whom we are repeatedly told that they were not natives of the place, but 'certain which came from Jerusalem.' " (Farrar, p. 334.)

He has aforetime healed in synagogues on the Sabbath, and but recently has vindicated his disciples for harvesting and threshing a few grains of barley on that holy day. His enemies, however, at the direction of the Jewish leaders in Jerusalem, are building up a case against him. By the sheer weight of the evidence, by accumulating numerous instances of supposed wrongdoing, they seek to justify their murderous designs. Will he heal on this Sabbath as he has done on others?

There is in the synagogue a man with a withered hand an underdeveloped hand, a hand without strength or facility, hanging on an arm and a wrist that may not have been wholly normal. Whether the man is there of his own accord to worship with his fellow Galileans, or was enticed to come as an unwitting dupe, that the guile-filled Pharisees might have aught with which to challenge the Master Healer, is not apparent. Perhaps it is the latter, for the Pharisees, "that they might accuse him," ask: "Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath days?"

This question, proposed by captious scribes and quarrelsome Pharisees, seems simple enough to us; but in their cultural and social circumstances it grew out of a maze of Rabbinic debate, uncertainty, and absurdity. Indeed: "So much unclearness prevails as to the Jewish views about healing on the Sabbath, that some connected information on the subject seems needful. We have already seen, that in their view only actual danger to life warranted a breach of the Sabbath-Law. But this opened a large field for discussion. Thus, according to some, disease of the ear, according to some throat-disease, while, according to others, such a disease as angina, involved danger, and superseded the Sabbath-Law. All applications to the outside of the body were forbidden on the Sabbath. As regarded internal remedies, such substances as were used in health, but had also a remedial effect, might be taken, although here also there was a way of evading the Law. A person suffering from toothache might not gargle his mouth with vinegar, but he might use an ordinary toothbrush and dip it in vinegar. The Gemara here adds, that gargling was lawful, if the substance was afterwards swallowed. It further explains, that affections extending from the lips, or else from the throat, inwards, may be attended to, being regarded as dangerous. Quite a number of these are enumerated, showing, that either the Rabbis were very lax in applying their canon about mortal diseases, or else that they reckoned in their number not a few which we would not regard as such. External lesions also might be attended to, if they involved danger to life. Similarly, medical aid might be called in, if a person had swallowed a piece of glass; a splinter might be removed from the eye, and even a thorn from the body." (Edersheim 2:59-60.)

But Jesus rises above the dust of Rabbinic battles; he is not concerned with their petty prohibitions, their childish rules, their endless debates. "What man shall there be among you," he asks, "that shall have one sheep, and if it fall into a pit on the sabbath day, will he not lay hold on it, and lift it out?" On this point also the Rabbinic debates raged; was it lawful to save the sheep, or not? In practice the people found ways of doing so. And so Jesus continues, "How much then is a man better than a sheep? Wherefore it is lawful to do well on the sabbath days."

At this point Jesus says to the man with the withered hand, "Stand forth," which he does. To the spies from Jerusalem, he rephrases their own tempting accusation: "Is it lawful to do good on the sabbath days, or to do evil? to save life, or to kill?" If their answer is affirmative, how can they condemn Jesus for Sabbath healings? If it is negative, they are condoning murder by neglect. They hold their peace and say nothing.

Then Jesus "looked round about on them with anger," his soul stirred with righteous indignation, he being "grieved for the hardness of their hearts," and he said to the man, "Stretch forth thine hand." The man obeyed, and his hand was restored; it became whole like unto the other one.

Among the Godfearing and the righteous such a miracle would have raised shouts of praise and thanksgiving that God dealt so graciously with suffering mortals. Not so among these enemies of Him who came down from heaven to heal men physically and to save them spiritually. Rather, "they were filled with madness" and took counsel with the hated Herodians—those half-apostate Jews who dealt traitorously toward their own people, and who stood for all that Roman tyranny imposed upon the chosen race—they took counsel with such misdirected recreants as to how they might destroy him. It was the ages-old scene of enemies forgetting their own differences and joining hands to fight the truth and Him who is its source.

While they held their council, planning how to destroy him, Jesus withdrew, leaving them to their own evil devices. His time had not yet come; much preaching lay ahead, and many miracles were yet to be wrought.

Some Gentiles Hear and Believe and Are Healed

(Matthew 12:15-21; Mark 3:7-12)

To what extent did Jesus preach and minister and heal among the Gentiles? Was the Holy One of Israel, while incarnate among men, destined to proclaim his message in other than Israelite ears?

As a general principle, we know from many passages that he was sent only to the lost sheep of the house of Israel; that during his lifetime he limited his preaching, and that of his disciples, to the members of the one chosen race; and that even after his resurrection, the other sheep whom he visited were Israelitish Nephites, not Gentiles whose blood lineage came from other than Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. (See Commentary 1:207-9; 325; 488.)

There are, of course, many Old Testament prophecies, as Paul's writings so amply attest, that foretell the taking of the message of salvation to the Gentiles. One of these that is purely Messianic comes to us from the pen of Isaiah and contains these words: "Behold my servant, whom I uphold; mine elect, in whom my soul delighteth; I have put my spirit upon him: he shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles. He shall not cry nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the street. A bruised reed shall he not break, and the smoking flax shall he not quench: he shall bring forth judgment unto truth. He shall not fail nor be discouraged, till he have set judgment in the earth: and the isles shall wait for his law." (Isa. 42:1-4.)

Matthew sees in what Jesus now does at least a partial fulfillment of Isaiah's prophecy. While the Herodians and Pharisees sit in council devising ways and means to destroy him, Jesus departs, apparently into the Decapolis area, to continue his preaching and healing ministry among a more receptive people. And those to whom he goes are in large measure Gentiles. Mark tells us whence they came. He says multitudes came from Galilee, and from Judea, and from Jerusalem. In addition, multitudes came from Idumea, and from beyond Jordan, and from Tyre and Sidon—all areas measurably inhabited by Gentiles. Being on the shore of the Sea of Galilee, and because the throngs press upon him in such great numbers, seeking just to touch his person, Jesus has his disciples provide a small ship to remove him from the press of the people. Through it all he teaches much, heals many, and casts out numerous unclean spirits. Those by whose mouths unclean spirits spoke testified, "Thou art the Son of God," and Jesus charged them "that they should not make him known." As his custom was, he desired no witness from devils, only from those whose testimony came from on high.

It is to Matthew that we turn to learn the identity of many in the surging throngs. He tells us that all this happened in fulfillment of Isaiah's Messianic prophecy, which he quotes in a paraphrased or targumed form, concluding with the affirmation: "And in his name shall the Gentiles trust."

Truly, Jesus came to "shew judgment to the Gentiles" as well as to gather in the lost sheep of Israel. Though his great commission was not to raise his voice in Gentile ears nor to strive personally to bring them into the Israelite fold, yet as Jew and Gentile mingled in the multitudes who sought his goodness, many Gentiles would believe and his healing power would bless them. Many of the bruised reeds who were weak in faith, and the smoking flax who were afflicted in body—whom Jesus taught and healed—were of Gentile blood. As Matthew testified, Jesus here labored with those outside the fold of Jacob, and his labors prefigured the great Gentile harvest that one day would sweep the world.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] It should come as no surprise to find that an apostate people, with this and numerous other Old Testament sabbatical injunctions before them—being devoid as they were of the Spirit of the Lord—had turned the worship of a holy being into the worship of what they esteemed to be a holy day. Jewish Sabbath observance in Jesus' day—founded upon and growing out of prophetic utterances, such as this one from Jeremiah—was not all bad; within it lay the potential of true worship; its fault came because of the quenching of the Spirit and the igniting of the fires of rigid formalism. "The Judaism of that day substituted empty forms and meaningless ceremonies for true righteousness; it mistook uncharitable exclusiveness for genuine purity; it delighted to sun itself in the injustice of an imagined favouritism from which it would fain have shut out all God's other children; it was so profoundly hypocritical as not even to recognize its own hypocrisy; it never thought so well of itself as when it was crushing the broken reed and trampling out the last spark from the smoking flax; it thanked God for the demerits which it took for virtues, and fancied that He could be pleased with a service in which there was neither humility, nor truthfulness, nor loyalty, nor love." (Farrar, p. 330.)
[^2] See chapter 11 (Book I) for a brief summary of Jewish Sabbath practices. "The Sabbath was a Mosaic, nay, even a primeval institution, and it had become the most distinctive and the most passionately reverenced of all the ordinances which separated the Jews from the Gentiles as a peculiar people. It was at once the sign of their exclusive privileges, and the centre of their barren formalism. Their traditions, their patriotism, even their obstinacy, were all enlisted in its scrupulous maintenance. . . . They had suffered themselves on that day to lose battles, to be cut in pieces by their enemies, to see Jerusalem itself imperilled and captured. Its observance had been fenced round by the most painfully minute, the most ludicrously insignificant restrictions. . . . According to the pedantic school of Shammai, no one on the Sabbath might comfort the sick or enliven the sorrowful. Even the preservation of life was a breaking of the Sabbath; and, on the other hand, even to kill a flea was as bad as to kill a camel. Had not the command to 'do no manner of work upon the Sabbath day' been most absolute and most emphatic? had not Moses himself and all the congregation caused the son of Shelomith to be stoned to death for merely gathering sticks upon it? had not the Great Synagogue itself drawn up the thirty-nine abhoth [primary rules] and quite innumerable toldoth [derivative rules], or prohibitions of labours which violated it in the first or in the second degree?" (Farrar, pp. 330-32.)
