Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1980)

Section 5

The Twelve, the Sermon on the Mount, and Rising Pharisaic Opposition

Thou, O God, hast prepared of thy goodness for the poor. The Lord gave the word: great was the company of those that published it. (Ps. 68:10-11.)

Jesus now calls unto him the Twelve—holy men; men of faith and valor; men who will serve and suffer and bleed and die for him—and upon them he confers the holy apostleship. From henceforth they shall be his special witnesses, to teach his doctrine and testify of his divine Sonship before all men.

To them—and to a great multitude—he preached the Sermon on the Mount. The Lord gave the word! Such a sermon as none but he could preach fell from his lips.

And great was the company of those that published it! Jesus, the Twelve, Mary Magdalene and other faithful women, a great host of disciples—all traveling through every city and village of Galilee—spread the word that salvation is in Christ and that all men must come unto him, repent of their sins, and keep his commandments, to gain peace in this world and eternal life in the world to come.

Jesus heals the son of a Gentile centurion, and accepts an anointing from a repentant sinner in Simon's house; he raises from death a widow's son near Nain; he acclaims John the Baptist as one than whom there is no greater prophet; and he casts a demon out of one who is deaf and blind, thus also opening his eyes and unstopping his ears.

Then the spies from the Sanhedrin launch their assaults anew. He is accused of being Satan incarnate, of casting out devils, and of performing miracles by the power of Beelzebub, the prince of devils.

He excoriates his adversaries; speaks of pardoning grace and the unpardonable sin; condemns those who seek signs, identifying them as adulterers; and extends the limits of his family to include all those who do the will of his Father who is in heaven.

The Lord gave the word! His preachers—a great and mighty host—did and do publish it to all men everywhere. It is the word of salvation, his everlasting gospel.

Chapter 40

Jesus Chooses the Twelve

Mine apostles, the Twelve, which were with me in my ministry at Jerusalem, shall stand at my right hand at the day of my coming in a pillar of fire, being clothed with robes of righteousness, with crowns upon their heads, in glory even as I am. (D&C 29:12.) [^1]

Apostles: Their Position and Powers

Jesus is now going to call the Twelve: twelve men who will be his witnesses; who will bear, with him, the burdens of the kingdom; who will accept martyrdom and defy the rulers of the world; and who, save Judas the traitor and John the Beloved, shall seal their testimonies with their own blood.

The day has arrived and the hour is at hand to build, on the foundation he has laid, that glorious structure: the Church and kingdom of God on earth. A year and a half has elapsed since he was baptized by John, since his formal ministry began. It is the summer of A.D. 28; in less than two years (April of A.D. 30) he will finish his mortal labors, ascend unto his Father, and leave the Twelve to preach the gospel in all the world and to build up that church and kingdom which will administer salvation to all who believe and obey.

Truly, "God hath set some in the church" to be living witnesses of the truth and divinity of the work; to regulate all the affairs of the kingdom; to serve, by their very presence, as conclusive proof that the Lord's hand is in his earthly work. Who and what identities the true church? The Holy Book responds: "First apostles, secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers"—such is the divine order of priority—"after that miracles, then gifts of healings, helps, governments, diversities of tongues." (1 Cor. 12:28.)

Truly, the Lord has given "some, apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers; For the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ: Till we all come in the unity of the faith." These officers, as the Holy Book also records, are placed in the true church, "That we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive." These agents of the Lord, "speaking the truth in love," guide and direct the Lord's affairs on earth. (Eph. 4:11-15.)

Truly, where there are apostles and prophets, called of God and endowed with power from on high, there is the true church and kingdom; and where these are not, there the Lord's work is not established among men. And so we come to that point in time when Jesus, setting up anew for his day and dispensation the organization designed to administer salvation to mortals, is prepared to call the Twelve.

Apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ—mighty men of faith; pillars of personal righteousness; chosen spirits who were before ordained to walk with Christ, teach his doctrine, and testify of his divine Sonship!

These are they whom Lehi saw—following one whose "luster was above that of the sun at noon-day"—they whose own "brightness did exceed that of the stars in the firmament. And they came down and went forth upon the face of the earth." (1 Ne. 1:9-11.) These are they who were among "the noble and great ones" seen by Abraham, who were chosen to be rulers before they were "born." (Abr. 3:22-23.) As with Jeremiah, their fellow servant—before they were formed "in the belly," and before they came "forth out of the womb"—the Lord had known them, and "sanctified" them, and "ordained" them to be prophets and apostles "unto the nations." (Jer. 1:5.) There was no happenstance in their calls; they had been foreordained by Him who knows all things and who had prepared them from all eternity to be his ministers in the meridian day.

Witnesses of the Redeemer—humble folk; weak and simple Galileans, unlearned in Rabbinic lore; but men who could be taught from on high, whose souls will vibrate as the revelations of eternity pour in upon them!

How aptly it is written of them, and of Heaven's emissaries in all ages: "Ye see your calling, brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called: But God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise; and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things which are mighty; And base things of the world, and things which are despised, hath God chosen, yea, and things which are not, to bring to nought things that are: That no flesh should glory in his presence." (1 Cor. 1:26-29.)

His apostolic friends—men who will walk with him through his mortal trials; who will feel the scourge and carry a cross; who are appointed unto suffering and persecution and death!

"I think that God hath set forth us the apostles last, as it were appointed to death: for we are made a spectacle unto the world, and to angels, and to men. We are fools for Christ's sake, but ye are wise in Christ; we are weak, but ye are strong; ye are honourable, but we are despised. Even unto this present hour we both hunger, and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain dwelling place; And labour, working with our own hands: being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we suffer it: Being defamed, we intreat: we are made as the filth of the world, and are the offscouring of all things unto this day." (1 Cor. 4:9-13.)

Noble souls—unknown, unlearned, and unlettered now, as it were; but men who, as the world's greatest crusaders, will attain endless fame and receive eternal renown; whose names shall be engraved forever in the walls of the Holy City!

As there are twelve tribes in Israel, so there are twelve apostles for all Israel and the world; as Jehovah gave his saving truths to the twelve sons of Jacob and their seed, throughout their generations, so Jesus is placing in the hands of his twelve friends the saving truths and powers for their day; and as the names of the twelve tribes of Israel are written on the twelve gates of the Holy Jerusalem, which shall descend from God out of heaven, so are the names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb written on the twelve foundations of the walls of that celestial city. (Rev. 21:10-14.) Surely it shall be with the Jewish Twelve as it is with the Nephite Twelve—and as it shall be with the latter-day Twelve, as also with all the saints who are true and faithful: "Behold, they are righteous forever; for because of their faith in the Lamb of God their garments are made white in his blood." (1 Ne. 12:10.)

The Twelve Apostles of the Lamb—legal administrators who shall in due course hold the keys of the kingdom; who shall have power to bind on earth and seal in heaven; who shall stand in the place and stead of the Lord Jesus when he returns to his Father to reign in eternal glory forever!

The Twelve Apostles of the Lamb—the choicest and noblest spirits available to the God of Heaven to do his work in that day; the friends of his Son; those who shall see visions, receive revelations, and work wonders—such are the ministers whom Jesus is about to choose, to ordain, and to instruct! What a glorious day this is in the cause of truth and righteousness!

Jesus Calls Eleven Galileans and One Judean

(Mark 3:13-21; JST Mark 3:16; Matthew 10:2-4; Luke 6:12-16)

When the servants of the Lord go forth to choose others to labor on the Lord's errand and to engage in his ministry, they have one goal and one only: to find those whom the Lord has already chosen to serve in whatever capacities are involved. Their constant prayer on those occasions is: "Lord, show unto thy servants whom thou hast chosen to do this work or fill these offices." All of the legal administrators in the earthly kingdom "must be called of God, by prophecy, and by the laying on of hands, by those who are in authority, to preach the Gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof." (A of F 5.)

It is the Lord's work and not man's, and the Lord knows whom he wants to serve in all places in his kingdom. No man, of himself, can build up the kingdom; it is only when the earthly servants get the spirit of revelation, and do thereby the things the Lord wants done, that the work prospers to the full. And as with us, so also with the Lord Jesus, who came not to do his own will, but that of his Father who sent him. We heard him say at the Passover in Jerusalem after healing the impotent man at the pool of Bethesda: "I can of mine own self do nothing; . . . because I seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father which hath sent me." (John 5:30.)

Now Jesus is to choose the Twelve—the holy apostles who were foreordained in the councils of eternity to tread in his tracks and bear witness of his name in all the world—the Twelve whose spiritual talents, developed before they were born, will enable them to build up the kingdom and withstand the pressures of the world. Whom shall he choose? He must find those whom Nephi saw in vision six hundred years before; he must select those whom he himself first called to this high and holy ministry when he and they mingled among the noble and great spirits, seen by Abraham, who were destined to be the Lord's rulers among mortal men. These foreordained ones must be found; there must be no mistakes made.

Thus we see Jesus (for the time for calling the Twelve is now) go out alone into a mountain to pray. All night long his petitions ascend to his Father; during the long hours of darkness he communes with the one who sent him and whose will he came to do. He needed—as we need during the long and dark days of life—direction from on high. He received answer to his prayer; and someday, perhaps, when our spiritual capacity enables us to know and feel what else was involved in this and other prayers of the Son of God, we shall gain that knowledge. For now, we know only that "when it was day, he called unto him his disciples: and of them he chose twelve, whom also he named apostles."

All true believers are disciples; all who keep his commandments and who follow him as he follows his Father are his disciples; the apostles, as here designated, are those chosen disciples who are ordained to the office of apostle in the Melchizedek Priesthood and who receive and use the keys of the kingdom of God on earth. There are or may be disciples without number, but those acting in the holy apostleship are twelve in number at any given time; they are the governing officers over the disciples.

Those chosen by Jesus on this memorable morning are named, as a group, four times in the New Testament—by Matthew, by Mark, and twice by Luke, once in his Gospel and once in the Acts of the Apostles. No two of these listings give the same order of seniority, and in some instances the name applied to the same person varies. All of the lists place Peter first, and the three that mention Judas place him last. The account in Acts lists only the eleven, as Judas by then had served his purpose and sealed his traitorous conduct with a suicidal death.

From other sources we know that Peter, James, and John were the preeminent three, and were in fact the First Presidency of the Church in that day, although we have no way of knowing whether they served as a separate quorum apart from the others of the Twelve as is the case today. They may well have done, since "the keys of the kingdom" that they restored in this dispensation "belong always unto the Presidency of the High Priesthood" (D&C 81:2), meaning they are always, in all dispensations, held by the First Presidency of the Church.

Our present knowledge of the original Twelve is scanty; some things cannot be other than speculative at this time, and a true understanding of their lives and ministries—of their kinships and works, of the sermons they preached and the miracles they wrought—must await the day when all things are revealed. [^2] It may be that all of them wrote Gospels that someday will come forth for the enlightenment and salvation of men, Gospels that will come forth in a day when men are prepared, by faith and good works, and have attained the spiritual stature to be worthy to study their holy words.

Without falling into the not-uncommon trap of creating a whole personality, or of pontificating a complete life-style, or of naming with finality all of the characteristics and attributes of a person, simply because we have a known sliver of information about him, we can with some assurance note at least the following about the Twelve whom Jesus called. We shall take Mark's order of seniority, since he was the disciple of Peter and is believed to have set forth views and feelings and factual knowledge received personally from the Chief Apostle.

This noble soul—chief of the apostles, valiant, courageous, conforming; as rugged and forceful as Elijah, who called down fire from heaven, and slew the priests of Baal with the sword; as submissive and spiritual as Samuel, who attuned his ear to hear the voice of God—Simon Peter was called by Jesus to preside over the earthly kingdom, to lay the foundation and build up that church which alone would administer salvation for that day and dispensation.

We shall see him in many settings: forsaking all to follow Jesus; testifying of his divine Sonship in the coast of Caesarea Philippi; severing the ear of Malchus with a sword in Gethsemane; denying that he knows who Christ is in the courtyard of Caiaphas, the high priest; accusing the Jews, to their face, of murdering the Lord; penning the most sublime language in the New Testament; being crucified, head downward, for the testimony of Jesus that was his; coming in resurrected glory in 1829 to restore priesthood and keys and call men again to the holy apostleship.

He is described as being "generous, impetuous, wavering, noble, timid," of being "thoroughly human," and of having a "most lovable disposition." He was all this and more. There has seldom been such a mighty man as he on earth. "It would be hard to tell," says one analyst, "whether most of his fervour flowed through the outlet of adoration or activity. His full heart put force and promptitude into every movement. Is his Master encompassed by fierce ruffians?—Peter's ardour flashes in his ready sword, and converts the Galilean boatman into the soldier instantaneous. Is there a rumor of a resurrection from Joseph's tomb?—John's nimbler foot distances his older friend; but Peter's eagerness outruns the serene love of John, and past the gazing disciple he rushes breathless into the vacant sepulchre. Is the risen Saviour on the strand?—his comrades secure the net, and turn the vessel's head for shore; but Peter plunges over the vessel's side, and struggling through the waves, in his dripping coat falls down at his Master's feet. Does Jesus say, 'Bring of the fish ye have caught?'—ere any one could anticipate the word, Peter's brawny arm is lugging the weltering net with its glittering spoil ashore, and every eager movement unwittingly is answering beforehand the question of the Lord, 'Simon, lovest thou me?' And that fervour is the best, which, like Peter's, and as occasion requires, can ascend in ecstatic ascriptions of adoration and praise, or follow Christ to prison and to death; which can concentrate itself on feats of heroic devotion, or distribute itself in the affectionate assiduities of a miscellaneous industry." (Dr. Hamilton, cited in Farrar, pp. 195-96.)

The whims of chance and the happenstance of history leave us little knowledge that is unique and personal about the second man in seniority in that earthly kingdom of the One who chose and placed in their order those whom he had foreordained unto those very positions in the councils of eternity. James and his brother John, their father Zebedee, and Simon and Andrew were partners in a prosperous fishing business. They owned boats and employed servants. They forsook all to follow Jesus, and James was the first apostolic martyr in the meridian dispensation. He was beheaded by Herod Agrippa just before the Passover in A.D. 44. With Peter, his file leader, and John, his brother, he served in the Council of Three whose destiny called them to preside over the others of the Twelve and over the whole earthly kingdom of their Lord. It was these three who alone were present when Jesus raised the daughter of Jairus from death; they alone of the Twelve ascended the Mount of Transfiguration to receive keys and powers from Elias, Moses, and Jesus, and to hear the Heavenly Voice acclaim that the Beloved Son was then dwelling on earth; they were the ones chosen to be nearby when the sins of all men were laden on the Nazarene's back as he sweat great drops of blood in Gethsemane; and it was they, in June 1829, who ministered with life-giving power to their mortal fellowservants.

We come now to John: to John the disciple of the Baptist—who forsook the forerunner, to follow Him of whom the witness said, "Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world" (John 1:29); to John the Beloved—the disciple whom Jesus loved, and who, at the last supper, leaned on the Master's breast; to John the Revelator—who was banished to Patmos where he saw the visions of eternity and wrote the book of Revelation; to John—the author of the Gospel of that name, a gospel oriented to the saints, and of three other New Testament epistles; to John—generally esteemed to be a mystic though he and James are called by Jesus Boanerges, or Sons of Thunder, because they were rugged and forceful characters, like Elijah, who would have called down fire from heaven upon their enemies; to John—the translated one, who alone of all the Twelve chose to live on earth until the Second Coming that he might bring souls unto salvation; to John—an apostle of love, than whom there have been few greater on earth. He is known to us for his inspired writings, his heavenly visions, and his incomparable centuries-long missionary work. It was he to whom Jesus, hanging in agony upon the cross, entrusted the care of the Blessed Virgin, and who enjoyed as close an intimacy with the Lord as any man who ever lived.

In the veins of Andrew surged the same believing blood that made his brother Peter a valiant witness of the truth. They were sons of Jona, fishing partners, and friends of Zebedee's children. Andrew and John the apostle were disciples of the Baptist, who, believing his witness of the Messiah, forsook the son of Zacharias to follow Jesus. After one day with our Lord, Andrew gained a witness of his divinity, found his brother, the future president of the Church, and said: "We have found the Messias." (John 1:41.) Andrew was with Peter when the Lord found them casting a net into the still Galilean waters, and said: "Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men." (Matt. 4:19.) He is mentioned in connection with several New Testament episodes and, according to tradition, was crucified at Patrae in Achaia.

Jesus found Philip, apparently searched for him, at Bethsaida, the city where Andrew and Peter then lived. This early-found disciple was with Jesus at the marriage feast in Cana and is mentioned several other times. His most noted conversation of which we have record was the plea, "Lord, shew us the Father, and it sufficeth us," in reply to which he received the mild rebuke: "Have I been so long time with you, and yet hast thou not known me, Philip? he that hath seen me hath seen the Father; and how sayest thou then, Shew us the Father?" (John 14:8-9.) Of his ministry after Jesus' ascension we know nothing.

Called also Nathanael, he is described by Jesus as an Israelite without guile; his witness from the beginning, as first spoken to Jesus, was: "Rabbi, thou art the Son of God; thou art the King of Israel." (John 1:49.) He received from Jesus the promise that he would see the heavens open and angels ascending and descending upon the Son of Man. We know little else of him but doubt not that the divine promise found fulfillment at the appointed time.

In his capacity as a special witness, Matthew took it upon himself to write of the generation, birth, ministry, passion, resurrection, and exaltation of the Lord Jesus. His spiritual talents and literary craftsmanship enabled him to record—more particularly for Jewish readers, who believed the prophets and pondered their Messianic utterances—many of the words and deeds of the one he knew to be the Son of God. Also known as Levi the son of Alpheus, he was a publican, one of that hated and despised group of Roman tax collectors; apparently he was well-to-do, as he gave a great feast in his own home to introduce many publicans and sinners to Jesus. The numerous quotations in his Gospel from the Old Testament identify him as a scriptural scholar and a trained theologian. His collecting and collating of the numerous events preserved for us in his Gospel establish him as a historian and preserver of that knowledge which Christ came to deliver to men. Aside from the obvious diligence manifest and the labors involved in preparing his written testimony, we know nothing of his ministry after the ascension of the Lord.

Clearly this holy man, known also as Didymus, was one of the most valiant and courageous of the Twelve, one whose sure witness of the divine Sonship is recorded in fervent and worshipful words. When others of the Twelve counseled Jesus not to go into Judea, where the Jews then sought his life and where Lazarus lay in need of divine help, it was Thomas who said, "Let us also go, that we may die with him." (John 11:16.) When Jesus told the Twelve that he was going to prepare a heavenly place for them and that they knew the way to obtain such a high status, it was Thomas who dared to say: "Lord, we know not whither thou goest; and how can we know the way?" (John 14:5), which brought forth the great pronouncement that Jesus was the way, the truth, and the life. And it was Thomas—absent when the others, in the upper room, felt the prints of the nails, thrust their hands into the riven side, and saw the resurrected Lord eat before them—it was Thomas, not understanding the corporeal nature of the resurrection, who expressed disbelief, only to have Jesus appear eight days later and say: "Thomas, Reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands; and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side: and be not faithless, but believing." Then came from Thomas the inspired witness: "My Lord and my God" (John 20:27-28), which we may be assured he continued to bear as long as mortal breath was his.

Of this James we know only that he was the son of Alpheus, and that he was ordained to the holy apostleship. That he was of apostolic stature, bore true witness, and taught sound doctrine is implicit in the known system governing the apostolate. Our lack of knowledge about him shows only the inadequacy of the accounts that have been preserved for us.

Luke calls him "Judas the brother of James," and Matthew names him as "Lebbeus, whose surname was Thaddeus." As to his works and ministry we are not advised, and conclude only that he was of like spiritual stature with his brethren of the Twelve.

Of this member of the Twelve we know only that he was at one time one of the party of Zealots, but this fact of itself speaks volumes. The Zealots were a Jewish sect whose avowed purpose was to uphold the Mosaic ritual and stand as guardians of the law. Simon must have been a valiant leader in this politico-nationalistic movement, for Matthew, Mark, and Luke, all three, in identifying him append the name of the sect to his personal name. Luke calls him Simon Zelotes; Matthew and Mark call him Simon the Canaanite. In the original records the term Canaanite, in this instance, is the Syro-Chaldaic equivalent of the Greek word that has been translated into English as Zelotes. [^3]

Eleven of the Twelve were Galileans; Judas only was from Judea, his name signifying as it is supposed, that he came from Kerioth, a small town of the tribe of Judah. Ish Kerioth (Iscariot) signifies "a man of Kerioth." He was the steward and almoner for Jesus and the other disciples, receiving and dispensing, to the poor and otherwise, such monies as came into their hands. We suppose he had a testimony and followed Jesus willingly, although he well could have done so with ulterior motives—for money and power—and with evil intent. Certainly Satan was his chief master; greed and avarice dwelt in his heart; he was dishonest in caring for the monies placed in his hands; and for thirty pieces of silver he planted the traitor's kiss. Thereafter he hanged himself at Aceldama, the field of blood, which is on the southern slope of the valley of Hinnom outside Jerusalem. In the process he fell headlong, burst asunder, his bowels gushed out, and his spirit went to associate with Lucifer in that realm where traitors to the truth suffer the agonies of the damned.

These, then, are the Lord's Twelve—all save one are holy and righteous men—the ministers called to bear witness of his holy name and build up his earthly kingdom, first among the Jews, and then among the Gentiles. [^4] They were called of God by prophecy; power from on high was imparted by the laying on of hands; they all held the holy Melchizedek Priesthood; and each was ordained to the office of an apostle therein. "Ye have not chosen me"—men do not call themselves to the ministry!—"but I have chosen you, and ordained you," Jesus said. (John 15:16.) Of their call Mark, reflecting Peter's teaching, said: "He ordained twelve, that they should be with him, and that he might send them forth to preach, And to have power to heal sicknesses, and to cast out devils."

In due course Jesus will give, first to Peter, James and John, and then to all of the Twelve, the keys of the kingdom of heaven; these keys will enable them to preside over the earthly kingdom and direct all its affairs, to say nothing of that divine and eternal power which transcends the bounds of earth and endures beyond this mortal vale—the power to bind and seal on earth and in heaven. These keys enable the Lord's servants on earth to seal men up unto eternal life, on the one hand, and, on the other, "to seal them up unto the day when the wrath of God shall be poured out upon the wicked without measure." (D&C 1:9.)

For the meridian dispensation, vacancies in the Twelve were filled as they occurred. By the spirit of revelation, the Eleven chose Matthias—one who had companied with them all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out among them—to serve in the place of Judas. This thirteenth apostle was "ordained" to be a witness with the others of the resurrection and to bear with them the burdens of the kingdom. The pattern being thus set, vacancies in the Quorum of the Twelve were filled until that day when the man-child "was caught up unto God and his throne," and the long night of apostate darkness descended upon the earth. (Commentary 3:513-19.) [^5]

Footnotes

"Simon and Andrew the sons of Jonas, James and John the sons of Zabdia, and Philip, were of the village of Bethsaida. [As we have heretofore seen, Philip was at Bethsaida, not of Bethsaida, when Jesus first called him.] If Matthew be the same as Levi [and of this there is almost complete agreement], he was a son of Alpheus, and therefore a brother of James the Less and of Jude, the brother of James, who is generally regarded as identical with Lebbeus and Thaddeus. They belonged in all probability to Cana or Capernaum, and if there were any ground for believing the tradition which says that Mary, the wife of Alpheus or Klopas, was a younger sister of the Virgin, then we should have to consider these three brothers as first-cousins of our Lord. Nathanael or Bartholomew was of Cana in Galilee. Thomas and Simon Zelotes were also Galileans. Judas Iscariot was the son of a Simon Iscariot, but whether this Simon is identical with the Zealot cannot be determined." (Farrar, pp. 190-91.) This analysis makes Matthew, James the Son of Alpheus, and Jude brothers, and possible cousins of Jesus.

"The difficulties connected with tracing the family descent or possible relationship between the Apostles are so great, that we must forego all hope of arriving at any certain conclusion. . . . Some points at least seem clear. First, it appears that only the calling of those to the Apostolate is related, which in some sense is typical, viz. that of Peter and Andrew, of James and John, of Philip and Bartholomew (or Bar Telamyon, or Temalyon, generally supposed the same as Nathanael), and of Matthew the publican. Yet, secondly, there is something which attaches to each of the others. Thomas, who is called Didymus (which means 'twin'), is closely connected with Matthew, both in St. Luke's Gospel and in that of St. Matthew himself. James is expressly named as the son of Alpheus or Clopas. This we know to have been also the name of Matthew-Levi's father. But, as the name was a common one, no inference can be drawn from it, and it does not seem likely that the father of Matthew was also that of James, Judas, and Simon, for these three seem to have been brothers. Judas is designated by St. Matthew as Lebbeus, from the Hebrew lebh, a heart, and is also named, both by him and by St. Mark, Thaddeus. . . . St. Luke simply designates him Judas of James, which means that he was the brother (less probably, the son) of James. Thus his real name would have been Judas Lebbeus, and his surname Thaddeus. Closely connected with these two we have in all the Gospels, Simon, surnamed Zelotes or Cananean (not Canaanite), both terms indicating his original connection with the Galilean Zealot party, the 'Zealots for the Law.' His position in the Apostolic Catalogue, and the testimony of Hegesippus, seem to point him out as the son of Clopas, and brother of James, and of Judas Lebbeus. These three were, in a sense, cousins of Christ, since, according to Hegesippus, Clopas was the brother of Joseph, while the sons of Zebedee were real cousins, their mother Salome being a sister of the Virgin. Lastly, we have Judas Iscariot, or Ish Kerioth, 'a man of Kerioth,' a town in Judah. Thus the betrayer alone would be of Judean origin, the others all of Galilean." (Edersheim 1:521-22.) This analysis makes James the Less, Judas, and Simon Zelotes brothers and cousins of Christ through Joseph. James and John are listed as blood-cousins through Mary.

It is worthy of note that among the Nephite Twelve, Nephi and Timothy were brothers, as also were Mathoni and Mathonihah, and that Jonas was a son of Nephi. (3 Ne. 19:4.)

In the first Twelve called in this dispensation, Parley P. and Orson Pratt were brothers, as were Luke S. and Lyman E. Johnson. Joseph Smith, the Prophet, and Hyrum Smith, the Patriarch, were brothers; their brother William served in the Twelve, and their father, Joseph Smith, Sr., was the first Patriarch to the Church. Brigham Young, Jr., a son of President Brigham Young, was one of the Twelve. George A. Smith, John Henry Smith, and George Albert Smith constitute three generations of apostles, as do Franklin D. Richards, George F. Richards, and LeGrand Richards, and Amasa, Francis M., and Richard R. Lyman. President Joseph F. Smith and two of his sons, Hyrum Mack and Joseph Fielding, served in the Twelve. Lorenzo and Erastus Snow were related. John Taylor and his son John W., Wilford Woodruff and his son Abraham O., Matthias F. Cowley and his son Matthew, and George Q. Cannon and his son Sylvester were all apostles. Joseph F. Merrill was a son of Marriner W. Merrill, Ezra Taft Benson a great-grandson of the original Ezra T. Benson, and Stephen L Richards a grandson of Willard Richards. President Spencer W. Kimball is a grandson of Heber C. Kimball, and Gordon B. Hinckley a nephew of Alonzo A. Hinckley—plus the fact that there are many instances of cousins and more distantly related family members, all called to positions of apostolic power. Truly, faith runs in families, in all dispensations.

---
Notas:
[^1] "The plain" of Luke 6:17 is better rendered "level spot," which translation brings the account into complete harmony with Matthew's statement that the sermon was delivered in a mountain, meaning on a level plateau in a mountainous area.
[^2] "Ye Elders of Israel," Hymns, no. 44.
[^3] This principle applies to mercy and every godly attribute, as also to carnality and devilishness and every evil thing, as Alma has so well said: "The meaning of the word restoration is to bring back again evil for evil, or carnal for carnal, or devilish for devilish—good for that which is good: righteous for that which is righteous; just for that which is just; merciful for that which is merciful. Therefore, my son, see that you are merciful unto your brethren: deal justly, judge righteously, and do good continually; and if ye do all these things then shall ye receive your reward: yea, ye shall have mercy restored unto you again; ye shall have justice restored unto you again: ye shall have a righteous judgment restored unto you again; and ye shall have good rewarded unto you again. For that which ye do send out shall return unto you again, and be restored; therefore, the word restoration more fully condemneth the sinner, and justifieth him not at all." (Alma 41:13-15.)
[^4] This applies to all that Jesus did and said—it was unlike and superior to the prevailing preachments and performances in the same fields. For instance, there are in the Talmud many graphic statements and wise sayings that, quoted out of context, have been interpreted by some to mean that the Talmud is an inspired work comparable to the New Testament. But, as Edersheim expresses it: "Take these in their connection and real meaning, and what a terrible awakening! Who, that has read half-a-dozen pages successively of any part of the Talmud, can feel otherwise than by turns shocked, pained, amused, or astounded? There is here wit and logic, quickness and readiness, earnestness and zeal, but by the side of it terrible profanity, uncleanness, superstition, and folly. Taken as a whole, it is not only utterly unspiritual, but anti-spiritual. . . . Taken not in abrupt sentences and quotations, but as a whole, it is so utterly and immeasurably unlike the New Testament, that it is not easy to determine which, as the case may be, is greater, the ignorance or the presumption of those who put them side by side. . . . He who has thirsted and quenched his thirst at the living fount of Christ's Teaching, can never again stoop to seek drink at the broken cisterns of Rabbinism." (Edersheim 1:525-26.)
[^5] "When men are called unto mine everlasting gospel, and covenant with an everlasting covenant," the Lord says, "they are accounted as the salt of the earth and the savor of men; They are called to be the savor of men; therefore, if that salt of the earth lose its savor, behold, it is thenceforth good for nothing only to be cast out and trodden under the feet of men." (D&C 101:38-40. See also D&C 103:9-10.)
