Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1980)

Chapter 41

The Sermon on the Mount

His name shall endure for ever: his name shall be continued as long as the sun: and men shall be blessed in him: all nations shall call him blessed. Blessed be the Lord God, the God of Israel, who only doeth wondrous things. And blessed be his glorious name for ever: and let the whole earth be filled with his glory. (Ps. 72:17-19.)

Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. (Matt. 25:34.)

The Sermon on the Mount—Its Nature and Delivery

It is now our privilege to hear anew the Sermon on the Mount, the Sermon on the Plain, the Sermon in Bountiful—for they are all one; all contain the same truths; all fell from the same lips; all were spoken by the power of the same Spirit. We shall not hear the whole sermon, for no man, of whom we know, has been so privileged since the holy words fell from the lips of Him who chose in his own right, rather than by the mouths of his servants the prophets, to present such a wondrous compilation of the divine truth in a single sermon. But we shall both hear the words and feel the spirit of the portion that has come down to us in Holy Writ.

There may have been greater sermons preached to selected congregations of spiritual giants—as, for instance, at Adam-ondi-Ahman when the first man assembled together the high priests and patriarchs of his dispensation, along with other righteous saints of like spiritual capacity—there may have been other sermons preached to spiritual giants who could comprehend more of the truths of eternity than the general run of mankind. The Sermon on the Mount, however, was preached to instruct and counsel the newly ordained apostles; to open the door of spiritual progress for all newly called members of the Church and kingdom of God on earth; and to stand as a beacon inviting men of good will of every doctrinal persuasion to come to the Fount of Wisdom and learn those things which will assure them of peace in this world and eternal glory in the world to come.

This sermon is a recapitulation, a summary, and a digest of what men must do to gain salvation; and the eternal concepts in it are so stated that hearers (and readers) will get out of it as much as their personal spiritual capacity permits. To some it will point the way to further investigation; to others it will confirm and reconfirm eternal truths already learned from the scriptures and from the preachers of righteousness of their day; and to those few whose souls burn with the fires of testimony, devotion, and valiance, it will be as the rending of the heavens: light and knowledge beyond carnal comprehension will flow into their souls in quantities that cannot be measured. Every man must judge and determine for himself the effect the Sermon on the Mount will have upon him.

As the words of the sermon are spoken, anew, as it were, in our ears, there are some basic and simple realities of which we must be aware. The Sermon on the Mount has never been recorded in its entirety as far as we know; at least no such scriptural account is available to us. What has come to us is a digest; the words in each account that are attributed to Jesus are, in fact, verbatim recordings of what he said, but they are not all that he said by any means. He may have expounded on each point at extended length, with the Gospel historians who preserved his sayings being guided by the Spirit to write only those words which, in the infinite wisdom of Him who knoweth all things, should have been incorporated into their scriptural accounts. It may well be that the most perfect and elaborate sermon was delivered to the Nephites, for their congregation was composed only of spiritually attuned souls. Without question, when Matthew records a thought in one set of words and Luke does so in different language, both are preserving the verbatim utterances of the Lord. He said what both of them attribute to him as part of the whole sermon. The recording witnesses of his words simply chose to preserve different spoken sentences to present the eternal concepts involved.

And, finally, in this connection: The Sermon on the Mount is not an assemblage of disjointed sayings, spoken on diverse occasions, that have been combined in one place for convenience in presentation, as some uninspired commentators have speculated. It is rather selected sayings, all spoken by Jesus on one day, following the ordination of the Twelve; it is that portion of his words, spoken on that occasion, which the Spirit knew should be preserved for us and for all men who seek truth. It may well be that the sealed portion of the Book of Mormon contains more of the sermon than is now found in Third Nephi, and it may well be that future revelations—accounts of others of the apostles, for instance—will bring to light more that was said on the mountainous plain near Capernaum where Jesus spoke the Spirit-guided words to his Jewish friends.

No doubt what we receive in the future—as to this and all other scriptural expansions—will depend upon our spiritual maturity. When we exercise faith like unto the brother of Jared, we will learn by revelation what he knew, and feel by the power of the Spirit what he felt. Until then let us start with what we have, the glorious truths recorded in Matthew 5, 6, and 7; in Luke 6; and in 3 Nephi 12, 13, and 14; and let us lay the foundation for that knowledge and that perfection of life which it is ours to receive because we have what we have—the glorious Sermon on the Mount as now constituted.

Jesus Speaks the Beatitudes

(3 Nephi 12:1-12; Matthew 5:1-12; JST Matthew 5:3-5, 8, 10-12, 14; Luke 6:17-26; JST Luke 6:20-21, 23)

Jesus came in resurrected glory to a great multitude of the Nephites who were assembled round about the temple in the land Bountiful. At his invitation they all thrust their hands into his side and felt the print of the nails in his hands and in his feet, and all cried out with one accord: "Hosanna! Blessed be the name of the Most High God!" From among them Jesus chose Twelve, whom he ordained apostles, and to whom he gave power to proclaim his gospel, to baptize, to confer the gift of the Holy Ghost, and to do all things needful for the salvation of that remnant of the house of Israel.

To these Twelve and to the whole congregation Jesus taught his gospel, including faith, repentance, baptism of water and of the Spirit, and the keeping of the commandments of God. (3 Ne. 11.) Then, stretching forth his hand to the multitude, he began to deliver the Sermon in Bountiful, which was the Sermon on the Mount, as we conclude from Matthew's account, or the Sermon on the Plain, as we reason from Luke's recording of the same persuasive words. [^1] His initial declarations in this sermon have been appropriately called the Beatitudes. To beatify is to make supremely happy or to announce that a person has attained the blessedness of heaven. Beatitude is a state of utmost bliss, and the Beatitudes are our Lord's declarations of the blessedness and eventual eternal glory of those who obey the various principles recited in them. May we now, with beatific vision, as it were, seek to envision the meaning of Jesus' blessed pronouncements on blessedness.

Blessed are ye if ye shall give heed unto the words of these twelve whom I have chosen from among you to minister unto you, and to be your servants; and unto them I have given power that they may baptize you with water; and after that ye are baptized with water, behold, I will baptize you with fire and with the Holy Ghost; therefore blessed are ye if ye shall believe in me and be baptized, after that ye have seen me and know that I am.

And again, more blessed are they who shall believe in your words because that ye shall testify that ye have seen me, and that ye know that I am. Yea, blessed are they who shall believe in your words, and come down into the depths of humility and be baptized, for they shall be visited with fire and with the Holy Ghost, and shall receive a remission of their sins.

These are the basic Beatitudes; these are the initial words of blessing; these are the beatific promises that precede all others; out of them all other blessings come. Before the blessedness of heaven; before the beatific state of supreme happiness; before the glory of utmost bliss can be gained; before we progress on the strait and narrow path leading to eternal life—before nearly all else, we must believe in the Lord Jesus Christ; we must give heed to the apostles and prophets who minister in his name; we must come down in the depths of humility and be baptized in his holy name; we must be visited with fire and with the Holy Ghost and receive a remission of our sins; and we must then walk in the light of the Spirit. It is only after the blessings promised in these beginning Beatitudes have been received that we can obtain the things promised in the Beatitudes that follow.

Jesus' beginning beatific statements in the Sermon on the Mount, as delivered on the mountainous plain near Capernaum, were similar to those made to the Nephites. Having spent the night on the mountain in prayer, Jesus chose the Twelve, ordained them, and gave them the same powers and commission received by their Nephite fellow laborers. Then, Luke says, "he came down with them, and stood in the plain," meaning a high plateau area near where he, alone, had communed during the night with his Father.

Assembled before him were a host of disciples and a great multitude of people. Disciples and investigators had come together "out of all Judea and Jerusalem, and from the sea coast of Tyre and Sidon." They came to hear and heed, to be healed of their diseases, to bask in the divine Presence, to be fed spiritually. It was a day of miracles. Those vexed with unclean spirits were healed; multitudes thronged near seeking merely to touch him; faith was in every heart; he responded to their pleas; and "virtue went out of him, and healed them all." The account seems to indicate that thousands were present. He healed them all! All were given health of body and enlightenment of soul. The kinds and severities of their afflictions are not named, simply that he healed them all.

On other occasions, the healing of lepers, the opening of blind eyes, the restoring of withered legs and arms, the raising of dead bodies from their biers and graves—all are recounted in detail. But the great event of this day was not the miracles, but the sermon; and so, in the setting of faith where all present were healed, in a setting where the Spirit of the Lord was present, Jesus began the Sermon on the Plain. These beginning Beatitudes then fell from his lips:

Blessed are they who shall believe on me; and again, more blessed are they who shall believe on your words, when ye shall testify that ye have seen me and that I am.

Yea, blessed are they who shall believe on your words, and come down into the depth of humility, and be baptized in my name; for they shall be visited with a fire and the Holy Ghost, and shall receive a remission of their sins.

Believe in Christ; believe in the words of the apostles; come down in the depths of humility; be baptized; receive the gift of the Holy Ghost; gain a remission of sins—all of which must happen if men are to be led into all truth—and then comes an understanding of all the Beatitudes. It was in such a setting—a setting of faith, of belief in the Son of God; a setting of miracles and healings and worship—that Jesus spoke the Sermon on the Mount both in Galilee and in the land Bountiful.

And he lifted up his eyes on his disciples, and said, Blessed are the poor; for theirs is the kingdom of God.

Yea, blessed are the poor in spirit, who come unto me; for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

We'll go to the poor, like our Captain of old, And visit the weary, the hungry, and cold; We'll cheer up their hearts with the news that he bore, And point them to Zion and life evermore. [^2]

"To the poor the gospel is preached." (Luke 7:22.) "Hath not God chosen the poor of this world rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom which he hath promised to them that love him?" (James 2:5.) The poor in spirit! If they come unto Christ, salvation is theirs; and it is so often easier for those who are not encumbered with the cares and burdens and riches of the world to cast off worldliness and set their hearts on the riches of eternity than it is for those who have an abundance of this world's goods.

Blessed are they who weep now; for they shall laugh.

And again, blessed are all they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.

Those who are bereft of loved ones, having learned the purposes of the Lord in the brief separation called death, shall be comforted. The peace that passeth understanding shall rest upon all those who have a knowledge of the plan of salvation. What greater comfort is there than to know that lost loved ones shall be returned to the family unit, and that all the saints shall reign in joy and peace forever? And further: When He comes again whose right it is to rule, he "shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain." (Rev. 21:4.) They that mourn shall be comforted!

Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth.

As things are now constituted, the meek do not inherit the earth; even He who said of himself, "I am meek and lowly in heart" (Matt. 11:29) had in fact no place of his own to lay his head. This world's goods were of little moment to him, and he had neither gold nor silver nor houses nor lands nor kingdoms. Peter was even directed to catch a fish in whose mouth a coin was lodged, that a levied tax might be paid for the two of them. The meek—those who are the God-fearing and the righteous—seldom hold title to much of that which appertains to this present world. But there will be a day when the Lord shall come to make up his jewels; there will be a day when Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the faithful of ancient Israel shall dwell again in old Canaan; and there will be also an eventual celestial day when "the poor and the meek of the earth shall inherit it." (D&C 88:17.)

Blessed are they who hunger now; for they shall be filled.

And blessed are all they that do hunger and thirst after righteousness; for they shall be filled with the Holy Ghost.

Filled with the Holy Ghost! As starving men crave a crust of bread, as choking men thirst for water, so do the righteous yearn for the Holy Ghost. The Holy Ghost is a Revelator; he is a Sanctifier; he reveals truth, and he cleanses human souls. He is the Spirit of Truth, and his baptism is one of fire; he burns dross and evil out of repentant souls as though by fire. The gift of the Holy Ghost is the greatest of all the gifts of God, as pertaining to this life; and those who enjoy that gift here and now, will inherit eternal life hereafter, which is the greatest of all the gifts of God in eternity.

Blessed are the merciful; for they shall obtain mercy.

Mercy is for the merciful. In that great day of restoration and judgment, when every man is rewarded according to the deeds done in the flesh, those who have manifest mercy to their fellowmen here will be treated mercifully by the Merciful One. Those who have acquired the godly attribute of mercy here shall have mercy restored unto them again in that bright day. [^3]

And blessed are all the pure in heart; for they shall see God.

How glorious is the voice we hear from him! Man may see his Maker! Did not Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob see the Lord? Did not Moses and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel see the God of Israel, under whose feet was a paved work of a sapphire stone? Was it not thus with Isaiah and Nephi, with Jacob and Moroni, and with mighty prophets without number in all ages? Is God a respecter of persons who will appear to one righteous person and withhold his face from another person of like spiritual stature? Is he not the same yesterday, today, and forever, dealing the same with all people, considering that all souls are equally precious in his sight? Did not Moses seek diligently to sanctify his people, while they were yet in the wilderness, that they might see the face of God and live? Does not the scripture say that the brother of Jared had such a perfect knowledge of God that he could not be kept from seeing within the veil? Why then should not the Lord Jesus invite all men to be as the prophets, to purify themselves so as to see the face of the Lord?

It is written: "Verily, thus saith the Lord: It shall come to pass that every soul who forsaketh his sins and cometh unto me, and calleth on my name, and obeyeth my voice, and keepeth my commandments, shall see my face and know that I am." (D&C 93:1.) How glorious the concept is! What a wondrous reality! The pure in heart—all the pure in heart—shall see God!

And blessed are all the peacemakers; for they shall be called the children of God.

The gospel of peace makes men children of God! Christ came to bring peace—peace on earth and good will to men. His gospel gives peace in this world and eternal life in the world to come. He is the Prince of peace. How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of them who preach the gospel of peace, who say unto Zion: Thy God reigneth! Let there be peace on earth, and let it begin with his saints. By this shall all men know the Lord's disciples: They are peacemakers; they seek to compose difficulties; they hate war and love peace; they invite all men to forsake evil, overcome the world, flee from avarice and greed, stand in holy places, and receive for themselves that peace which passeth understanding, that peace which comes only by the power of the Spirit.

And these are they who are adopted into the family of God. They become the sons and daughters of him whose we are. They are born again. They take upon themselves a new name, the name of their new Father, the name of Christ. Those who believe in him have power to become his sons and his daughters. Truly the peacemakers shall be called the children of God!

Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man's sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy; for behold your reward shall be great in heaven; for in the like manner did their fathers unto the prophets.

Blessed are all they that are persecuted for my name's sake; for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. And blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake. For ye shall have great joy, and be exceeding glad; for great shall be your reward in heaven; for so persecuted they the prophets which were before you.

How could it be said better? Jesus is speaking to the members of his earthly kingdom. In our day that kingdom is The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. It is composed of those who have taken upon them the name of Christ—covenanting in the waters of baptism to honor that name and to do nothing that will hold it up to contempt or ridicule. It is composed of those who have forsaken the world; who have crucified the old man of sin; who have become humble, meek, submissive, willing to conform to all that the Lord requires of them.

And, of course, the world loves its own and hates the saints. The world is the carnal society created by evil men; it is made up of those who are carnal and sensual and devilish. Of course the world persecutes the saints; the very thing that makes them saints is their enmity toward the things of the world. Let the ungodly and the evildoers reproach the Lord's people; let them cry transgression against his saints; let persecution rage against those who bear the Lord's name; let true believers be reviled and evilly spoken of—all for his name's sake. So be it!

Do they face trials of cruel mockings and scourgings? Are they stoned, sawn asunder, slain with the sword? Are they destitute, afflicted, tormented? Are they cast into dens of lions and furnaces of fire? Are they slain in gladiatorial arenas, lighted as torches on the walls of Rome, crucified head downward? Are they driven from Ohio to Missouri, and from Missouri to Illinois, and from Illinois to a desert wilderness—leaving their Prophet and Patriarch in martyrs' graves? No matter! They do not live for this life alone, and great shall be their reward in heaven.

Such are the Beatitudes—insofar as they have been preserved for us—those blessed statements about blessedness. As with all our Lord's sayings, they were unlike and superior to the Rabbinical beatitudes of the day. [^4] No doubt Jesus made many more beatific declarations either in this sermon or on other occasions. Such of his statements as "It is more blessed to give than to receive" would take on the nature of a true beatitude if it were phrased thus: "Blessed are all they who give all they have for the building up of the Lord's kingdom on earth, for they shall receive the riches of eternity in the world to come."

Quite properly we glory in the Beatitudes, as Jesus himself gloried in them. Edersheim says they are the New Testament counterpart of the Ten Commandments, and that they "present to us, not the observance of the Law written on stone, but the realization of that Law which, by the Spirit, is written on the fleshly tables of the heart." (Edersheim 1:529.) But as we glory in their greatness—and all the blessings thereunto appertaining—we must not overlook the fact that Jesus appended to them certain curses, curses for those who continue to live after the manner of the world and who do not walk in that course which leads to blessedness.

But woe unto you that are rich! for ye have received your consolation. Woe unto you that are full! for ye shall hunger. Woe unto you that laugh now! for ye shall mourn and weep. Woe unto you, when all men shall speak well of you! for so did their fathers to the false prophets.

If there is a blessing, there must needs be a cursing. There can be no light without darkness, no good without evil, no blessed heights of glory and honor unless there are also cursed depths of despair and damnation.

If the pure in heart shall see God, those whose hearts are impure shall be shut out of his presence. If the peacemakers shall be called the children of God, those who foment war shall be the children of Lucifer their father. If those who hunger and thirst after righteousness shall be filled with the Holy Ghost, those whose appetites are fed on carnal and evil food shall be filled with a worldly spirit that breeds evil deeds. And so on with reference to all of the Beatitudes. All things have their opposites, and there must needs be an opposition in all things.

Woe, then, unto the rich, Jesus says, the rich whose hearts are set on the things of this world; on the gold in the mountains and the cattle on the hills; on the merchant's goods and the spices coming in on a thousand ships—for they have already received their consolation, the consolation and rewards of this life, rather than the riches of eternity.

Woe unto those whose bellies are full; who have laid up provisions in granaries and storehouses; who have been concerned only with feeding the body—for their spirits, being unfed, shall hunger.

Woe unto those who laugh now, as they rejoice in the things of this world—for they shall mourn and weep in the day of judgment.

Woe unto those who are held in high esteem by worldly and evil people; who revel in the praise of ungodly men; who gain the plaudits of carnal people—for in such manner were the false prophets treated in days of old.

"Ye Are the Light of the World"

(Matthew 5:13-16; JST Matthew 5:15-18; 3 Nephi 12:13-16)

We repeat: The Sermon on the Mount, including the Beatitudes, was delivered to true believers; to the Twelve Apostles of the Lamb (it was their ordination sermon); to the saints of the Most High God; to members of the Church of Jesus Christ; to people who had been baptized and who were in process of seeking the riches of eternity. To them—after holding out the blessed and sanctified wonders of gospel obedience, as these are stated in the Beatitudes—Jesus now says: "Ye are the salt of the earth. . . . Ye are the light of the world." That is to say: 'Ye are the choicest and best people on earth; and ye must now be an example to all men, that others, seeing your good works, shall come unto me and glorify your Father who is in heaven.' Our Lord's words, insofar as they have been preserved for us, are:

Verily, verily, I say unto you, I give unto you to be the salt of the earth; but if the salt shall lose its savor, wherewith shall the earth be salted? the salt shall thenceforth be good for nothing but to be cast out, and to be trodden under foot of men.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, I give it unto you to be the light of the world; a city that is set on a hill cannot be hid.

Behold, do men light a candle and put it under a bushel? Nay, but on a candlestick; and it giveth light to all that are in the house.

Therefore, let your light so shine before this world, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father who is in heaven.

Salt and light, symbols of the saints: salt because it has a seasoning, purifying, preserving power; light because it manifests the good works and wise words of the true believers! The saints, as the salt of the earth, are set forth to season their fellowmen, to keep society free from corruption, to help their fellow beings become wholesome, pure, and acceptable before the Lord. [^5] The saints, as the light of the world, are to set an example of good works and charitable deeds, so they may say to all men, as does their Master, 'Follow thou me; and I will lead you in sure paths here and to heights above the clouds hereafter.' [^6]

That Christ is the Light of the World, no Christian doubts; what Jesus is now saying is that all his disciples should be even as he is. That upright people who keep the commandments are the salt of the earth, none question; but we might add that the Lord Jesus himself is the Salt of the Earth. The seasoning, sanctifying, edifying, preserving, uplifting influence of his gospel keeps all the obedient from corruption and decay and sorrow.

If the saints lose their seasoning power and no longer set examples of good works, they are thenceforth as other worldly people to whom salvation is denied. The saints are as a city set on a hill that is open to the view of all. Their good works lead others to the truth and to glorify their Creator, their Redeemer, and the Holy Spirit who testifies of the truth of all things.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Murder and anger. These words were spoken by the Lord to the Nephites after his resurrection, and hence after the law of Moses was fulfilled, a situation that did not prevail when he discoursed on the same subject near Capernaum in his Jewish Sermon on the Mount.
[^2] Profanity. As it was with the Nephites, so it is with all who have received the word of truth in the same measure to which it came to them: 'Except all such keep the gospel commandments, which are thus offered to them, they shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven.' Salvation for the dead is for those only who would have received and lived the gospel with all their hearts had the principles been offered to them while they dwelt in mortality.
[^3] Reconciliation between brethren.
[^4] Avoiding legal entanglements.
[^5] Adultery.
[^6] Casting sins away.
