Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1980)

Chapter 42

Jesus Discourses on the Law of Moses

The law is fulfilled that was given unto Moses. Behold, I am he that gave the law, and I am he who covenanted with my people Israel; therefore, the law in me is fulfilled, for I have come to fulfil the law; therefore it hath an end. Behold, I do not destroy the prophets, for as many as have not been fulfilled in me, verily I say unto you, shall all be fulfilled. And because I said unto you that old things have passed away, I do not destroy that which hath been spoken concerning things which are to come. For behold, the covenant which I have made with my people is not all fulfilled; but the law which was given unto Moses hath an end in me. Behold, I am the law, and the light. Look unto me, and endure to the end, and ye shall live; for unto him that endureth to the end will I give eternal life. Behold, I have given unto you the commandments; therefore keep my commandments. And this is the law and the prophets, for they truly testified of me. (3 Ne. 15:4-10.) [^1]

Jesus Fulfills and Honors the Law

(Matthew 5:17-20; JST Matthew 5:19-21; 3 Nephi 12:18-20, 46-47)

Jesus has now spoken the Beatitudes; he is about to go forward in his glorious mountain sermon with some very plain statements about the law of Moses. A sweet spirit has filled our souls as we have heard and felt the sublime truths given in the Beatitudes. We cannot, however, avoid contrasting that which occurred on the Mount of Beatitudes with the heavenly manifestations displayed on Mount Sinai when the law itself was given.

Jesus as Jehovah spoke to Moses amid the fires and thunders and quakings of Sinai; smoke ascended as from a furnace; all Israel trembled at the display; and the Lord, in majesty, with a finger of fire, wrote his holy law for that man whom he had chosen to lead his people. Below were the camps of Israel, with their lowing cattle and bleating sheep, and with all the confusion of moving multitudes.

The law then given was a law of eternal verities—first, the gospel itself, which the people rejected, and, later, the lesser law; a law, however, that changed the course of history forever; a law that revealed Jehovah to his people and commanded them—at sword's point, as it were—to worship him or be damned. The crescendo of sounding trumpets proclaimed: 'Thou shalt not worship false gods, or violate the Sabbath, or commit adultery, or kill, or do any wickedness.' It set forth, as illustrated in Exodus 21 and 22, the minutia and detail and strictness and severity of the divine will where his slave-like people were concerned. For instance: "He that curseth his father, or his mother, shall surely be put to death. . . . Thou shalt give life for life, Eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot, Burning for burning, wound for wound, stripe for stripe. . . . If an ox gore a man or a woman, that they die: then the ox shall be surely stoned, and his flesh shall not be eaten; but the owner of the ox shall be quit. But if the ox were wont to push with his horn in time past, and it hath been testified to his owner, and he hath not kept him in, but that he hath killed a man or a woman; the ox shall be stoned, and his owner also shall be put to death." And so on and so on and so on.

Jehovah as Jesus spoke to the Twelve and to the multitude in the calm serenity of a summer morning, on a grassy plateau on the Mount of Beatitudes. Below them, in silver splendor, lay the rippling waters of the Sea of Galilee; all was calm; a spirit of peace and quietude overshadowed the worshipful throng. That which Jesus then spoke was not written with burnished swords of steel, but came forth as the gentle breeze of a cool and pleasant evening. There was no thunderous "Thou shalt not," only a soft spoken plea, "Here is the way; walk ye in it." It was a new day, a new order, a new way, a new gospel; the patterns of the future were being formed; from henceforth, through all generations, the Messiah and his disciples would teach correct principles and let all who heard govern themselves. Such is the perfect gospel standard.

And so now—as the Sermon on the Mount continues—Jesus, leaving the sweet bliss and serene blessedness of the Beatitudes, turns their thoughts to the harsh realities of the law of Moses; to the yoke that hung heavily on their bowed heads and aching shoulders; to these scrupulosities and performances by which they were bound. This yoke, with all its burdensome rituals and restrictions, was about to be removed by their Redeemer and Deliverer. The set time for him to fulfill the law and make an end to all its curtailing provisions was not far distant. His chosen Twelve in particular, and all his newly won disciples in general, must condition their minds to reject the old and receive the new, to turn their hearts from Moses, who bore record of the Messiah, to Jesus, who was the Messiah.

"Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets," Jesus said. For nearly fifteen hundred years all the faithful in Israel—and all the souls they had won from their Gentile neighbors and ofttimes overlords—had bowed their backs and harnessed their strength as they struggled to keep the law of Moses the man of God. For all these years the law and the prophets had testified of a coming Messiah; the performances of the law were types and shadows of his ministry and mission; the words of the prophets were inspired utterances that bore the same witness. Now the Messiah had come, and soon he would—according to the promises—atone for the sins of the world and thus fulfill the law.

Nothing was to be lost; no act of the past would be shunted aside or deemed useless. The law had been the most glorious system of worship on earth during the period of its ascendancy. But now it was to be replaced; the schoolmaster's work was done, and the students of righteousness, yet in the elementary grades, were about to enter the gospel university where the fulness of revealed truth awaited their study.

"I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill," Jesus continued. "For verily I say unto you, Heaven and earth must pass away, but one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, until all be fulfilled."

Even his disciples must continue to keep the law for the present. Sacrifices were still the order of the day. And he, with his disciples, would yet keep that final Passover feast when the sacrament of the Lord's Supper would be instituted; together they would then eat the paschal lamb, in similitude of the sacrifice of the Lamb of God; and they would do it during the last moments of the law's legal continuance; they would do it while the true Lamb of God was en route to Golgotha to be sacrificed. But for now, though true believers were beginning to receive the higher principles of the higher law, the law itself was still in force.

"Whosoever, therefore, shall break one of these least commandments, and shall teach men so to do, he shall in no wise be saved in the kingdom of heaven; but whosoever shall do and teach these commandments of the law until it be fulfilled, the same shall be called great, and shall be saved in the kingdom of heaven."

Then came this sobering indictment against their Jewish leaders: "For I say unto you, That except your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees, ye, shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven." What an awesome responsibility is assumed by self-styled ministers who teach the traditions of their fathers rather than the pure principles of revealed religion, and who thereby teach people to break "one of these least commandments," as it were!

When Jesus gave the Sermon in Bountiful to the Nephites, the law had been fulfilled. Gethsemane and the cross were past; the blood of the last authorized paschal lamb had been spilt in similitude of his eternal sacrifice; sacrifices by the shedding of blood were no longer required or accepted. "For verily I say unto you, one jot nor one tittle hath not passed away from the law," Jesus then said, "but in me it hath all been fulfilled."

And behold, I have given you the law and the commandments of my Father, that ye shall believe in me, and that ye shall repent of your sins, and come unto me with a broken heart and a contrite spirit. Behold, ye have the commandments before you, and the law is fulfilled.

Therefore come unto me and be ye saved; for verily I say unto you, that except ye shall keep my commandments, which I have commanded you at this time, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven. . . .

Therefore those things which were of old time, which were under the law, in me are all fulfilled.

Old things are done away, and all things have become new. [^2]

He Contrasts the Law of Moses and the Law of Christ

(Matthew 5:21-47; JST Matthew 5:23-26, 29, 31-34, 42-43, 50; 3 Nephi 12:21-37, 48; Luke 6:27-30, 32-35; 12:58-59; JST Luke 6:27-30, 33)

Jesus now sets a pattern for all other preachers of righteousness. He illustrates his profound and sobering concept relative to the law of Moses, and he states additional gospel concepts that grow out of his illustrations. These all are twelve in number.

Moses' law—more properly Jehovah's law given through Moses—forbade murder. "Thou shalt not kill; and whosoever shall kill, shall be in danger of the judgment of God." The same prohibition applies under the gospel law, but this higher law, in addition, raises a higher standard. It strikes at the cause of murder, which is anger. The man whose fired bullet misses its human target is as guilty as the marksman whose bullet brings death to the intended victim. It is the feeling one has in his heart that counts, not the eventuality that occurs. "Whosoever hateth his brother is a murderer: and ye know that no murderer hath eternal life abiding in him." (1 Jn. 3:15.) And so Jesus says: "But I say unto you that whosoever is angry with his brother, shall be in danger of his judgment."

Let us envision at this point, if we may, what Jesus is doing here and in all the illustrations that follow. He is saying: 'Jehovah of old—through Moses—said such and such; but now I say unto you something more or something different.' He is placing himself on a par with the God of Israel; he is saying: 'God Almighty did or said thus and so, but I, Jesus, add to, amend, alter, delete from, and change the word of God.' It is blasphemy, pure and simple for a mortal so to speak; but, no, in this case it is an affirmation of Messiahship, and Jesus is guiltless in his affirmations, for he is Jehovah; and if Jehovah edits Jehovah, so be it—who has a better right!

Further: "Whosoever shall say to his brother, Raca, or Rabcah, shall be in danger of the council; and whosoever shall say to his brother, Thou fool, shall be in danger of hellfire." That is, profane and vulgar epithets and expressions—for such, in the Jewish culture, were the nature of the words here recited—when hurled at our fellowmen lead to damnation. The fires of Gehenna burn in the hearts of those whose minds think and speak evilly against their brethren. Among the abominations that the Lord hates is listed "an heart that deviseth wicked imaginations." (Prov. 6:16-19.) Men curse themselves when they think and speak ill of their brethren. Profane, vulgar, contemptuous, and unholy expressions degrade their author more than they taint the soul of the hearer.

We must do all in our power to assuage the hurt feelings of our brethren if we ourselves are to stand blameless before the Lord. "If ye shall come unto me, or shall desire to come unto me," Jesus says, "or if thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there rememberest that thy brother hath aught against thee, Leave thou thy gift before the altar, and go thy way unto thy brother, and first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift." That is, if we choose to come unto Christ and to be one with him in his fold; if we bring our gifts to his holy altar, that our wealth and means may be used to further his work on earth; and if we then remember that others have aught against us, our obligation, more important than the gifts we bestow, is to heal the wounded feelings of our brethren. Jesus speaks here not of our anger or ill feeling toward others, but of their ill feelings, for whatever cause, against us. No matter that we are the one who has been wronged. The gospel standard calls for us to search out those whose anger is kindled against us and to do all in our power to douse the fires of hate and animosity. "Go thy way unto thy brother, and first be reconciled to thy brother," he said to the Nephites, "and then come unto me with full purpose of heart, and I will receive you."

With particular reference to the Twelve and others engaged in missionary work, in ministerial service, and in building up the kingdom, Jesus said: "Agree with thine adversary quickly, whiles thou art in the way with him; lest at any time the adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the officer, and thou be cast into prison. Verily I say unto thee, Thou shalt by no means come out thence, till thou hast paid the uttermost farthing." It was more important, in the social and political circumstances then prevailing, for the Lord's servants to suffer legal wrongs than that their ministries be hindered or halted by legal processes.

Mosaic fiat decreed: "Thou shalt not commit adultery." Jesus, who himself had given the decree to "them of old time," now says: "But I say unto you, That whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her hath committed adultery with her already in his heart. His is now a higher law; it is not the immoral act alone that the gospel condemns—it is also the lewd and lustful desires that lead to its commission. "He that looketh on a woman to lust after her, or if any shall commit adultery in their hearts, they shall not have the Spirit, but shall deny the faith and shall fear." (D&C 63:16.)

Jesus has spoken of sins of the heart and of the mind and of the mouth. Anger is as murder; profanity leads to hell; ill feelings against our brethren canker the soul; lewdness, evil thoughts—adultery committed in the heart—are as the very act itself. Gospel standards govern what is in the hearts of men as well as the deeds they do. In this setting, he then says:

Behold, I give unto you a commandment, that ye suffer none of these things to enter into your heart;

For it is better that ye should deny yourselves of these things, wherein ye will take up your cross, than that ye should be cast into hell.

Based on this principle, the Master Teacher uses two parabolic illustrations that dramatize the severity—even harshness—of action that should be taken to rid ourselves of the sins involved and of all sin. "Wherefore," that is, in the light of the principles just enunciated, "if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out and cast it from thee; for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into hell. Or if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off and cast it from thee; for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into hell." These statements about the eye and the hand were not included in the recorded account of the Sermon in Bountiful.

The severity of such a course—plucking out an eye or severing a hand—staggers reality. Scarcely is there an affliction calling for such a drastic operation. No suffering invalid parts with an eye or a hand unless life itself is at stake. And so, having selected with care the most drastic of all remedies, Jesus reveals his true meaning:

And now this I speak, a parable concerning your sins; wherefore, cast them from you, that ye may not be hewn down and cast into the fire.

Have there ever been such teachings as this to show the need to cast away our sins, to cast them away lest we die spiritually, to cast them away lest our eternal souls be themselves cast into fire?

Under the law of Moses, divorce came easily; but recently freed from Egyptian slavery, the chosen race had yet to attain the social, cultural, and spiritual stability that exalts marriage to its proper place in the eternal scheme of things. Men were empowered to divorce their wives for any unseemly thing. "It hath been said, Whosoever shall put away his wife, let him give her a writing of divorcement."

No such low and base standard is acceptable under gospel law. Thus Jesus summarized his perfect marriage order by saying: "But I say unto you, That whosoever shall put away his wife, saving for the cause of fornication, causeth her to commit adultery: and whosoever shall marry her that is divorced committeth adultery." Divorce is totally foreign to celestial standards, a verity that Jesus will one day expound in more detail to the people of Jewry. For now, as far as the record reveals, he merely specifies the high law that his people should live, but that is beyond our capability even today. If husbands and wives lived the law as the Lord would have them live it, they would neither do nor say the things that would even permit the fleeting thought of divorce to enter the mind of their eternal companions. Though we today have the gospel, we have yet to grow into that high state of marital association where marrying a divorced person constitutes adultery. The Lord has not yet given us the high standard he here named as that which ultimately will replace the Mosaic practice of writing a bill of divorcement.

Here again we come to a standard of conduct that—geared to the needs of various cultures and conditions—has varied, with divine approval, from one age to the next. Abraham and the ancients, who lived by gospel standards, were permitted to take oaths—to swear in the Lord's name, thus certifying that they would act or speak in a named way. Such a certification guaranteed their words because the oath made God their partner, and God cannot lie or fail. The words they then spoke became the Lord's words and were accepted as true; and the deeds they vowed by an oath to do became the Lord's performances, and they must be done at the peril of one's life, for God has all power and he cannot fail in any particular to do that which he is bound to do.

Today it is the practice among Christian people to swear with an oath to tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth in certain judicial proceedings. Under the Mosaic law the taking of oaths was so common and covered such a variety of circumstances that, in practice, little verity attended statements that were not made with an oath. "If a man vow a vow unto the Lord, or swear an oath to bind his soul with a bond; he shall not break his word, he shall do according to all that proceedeth out of his mouth." (Num. 30:2.) And so Jesus, rejecting the old and proclaiming the new, said: "And again it is written, thou shalt not forswear thyself, but shalt perform unto the Lord thine oaths; But I say unto you, Swear not at all; neither by heaven; for it is God's throne: Nor by the earth; for it is his footstool: neither by Jerusalem; for it is the city of the great King. Neither shalt thou swear by thy head, because thou canst not make one hair white or black. But let your communication be Yea, yea; Nay, nay; for whatsoever cometh of more than these is evil."

Under the perfect law of Christ every man's word is his bond, and all spoken statements are as true as though an oath attended each spoken word.

Retaliation—with the inevitable bitterness and smallness of soul that attends it—cannot do other than keep hatred alive in the souls of men. If a man gouge out the eye of his neighbor, what benefit accrues to the wounded person if he retaliate by gouging out the eye of the offender? Has he enlarged his own soul, or has he permitted it to shrivel to the same smallness as the soul of his attacker? "Ye have heard that it hath been said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth," Jesus said, using words, found in the law of Moses, that summarized both the letter and the spirit of those ancient rules. "But I say unto you, That ye resist not evil," he continued, "but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also." Luke preserves for us the more complete account and meaning of Jesus' saying on this point: "And unto him who smiteth thee on the cheek, offer also the other; or, in other words, it is better to offer the other, than to revile again. And him who taketh away thy cloak, forbid not to take thy coat also. For it is better that thou suffer thine enemy to take these things, than to contend with him. Verily I say unto you, Your heavenly Father who seeth in secret, shall bring that wicked one into judgment."

"Contention leads to bitterness and smallness of soul; persons who contend with each other shrivel up spiritually and are in danger of losing their salvation. So important is it to avoid this evil that Jesus expects his saints to suffer oppression and wrong rather than lose their inner peace and serenity through contention. 'He that hath the spirit of contention is not of me,' he told the Nephites, 'but is of the devil, who is the father of contention, and he stirreth up the hearts of men to contend with anger, one with another. (3 Ne. 11:29.)' " (Commentary 1:228.)

To his apostles and ministers—those whose talents and strength must be devoted, without hindrance, to the preaching of the gospel and the building up of the kingdom—Jesus had this special counsel: "And if any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him have it; and if he sue thee again, let him have thy cloak also. And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him a mile; and whosoever shall compel thee to go with him twain, thou shalt go with him twain. Give to him that asketh of thee, and from him that would borrow of thee turn not thou away."

Nothing is so important as the spread of truth and the establishment of the cause of righteousness. The petty legal processes of that day must not be permitted to impede the setting up of the new kingdom.

Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love thy neighbour, and hate thine enemy.

But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you and persecute you;

That ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven: for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust.

For if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye? do not even the publicans the same?

And if ye salute your brethren only, what do ye more than others? do not even the publicans so?

Of olden time, and in ages past, Israel's enemies had been God's enemies, and the Gentile nations were kept away at sword's point; had it not been so, the chosen people would have been swallowed up by the world. Their world was one of force and violence in which whole nations were forced to believe what their rulers decreed or be destroyed from off the face of the earth. This tight grip on the minds of men has now been loosened, and now the gospel is to go to the world—all men everywhere are to hear the word. Israel must love the Gentiles, for they are to be adopted into the family of Jehovah.

All men will be judged by what is in their own hearts. If their souls are full of hatred and cursings, such characteristics shall be restored to them in the resurrection. Loving one's enemies and blessing one's cursers perfects the soul. Such perfection is the object of the gospel, and of it Jesus now chooses to speak.

As a climax to all his sayings contrasting the old Mosaic order with the new gospel law, and by way of commandment to all those who would forsake the old and cleave unto the new, Jesus proclaimed to the Jews:

Ye are therefore commanded to be perfect, even as your Father who is in heaven is perfect.

To his Nephite brethren—to whom he spoke after his resurrection, after he had risen in immortal glory with a celestial body, after he had received all power in heaven and on earth—his proclamation was couched in these words:

Therefore I would that ye should be perfect even as I, or your Father who is in heaven is perfect.

Perfection—a relative degree of perfection in this life, and eternal perfection, the kind possessed by the Father, the life to come—these are gained by full obedience to the fulness of gospel law. This is the doctrine of exaltation, the doctrine that as God now is, man may become; this is the doctrine that mortals have power to become like Deity in power, might, and dominion; in wisdom, knowledge, and truth; in love, charity, mercy, integrity, and in all holy attributes. "Ye shall be even as I am, and I am even as the Father; and the Father and I are one," Jesus said to certain faithful Nephite disciples. (3 Ne. 28:10.)

If the newly called saints overcome anger; if they are reconciled with their brethren; if they rise above lewd and lascivious thoughts and commit no adultery in their hearts; if they cast away their sins, as though severing an offending hand; if their every spoken word is true as though sworn with an oath; if they do not retaliate when others offend them; if they turn the other cheek and resist not evil impositions; if they love their enemies, bless those who curse them, and pray for those who despitefully use them and persecute them—if they do all these things, they will become perfect even as their Eternal Father is perfect. And perfection comes not by the law of Moses, but by the gospel. "If therefore perfection were by the Levitical priesthood, (for under it the people received the law,) what further need was there that another priest should rise after the order of Melchisedec, and not be called after the order of Aaron?" (Heb. 7:11), Paul asks. But—thanks be to God—"another priest," Jesus the Son of God, arose; and ministering in all the glory of the gospel, he is now fulfilling the old law and inviting men to believe and obey the new law.

At this point he is somewhat less than halfway through the Sermon on the Mount. Now he turns from contrasting the old and the new to an out-and-out proclamation of new and glorious standards.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "Blessed are the poor who are pure in heart, whose hearts are broken, and whose spirits are contrite, for they shall see the kingdom of God coming in power and great glory unto their deliverance; for the fatness of the earth shall be theirs. For behold, the Lord shall come, and his recompense shall be with him, and he shall reward every man, and the poor shall rejoice; And their generations shall inherit the earth from generation to generation, forever and ever." (D&C 56:18-20.)
[^2] This revelation also says: "I, the Lord, will forgive whom I will forgive, but of you it is required to forgive all men. And ye ought to say in your hearts—let God judge between me and thee, and reward thee according to thy deeds."
