Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1980)

Chapter 43

Jesus Discourses on Gospel Standards

Good and upright is the Lord: therefore will he teach sinners in the way. The meek will he guide in judgment: and the meek will he teach his way. And all the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth unto such as keep his covenant and his testimonies. (Ps. 25:8-10.)

Jesus Saith: ‘Care for the Poor’

(3 Nephi 13:1-4; Matthew 6:1-4; JST Matthew 6:1, 3)

A mighty sermon is in progress; Jesus is speaking by the power of the Holy Ghost; we are hearing wondrous words—words of light and truth and revelation. Our minds are open, our hearts are receptive, and our souls are afire with the spirit of everlasting life that attends each spoken thought. He is now counseling us to walk as becometh saints and to do the things that his disciples in all ages have always done. His next subsermon is: 'Care for the worthy poor; give alms in righteousness; impart of your substance to those in need; give generously because you love the Lord and your fellowman.'

"Verily, verily, I say that I would that ye should do alms unto the poor," he says. It is right; it is good; it is the will of the Master—we should care for the worthy poor among us. As long as greed and selfishness find place among us mortals, there will also be poor among us. And it is the will of the Lord that the poor among his people receive their just wants and needs. "It is my purpose to provide for my saints," he says, "for all things are mine. But it must needs be done in mine own way; and behold this is the way that I, the Lord, have decreed to provide for my saints, that the poor shall be exalted, in that the rich are made low. For the earth is full, and there is enough and to spare. . . . Therefore, if any man shall take of the abundance which I have made, and impart not his portion, according to the law of my gospel, unto the poor and the needy, he shall, with the wicked, lift up his eyes in hell, being in torment." (D&C 104:15-18.) [^1]

"But take heed that ye do not your alms before men to be seen of them; otherwise ye have no reward of your Father who is in heaven." Poverty or wealth are too often the happenstance of climate or geography or war. Some men are born to wealth, others to slavery. Today's rich may be tomorrow's paupers. And alms should not be given to exalt the giver, but to save the recipient. "Therefore when thou doest thine alms, do not sound a trumpet before thee, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, that they may have glory of men. Verily I say unto you, They have their reward. But when thou doest alms, let it be unto thee as thy left hand not knowing what thy right hand doeth; That thine alms may be in secret: and thy Father which seeth in secret himself shall reward thee openly."

Jesus Teaches Men How to Pray

(Matthew 6:5-15; JST Matthew 6:7, 10-14, 16; 3 Nephi 13:5-15; Mark 11:25-26; Luke 11:1-8; JST Luke 11:4-5)

Prayer and works of charity go hand in hand. Amulek, in a moving sermon, calls upon men to pray unto the Lord for temporal and spiritual blessings; to pray in secret and in public; to pray vocally and in their hearts. Then he says: "After ye have done all these things, if ye turn away the needy, and the naked, and visit not the sick and afflicted, and impart of your substance, if ye have, to those who stand in need—I say unto you, if ye do not any of these things, behold, your prayer is vain, and availeth you nothing, and ye are as hypocrites who do deny the faith. Therefore, if ye do not remember to be charitable, ye are as dross, which the refiners do cast out." (Alma 34:17-29.)

Jesus, in his Sermon on the Mount, turns from almsgiving to prayer. Again, it is the will of the Lord that his people should pray. They are to pray to the Father, in the name of the Son, by the power of the Spirit; they are to thank the Lord for all they have received and to importune before his throne for all that in wisdom should be theirs. Jesus does not now give them the whole law of prayer, but he does chart for them a course which, if pursued, will save them from the prayer failures of the Pharisees and lead them to an eventual full understanding of the true order of prayer.

"And when thou prayest, thou shalt not be as the hypocrites are: for they love to pray standing in the synagogues and in the corners of the streets, that they may be seen of men. Verily I say unto you, They have their reward." Devout Jews, at set times, faced Jerusalem, covered their heads, cast their eyes downward, and ostentatiously went through the ritual of prayer. If the hour of prayer found them in the streets, so much the better, for all men would see their devoutness! To attract attention by saying one's own prayers aloud in the synagogue was not uncommon. Such were among the practices of the day.

"But thou"—who hast come into the fold of Christ, and who thereby know better than to follow these mocking imitations of true prayer—"when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret; and thy Father which seeth in secret shall reward thee openly." And further: "When ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the hypocrites do; for they think that they shall be heard for their much speaking." The repetitious chants, the thoughtless "Hail Mary's," and the memorized "Our Father's" of modern Catholicism, the repeated mouthings of the poetic phrases of the prayer book—vain repetitions!—these are included in what Jesus here condemns. Prayers that ascend beyond the ceiling, to be heard before the Throne in the sidereal heavens, must be uttered "with all the energy of heart," as Mormon's colloquial expression puts it. (Moro. 7:48.)

"Be not ye therefore like unto them: for your Father knoweth what things ye have need of, before ye ask him." How then shall the saints pray? "After this manner therefore pray ye," Jesus says:

Our Father who art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name.

Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done on earth, as it is done in heaven.

Give us this day, our daily bread.

And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us.

And suffer us not to be led into temptation, but deliver us from evil.

For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, forever and ever, Amen.

Jesus did not say: 'This is the prayer to use; memorize it; say it by rote,' but he gave a pattern, a model, a type. 'Pray after this manner; in such simple words as these; in this general way; without ostentation. Call upon your Eternal Father, and ask him for your needs, both great and small.' And how wondrous are the words he used!

Our Father who art in heaven. God is our Father, the father of our spirits; we are his children, his offspring, literally. We lived in his presence, dwelt in his courts, and have seen his face. We were as well acquainted with him then as we are with our mortal fathers now. He is a holy man, has a body of flesh and bones, and dwells in a heavenly abode. When we approach his throne in prayer, we think—not alone that he is the Almighty, by whose word the earth, the sidereal heavens, and the universe came into being, but that he is a gracious and loving Father whose chief interest and concern is his family, and that he wants all his children to love and serve him and to become like him. Perfect prayer manifests our personal relationship to him who hears and answers the petitions of the faithful.

Hallowed be thy name. 'We approach thee in awe—reverentially—in the spirit of worship and thanksgiving, and we praise thy holy name. Thou art glorious beyond anything we can envision; all that is good we ascribe unto thee, and we desire to consecrate our life and being unto thee, for thou hast made us, and we are thine.'

Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done on earth, as it is in heaven. Thy kingdom: the earthly kingdom of God which is the Church. Thy kingdom: the millennial kingdom, the kingdom of heaven, which shall be when there is a new heaven and a new earth whereon dwelleth righteousness. These are the kingdoms for which we pray. After Jesus' resurrection and before his ascension, the newly ordained apostles, who by that time will be seasoned and tempered as few men have ever been, will ask him: "Lord, wilt thou at this time restore again the kingdom to Israel?" (Acts 1:6.) And even in our day, the faithful continue to pray: "May the kingdom of God go forth, that the kingdom of heaven may come, that thou, O God, mayest be glorified in heaven so on earth, that thine enemies may be subdued; for thine is the honor, power and glory, forever and ever." (D&C 65:6.)

'Thy kingdom come! Let it be, O Lord, for in that glorious millennial day; in that day when Zion shall cover the earth, when all Israel shall be gathered home from their long dispersion, when every corruptible thing shall have been consumed, when the vineyard shall have been burned and few men left—then shall thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. May we, O Lord, prepare for that day by living as though it were here.'

Give us this day our daily bread. 'But our concerns are not alone for the promised day of triumph and glory when thy people shall prevail in all the earth. We need food, clothing, and shelter, health of body, and strength of mind.' Our daily wants must be supplied, and he who notes the sparrow's fall will also provide manna for his people from day to day. He calls upon us to sow and reap and harvest and bake and eat. The concerns of daily life, however trivial, are the concerns of omnipotence, and we are to rely upon him in faith for all things.

And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us. Or, as it is otherwise rendered—less perfectly, we feel—"Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors"; or, yet again: "Forgive us our sins; for we also forgive every one that is indebted to us." "For if ye forgive men their trespasses, who trespass against you, your heavenly Father will also forgive you; but if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your heavenly Father forgive you your trespasses." When he judges whose judgment is just, he will, as it is written, "recompense unto every man according to his work, and measure to every man according to the measure which he has measured to his fellow man." (D&C 1:10.) We judge ourselves; forgive and be forgiven; sow mercy and reap the same, for every seed brings forth after his own kind. "Ye ought to forgive one another; for he that forgiveth not his brother his trespasses standeth condemned before the Lord; for there remaineth in him the greater sin." (D&C 64:1-14.) [^2]

And suffer us not to be led into temptation, but deliver us from evil. "Lead us not into temptation." The Lord does not lead us into temptation, except in the sense that he has placed us here in a probationary estate where temptation is the order of the day. We are here in mortality to be tried and tested; to see if we will keep the commandments; to overcome the world. We are here to learn how to bridle our passions and control every lustful and evil desire. None of us want to be tested beyond our capacity to resist; we want to be delivered from evil, to flee from the presence of sin, and to go where goodness and righteousness are. The trials of life are difficult enough without any of us placing ourselves in a position where sin and evil are made attractive. Foolish indeed is that man who, intending to remain morally clean, yet exposes his mind to pornographic things that in their nature invite lustful thoughts and deeds into his life.

For thine is the kingdom, and the power and the glory, forever and ever. All things are the Lord's. His is the kingdom—both the earthly kingdom, which is the Church, and that glorious realm of celestial rest prepared for his saints. His is the power—nothing is too hard for the Lord; he is omnipotent; he it is who will change this earth into a heaven, and he it is who will raise lowly mortals to that eternal exaltation which makes of man a god. His is the glory—that is, the dominion, the exaltation, and the endless kingdoms; and also, the light and truth and infinite wisdom and knowledge he possesses.

How glorious it is to address such a holy and exalted person by the greatest of all titles, Father, and to be privileged to have audience with him on our own invitation, anytime we pray in faith with all the strength and energy of our souls!

The Lord's Prayer, as we have come to call these expressive words, spoken by Jesus as part of the Sermon on the Mount (as we are aware from Matthew and 3 Nephi) was also recorded by Luke—apparently, however, as given by Jesus on a different occasion. To his account, Luke appends these instructive words of Jesus: "And he said unto them, Your heavenly Father will not fail to give unto you whatsoever ye ask of him. And he spake a parable, saying, Which of you shall have a friend, and shall go unto him at midnight, and say unto him, Friend, lend me three loaves; For a friend of mine has come to me in his journey, and I have nothing to set before him; And he from within shall answer and say, Trouble me not: the door is now shut, and my children are with me in bed; I cannot rise and give thee. I say unto you, Though he will not rise and give him because he is his friend, yet because of his importunity, he will rise and give him as many as he needeth."

"Lay Up for Yourselves Treasures in Heaven"

(Matthew 6:16-24; JST Matthew 6:22; Luke 11:33-36; 12:33-34; JST Luke 11:37; 12:36; 3 Nephi 13:16-24)

Jesus now says a few well-chosen words about fasting, about laying up treasures in heaven, and about seeking spiritual light.

In all ages the Lord has called upon his people to fast and pray and seek him with all their strength and power. Fasting—the abstaining from food and drink for a designated period—gives a man a sense of his utter dependence upon the Lord so that he is in a better frame of mind to get in tune with the Spirit. Moses and Jesus both fasted for forty days as they sought that oneness with the Father out of which great spiritual strength comes. As with almost all else, however, fasting among the Jews no longer served its true purpose; it had become degenerate, self-serving, and ostentatious. Jesus expected his new followers to fast—not as the Pharisees, but in a true spirit of worship and self-effacement.

"When ye fast," he said, thus endorsing fasting as such, and thus counseling his disciples that they should so do, "be not, as the hypocrites, of a sad countenance: for they disfigure their faces, that they may appear unto men to fast. Verily I say unto you, They have their reward." Their fathers—rebellious in spirit, reproachful of prophetic counsel—had fasted "for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedness," and to make—ostentatiously—their voice "heard on high." (Isa. 58:1-4.) "But thou, when thou fastest," Jesus instructed, "anoint thine head, and wash thy face; That thou appear not unto men to fast, but unto the Father which is in secret: and thy Father, which seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly."

"While yet on earth men may lay up treasures in heaven. These treasures, earned here and now in mortality, are in effect deposited to our eternal bank account in heaven where eventually they will be reinherited again in immortality. Treasures in heaven are the character, perfections, and attributes which men acquire by obedience to law. Thus, those who gain such attributes of godliness as knowledge, faith, justice, judgment, mercy, and truth, will find these same attributes restored to them again in immortality. 'Whatever principle of intelligence we attain unto in this life, it will rise with us in the resurrection.' (D&C 130:18.) The greatest treasure it is possible to inherit in heaven consists in gaining the continuation of the family unit in the highest heaven of the celestial world." (Commentary 1:239-40; Alma 41:13-15; D&C 130:18.)

Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal:

But lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where thieves do not break through and steal:

For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.

Christ is the light; the gospel is the light; the plan of salvation is the light; "that which is of God is light; and he that receiveth light, and continueth in God, receiveth more light; and that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day." As the light of the sun enters the body through our natural eyes, so the light of heaven—the light of the Spirit which illuminates our souls—enters through our spiritual eyes. "The light of the body is the eye," Jesus says; "if therefore thine eye be single to the glory of God, thy whole body shall be full of light."

"But if thine eye be evil"—if we choose darkness rather than light—"And that which doth not edify is not of God, and is darkness" (D&C 50:23-24)—"thy whole body shall be full of darkness. If therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness!"

"How great is that darkness!" If the saints of God cease to serve with an eye single to the glory of God; if their spiritual eyes are dimmed by sin; if their eyes, being evil, admit carnality and heresy and false doctrine into their souls; if the light that once was theirs turns to darkness, "how great is that darkness!"

Later, in Judea, teaching there what the Galileans have already heard, Jesus will express kindred concepts in these words:

No man, when he hath lighted a candle, putteth it in a secret place, neither under a bushel, but on a candlestick, that they which come in may see the light.

"A light that is hidden, whose guiding rays are covered by a bushel, is of no value to one stumbling in darkness. Similarly, the true saints must let the gospel light shine forth from them to all men, lest the saints, [like] the hidden candle, fail to fulfill their purpose in life. Jesus in effect is saying: 'No man accepts the gospel and then buries its light by continuing to walk in darkness; rather, he holds the light up before men so that they, emulating his good works, may also come to the Father.' " (Commentary 1:240.)

The light of the body is the eye: therefore when thine eye is single, thy whole body also is full of light; but when thine eye is evil, thy body also is full of darkness. Take heed therefore that the light which is in thee be not darkness. If thy whole body therefore be full of light, having no part dark, the whole shall be full of light, as when the bright shining of a candle doth give thee light.

"Through the natural eyes men see the light which guides them in their physical existence, through their spiritual eyes, the spiritual light which leads to eternal life. As long as the natural eyes are unimpaired, men can see and be guided by the light of day; and as long as the spiritual eyes are single to the glory of God—that is, as long as they are undimmed by sin and are focused solely on righteousness—men can view and understand the things of the Spirit. But if apostasy enters and the spiritual light turns to darkness, 'how great is that darkness!' " (Commentary 1:240.)

Also in Judea, in connection with one's treasure being where his heart is, Jesus will say:

Sell that ye have and give alms, provide not for yourselves bags which wax old, but rather provide a treasure in the heavens, that faileth not; where no thief approacheth, neither moth corrupteth.

Truly treasures in heaven are to be preferred to those stored in purses that wear out and from which earthly treasures will be lost!

No man can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and Mammon.

Light and darkness cannot dwell together. It cannot be both day and night at the same time; water cannot be both sweet and salty at the same hour. No man can serve God, who is the author of light and righteousness, while he is in the employ of Lucifer, who is the author of darkness and sin. Mammon is an Aramaic word for riches. 'Ye cannot serve God and love riches and worldliness at the same time.'

The Lord Supplies the Needs of His Twelve Ministers

(3 Nephi 13:25-34; Matthew 6:25-34; JST Matthew 6:25-30, 34, 36-39; Luke 12:22-32; JST Luke 12:26, 30-34)

Now Jesus turns to the Twelve. He has something to say specifically to them about their ministerial labors. They are to forsake worldly pursuits—their fishing boats, the customs house, their fields and vineyards, all temporal enterprises—and use all of their time, talents, and means for the building up of the earthly kingdom and the establishment of the cause of Christianity. Others also, the seventies among them, will tread a like path in due course. The Lord's missionaries and ministers engage in such important labors that no worldly pursuit can be permitted to interfere; nothing pertaining to this world can be allowed to dilute and divide the energy and strength of the Lord's servants.

Other members of the Church are expected—nay, obligated; it is a command; they must do it—to provide for their own. Work, industry, frugality—sowing, reaping, and eating our bread by the sweat of our faces—such is the royal order of life. From the beginning men have been commanded to labor in seed time and harvest and to lay up in store against times of winter and famine. Cain reaped in the fields and Abel tended his flocks; Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob had their flocks and herds, their fields and gardens and vineyards. This is a temporal world, and men who dwell thereon are appointed to deal with temporal concerns. The gospel law requires men to care for their own needs and those of their families. And, "if any provide not for his own, and specially for those of his own house, he hath denied the faith, and is worse than an infidel." (1 Tim. 5:8.)

But for selected ones who are called to spread the truth and minister for the salvation of their fellows, it is otherwise; they may be called to go forth without purse or scrip, to forsake houses and lands and orchards, to do whatever circumstances require, and to rely upon the Lord for food and drink and raiment and a place to lay their head—all to the end that the Lord's work may spread and be established among all men.

In the Nephite account we read that "Jesus . . . looked upon the twelve whom he had chosen, and said unto them: Remember the words which I have spoken. For behold, ye are they whom I have chosen to minister unto this people. Therefore I say unto you"—the command was to them, not to the whole congregation—"take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on."

In Matthew's account the instructions are more extended and express. To the Twelve who were with him in his personal ministry, Jesus said: "I say unto you, Go ye into the world, and care not for the world; for the world will hate you, and will persecute you, and will turn you out of their synagogues. Nevertheless, ye shall go forth from house to house, teaching the people; and I will go before you. And your heavenly Father will provide for you, whatsoever things ye need for food, what ye shall eat; and for raiment, what ye shall wear or put on. Therefore I say unto you, Take no thought for your life," and so on.

We hear now the eloquent reasoning of the Master Teacher. "Is not the life more than meat, and the body than raiment?" he asks. Shall we concern ourselves with life itself—the life of the body and the life of the soul—or merely with the food we eat and the rags or robes we chance to use as covering raiment? Then, using words that are eloquent in their simplicity, and drawing his illustrations from the beauties of nature that surround them, Jesus continues:

Behold the fowls of the air, for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns; yet your heavenly Father feedeth them. Are ye not much better than they? How much more will he not feed you?

Wherefore take no thought for these things, but keep my commandments wherewith I have commanded you.

For which of you by taking thought can add one cubit unto his stature?

And why take ye thought for raiment? Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin.

And yet I say unto you, that even Solomon, in all his glory, was not arrayed like one of these.

Therefore, if God so clothe the grass of the field which today is, and tomorrow is cast into the oven, how much more will he not provide for you, if ye are not of little faith?

Therefore take no thought, saying, What shall we eat? or, What shall we drink? or, Wherewithal shall we be clothed?

The leading servants and chief underlings of the kings of the earth dwell in palaces, command fortresses, and are waited upon by lesser servants. Robes and rich food and soft beds and lewd entertainment abound for them. Herod Antipas and his courtiers lived such a life. But not so with the great King. His disciples, dressed often in rags, eating the rough food of the poor, sleeping in guest chambers, or even with the beasts of burden when there was no room in the inn—his chief disciples, his apostles, were to travel and live as he himself did.

None but the Lord would dare call upon chosen followers to live such a life and pursue such a course, and none but he could assure them that their essential needs would be met. The contrast between the courtiers of earthly kings and the disciples of the Eternal King is dramatic. The gospel standard is high and soul developing. It is no wonder that the newly called and as yet untested apostles were troubled at the prospects of the future. For their comfort and assurance, Jesus said: "Why is it that ye murmur among yourselves, saying, We cannot obey thy words because ye have not all these things, and seek to excuse yourselves, saying that, After all these things do the Gentiles seek. Behold, I say unto you that your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things." Then came that great and wondrous declaration:

Wherefore, seek not the things of this world but seek ye first to build up the kingdom of God, and to establish his righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you.

It is common among us to quote the less perfect translation of this statement, which says, "Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness," rather than the inspired rendition, "Seek ye first to build up the kingdom of God, and to establish his righteousness." Both statements are true; both are profound; both present a standard and a concept around which the saints should rally; and the Nephite account does in fact preserve the first of the two, which is, of course, the ultimate objective of true believers. To seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness, in the ultimate and eternal sense, is to seek the celestial kingdom and the state of righteousness in which God dwells. The process by which this ultimate goal is attained is to devote oneself to building up the earthly kingdom, which is the Church, and to establish the Cause of Righteousness on earth. Having so taught, and as a summary for this mid-portion of the Sermon on the Mount, our Lord said: "Take, therefore, no thought for the morrow; for the morrow shall take thought for the things of itself. Sufficient unto the day shall be the evil thereof."

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Mormon, who had the Nephite Sermon in Bountiful before him when he wrote, leaves us this analysis of properly judging all things: "Take heed, my beloved brethren, that ye do not judge that which is evil to be of God, or that which is good and of God to be of the devil. For behold, my brethren, it is given unto you to judge, that ye may know good from evil; and the way to judge is as plain, that ye may know with a perfect knowledge, as the daylight is from the dark night. For behold, the Spirit of Christ is given to every man, that he may know good from evil; wherefore, I show unto you the way to judge; for every thing which inviteth to do good, and to persuade to believe in Christ, is sent forth by the power and gift of Christ; wherefore ye may know with a perfect knowledge it is of God. . . . And now, my brethren, seeing that ye know the light by which ye may judge, which light is the light of Christ, see that ye do not judge wrongfully; for with that same judgment which ye judge ye shall also be judged." (Moro. 7:14-18.)
[^2] These are two of the verses of Eliza R. Snow's great Mormon hymn. "Truth Reflects Upon Our Senses," Hymns, no. 188.
