Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1980)

Chapter 44

Jesus Teaches Doctrine to His Saints

The Lord hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek. (Isa. 61:1.)

The Lord . . . hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor. (Luke 4:18.)

He Saith: ‘Judge Righteous Judgments’

(Matthew 7:1-5; JST Matthew 7:1-8; Luke 6:37-38, 41-42; 3 Nephi 14:1-5)

In sweet and sublime simplicity, with an eloquence and power possessed by none other, the One sent to preach good tidings to the meek, to preach the gospel to the poor, continues to pour forth the inspired wisdom of his Sermon on the Mount. He has just finished the special counsel applicable only to those special witnesses and their associates whose commission it is to preach to the world and to build up the kingdom—the instruction relative to forsaking all earthly interests and devoting themselves exclusively to the service of the ministry. Now he has a message for all his people, apostles and disciples alike. All must live the law to gain the blessing; all must do good and work righteousness; all must acquire for themselves, here and now, the attributes of godliness, if they are to possess them in eternity; all must keep the commandments to be saved in his Father's kingdom.

Matthew introduces his account of this portion of the Sermon on the Mount by saying, "Now these are the words which Jesus taught his disciples that they should say unto the people. Judge not unrighteously, that ye be not judged; but judge righteous judgment. For with what judgment ye shall judge, ye shall be judged; and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again." The Nephite record says that when Jesus had spoken to the Twelve the message on missionary service, "he turned again to the multitude," to whom he said: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, Judge not, that ye be not judged," and so on. Luke's account includes this provision: "Condemn not, and ye shall not be condemned: forgive, and ye shall be forgiven: Give, and it shall be given unto you; good measure, pressed down, and shaken together, and running over, shall men give into your bosom."

These words, thus, are a message for his saints, for all the people, for those who choose him as the way, the truth, and the life. The sense and meaning of each rendition is expressive of the divine will: 'Condemn not, that ye be not condemned; judge wisely and righteously, so that ye shall be judged in like manner; [^1] and the Lord shall recompense to every man according to his work, and measure to him "according to the measure which he has measured to his fellow man." (D&C 1:10.)'

Our Lord continues to speak: "And again, ye shall say unto them"—that is, Ye, my disciples, shall "say unto the people"—"Why is it that thou beholdest the mote that is in thy brother's eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye? Or how wilt thou say to thy brother, Let me pull out the mote out of thine eye; and canst not behold a beam in thine own eye?"

It was ever thus. Even the members of the kingdom, striving as they are to perfect their lives; even those who know the truth and who are seeking to live by the high standards of the gospel; even these chosen ones can see the motes—the small splinters, the tiny dry twigs or stalks, the lesser faults—in the doings of their brethren in the Church; but they cannot see the beams—the great roof-beams, the large pieces of timber that hold up the house—which are part of their own doings.

Once I said unto another, In thine eye there is a mote, If thou art a friend, a brother, Hold, and let me pull it out. But I could not see it fairly, For my sight was very dim, When I came to search more clearly In mine eye there was a beam.

If I love my brother dearer, And his mote I would erase, Then the light should shine the clearer, For the eye's a tender place. Others I have oft reproved, For an object like a mote, Now I wish this beam removed, Oh, that tears would wash it out! [^2]

At this point in the Jewish sermon, but not in the one delivered to the Nephites, Jesus rebukes in scathing terms the false ministers who then led the people astray. "And Jesus said unto his disciples," Matthew records, "Beholdest thou the scribes, and the Pharisees, and the priests, and the Levites? They teach in their synagogues, but do not observe the law, nor the commandments; and all have gone out of the way, and are under sin. Go thou and say unto them, Why teach ye men the law and the commandments, when ye yourselves are the children of corruption? Say unto them, Ye hypocrites,"—and here he extends the law of the mote and the beam to all men—"first cast out the beam out of thine own eye; and then shalt thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brother's eye."

'Ye teach that Moses forbade adultery, but ye yourselves are adulterers. Ye teach that men should honor their parents, but ye have dishonored your own fathers by your disobedience. Ye teach that men must repent and gain a remission of their sins, and yet ye yourselves are full of corruption. Ye teach that the Messiah shall come to redeem his people, and yet the one who now ministers among you with Messianic power ye reject.'

He Saith: ‘Seek to Know the Truth’

(Matthew 7:6-14; JST Matthew 7:9-12, 14-17, 22; 3 Nephi 14:6-14; Luke 6:31)

Jesus personally is not destined to do all the teaching that must be done; he alone will not take the message of salvation to every person; he can be in only one place at one time; while he speaks to this congregation, assembled above Capernaum on the Mount of Beatitudes, there are other congregations—throughout Palestine, Asia, the realm of the Roman Caesars, and the whole world—that could be assembled to hear the word of truth. Others must be called and trained and sent forth to proclaim the everlasting word. And so Jesus continues to tell his disciples what they shall say as they carry his message to the hosts who shall never see his mortal face or hear his blessed voice.

"Go ye into the world," he directs, "saying unto all, Repent, for the kingdom of heaven has come nigh unto you."

'Go! No longer sit at ease in your homes and in your synagogues! Arise; gird up your loins, and go! The gospel must be preached everywhere; the whole earth must hear the message; the voice of truth must echo and re-echo in every ear; every heart must be penetrated; there are none to escape. The voice of the Lord is unto all men. Say: The kingdom of heaven is at hand; the gospel of salvation is here; the Church of Jesus Christ is now on earth; it is the kingdom of God on earth; and we are legal administrators who teach by the power of the Holy Ghost, and who perform the ordinances of salvation so they will be binding on earth and sealed everlastingly in the heavens. Repent, and believe the gospel. Live its laws and be saved.'

And the mysteries of the kingdom ye shall keep within yourselves; for it is not meet to give that which is holy unto the dogs; neither cast ye your pearls unto swine, lest they trample them under their feet.

For the world cannot receive that which ye, yourselves, are not able to bear; wherefore ye shall not give your pearls unto them, lest they turn again and rend you.

Any gospel truth, however easy and simple, that is not understood, or that is beyond the present spiritual capacity of a given person to understand, is to him a mystery. Faith, repentance, and baptism are mysteries to the unbelieving Gentiles. But the mysteries of the kingdom, of which Jesus here speaks, are quite another thing. This phrase has a special meaning; it refers to the deep and hidden things of the gospel—to the calculus, as it were, which can only be comprehended after the student has become proficient in arithmetic, algebra, and geometry; it refers to the temple ordinances; to the gifts of the Spirit; to those things which can be known only by the power of the Holy Ghost.

The saints are to keep the deep and more mysterious doctrines to themselves and not offer to the world more than people are able to bear. Until the newborn babe in Christ is weaned, he cannot eat meat; the milk of the world must suffice. Gospel pearls in the hands of Gentile swine enable those hoofed and snouted beasts, wallowing in the filth and swill of their rebellion and disbelief, to rend the saints with their evil fangs. Thus: "It is given unto many to know the mysteries of God; nevertheless they are laid under a strict command that they shall not impart only according to the portion of his word which he doth grant unto the children of men, according to the heed and diligence which they give unto him." (Alma 12:9.) [^3]

How will the world know of the truth and divinity of the gospel message when it is taught by the disciples? When the command comes to 'repent and believe the gospel,' how can the hearers come to know they must believe and obey at the peril of their salvation? Jesus continues to counsel:

Say unto them, Ask of God; ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. For every one that asketh, receiveth; and he that seeketh, findeth; and unto him that knocketh, it shall be opened.

It is the Lord's work that is involved; it is his gospel; he will bear record of its truth and divinity. He is no respecter of persons; he will give the Holy Ghost to those who hunger and thirst after righteousness, for, as Nephi said, "the Holy Ghost . . . is the gift of God unto all those who diligently seek him, as well in times of old as in the time that he should manifest himself unto the children of men." [^4] Truth seekers must turn to the Lord for a final and conclusive answer on religious matters. Every person who hears the gospel preached by a legal administrator sent from God; every person who desires to know which of all the churches is right and which he should join; every person who is really concerned with the well-being of his eternal soul—every such person stands exactly where Joseph Smith stood at the beginning of this dispensation: He must ask of God, who giveth to all men liberally and upbraideth not. [^5]

The preaching of the gospel, however, to those already mired in their own theological mud—no matter when or to whom or under what circumstances—always brings the same response; the reaction to the new message is as predictable as is the rising of the morning sun. Those who already think they possess the light of heaven; those who believe they are engaged in the Lord's service; those who have a form of godliness that satisfies their instinctive desires to worship—such will always say: 'We already have the truths of salvation; why should we give heed to this new nonsense which you preach?' Aware—partly by instinct and partly, no doubt, by the experiences already gained in discussing Jesus and his doctrines with others—that such a reaction would be forthcoming, "his disciples said unto him: They will say unto us, We ourselves are righteous, and need not that any man should teach us. God, we know, heard Moses and some of the prophets; but us he will not hear. And they will say, We have the law for our salvation, and that is sufficient for us." [^6]

Jesus has already identified the door through which men must enter to gain a testimony of the new order that is now replacing the old Mosaic system. It is: Ask of God in faith and he will reveal the truth of it unto you by the power of the Holy Ghost. And so to answer the expressed anxieties of his disciples, he simply brings them back again to the basic reality involved: There is only one way to know the truth about God and his laws, and that is to receive personal revelation. "Then Jesus answered, and said unto his disciples, Thus shall ye say unto them:

What man among you, having a son, and he shall be standing out, and shall say, Father, open thy house that I may come in and sup with thee, will not say, Come in, my son; for mine is thine, and thine is mine?

Or what man is there among you, who, if his son ask bread, will give him a stone?

Or if he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent?

If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your Father who is in heaven give good things to them that ask him?

To all this there is a conclusion to be reached, a grand climax to hear, a summit of inspired logic yet to shine forth. None but the one whose sermon we are hearing anew could have said it so well:

Therefore [that is, in the light of all that he has just said] all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them: for this is the law and the prophets.

The Golden Rule, as we have come to call it; the law of Moses and the teachings of the prophets—all summarized in one sentence! Truly, never man spake as this Man!

And all this being so—the gospel being taught; the kingdom being once again established; the door being open for all who will to enter; the disciples being instructed in the part they are to play—Jesus now proclaims:

Repent, therefore, and enter ye in at the strait gate; for wide is the gate, and broad is the way that leadeth to destruction, and many there be who go in thereat. Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it.

Enter in at the strait gate of baptism; find yourself on the strait and narrow path leading to the celestial kingdom. Enter in at the strait gate of celestial marriage; find yourself on the strait and narrow path leading to eternal life in the highest heaven of the celestial world. The broad gate is always open, and all the influences of the world urge and entice men to enter and go downward to darkness; the narrow gate is open only to those who desire righteousness and who seek the Lord and his goodness. It is written:

Behold, the way for man is narrow, But it lieth in a straight course before him, And the keeper of the gate is the Holy One of Israel; And he employeth no servant there; And there is none other way save it be by the gate; For he cannot be deceived, For the Lord God is his name.

And whoso knocketh, to him will he open; And the wise, and the learned, and they that are rich, Who are puffed up because of their learning, and their wisdom, and their riches— Yea, they are they whom he despiseth;And save they shall cast these things away, And consider themselves fools before God, And come down in the depths of humility, He will not open unto them.

But the things of the wise and the prudent Shall be hid from them forever— Yea, that happiness which is prepared for the saints. [^7]

Jesus Speaks of Prophets, Good Works, and Salvation

(Matthew 7:15-29; 8:1; JST Matthew 7:30-31, 33, 36-37; 3 Nephi 14:15-27; Luke 6:43-44, 46-49)

Now Jesus speaks some sharp and cutting words about the false prophets who are everywhere to be found in his day. But moments ago he pointed to the scribes, the Pharisees, the priests, and the Levites and said: "Ye yourselves are the children of corruption." They are apostate; they have all "gone out of the way"; they all are "under sin"; and neither do they "observe the law, nor the commandments." And the disciples, also but moments ago, have quoted these same blind guides of an erring race as saying: "God, we know, heard Moses and some of the prophets; but us he will not hear." Now Jesus excoriates these same teachers as, with reference to them—and in principle, also, to all future blind guides and erring religious teachers—he tells the people: "Beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves."

False prophets—the curse and scourge of the world! How awful and awesome and evil it is when one pretends and professes to speak for God in leading men to salvation, but in fact has a message that is false, a doctrine that is not true, and a prophecy that will not come to pass. And how little do the Jewish people of Jesus' day know—or does the world today know—who among them are the false prophets. But then, false prophets are of the world; they follow the practices of the world; they teach what the carnal mind desires to hear; they are loved by the world.

Moses, in whom the Jews trusted, and whose name was reverenced in all their synagogues, was the one who said: "Would God that all the Lord's people were prophets, and that the Lord would put his spirit upon them!" (Num. 11:29.) Paul would soon say: "Ye may all prophesy," and, "covet to prophesy." (1 Cor. 14:31, 39.) And John the Beloved would in a not-distant day hear from angelic lips the gracious words: "The testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy." (Rev. 19:10.)

A true prophet is one who has the testimony of Jesus; one who knows by personal revelation that Jesus Christ is the Son of the living God, and that he was to be—or has been—crucified for the sins of the world; one to whom God speaks and who recognizes the still small voice of the Spirit. A true prophet is one who holds the holy priesthood; who is a legal administrator; who has power and authority from God to represent him on earth. A true prophet is a teacher of righteousness to whom the truths of the gospel have been revealed and who presents them to his fellowmen so they can become heirs of salvation in the highest heaven. A true prophet is a witness, a living witness, one who knows, and one who testifies. Such a one, if need be, foretells the future and reveals to men what the Lord reveals to him.

A false prophet is the opposite of all this. He does not know by personal revelation of the divine Sonship of the Prophet who was like unto Moses. He does not enjoy the gift of the Holy Ghost or hold the holy priesthood, and he is not a legal administrator who has power to bind and seal on earth and in heaven. He is not a teacher of true doctrine; he may believe any of an infinite variety of false doctrines, but he does not teach, in purity and perfection, the fulness of the everlasting gospel. Because he does not receive revelation or enjoy the gifts of the Spirit, he believes these things have ceased. He thinks: 'God, I know, heard Moses and some of the prophets; but me he will not hear.' Because he teaches false doctrines, he does not lead men to salvation, and in cases not a few he becomes a ravening wolf in sheep's clothing. [^8]

To denounce these ravening wolves among the scribes and Pharisees who, parading before the people as prophets, yet tore and gashed and mutilated the souls of men with their false teachings; to excoriate the hypocritical practices of the priests and Levites, as they performed their sacrificial rites in similitude of a future Messiah who had in fact come and been rejected by them; to acclaim as false that which is evil—to do all this is not to denounce or reject that which is true and good. All Israel knew there had been true prophets in days of old. All Israel knew that some then living were claiming prophetic stature. All Israel knew—this above all—that the Lord God of their fathers had, by the mouth of Moses, the man of God, promised to raise up a prophet like unto Israel's great lawgiver, and that the prophet so called forth would be the Messiah.

The Jews themselves had sent priests and Levites to John to ask, "Art thou that prophet?" (John 1:21.) And many people, among them the man who was blind from birth, said of Jesus, "He is a prophet." (John 9:17.) None among them questioned that there had been and were and would be true prophets. They knew that God always had spoken and always would speak by the mouths of men called by him to the prophetic office. The issue then was—and now is—how to identify the true prophets; how to know who among the professing prophets represent the Lord and who have no such divine commission: how to tell the true from the false.

"Ye shall know them by their fruits," Jesus said. By their fruits—their words, their acts, the wonders that they do—these things shall separate true prophets and teachers frown false ones. Do they receive revelations and see visions? Does the Holy Ghost speak by their mouth? Are they legal administrators who have power to bind and seal on earth and in heaven? Is their doctrine true and sound and in harmony with all that is found in Holy Writ? Do they enjoy the gifts of the Spirit, so that the sick are healed under their hands? And does the Lord God give his Holy Spirit to attest the truth of their words and to approve the acts that they do? Without true prophets there is no salvation; false prophets lead people astray; men choose, at the peril of their salvation, the prophets whom they follow.

"Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles?" Jesus asks. Matthew records no answer to the query, only the application: "Even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit; but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit." Luke's account, however, quotes Jesus as saying:

For a good tree bringeth not forth corrupt fruit; neither doth a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. For every tree is known by his own fruit. For of thorns men do not gather figs, nor of a bramble bush gather they grapes.

Or, in other words, as Moroni wrote, quoting the words of his father, Mormon:

A man being evil cannot do that which is good; neither will he give a good gift.

For behold, a bitter fountain cannot bring forth good water; neither can a good fountain bring forth bitter water; wherefore, a man being a servant of the devil cannot follow Christ; and if he follow Christ he cannot be a servant of the devil. (Moro. 7:10-11.)

By way of conclusion to this part of his sermon, Jesus continued: "Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire. Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them."

Our Lord's mighty sermon is drawing to its close. He is about to lay the capstone on the structure of doctrine and counsel and exhortation which his gracious words have built, and that capstone is: Keep the commandments so as to be able to withstand the trials and tests that are ahead.

"Verily I say unto you, it is not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, that shall enter into the kingdom of heaven," he says, "but he that doeth the will of my Father who is in heaven." Lip service alone does not save; it is not confessing that Jesus is the Lord, without more, that opens heaven's door; belief without works has no saving power. Keep the commandments; do the will of the Father; work and labor and struggle and strive—then expect salvation. Baptism alone does not save; celestial marriage alone does not exalt; church membership without more does not assure an inheritance in celestial glory. "After ye have gotten into this straight and narrow path, I would ask if all is done?" Nephi queries, and his answer is, "Nay." Rather: "Ye must press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope, and a love of God and of all men. Wherefore, if ye shall press forward, feasting upon the word of Christ, and endure to the end, behold, thus saith the Father: Ye shall have eternal life." (2 Ne. 31:19-20.)

"For the day soon cometh, that men shall come before me to judgment, to be judged according to their works." 'I am the Judge; I am the Messiah; look unto me and live; I shall sit in judgment upon the world.' And, "Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? and in thy name have cast out devils? and in thy name done many wonderful works?" To whom is he speaking? Is it not to those who have been baptized; those who have gained the testimony of Jesus, which is the spirit of prophecy; those who have received the holy priesthood and have cast out devils and worked miracles?

Two answers of equivalent meaning are recorded to his question; both are answers that will be given to those saints who have not endured to the end, who have not kept the commandments, and who have not pressed forward with a steadfastness in Christ after baptism. In one, the account says: "And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you: depart from me, ye that work iniquity." In the other account the words are: "And then will I say, Ye never knew me; depart from me ye that work iniquity."

'I never knew you, and you never knew me! Your discipleship was limited; you were not perfect members of my kingdom. Your heart was not so centered in me as to cause you to endure to the end; and so for a time and a season you were faithful; you even worked miracles in my name; but in the end it shall be as though I never knew you.'

And why call ye me, Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say?

'If ye believe that I am he of whom the prophets testified; if ye accept me as the Promised Messiah; if I am the Son of God and ye call me Lord, then keep my commandments; endure to the end; worship the Father in my name, and ye shall be saved.' "Whosoever cometh to me, and heareth my sayings, and doeth them"—that is, he who is my disciple, he who believes my gospel and joins my church—"I will shew you to whom he is like:

He is like a man which built an house, and digged deep, and laid the foundation on a rock: and when the flood arose, the stream beat vehemently upon that house, and could not shake it: for it was founded upon a rock.

But he that heareth, and doeth not, is like a man that without a foundation built an house upon the earth; against which the stream did beat vehemently, and immediately it fell; and the ruin of that house was great.

Blessed are all they who receive the word with joy; who build their house of salvation upon him who is the Eternal Rock; and who then endure to the end—for they shall be saved with an everlasting salvation.

Blessed are all they who call Jesus, Lord, Lord; who have in their hearts the prophetic insight that men call the testimony of Jesus; and who are valiant in testimony all their days—for they shall wear the victor's crown.

Blessed are all they who keep the commandments; who are true and faithful to every trust; and who do ever those things which please Him whose we are—for they shall dwell everlastingly with him in celestial rest.

And so endeth the Sermon on the Mount, the Sermon on the Plain, the Sermon in Bountiful—the sermon like none other ever delivered. As for the people who heard him, they "were astonished at his doctrine; For he taught them as one having authority from God, and not as having authority from the scribes."

And so Jesus, as "great multitudes followed him," "was come down from the mountain," to be elsewhere and otherwise about his Father's business. The Lord be praised that we know as much as we do about what he said and did in his day!

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] These sweet words are taken from a footnote in Farrar, p. 205, and are attributed by him to Arthur Hugh Clough.
[^2] These are two of the verses of Eliza R. Snow's great Mormon hymn. "Truth Reflects Upon Our Senses," Hymns, no. 188.
[^3] This same truth, in principle, is found in latter-day revelation in these words: "Thou shalt declare glad tidings"—that is, present the message of the restoration to the world—"yea, publish it upon the mountains, and upon every high place, and among every people that thou shalt be permitted to see. . . . And of tenets [those doctrines which are over and above and deeper than the ones contained in the basic message itself] thou shalt not talk, but thou shalt declare repentance and faith on the Savior, and remission of sins by baptism, and by fire, yea, even the Holy Ghost." (D&C 19:29-31.)
[^4] In addition to the words quoted, Nephi also says: "For he that diligently seeketh shall find; and the mysteries of God shall be unfolded unto them, by the power of the Holy Ghost, as well in these times as in times of old, and as well in times of old as in times to come; wherefore, the course of the Lord is one eternal round." (1 Ne. 10:17-19.)
[^5] It was of James's words—"If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given"—that Joseph Smith said: "Never did any passage of scripture come with more power to the heart of man than this did at this time to mine." He pondered upon it again and again, until, guided by the Spirit, he was led to offer the prayer which rent the heavens and opened the dispensation of the fulness of times. (JS-H 1:10-20.)
[^6] "How similarly the spiritually closed mind operates in all ages! These Jewish attempts, to justify adherence to a false religion, sound as though they had been made by the ministers of modern Christendom. 'We ourselves are righteous, and what can these Mormon Elders teach us. True it is that God spoke to prophets of old, but revelation has ceased; there is no modern communion with heaven. We have the Bible and are Christians, and that is sufficient for us.' But Jesus' counsel is: 'Tell them to humble themselves, repent of their sins, and pray to the Father in mighty prayer so they may learn where the truth really lies.' " (Commentary 1:249.)
[^7] 2 Ne. 9:41-43.
[^8] Two statements from the Prophet Joseph Smith give prophetic sanction to the views on prophets here presented. First: "When a man goes about prophesying, and commands men to obey his teachings, he must either be a true or false prophet. False prophets always arise to oppose the true prophets and they will prophesy so very near the truth that they will deceive almost the very chosen ones." (Teachings, p. 365.) Second: "If any person should ask me if I were a prophet, I should not deny it, as that would give me the lie; for, according to John, the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy; therefore, if I profess to be a witness or teacher, and have not the spirit of prophecy, which is the testimony of Jesus, I must be a false witness; but if I be a true teacher and witness, I must possess the spirit of prophecy, and that constitutes a prophet; and any man who says he is a teacher or a preacher of righteousness, and denies the spirit of prophecy, is a liar, and the truth is not in him; and by this key false teachers and impostors may be detected." (Teachings, p. 269.)
