Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1980)

Chapter 45

Jesus Ministers As One Having Authority

Across the sea, along the shore, In numbers ever more and more, From lonely hut and busy town, The valley through, the mountain down, What was it ye went out to see, Ye silly folk of Galilee? The reed that in the wind doth shake? The weed that washes in the lake? . . .

A Teacher? Rather seek the feet Of those who sit in Moses' seat. Go, humbly seek, and bow to them Far off in great Jerusalem. . . . What is it came ye here to note? A young Man preaching in a boat. A Prophet! Boys and women weak! Declare—and cease to rave— Whence is it He hath learnt to speak? Say, who His doctrine gave? A Prophet? Prophet wherefore He Of all in Israel's tribes?— He teacheth with authority And not as do the scribes. [^1]

He Speaks as One Having Authority

(Matthew 7:28-29; JST Matthew 7:36-37)

We are now in a high state of spiritual exhilaration, even exultation. Gracious and God-given words echo and re-echo through every fiber of our being. We walk down the gentle slopes, covered with grass and flowers and shrubs, as we go from the high plateau on the Mount of Beatitudes to the busy getting and giving of Capernaum and its lake-near-environs. We are basking in the light and love and beauty of the Sermon on the Mount. We ponder every spoken word; each phrase sinks into our heart as though by fire, and our bosom burns with the truth and reality of it all. Our souls could not be more stirred had we stood with Moses on Sinai as the smoke and fire ascended, as the thunders rolled, and as the Holy Mount quaked with Jehovah's presence.

Never man spake as we have just heard the Lord Jesus speak. "The people were astonished at his doctrine," Matthew says, "For he taught them as one having authority, and not as the scribes." Or, rather, as we have already seen, "He taught them as one having authority from God, and not as having authority from the scribes." His voice was the voice of the Incarnate Jehovah; his words, spoken by the power of the Holy Ghost, were the words of his Father. Others were authorized to preach and teach by the scribes; he had his "authority from God." He came in his Father's name, used his Father's voice, and exercised his Father's power. This we have seen him do in the Sermon on the Mount, which itself was the ordination sermon and charge for the Twelve special witnesses, whom he had chosen to testify of him in all the world.

It is better, no doubt, to have a false religion and to worship false gods than to have no religion and no worship at all. Neutrality is as nothing, and indifference is denigrating and damning. Those who are lukewarm—who are neither hot nor cold; who take no affirmative stand; who do not seek the blessings available through worship—will one day be spewed out of the divine mouth, as it were, and find their place in one of the lesser eternal realms. And this much we can say for the scribes: they were anything but lukewarm. They had a zeal for religion, a zeal for worship, a zeal for God, but it was a misplaced, a twisted, and a perverted zeal. But those who are zealous, even in false causes, are at least prospective zealots—as witness Saul of Tarsus—in true causes. Our concern here is the comparison between the teachings of the scribes, who spoke without divine approval, and the teachings of him who was the Divine Voice.

"The teaching of their Scribes was narrow, dogmatic, material; it was cold in manner, frivolous in matter, secondhand and iterative in its very essence; with no freshness in it, no force, no fire; servile to all authority, opposed to all independence; at once erudite and foolish, at once contemptuous and mean; never passing a hair's breadth beyond the carefully-watched boundary line of commentary and precedent; full of balanced inference and orthodox hesitancy, and impossible literalism; intricate with legal pettiness and labyrinthine system; elevating mere memory above genius, and repetition above originality; concerned only about Priests and Pharisees, in Temple and synagogue, or school, or Sanhedrin, and mostly occupied with things infinitely little. It was not indeed wholly devoid of moral significance, nor is it impossible to find here and there, among the dÃ©bris of it, a worthy thought; but it was occupied a thousandfold more with Levitical minutia about mint, and anise, and cumin, and the length of fringes, and the breadth of phylacteries, and the washing of cups and platters, and the particular quarter of a second when new moons and Sabbath-days began." (Farrar, pp. 201-2.) Such are the well-chosen words that depict the teachings—to say nothing of the inner feelings and twisted religious instincts—of the scribes. Teachers—call them false prophets, if you will, for Jesus so designated them in the great sermon just delivered—who are without authority, who are devoid of inspiration, and who do not and cannot in fact speak for the Almighty—such teachers turn, in the very nature of things, to learned commentary about what inspired teachers of other ages have spoken and which is preserved in the form of scripture.

Now, in contrast, let us summarize how the Master Teacher approached his podium. "This teaching of Jesus was wholly different in its character, and as much grander as the temple of the morning sky under which it was uttered was grander than stifling synagogues or crowded school. It was preached, as each occasion rose, on the hill-side, or by the lake, or on the roads, or in the house of the Pharisee, or at the banquet of the Publican; nor was it any sweeter or loftier when it was addressed in the Royal Portico to the Masters of Israel, than when its only hearers were the ignorant people whom the haughty Pharisees held to be accursed.

"And there was no reserve in its administration. It flowed forth as sweetly and as lavishly to single listeners as to enraptured crowds; and some of its very richest revelations were vouchsafed, neither to rulers nor to multitudes, but to the persecuted outcast of the Jewish synagogue, to the timid inquirer in the lonely midnight, and the frail woman by the noon-day well. And it dealt, not with scrupulous rites and ceremonial cleansings, but with the human soul, and human destiny, and human life—with Hope and Charity, and Faith. There were no definitions in it, or explanations, or 'scholastic systems,' or philosophic theorizing, or implicated mazes of difficult and dubious discussion, but a swift intuitive insight into the very depths of the human heart—even a supreme and daring paradox that, without being fenced round with exceptions or limitations, appealed to the conscience with its irresistible simplicity, and with an absolute mastery stirred and dominated over the heart. Springing from the depths of holy emotions, it thrilled the being of every listener as with an electric flame. In a word, its authority was the authority of the Divine Incarnate; it was the Voice of God, speaking in the utterance of man; its austere purity was yet pervaded with tenderest sympathy, and its awful severity with an unutterable love. It is, to borrow the image of the wisest of the Latin Fathers, a great sea whose smiling surface breaks into refreshing ripples at the feet of our little ones, but into whose unfathomable depths the wisest may gaze with the shudder of amazement and the thrill of love. . . .

"How exquisitely and freshly simple is the actual language of Christ compared with all other teaching that has ever gained the ear of the world! There is no science in it, no art, no pomp of demonstration, no carefulness of toil, no trick of rhetoricians, no wisdom of the schools. Straight as an arrow to the mark His precepts pierce to the very depths of the soul and spirit. All is short, clear, precise, full of holiness, full of the common images of daily life.

"There is scarcely a scene or object familiar to the Galilee of that day, which Jesus did not use as a moral illustration of some glorious promise or moral law. He spoke of green fields, and springing flowers, and the budding of the vernal trees; of the red or lowering sky; of sunrise and sunset; of wind and rain; of night and storm; of clouds and lightning; of stream and river; of stars and lamps; of fire and salt; of quivering bulrushes and burning weeds; of rent garments and bursting wine-skins; of eggs and serpents; of pearls and pieces of money; of nets and fish. Wine and wheat, corn and oil, stewards and gardeners, labourers and employers, kings and shepherds, travellers and fathers of families, courtiers in soft clothing and brides in nuptial robes—all these are found in His discourses. He knew all life, and had gazed on it with a kindly as well as a kingly glance. He could sympathize with its joys no less than He could heal its sorrows, and the eyes that were so often suffused with tears as they saw the sufferings of earth's mourners beside the bed of death, had shone also with a kindlier glow as they watched the games of earth's happy little ones in the green fields and busy streets." (Farrar, pp. 202-5.)

Jesus Heals the Servant of a Gentile Centurion

(Luke 7:1-10; Matthew 8:5-13; JST Matthew 8:9-10, 12)

This Man, who spake as none else before or since—whose words exceed in wisdom those even of Enoch, and Moses, and Isaiah, all of whom received their inspiration from him, but who expressed the thoughts after the manner of their language, and according to their own talents and abilities—this Man now goes forth to do deeds that no others, before or since, have ever assayed to do. His authority was not only to use the voice and speak the words of Him whose servant he was, but to use the power given him to heal the sick and raise the dead. His miracles will stand as an attesting seal, written in the souls of men, to the words that he spoke.

We are with him now in Capernaum, his own city. A Roman garrison is located here. One of its officers, a centurion of heathen-Gentile birth, who commands between fifty and a hundred men, has an esteemed servant who is "ready to die" of a paralytic seizure. This centurion, a soldier in the service of Herod Antipas, is no ordinary Gentile upon whom the curse of disbelief rests, or who revels in the carnal lusts by which soldiers sometimes entertain themselves. He may have been a "proselyte of righteousness," one adopted into the family of Abraham, one who chose to live as an Israelite and worship the Lord Jehovah. At least he was a friend of the Jews and had, out of his own munificence, built for them a synagogue in Capernaum. Hearing that Jesus was coming into their city, he besought the elders of the Jews to intercede on his behalf. "My servant lieth at home sick of the palsy, grievously tormented," he said. And the importuning Jews told Jesus "that he was worthy for whom he should do this: For he loveth our nation, and he hath built us a synagogue." Jesus said, "I will come and heal him."

Jesus and the Jewish elders—plus the select group upon whom his countenance shone—started their journey to the home of the centurion. We may suppose that this military commander knew of the nobleman, who also served Herod Antipas, and whose son in Capernaum had been healed by Jesus' word, spoken twenty miles away in Cana. In any event, when Jesus was "not far from the house, the centurion sent friends to him" who said: "Lord, trouble not thyself: for I am not worthy that thou shouldest enter under my roof: Wherefore neither thought I myself worthy to come unto thee: but say in a word, and my servant shall be healed. For I also am a man set under authority, having under me soldiers, and I say unto one, Go, and he goeth; and to another, Come, and he cometh; and to my servant, Do this, and he doeth it."

"The centurion's reasoning—profound in logic, perfect in showing forth faith—was to this effect: If I, a mere officer in the Roman army, must obey my superiors, and also have power myself to send others forth at my command, then surely the Lord of all needs but speak and his will shall be done." (Commentary 1:258.)

Those who were with Jesus marveled at the message from the centurion, and Jesus said: "I have not found so great faith, no, not in Israel." Such a teaching moment as this seldom arises, and of it the Master Teacher makes the most.

Many shall come from the east and west, and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven. But the children of the wicked one shall be cast out into outer darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

In just a moment, he who was not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel; he who came to his kindred, that the word of truth might go first to the Jews and at a later date to the Gentiles; he who was the God of Israel—in just a moment he was going to heal the servant of a Gentile whose faith exceeded the faith of the members of the chosen race. But before doing so he chose to shake the theological foundations upon which Israel's preferential status rested. Many—not a few; Gentile hosts; members of the hated, alien nations—many would find glory in heaven with the ancient patriarchs, while the literal seed, being the children of Satan, Jews who should have been the children of the kingdom, would be cast out. How little his Jewish hearers understood the meaning of that which Jehovah had of old time said to Abraham: "As many as receive this Gospel shall be called after thy name, and shall be accounted thy seed, and shall rise up and bless thee, as their father." (Abr. 2:10.)

Then came the miracle, which attested to the truth of his doctrine. The message for the centurion was: "Go thy way; and as thou hast believed, so be it done unto thee. And his servant was healed in the selfsame hour."

Jesus Raises a Widow's Son from Death

(Luke 7:11-17)

It is now the day after the healing of the centurion's servant in Capernaum. Jesus, his disciples, and a great multitude have traversed their weary way—a distance of twenty-five miles—to a little Galilean village of no particular note, a place called Nain. It is, as we have seen, Jesus' wont to visit the towns and villages of Galilee, of Judea, and of all Palestine to preach the gospel and offer salvation to his people. Aside from the fact there was a funeral in Nain today, the day has been no different from the ceaseless caravan of days that pass endlessly along in hundreds of the sleepy villages of Israel. But ere the sun sets this day, such a miracle will be wrought in Nain as no man on earth has before seen. A dead youth, one prepared for consignment to the tomb, shall live again; one word from the Lord of life and the dried blood will flow again through a newly enlivened heart, and the breath of life will inflate anew the collapsed lungs of a dead corpse. Where there was death, with all its decay and sorrow, there will be life, with all its growth and joy. This is the day when the Prince of life will smite the angel of death with the breath of his lips, and that which was cold and stiff and lifeless will rise in warmth and vigor and all the strength and beauty of youth.

Two multitudes are about to meet: one sorrowing because the only son of his mother, a widow, has passed to the great beyond—sorrowing because such a promising Israelite, whose help was so much needed by a weeping mother, was about to be laid in a lifeless tomb; the other a joyful multitude—a group of believing, rejoicing disciples in whose bosoms the fires ignited on the Mount of Beatitudes still burned; a group who, but yesterday, had heard their Prophet-Leader command a centurion's servant to arise from his paralytic bed, and it was so.

In one group, where sorrow and sadness reign, the central figure is a weeping widow, trudging beside a funeral bier, as the cortege approaches the final corpse-prepared resting place for her only and beloved son. Her thoughts are filled with death and all its dreads. In her is fulfilled the ancient proverb: "Make thee mourning, as for an only son, most bitter lamentation." (Jer. 6:26.) The central figure in the other group—where joy abounds and words of life and light flow freely—is the one who has life in himself because God is his Father, and to whom what men call death is but the transfer of an eternal soul to another realm of life.

The sorrowing mother has suffered through the siege of sickness; every mortal means has been used to stay the grim reaper's hand. We cannot but think that she importuned in faith, before the Eternal Throne, for the life of her son, her only son; but death, in the end, has come off victorious. "The well-known blast of the horn has carried tidings, that once more the Angel of Death has done his dire behest. In passionate grief the mother has rent her upper garment. The last sad offices have been rendered to the dead. The body has been laid on the ground; hair and nails have been cut, and the body washed, anointed, and wrapped in the best the widow could procure." (Edersheim 1:554.) The funeral itself has now been held; its sermons are over; mourning women have been employed to chant "in weird strains the lament: 'Alas, the lion! alas, the hero!' or similar words," and "the funeral orator, if one was employed," is preceding "the bier, proclaiming the good deeds of the dead." The youth lies on the open bier; friends and neighbors take turns, as pallbearers, in carrying the mortal remains, and behind the bier come the mourning and sympathizing townspeople. "Up from the city close by came this 'great multitude' that followed the dead, with lamentations, wild chants of mourning women, accompanied by flutes and the melancholy tinkle of cymbals, perhaps by trumpets, amidst expressions of general sympathy. Along the road from Endor streamed the great multitude which followed the 'Prince of Life.' Here they met: Life and Death." (Edersheim 1:555-57.)

"And when the Lord saw her, he had compassion on her, and said unto her, Weep not." He who came to bear the sorrows of many was himself sorrowful. He "touched the bier: and they that bare him stood still." No doubt the pallbearers recognized the Prophet of Nazareth of Galilee whose fame was everywhere; at least his commanding presence and saintly demeanor stayed the funereal march. His words were simple; his command could not be gainsaid. There was no struggle, no stretching of "himself upon the child three times," no pleading with the Lord, as when Elijah raised the son of the widow of Zarephath from death. (1 Kgs. 17.) There was no shutting of the door, no praying to the Lord, no lying upon the child, so as to "put his mouth upon his mouth, and his eyes upon his eyes, and his hands upon his hands," as when Elisha raised from death the son of the great woman of Shunem. (2 Kgs. 4.)

With Jesus it was not so. He said simply: "Young man, I say unto thee, Arise. And he that was dead sat up, and began to speak." Then Jesus graciously in tender solicitude, "delivered him to his mother."

The living die and the dead live again—because He wills it. There was no importuning of God, nor was there need for such. Jesus did it. Jehovah was there. His words were "I say unto thee, Arise." He was claiming divinity, Messiahship, eternal godhood—and proving his claim (there was no blasphemy here!) by raising the dead!

And is not this first known instance of calling mortals from death to life by Jesus but a type and a shadow—a heaven-sent similitude—of what this same Jesus shall do for all his people at an appointed time? Will he not say to all, 'Come forth from your graves; step out of your tombs; arise from your biers. Live again—this time in glorious immortality, never to suffer the pangs of death again'? And will he not then deliver the righteous into the arms of their mothers and fathers and loved ones?

As the marvel of what had this day happened in Nain dawned upon the throngs in whose presence the miracle was wrought, is it any wonder, as Luke recounts, that "there came a fear on all: and they glorified God, saying, That a great prophet is risen up among us; and, That God hath visited his people. And this rumour of him went forth throughout all Judea, and throughout all the region round about."

Yes, it went even into the dungeon at Machaerus, where John the Baptist suffered in imprisoned silence for the testimony of Jesus that was his. And of this imprisonment and the part it played in the teachings of Jesus we shall soon see.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith gave three reasons why John was considered one of the greatest prophets: "First. He was entrusted with a divine mission of preparing the way before the face of the Lord. Whoever had such a trust committed to him before or since? No man. "Secondly. He was entrusted with the important mission, and it was required at his hands, to baptize the Son of Man. Whoever had the honor of doing that? Whoever had so great a privilege and glory? Whoever led the Son of God into the waters of baptism, and had the privilege of beholding the Holy Ghost descend in the form of a dove, or rather in the sign of the dove, in witness of that administration? . . . "Thirdly. John, at that time, was the only legal administrator in the affairs of the kingdom there was then on earth, and holding the keys of power. The Jews had to obey his instructions or be damned, by their own law; and Christ Himself fulfilled all righteousness in becoming obedient to the law which he had given to Moses on the mount, and thereby magnified it and made it honorable, instead of destroying it. The son of Zacharias wrested the keys, the kingdom, the power, the glory from the Jews, by the holy anointing and decree of heaven, and these three reasons constitute him the greatest prophet born of woman." (Teachings, pp. 275-76.)
