Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1980)

Chapter 46

Jesus and John Testify of Each Other

John: "Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world. . . . He must increase, but I must decrease. . . . He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life." (John 1:29; 3:30, 36.)

Jesus: "Among those that are born of women there is not a greater prophet than John the Baptist." (Luke 7:28.)

John Sends His Disciples to Jesus

(Luke 7:18-23; Matthew 11:2-6; JST Matthew 11:3, 6)

Our last report on the life and ministry of the one sent to prepare the way for Him by whom salvation comes; our last account relative to the blessed Baptist, who immersed the Son of God in Jordan's waters; our last record told of his imprisonment by Herod Antipas in a dungeon at the impregnable fortress at Machaerus. That word was that Jesus—compassionate, concerned, sorrowful because of the suffering of his beloved associate—sent angels to console and minister to his kinsman. John is still in his dungeon cell suffering manfully, as did so many of his fellow prophets, for the sure knowledge that is his that salvation is in the mighty Messiah whose witness he is.

We know little of what went on in the walled and barred place where the Baptist languished, only that the prisons of that day were places of unbearable torture and evil and heartless imposition. John did have visitors, however; there were times and circumstances when news from the outside could be spoken in his ears. His disciples were yet solicitous for his well-being, and they told him of the teachings and miracles of the Messiah. Word came to him of the eyes that were opened, the ears that were unstopped, and the lepers that were cleansed. He was told that the only son of a widow from Nain—dead, prepared for burial, en route to the cemetery—had responded to a gentle command, "Young man, I say unto thee, Arise," and was now secure in the arms of a rejoicing mother.

pparently some of the Baptist's disciples desired not only to minister to his needs in the prison, not only to bring him news of the religious movement that was sweeping the land, but also to look to him, rather than to Jesus, as the prophet whom they should follow. Conversion is a process that seldom occurs in an instant suddenly. Gospel grace dawns gradually upon most believers. These disciples knew that John, whom they revered, had seen the heavens open and the Spirit of God descend upon Jesus, and they knew that he had heard the heavenly voice acclaim, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased." (Matt. 3:17.) They knew that the son of Zacharias had sent others of his disciples, John the Beloved and Andrew among them, into the fold of Jesus by testifying: "Behold the Lamb of God!" (John 1:36) as Jesus walked among them. They knew that John claimed to be an Elias only, and that from the beginning he had taught that one who came after would baptize them with fire and with the Holy Ghost. All of the Baptist's teachings, every word that he spoke, and every act he performed pointed men toward the Messiah in whom they must believe to gain salvation. Yet there were some who still had not as yet followed his counsel to forsake the lesser light and cleave unto the Light of the world.

What can John do more than he has done? What more can he say than to them he hath said? Clearly there is only one remaining hope. John's disciples must come under the spell of Jesus' voice; they must feel the sweet spirit that comes forth from him; they must see his works, hear him teach the gospel, hear his voice testify of his own divine Sonship. They have heard John; let them now hear Jesus. Is this Prophet of Galilee, noble and renowned as he is, the very one of whom Moses taught? Is he the Messiah who was promised? Let them see and hear and learn for themselves; and so, at John's direction, they go from Machaerus, which is in the south of Perea, near the Dead Sea, to an unnamed location in Galilee.

Finding Jesus and the throngs who hear his words and whose sick he heals, they identify themselves; "John Baptist hath sent us unto thee," they say. Then comes the great question, the question upon which their salvation rests, the question that all investigators must answer for themselves: "Art thou he of whom it is written in the prophets that he should come, or do we look for another?" 'Art thou the Son of God who shall atone for the sins of the world, as promised by all the holy prophets since the world began—including John who sent us—or is our Messiah yet to come in another day to another people? We have heard John's witness. We know he said of you, "He is God's own Son, the Beloved One, the very Lamb of God who shall be sacrificed for the sins of the world," but we would hear the witness from your lips. Art thou the Deliverer, the Savior, the Redeemer, as John says you are?'

The question has been asked; it is a fair and proper inquiry; the issue is before the whole multitude; and Jesus will answer it—answer it in a way that no mortal imposter could. He will show in word and in deed that he is indeed the One of whom they speak.

Jesus Testifies of Himself and of John

(Luke 7:21-35; JST Luke 7:24; Matthew 11:6-19; JST Matthew 11:7, 13-16, 21)

John's disciples have zeroed in to the heart and core of revealed religion. They have asked: 'Art thou the Son of God, as John says, or is salvation to be found elsewhere and to come through another?' If Jesus answers 'I am he,' to what extent will he enhance the belief of John's followers, who already have heard their own teacher testify, in like words, to the divine Sonship of the one whom he baptized at Bethabara? It is not a spoken answer that is needed here; it is, rather, an answer written in fire, an answer that causes Sinai to quake and smoke to ascend like a furnace; it is an answer written in the flesh and blood and sinews of diseased bodies now made whole. Such an answer the Son of God is prepared to give. The abrupt query of John's disciples is left unanswered for the time being as far as spoken words are concerned. Jesus lets them listen to his sermons and see his miracles. "And in that same hour he cured many of their infirmities and plagues, and of evil spirits; and unto many that were blind he gave sight."

What must they think of one who John says is the Messiah, who does such wonders? Was it ever so in Israel of old? Did even Moses and the greatest of the prophets heal whole multitudes? Who before has ever opened the eyes of a legion of blind persons, or cured the infirmities and plagues of a whole nation of people? Jesus has answered their question, not in words but in works. Now he confirms with his lips the things his hands have done; he confirms the conclusion they must already have reached in their hearts. "Go your way," he says, "and tell John what things ye have seen and heard; how that the blind see, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, to the poor the gospel is preached." 'Tell John that his witness is true; know also within yourselves that I am he of whom the prophets spoke. These miracles attest to the truth of my words and of John's testimony. Ye have heard me preach the gospel to the poor, as Isaiah promised. What think ye, am I not he? Return and tell John what you have seen, and buoy up his spirit, in the prison of his depression, with the assurance that you now believe him because ye have seen the works I do.'

And further: Blessed is John—who has been faithful and true all his days, and who has been, and now is, valiant in the testimony of Jesus—and blessed also are "whosoever shall not be offended in me." That is, 'You yourselves also will be blessed with the saints if ye believe my words and are not offended by the strong doctrine that I teach.'

With this, the two disciples—who we must believe were now fully converted—left to make their wearisome way back to the south of Perea where an evil Antipas held John as a prisoner in the cause of righteousness. And we cannot but feel that their return southward was attended with a spirit of rejoicing that had not manifested itself in the long journey to see Him of whom the meridian Elias so fervently testified.

After their departure, Jesus said to the multitude concerning John: "What went ye out into the wilderness to see? Was it a reed shaken with the wind?" 'Why did you assemble by the thousands in the deserts around Bethabara, and in the waste places near Aenon? Was it to hear an uncertain sound blown on a muted trumpet? Did John ever waver in his testimony? Did the winds of false doctrine, and the hurricanes of disbelief of your rulers, cause him to so much as sway like a reed before them?' "And they answered him, No."

"But what went ye out for to see? A man clothed in soft raiment? Behold, they which are gorgeously apparelled, and live delicately, are in kings' courts." 'Was John clothed in the princely garments of Antipas, and Philip, and Archelaus, the royal sons of the wretched man who sat on the throne of Israel in the day I made flesh my tabernacle, which sons thereafter reigned in their father's stead? Or did he come in the rough and prophetic garb of an Elijah, from the peasant home of poor Judean folk, to whom all the graces of a kingly court were foreign?'

"But what went ye out for to see? A prophet? Yea, I say unto you, and much more than a prophet." How they had flocked to John to learn his doctrine and hear his testimony! By the thousands and the tens of thousands they had left their homes and traveled to Bethabara and to Aenon, journeys that meant camping overnight in the crude caravanserais of the day, on which occasions there was ample time to ponder and discuss the thunderous challenges of the fiery Judean preacher from Hebron. All Jerusalem, as the hyperbolic account expresses it, had gone out to hear a voice crying in the wilderness, a voice that commanded them to repent, to be baptized for the remission of sins, and to await the day when one coming after should baptize them with fire and the Holy Ghost; a voice that introduced, with testimony, the Lamb of God of whom Moses and all the prophets had spoken. Why had they gone forth to hear a voice that smote their consciences and called for a complete revolution in their way of life? What power swept over a whole people, impelling them to seek out the rugged, Elijah-like prophet of the deserts? And if they all esteemed John as a prophet, how could they escape believing his prophetic witness of the One who now ministered among them?

And he was more than a prophet—"much more than a prophet." It is as though Jesus said: 'Ye yourselves know John was a prophet. Ye went out to hear his voice because it was a prophetic voice, one that spoke the mind and will of the Lord, and now I say unto you that John was a prophet and much more than a prophet!'

How can a man be more than a prophet? What is there that is greater than to be a personal representative on earth of the Lord and to speak his mind and will to all men? Jesus gives a partial answer by now saying of John: "This is he, of whom it is written, Behold, I send my messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee."

We learned from Jesus as he sat on the Mount of Beatitudes, delivering his incomparable Sermon on the Mount, that we should beware of false prophets—of the scribes and Pharisees, of the priests and Levites, who professed to be teachers and leaders and prophets but who were in fact ravening wolves in sheep's clothing. Though they wore the mantle of religious leadership, their false teachings tore apart the spiritual well-being of their flocks. Implicit in Jesus' denunciation of false prophets was the standing counsel to cleave unto true prophets. Now he is acclaiming John as a true prophet, "Yea . . . much more than a prophet." John, as a witness of his living Lord, was indeed a prophet, and, in addition, he prepared the way before that very Lord, so that the greatest prophetic ministry ever to grace the earth would be manifest. He served as the Lord's messenger, carrying the message that the Lord himself—the Great Immanuel, the God-with-us of whom Isaiah spoke—was indeed with them.

For I say unto you, Among those that are born of women there is not a greater prophet than John the Baptist: but he that is least in the kingdom of God is greater than he. [^1]

There is more than a touch of irony here. As to John, the people honored him as a prophet; but as to Jesus, there was no such unreserved acceptance, even though John testified of him. "Whom did Jesus have reference to as being the least?" Joseph Smith asked. "Jesus was looked upon as having the least claim in God's kingdom, and [seemingly, or at least in the minds of the unbelieving among them] was least entitled to their credulity as a prophet; as though He had said, 'He that is considered [by many of you, as] the least among you is greater than John—that is I myself.' " (Teachings, p. 276.) For that matter, if John is the equal or superior of all the prophets, how could anyone be greater than he, except that Prophet of whom Moses and the inspired witnesses of all the ages had spoken?

And from the days of John the Baptist until now the kingdom of heaven suffereth violence, and the violent take it by force. But the days will come, when the violent shall have no power; for all the prophets and the law prophesied that it should be thus until John. Yea as many as have prophesied have foretold of these days. And if ye will receive it, verily, he was the Elias, who was for to come and prepare all things. He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.

From the hour John finished the days of his preparation in the wilderness; from the time he first cried repentance to a spiritually sick generation; from the moment he first baptized believing souls in the mighty Jordan—from then "until now," everywhere and in all parts of Palestine, "the kingdom of heaven suffereth violence." Mark it well: the kingdom of heaven set up by John, the kingdom of God on earth, the Church of Jesus Christ, "suffereth violence." And further: "The violent take it by force." There is persecution; there is bitterness. The hosts of hell oppose every investigator who comes near to the truth; the scribes and Pharisees, the priests and Levites—they being the false prophets of the day—marshal their forces. Violence is the result, violence that will mount in intensity until the Elias of preparation is beheaded in Machaerus and the Prophet whose way he prepared is crucified on Calvary. And even then it shall not cease. Violence, born of Beelzebub, ever was and ever will be manifest against the saints until the millennial day, "when the violent shall have no power." [^2]

Jesus continues his witness about John: "And all the people that heard him [meaning John], and the publicans, justified God, being baptized with the baptism of John." What a mighty tide of conversion and baptism attended the ministry of the Baptist! The baptism of John—immersion in water by a legal administrator for the remission of sins, the ordinance that prepares men for the baptism of fire and of the Holy Ghost that comes after—this baptism, of which even the hated publicans partook, was ordained of God. All men must be baptized to gain salvation.

"But the Pharisees and lawyers rejected the counsel of God against themselves, being not baptized of him." The counsel of God! God counsels baptism, baptism in water, John's baptism. Some professors of religion do not; they say it is only an outward sign of an inward grace, and that all that matters is how one feels in his heart, or if not that, all that counts is the baptism of desire, or the baptism of the Spirit. But Jesus says that all men—the Pharisees and the lawyers of his day, the false ministers of religion of our day—all must choose whose counsel to take, the counsel that comes from God or that which comes from man.

Then, as a conclusion to this part of his teaching, Jesus asks: "Whereunto then shall I liken the men of this generation? and to what are they like?" He answers: "They are like unto children sitting in the marketplace, and calling one to another, and saying, We have piped unto you, and ye have not danced; we have mourned to you, and ye have not wept. For John the Baptist came neither eating bread nor drinking wine; and ye say, He hath a devil. The Son of man is come eating and drinking; and ye say, Behold a gluttonous man, and a winebibber, a friend of publicans and sinners! But wisdom is justified of all her children."

'What illustration can I choose to show how petty, peevish, and insincere are you unbelieving Jews? You are like fickle children playing games: when you hold a mock wedding, your playmates refuse to dance; when you change the game to a funeral procession, your playmates refuse to mourn. In like manner you are only playing at religion. As cross and capricious children you reject John because he came with the strictness of the Nazarites, and ye reject me because I display the warm human demeanor that makes for pleasant social intercourse.' (Commentary 1:263.)

We have now heard John, as an Elias of preparation, bear testimony of the Elias of restoration; and have heard Jesus, in turn, testify of the divine mission of his forerunner. Shortly we shall see John, now languishing in a vile prison, seal his testimony with his blood, preparatory to the receipt of that eternal life of which he is already assured.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Hartley Coleridge, quoted, Farrar, p. 231.
[^2] "If 'this Man,' this strange, wandering, popular idol, with His strange, novel ways and words, Whom in politeness he must call 'Teacher,' Rabbi, were a Prophet, He would have known who the woman was, and, if He had known who she was, then would He never have allowed such approach." (Edersheim 1:567.)
