Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1980)

Chapter 47

Jesus Faces His Pharisaic Foes

She sat and wept beside his feet; the weight Of sin oppressed her heart; for all the blame, And the poor malice of the worldly shame, To her were past, extinct, and out of date; Only the sin remained—the leprous state. She would be melted by the heat of love, By fires far fiercer than are blown to prove And purge the silver ore adulterate. She sat and wept, and with her untressed hair, Still wiped the feet she was so blessed to touch; And He wiped off the soiling of despair From her sweet soul, because she loved so much. [^1]

His Feet Anointed in Simon's House

(Luke 7:36-50)

It is now autumn, A.D. 28. Jesus has been traveling, teaching, testifying, and healing for nearly two years. Timewise most of his mortal ministry is accomplished, and in another year and a half, by April of A.D. 30, he will be lifted up upon the cross by sinful men—sinful scribes and Pharisees, sinful priests and Levites, who will use a Roman arm and a Roman cross, a Roman nail and a Roman spear, to do what they cannot do personally.

And we are now seeing a gradually rising tide of Pharisaic opposition that will roll forward, on waves of hatred and bitterness, until it becomes a mighty crescendo of tumult and thunderous denunciation, punctuated with shrill cries of, "Crucify him; crucify him; his blood be upon us and our children." Already we have seen him rejected by his own in Nazareth; we have heard the murmuring charges of blasphemy when he forgave and then healed the paralytic in Peter's home in Capernaum; we have gone with him to the second Passover in Jerusalem, seen him heal on the Sabbath the man who for thirty-eight years had taken no step on his own; and we have felt pity for those who thereafter sought to slay him because he worked a miracle on their holy day. Back in Galilee, again because he healed on the Sabbath, we have seen the Rabbis, scribes, and Sanhedrinists conspire with the Herodians as to how they might put him to death.

And through it all we have heard Jesus speak loving words to the penitent—as illustrated in the Beatitudes—and send forth harsh denunciations toward his foes and oppressors, as witness his declarations, just made, against those who had called the Son of Man a glutton and a winebibber because of his friendly social intercourse with the people, and a friend of publicans and sinners because his arms and heart were open to all who would hear his voice.

We cannot doubt that this rising tide of opposition was part of the divine plan. It was the preaching of the gospel and the performance of his miracles, strange as this latter may seem, that caused it to spring forth. There will even be Jewish opponents who will seek to slay Lazarus, after he rises from the dead, lest people seeing him alive believe in Christ.

Jesus may not have courted persecution and opposition as such, but the proclamation of a new gospel dispensation, proclaimed to those who fear for their craft, can have no other effect. Indeed, it would appear that "in the unfolding of His Mission to Man, the Christ progressively placed Himself in antagonism to the Jewish religious thought of his time, from out of which He had historically sprung. . . . From the first this antagonism was there in what He taught and did; and it appeared with increasing distinctness in proportion as He taught. We find it in the whole spirit and bearing of what he did and said—in the house at Capernaum, in the Synagogues, with the Gentile Centurion, at the gate of Nain, and especially here, in the history of the much forgiven woman who had much sinned." (Edersheim 1:562.)

And so now we join Jesus in the home of Simon the Pharisee to see what happens when the "much sinned" woman anoints his feet with her tears and with costly ointment brought in an alabaster box. We do not know the name of the city, who Simon was, or who the woman was; only that the banquet, the anointing, and the blessed words spoken by Jesus, all took place somewhere in Galilee. In Holy Writ a fragmentary account only is preserved for us. From it, in Luke's language, we learn that "one of the Pharisees desired him that he would eat with him. And he went into the Pharisee's house, and sat down to meat."

Jesus has often eaten with publicans and known sinners for which he has, by sinning Pharisees, been condemned. Now he accepts the invitation of one who wears the mantle of religion, but who has not received a remission of his sins in the waters of baptism, and in whose presence a woman of ill repute will come to render to Jesus the obeisance and respect that his host chose not to bestow. It was the social custom of the day for leading Pharisees of a village or city to invite visiting Rabbis to break bread with them in their abodes. Some of Jesus' disciples would have been included by Simon in his invitation. Hospitality was a way of life among them, and it was honorable and proper to feed and shelter visiting teachers and travelers.

Guests entering Palestinian homes often removed their sandals, lest the pollutions of the street contaminate the mats and rugs on which family prayers were offered. At the dining table they reclined on couches with their feet outward from the table, and the dining hall was accessible to others than those bidden to partake of its appetite-satisfying bounties. All of this enabled "a woman in the city, which was a sinner," carrying "an alabaster box of ointment," to enter uninvited and to stand behind Jesus. According to the social customs of the day she could even speak to the guests without being bidden to depart by the master of the house. This, however, she did not do; rather, she "stood at his feet behind him weeping, and began to wash his feet with her tears, and did wipe them with the hairs of her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them with the ointment."

All of the usual amenities of the day had been ignored by the day's host, as Jesus will soon remind him. But what the host should have done, however reluctantly, the unbidden spectator—and she a woman—had now done with a full heart and in a spirit of penitence and thanksgiving. Why did she do it? What would impel a woman whose life had been stained with sin—stained? perhaps drenched and buried in sin, for her past life could not have been other than one of gross immorality—what would impel such a person to come uninvited, face the Sinless One, and, as her tears bedewed his feet, wipe them with her tresses and seal the washing thus made with an anointing of costly ointment? She first washed the feet of Jesus with her tears, then anointed them with oil. Why? And was all this done by an evil sinner? No!—not by any means. All this was the work and worship of a devout and faithful woman who had been a sinner but who was now cleansed; who was now free from the crushing burden of many offenses; who now walked in a newness of life because of him whose feet she now kissed and upon whom she now bestowed all the reverent and awe-inspired love that her whole soul had power to possess.

This we must know if we are to envision what really transpired on this inspiring occasion in the home of Simon the Pharisee. Here is a woman who once was a sinner but now is clean. Jesus is not going to forgive her sins—he has already done so; it happened when she believed and was baptized in his name; it happened when she repented with full purpose of heart and pledged her life and every breath she thereafter drew to the Cause of Righteousness. We are dealing with a convert who has come to pour out, in the spirit of thanksgiving and rejoicing, the gratitude of her soul to him who has freed her, freed her in times past, from the chains of bondage and hell.

None of this is known to Simon. He is in his sins, being unbaptized; and like Nicodemus, the master in Israel who knew not that men can be born again, Simon is, in his present state, spiritually incapable of conceiving that a woman whose soul once was scarlet is now as white as snow.

Simon thus "spake within himself"; that is, he thought to himself—and as the ancient proverb says: "Guard well thy thoughts, for thoughts are heard in heaven"—Simon thought to himself: "This man, if he were a prophet, would have known who and what manner of woman this is that toucheth him: for she is a sinner." There is no sprouting faith here. Jesus is only "this man," not, as so many are saying, a mighty prophet and even the Messiah, who is called Christ, who is God's Son. Simon's thoughts toward his guest are no more respectful than were his deeds. [^2]

"Jesus answering"—he is answering the unspoken thoughts—"said unto him, Simon, I have somewhat to say unto thee. And he saith, Master, say on." Jesus then said:

There was a certain creditor which had two debtors: the one owed five hundred pence, and the other fifty. And when they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both. Tell me therefore, which of them will love him most?

In this illustration, which can scarcely be classed as a parable, "Jesus entered into the Pharisees' own modes of reasoning. Of two debtors, one of whom owed ten times as much as the other, who would best love the creditor who had freely forgiven them? Though to both the debt might have been equally impossible of discharge, and both might love equally, yet a Rabbi would, according to his Jewish notions, say, that he would love most to whom most had been forgiven. If this was the undoubted outcome of Jewish theology—the so much for so much—let it be applied to the present case. If there were much benefit, there would be much love; if little benefit, little love. And conversely: in such case much love would argue much benefit; little love, small benefit." (Edersheim 1:567-68.) As anticipated, Simon answered, "I suppose," and in this beginning there seems to be a touch of supercilious aloofness, an indication that Simon had no idea of whom Jesus had spoken, "I suppose," he replies, "that he, to whom he forgave most."

Jesus said, "Thou hast rightly judged." The answer had been given; the scene was set. All at the dinner table were attentive; all were acutely aware of Simon's host-imposed failures, of the woman's worshipful act, and of the Divine Presence, whose gracious words always presented a heavenly message in the best way. And so, turning to the woman, but speaking to Simon, Jesus said:

Simon, Seest thou this woman? I entered into thine house, thou gavest me no water for my feet: but she hath washed my feet with tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head.

Thou gavest me no kiss: but this woman since the time I came in hath not ceased to kiss my feet.

My head with oil thou didst not anoint: but this woman hath anointed my feet with ointment.

How beautifully painted is the picture; how expertly chosen are the words. Simon—a Pharisee, a leader of the people and man of note, a pillar in the synagogue, who gloried in his supposed righteousness—Simon proffered none of the usual civilities and courtesies, however ritualistic and meaningless they often were; but this woman, unnamed and otherwise unknown, reputed to be a sinner to whom the services in the synagogue held no allure, who scarcely deserved any attention in such an august gathering, had poured out, from the depths of her soul, such gratitude and thanksgiving and worship as is seldom seen. Then came the crowning pronouncement:

Wherefore I say unto thee, Her sins, which are many, are forgiven, for she loved much: but to whom little is forgiven, the same loveth little.

Thus Simon received the word; he stood instructed and rebuked, but it was the woman to whom the blessing must come. To her Jesus said, "Thy sins are forgiven." Properly rendered, the two phrases, the first to Simon and the second to the woman, should read: "Forgiven have been her sins the many," and "Thy sins have been forgiven, the many." (Edersheim 1:568-69.) That is to say, her sins were forgiven in times past, which Jesus now confirms, not her sins are now being forgiven by some special dispensation. [^3]

To conclude the whole matter—while "they that sat at meat with him began to say within themselves, Who is this that forgiveth sins also?" for they, like Simon, knew not what was involved in the law of repentance and baptism and forgiveness—Jesus "said to the woman, The faith hath saved thee; go in peace," or, again, as it is more properly rendered, "Go into peace" (Edersheim 1:569), meaning continue in the peace that is yours because you have believed and obeyed the gospel law.

Jesus Continues to Travel and Preach with His Friends

(Luke 8:1-3; JST Luke 8:1)

Throughout his whole ministry, Jesus traveled, preached, and healed. We are now with him in the autumn of A.D. 28 when he is making another tour of Galilee. An unnamed woman has but recently washed his feet with her tears, dried them with her tresses, and then anointed them with ointment—as she worshipped at his feet—while he sat, or rather reclined, at meat in the home of Simon the Pharisee. Now, in Galilee, he is visiting "every city and village, preaching and showing the glad tidings of the kingdom of God."

We repeat—and the concept must be ever before us, lest we slip into the sectarian concept that Jesus' ministry was one of teaching ethical verities only, that he was not, as a teacher, first and foremost one who taught doctrine, or that he was not a theologian of superlative capacity—we repeat that his teaching was "the glad tidings of the kingdom of God." In other words, he preached the gospel, as all the prophets preached it. He proclaimed the fatherhood of God, his own divine Sonship, the fall of Adam, and the resultant atoning sacrifice of a Savior of the world. His message was: 'Come unto Christ and be perfected in him; accept him as the Son of God; believe his words and live his law; repent of your sins and be baptized with the baptism of John, that, in due course, you may receive the baptism of fire and of the Holy Ghost.' Jesus taught the gospel; let us never forget it. Should we do so, we shall build on a foundation of sand, and when the rains of uncertainty fall and the winds of skepticism blow and the floods of persecution beat vehemently upon us, our house of partial faith, of partial knowledge, of partial understanding will fall.

With reference to this missionary journey, Luke specifies that Jesus took with him a large entourage. Apostles, disciples, and loyal followers were almost always with him as he taught and traveled. His work was not done in a corner, and always, by precept and by example, he was training others to do and be as he did and was. This time they included "the twelve who were ordained of him"—those chosen and foreordained witnesses who were now beginning to bear with him the burdens of the earthly kingdom, and who would carry a witness of his name to nations afar off, before their mortal ministries ended; he took with him the Twelve; also "certain women, which had been healed of evil spirits and infirmities"; also "Mary called Magdalene, out of whom went seven devils"; also "Joanna the wife of Chuza Herod's steward"; also Susanna; and also "many others." And all of these "ministered unto him of their substance," which is to say, he traveled without purse or scrip, as it were, relying on the goodness of God and the sustaining help of his believing friends for food and for clothing and for shelter. Jesus obeyed his own law that the laborer is worthy of his hire and that "they which preach the gospel should live of the gospel." (1 Cor. 9:14.)

And who shall say that it is anything less than a glorious privilege to feed and aid the Holy One of Israel in his mortal labors? Could those who had substance do other than rejoice at the privilege of sharing it—be it only a crust or a crumb—with him whose all things are, but who made himself subject to all of earth's ills and needs, that in due course he might rise above all things? And wherein is this different in principle from what the faithful always do when they share their substance with the servants of the Lord, or with their fellowmen, always knowing that whatsoever they do unto the least of the Lord's ministers, or to the least of his earthly brethren, they do unto him?

Would that we knew more—someday we will!—of the faithful ones who trod in the tracks of Jesus; who heard the truths of heaven from his divine lips; who saw the miracles he wrought; who learned from him how they, in turn, should carry the same message of salvation—the gospel message; "the glad tidings of the kingdom of God"—to yet others of earth's inhabitants. We have slivers of knowledge about each of the Twelve, which we have noted or will yet mention in other connections. Of Susanna we know nothing; of Joanna, the wife of Chuza Herod's steward, the record also is bare, although we speculate that she may have been the mother of the young man, the nobleman's son, who was healed by Jesus' word spoken in Cana while the youth was in Capernaum.

Of Mary, called Magdalene, we must make special mention. Her life was interwoven intimately with that of the Lord Jesus himself. She apparently came from Magdala, as the identifying appendage to her name signifies. At some unrecorded time she was healed by Jesus from severe physical and mental maladies, and from her body the Master—of the seen and the unseen—cast out seven devils. Hers was no ordinary illness, and we cannot do other than suppose that she underwent some great spiritual test—a personal Gethsemane, a personal temptation in the wilderness for forty days, as it were—which she overcame and rose above—all preparatory to the great mission and work she was destined to perform.

How often it is that the chosen and elect of God wrestle with physical, mental, and devilish infirmities as they cleanse and perfect their souls preparatory to the ministerial service they are called upon to render. A Moses with his stammering tongue, and a Paul with his thorn in the flesh, are called upon to rise above their flesh-born ills and be the teachers and witnesses they were destined to be. That Mary Magdalene passed whatever test a divine providence imposed upon her, we cannot doubt. And so we find her here, traveling with and ministering to the needs of the One who chose his intimates with perfect insight.

Hereafter we shall see her at the cross, a sword piercing her soul as it pierced that of another Mary, the Blessed Virgin, as they both witness the death struggles of the One who had life in himself. Then we shall find her at Joseph's tomb where Jesus' body is laid; and again, bringing spices and ointments to embalm his body; and again in the bare and open tomb whence his resurrected body has risen; and again, seeing the angelic shape and hearing the angelic words, "Why seek ye the living among the dead? He is not here, but is risen" (Luke 24:5-6); and yet again in the Garden, as the first mortal to see a resurrected personage, we shall see her with the Risen Lord, anxious to embrace him, and being restrained by his gentle command and explanation that he had not yet ascended to his Father. We suppose also that she was in the upper room with the other sorrowing worshippers when the Lord, whose body was one of flesh and bones, now appeared to his saints, that they might feel the nail marks in his hands and in his feet and thrust their hands into the gaping wound in his riven side. Can we do other than rank Mary Magdalene with the Blessed Virgin, with Mother Eve, and with Sarah, the wife of Abraham? [^4]

As to the other "women, which had been healed of evil spirits and infirmities," and as to the "many others," even their names, for the present, are unknown. Those today who are kindred in spirit to them, who have like faith and like good works, may, of course, see their ancient counterparts in visions. And in that glorious day when all the faithful sit down in the kingdom of God, with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the holy prophets, to go no more out, then all shall know and love each other, and, indeed, shall even remember the long association they had in preexistence—all in preparation for the probations of mortality, for the day when each, according to his assignment, would play his role in the eternal gospel drama, in the unfolding plan of the Almighty for the salvation of his children.

But for now let us continue our journey through Galilee with the Blessed Party, headed by the Blessed Personality, as the Blessed Teachings fall from his lips and the Blessed Acts of providence and goodness are wrought by his hands. Soon, with this select group of favored friends of our Friend, the Lord Jesus, we shall see him heal one whose affliction was imposed by an evil spirit inhabiting his body—because of which healing the tide of rising opposition will swell to new heights, and Jesus will come forth with new and strong doctrine.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Hartley Coleridge, quoted, Farrar, p. 231.
[^2] "If 'this Man,' this strange, wandering, popular idol, with His strange, novel ways and words, Whom in politeness he must call 'Teacher,' Rabbi, were a Prophet, He would have known who the woman was, and, if He had known who she was, then would He never have allowed such approach." (Edersheim 1:567.)
[^3] "In effect Jesus is saying: 'Her sins were many, but she believed in me, has repented of her sins, was baptized by my disciples, and her sins were washed away in the waters of baptism. Now she has sought me out to exhibit the unbounded gratitude of one who was filthy, but is now clean. Her gratitude knows no bounds and her love is beyond measure, for she was forgiven of much. Had she been forgiven of but few sins, she would not have loved me so intensely.' " (Commentary 1:265.)
[^4] "She is not to be confused with the unnamed though repentant sinner who anointed Jesus' feet in the home of Simon. (Luke 7:36-50.) It is one of the basest slanders of all history to suppose that Mary of Magdala was a fallen woman and therefore to use the term Magdalene as an appellation descriptive of reformed prostitutes." (Commentary 1:266.)
