Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1980)

Chapter 48

The Family of Jesus and the Family of Lucifer

If ye were Abraham's children, ye would do the works of Abraham. . . . If God were your Father, ye would love me. . . . Ye are of your father the devil. (John 8:39, 42, 44.)

"He Casteth Out Devils through Beelzebub"

(Matthew 12:22-30; JST Matthew 12:20-23; Mark 3:22-27; JST Mark 3:18-19; Luke 11:14-15; 17:23; JST Luke 11:15, 18-19, 23)

Our group of penitent believers—the Twelve, Mary Magdalene, Joanna, Susanna, and many others, both men and women—are traveling, preaching, healing, basking in the light of the Lord, through every city and village of Galilee. We say that they, all of them, were engaged in ministerial service, for we cannot doubt that Jesus called on others to express themselves, and delegated power and authority to worthy associates, as rapidly as they were able to perform the assigned labors. He was building men and sanctifying women, and though the records speak only of what he did and said—as they should, he being the Son of God—yet others were in process of growing in the things of the Spirit so that after his departure they would be prepared to step forth in dignity and with honor and carry on the work the Master had commenced.

They—our missionary group—come into Capernaum, the site of so many of Jesus' wondrous doings. Here there is brought to him "one possessed with a devil, blind, and dumb." This poor suffering soul, what manifold miseries weighed him down. He neither saw nor heard, and to top it all—an ill much greater than the physical imperfections—he was possessed by a devil, by one of the evil spirits who craved a body, even such a one as this, and even for such a moment of ill-gotten tenancy as was here allowed. Jesus healed him. He saw; he spoke; the devil departed. It was no ordinary miracle, for the affliction was of no common kind; it was of such magnitude as to deserve special recitation in Holy Writ. We cannot doubt that the man somehow had gained faith to make possible and bring to pass the marvelous deed; and we know that immediately thereafter, "all the people were amazed"—as, well they might be—and that hosts said, as though in unison, "Is not this the son of David?" 'Is not this the Messiah who was to come? Is he not that Prophet of whom Moses spoke? Is he not the Son of God who is to redeem his people? And shall we not, therefore, follow him, and live his law?' [^1]

Such a fame and a name has now fastened itself to this famous Galilean, that his steps are everywhere dogged with spies and enemies sent by the Sanhedrin to gain evidence against him. The rising tide of opposition is beating with increasing fury upon the Eternal Rock. And so, Mark says, "the scribes which came down from Jerusalem said, He hath Beelzebub, and by the prince of the devils casteth he out devils."

His miracle was a known reality. Blind eyes now saw; deaf ears now heard; the demon from hell had given up his stolen home. Jesus' act of mercy and healing was known to all. They were even hailing him as David's Son! Unless this and like miracles are explained away, the priestcrafts of the priests will be replaced by a new order; the scribes and Pharisees must disabuse the public mind or lose their positions of power and influence over the people.

He casteth out devils by Beelzebub! That is the solution to their problem, and from their standpoint it is a good one. Since the miracle cannot be denied, the alternative is to say it was wrought by Satanic power, that Satan cast out Satan, that the prince of devils said to an underling in his kingdom, Depart hence. This would even explain the opened eyes and the unstopped ears, for if Jesus operated by evil power, then all that he did was morally wrong.

This Pharisaic approach to Jesus and his ministry; this Rabbinic way of turning light into darkness; this priest-ridden denial and denunciation not of the miracle itself, but of the power by which it was wrought—all this is a perfect illustration of how Lucifer, in all ages, fights the truth. The latter-day miracle of Mormonism—Oh, it is nothing, say the ministers, because there is a flaw, so they assume falsely, in the doctrine. Pay no attention to the fruits of the prophetically planted tree, say the divines of the day; what if the fruit is good, for we have found (as they falsely suppose) a theological flaw in their beliefs. And since anyone can debate doctrine, let's get the spirit of contention in every heart; let's get an argument going about dotted I's and crossed T's; then people will forget the great and eternal blessings that flow from the restored gospel.

And so with the Pharisees. How helpful, they reason, if we can get the people arguing about the source rather than the fact of Jesus' power. If we can make people think he works by Satan's power, then no matter whether he raises the dead or calls down manna from heaven, it will all be part of demoniac delusion from which men must flee.

So perfectly does this Satan-born, Lucifer-inspired, devil-directed attack of the Pharisees illustrate how the enemy of all righteousness fights the truth, so cunning and evil is the approach, that it is worth our while to dwell upon it with some particularity. "To us a single well-ascertained miracle would form irrefragable evidence of the claims of Christ; to them it would not," as Edersheim so persuasively reasons. "They could believe in the 'miracles,' and yet not in the Christ. To them the question would not be, as to us, whether they were miracles—but, By what power, or in what Name, He did these deeds? From our standpoint, their opposition to the Christ would—in view of His Miracles—seem not only wicked, but rationally inexplicable. But ours was not their point of view.

"And here, again, we perceive that it was enmity to the Person and Teaching of Jesus which led to the denial of His claims. The inquiry: By what power Jesus did these works? they met by the assertion, that it was through that of Satan, or the Chief of the Demons. They regarded Jesus, as not only temporarily, but permanently, possessed by a demon, that is, as the constant vehicle of Satanic influence. And this demon was, according to them, none other than Beelzebub, the prince of the devils. Thus, in their view, it was really Satan who acted in and through Him; and Jesus, instead of being recognised as the Son of God, was regarded as an incarnation of Satan; instead of being owned as the Messiah, was denounced and treated as the representative of the Kingdom of Darkness. All this, because the Kingdom which He came to open, and which He preached, was precisely the opposite of what they regarded as the Kingdom of God. Thus it was the essential contrariety of Rabbinism to the Gospel of Christ that lay at the foundation of their conduct towards the Person of Christ. We venture to assert, that this accounts for the whole after-history up to the Cross.

"Thus viewed, the history of Pharisaic opposition appears not only consistent, but is, so to speak, morally accounted for. Their guilt lay in treating that as Satanic agency which was of the Holy Ghost; and this, because they were of their father the Devil, and knew not, nor understood, nor yet loved the Light, their deeds being evil. They were not children of the light, but of that darkness which comprehended Him not Who was the Light. And now we can also understand the growth of active opposition to Christ. Once arrived at the conclusion, that the miracles which Christ did were due to the power of Satan, and that He was the representative of the Evil One, their course was rationally and morally chosen. To regard every fresh manifestation of Christ's Power as only a fuller development of the power of Satan, and to oppose it with increasing determination and hostility, even to the Cross: such was henceforth the natural progress of this history." (Edersheim 1:574-75.)

Much as this reasoning may salve or sear the consciences of the Pharisaic practicers of priestcraft; much as it may make the ministers of our day feel that Mormonism is a monumental fraud; much as it may lay to rest, in the public mind, the rising dawn of a new day—yet it is weak, futile, and doomed to ultimate failure. The real issues are: What is the truth, where is the truth, and who has the truth. In Jesus' day, the true answers lay with him; in our day, they rest with those of us who are his latter-day servants. Jesus has heretofore taught that to find the truth about religion, men must gain personal revelation from God by the power of the Holy Ghost. Now he contents himself by saying that he cast out devils by the power of God and not the power of the devil, and his declaratory reasoning is irrefutable. "How can Satan cast out Satan?" he asks, and he says in answer:

Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation, and every city or house divided against itself shall not stand.

With this reasoning none can contend; even the scribes and Pharisees must agree—it is a simple summation of all secular history. Divided kingdoms fall, and the day comes when they are left desolate. And so, he continues:

If Satan cast out Satan, he is divided against himself; how then shall his kingdom stand?

His conclusion is irrefutable. Such strength as Satan has is in the united power of his evil ways; if he divides his strength, what is left?

And if I by Beelzebub cast out devils, by whom do your children cast them out? therefore they shall be your judges.

This would be a sore point. Jesus was not alone in casting out devils. Others, by faith, had the same power: others of the house of Israel then ministered among them with power to control the demons in hell. What power did they use? This was no longer a personal matter, a matter dealing with him alone. He had made converts, and whole congregations had come into the kingdom. If so many others found the truth, why shouldn't these bickering scribes?

But if I cast out devils by the Spirit of God, then the kingdom of God is come unto you. For they also cast out devils by the Spirit of God, for unto them is given power over devils, that they may cast them out.

Jesus cast out devils. He did it by the power of God, for Satan cannot cast out Satan, and, therefore, he is divine; the kingdom has been set up; the true Church has been established among them. And—mark it well—the others who cast out devils had the same power. They too were members of the Church; they too held the holy priesthood; they were followers of the One who then spoke to them.

Or else how can one enter into a strong man's house, and spoil his goods, except he first bind the strong man? and then he will spoil his house.

The reasoning is good; the conclusion is true; the lesson is well taught. Christ has entered the worldly realm of Lucifer, has bound the strong man who reigns therein, has cast out his minions from their ill-gotten abodes, and will in due course spoil the whole house and send away into outer darkness those whose dwelling it is.

He that is not with me is against me: and he that gathereth not with me scattereth abroad.

'I am Christ; I cast out devils in my Father's name; I heal the sick by his power; salvation comes by me. Let none of you longer stand neutral. Either ye are with me, or ye are against me. Unless you come unto me, and espouse my cause, and keep my commandments, ye are against me. There is no middle ground.'

Jesus Speaks of Forgiveness and the Unpardonable Sin

(Matthew 12:31-37, 43-45; JST Matthew 12:26, 37-39; Mark 3:28-30; JST Mark 3:21-25; Luke 6:45; 11:24-26; 12:8-10; JST Luke 11:25-27; 12:10-12)

Our Theologian-Friend—for such he is: the Chief Theologian, among all the professors of religion ever to dwell on planet earth—our Theologian-Friend is now about to preach some strong, even harsh doctrine. He stands accused—by scribal scripturalists and Pharisaic preachers—of being in league with Lucifer; of casting out devils and working miracles by the power of Beelzebub, the prince of devils. They have said he is not an incarnate God but an incarnate devil. In his response he has shown that a house divided against itself cannot stand and that Satan cannot cast out Satan lest he destroy himself.

To understand the doctrine Jesus is about to preach, we must let our eyes rest, first, upon the scene of spiritual anarchy created by his miracles, by the resultant charges laid against him, and by his response thereto. Some of his hearers believe his teachings to the full; among them are the Twelve, Mary Magdalene, and the others who traveled and consorted with him. Some of his hearers are defiant, rebellious, hateful; in their hearts is the spirit of murder, and they would fain destroy him if they could. This group is headed and guided and influenced by the scribal spies of the Great Sanhedrin which sits in Jerusalem itself. Yet others of his hearers choose to stand neutral; their spiritual strength does not align them with the ensign of righteousness that he has raised. They fear the Pharisees and have postponed a decision as to where and with whom they will pledge their allegiance. It is of them that Jesus has just said that those who are not for him are against him—there is no such thing as neutrality in the cause of truth and righteousness, either on earth or in heaven—and they who do not gather with him, by their indifference and indecision, scatter abroad. But further, amid the religious contention aroused by Jesus' ministry, there were some of his disciples who had begun to fear and who, under the pressure of public opinion, had spoken against him.

As Luke records, Jesus said: "Whosoever shall confess me before men, him shall the Son of man also confess before the angels of God: But he that denieth me before men shall be denied before the angels of God." Then comes this explanation as to why these words had been forthcoming: "Now his disciples knew that he said this, because they had spoken evil against him before the people; for they were afraid to confess him before men. And they reasoned among themselves, saying, He knoweth our hearts, and he speaketh to our condemnation, and we shall not be forgiven."

We can envision somewhat the anxiety and anguish that engulfed their souls. They had known and still knew of his divine Sonship, and yet—fearing men, unable to withstand the social and religious pressures of the day—they had joined with the dominant religious groups and spoken evilly of this Man of whom Moses wrote. Can traitors be forgiven? Could they again find grace in his sight? His answer to their thoughts of anguish and sorrow was Christ-like. "Whosoever shall speak a word against the Son of man, and repenteth, it shall be forgiven him," he said, "But unto him who blasphemeth against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him." The scene is thus set; we are now ready to hear Jesus' profound doctrine. In Matthew's account it follows the proclamation that those who are not for him are against him. Jesus now says:

Wherefore I say unto you, All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men who receive me and repent; but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven unto men.

And whosoever speaketh a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him; but whosoever speaketh against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the world to come.

There is an unpardonable sin, a sin for which there is no forgiveness, neither in time nor in eternity. It is blasphemy against the Holy Ghost; it is to deny Christ, to come out in open rebellion, to make open war against the Son of Man—after gaining, by the power of the Holy Ghost, a sure and perfect knowledge of the truth and divinity of the Lord's work. It is to shed innocent blood, meaning to assent unto the death of Christ—to crucify him afresh, Paul says [^2]—with a full and absolute knowledge that he is the Son of God. It is to wage open warfare, as does Lucifer, against the Lord and his Anointed, knowing that the course so pursued is evil. It is to deny—to say the sun does not shine while seeing its blazing light—it is to deny Christ after a sure and irrevocable testimony has been received by the power of the Holy Ghost. Hence, it is a scurrilous and evil declaration against the Holy Ghost, against the sole and only source of absolute and sure knowledge. It is blasphemy against the Holy Ghost. [^3]

Let men without this sure knowledge speak even against Christ himself; let them commit all manner of sins and blasphemies, even murder, and yet when the penalties have been paid and a proper repentance granted, men shall come forth in immortality and gain an inheritance in whatever kingdom of glory they merit. Only the sons of perdition shall be cast out eternally to live and reign with Lucifer in hell forever. Such is the mercy and wonder of that eternal plan—the gospel of God, now named after Christ his Son—which a gracious God has provided for all his children. [^4]

We cannot reconstruct the sequential order in which each spoken sentence fell from the lips of Jesus. Our synoptic friends, in recounting the same episodes, select different portions of the same discourse to emphasize the doctrine or teaching that seemed to them to be of greatest import. And as Jesus so often taught in the midst of surging and moving throngs, it is natural to assume that he repeated, summarized, paraphrased, and expanded his expressions as the needs of the moment required. We can only use our best judgment in lacing the varying comments of Matthew, Mark, and Luke into one consecutive narrative. Apparently at this point, as Mark records it, the following colloquy occurred:

And then came certain men unto him, accusing him, saying, Why do ye receive sinners, seeing thou makest thyself the Son of God.

Need we remind ourselves at this late date, as we study and ponder the sayings and doings of the Master, that he always and everywhere, without hesitancy, fear, or the slightest degree of self-effacement, has acclaimed and taught that he was God's Almighty Son. This is one point upon which there has been and is to be no question, no doubt, no secrecy. If he sometimes speaks in figures, or similitudes, or parables, so be it; but the message is always the same. 'I am the Son of God; I am the Messiah. Believe and obey my words. I am he; I am the Great Jehovah.' The Jews of that day heard what he said and knew what the words meant; for them it was a matter of believing or disbelieving, as it is also today when the message of salvation is proclaimed to a wicked world.

But he answered them and said, Verily I say unto you, All sins which men have committed, when they repent, shall be forgiven them; for I came to preach repentance unto the sons of men.

Thus, again we hear him phrase a profound proclamation. He came to cry repentance; there is no other course leading to salvation. Repent and believe the gospel; such ever has been and ever will be the divine will. Of course he received sinners. Who else is it that needs repentance? How else can he fulfill his divine commission to present the message of salvation to his mortal brethren?

And blasphemies, wherewith soever they shall blaspheme, shall be forgiven them that come unto me and do the works which they see me do.

Was it any different now than it had always been? Had not this same Jesus said to them of old, "As often as my people repent will I forgive them their trespasses against me." (Mosiah 26:30.) Did the very disciples themselves falter in their devotion and speak evilly of him? Let them repent. Were there those among men whose hearts were touched by the heavenly light and who desired salvation? Let them repent. Were there rebels, ungodly wretches, and scribes and Pharisees who thirsted for his blood? Let them repent. Repentance is for all accountable persons. There is no other gate through which men may walk to place their feet on the strait and narrow path leading to eternal life.

But there is a sin which shall not be forgiven. He that shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost, hath never forgiveness; but is in danger of being cut down out of the world. And they shall inherit eternal damnation.

And this he said unto them because they said, He hath an unclean spirit.

Again the message is given that forgiveness is for all except those who shall be damned eternally, those who blaspheme against the Holy Ghost, those who crucify Christ afresh, as it were, having a perfect knowledge, born of the Spirit, that he is the Son of God. And even those who said he had an unclean spirit and cast out devils by Beelzebub, the prince of devils, could repent and be forgiven, if they would.

Now we come to that portion of our Lord's discourse in which he excoriates his Pharisaic foes and in which he tells those who oppose him why they shall be judged and found wanting.

Either make the tree good, and his fruit good; or else make the tree corrupt, and his fruit corrupt: for the tree is known by his fruit.

'Be consistent, you Pharisees; make the tree good or bad. If it is good to cast out devils, and I cast them out, then my work is good, for a tree is known by its fruits; but if I am evil, as you say, then it must be a wicked thing to heal those possessed of evil spirits for a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit.' (Commentary 1:275.)

O generation of vipers, how can ye, being evil, speak good things? for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh.

A good man out of the good treasure of the heart bringeth forth good things: and an evil man out of the evil treasure bringeth forth evil things.

A parallel passage in Luke, spoken in another setting, that of the Sermon on the Plain, preserves for us these similarly oriented words: "A good man out of the good treasure of his heart bringeth forth that which is good; and an evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart bringeth forth that which is evil: for of the abundance of the heart his mouth speaketh." Such words need no exposition, only the spoken or unspoken reaffirmation, 'Never man spake as this Man.' He continues:

But I say unto you, That every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of judgment. For by thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned.

Must men work the works of wickedness to be damned? Are overt and evil acts a requisite? Are they needed to warrant one's being cast down to hell? Jesus is here preaching strong doctrine. Something less than evil acts will pull down curses upon the heads of the children of men. It suffices to think evil thoughts and to speak evil words; these alone identify what is in the heart of man and, without more, show the nature and kind of being he is. [^5]

Then came some of the scribes and said unto him, Master, it is written that, Every sin shall be forgiven; but ye say, Whosoever speaketh against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven. And they asked him, saying, How can these things be?

He has already taught the doctrine involved; he has already explained how forgiveness and pardoning grace operate. They have heard him say he came to preach repentance so that all sins might be forgiven; the question they ask has already been answered. And yet there is an exception to the law of forgiveness: it is that those who blaspheme against the Holy Ghost shall be damned eternally; for them there shall be no remission of sins—they cannot repent and they cannot be forgiven. But this condemnation is reserved for those only who have walked in the light and who now choose to say the sun does not shine while they see it. By raising the question again the scribes are going to great lengths to find fault with Jesus and raise questions in the public mind about his teachings.

And he said unto them, When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh through dry places, seeking rest and findeth none; but when a man speaketh against the Holy Ghost, then he saith, I will return into my house from whence I came out; and when he is come, he findeth him empty, swept and garnished; for the good spirit leaveth him unto himself.

When a man is baptized for the remission of sins; when evil and iniquity are burned out of him as though by fire, by the power of the Holy Ghost; when he becomes clean, and pure, and spotless before the Lord; when he has thus sanctified his soul—if he then sins against the Holy Ghost and loses the Spirit of the Lord as his companion, he is left in a fit condition to be swallowed up in every form of evil and iniquity. The house that was once swept and garnished, that was once a fit habitation for the Holy Spirit of God—that house is now vacant. The Spirit of the Lord will not dwell there longer, and the spirit of evil returns—returns to a vacant house, with a force and vigor exceeding anything of the past. As Jesus further says:

Then goeth the evil spirit, and taketh with him seven other spirits more wicked than himself; and they enter in and dwell there; and the last end of that man is worse than the first. Even so shall it be also unto this wicked generation.

There were those among them, obviously, who, having chosen to follow the Son of Righteousness, were now turning back, turning to worldly things, turning to follow Lucifer, their father, because their deeds were evil. [^6]

"An Evil Generation: They Seek a Sign"

(Matthew 12:38-42; Luke 11:16, 29-32; JST Luke 11:32-33)

Our Lord has just wrought a wondrous miracle: one who was deaf and dumb and possessed with an evil spirit has been blessed with a threefold miracle. Now he sees and speaks and is free from the shackling bondage of the demon who controlled his every thought and word and movement. How glorious it is to see such a wonder in Israel; but oh, what a mixed reaction it receives! To all those who believe in him who did the deed, it is an added sign and witness that he is the Messiah, their Deliverer, Savior, Redeemer, and King. But to those whose craft is in danger; who have sealed their hearts and minds against the new gospel dispensation; who say, God heard Moses and some of the prophets, but us he will not hear—to these scribal sectarians, as it were, the mighty miracle shows only that Jesus himself is possessed with a devil, and that all he does is by the power of the prince of devils. This view they have expressed, poisoning the minds of all whom they can influence. And their view has been refuted—in power, logically and conclusively—by the one at whose door the charge was laid.

What course is now open to them, and how shall they react? How shall they divert attention from their present discomfiture and rouse further animosity against this Nazarene who has taken upon himself the blasphemous assumption that he is divine? They must raise a new issue, or at least what will seem to be a new point of controversy. And so, "certain of the scribes and of the Pharisees," "tempting him," say: "Master, we would seek a sign from thee." Or, as Luke records it, they "sought of him a sign from heaven."

A sign from heaven! What, in heaven's name, had they just received? "They had already seen signs in such number and variety as had never before in all history been poured out upon a people. In their streets, houses, and synagogues, the lame leaped, the blind saw, the dumb spoke, paralytics walked and carried their beds, all manner of diseases were cured, devils were cast out, the dead raised—all by the command of him whom they now tempted. Yet, in the face of all this, they now demanded something new and different, some heavenly portent which would prove that what they had already seen was from above and not from beneath." (Commentary 1:277.)

Were they looking for a cloud by day and a pillar of fire by night to surround the Twelve? Was Jesus to divide the waters of the Sea of Galilee—congealing them with a wall of water on the right hand and on the left—so they all could walk from Capernaum to the land of the Gadarenes on dry ground? Did they expect to see Mount Zion or Mount Moriah quake, while smoke ascended up on high as from a furnace? Were they expecting this new Teacher to call down fire from heaven and consume six hundred Roman centurions with the sixty legions in which they served? How little they knew about how the Lord of heaven operates among men! True signs they had seen; signs of the sort they sought cannot be given without interfering with the divine law of agency under which all men must live.

"But he answered and said unto them," as Matthew records, "An evil and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign," and as Luke has it, "This is an evil generation: they seek a sign." Then as both synoptists say, "There shall no sign be given to it, but the sign of the prophet Jonas: For as Jonas was three days and three nights in the whale's belly; so shall the Son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth."

A sign from heaven! What part do signs play in the eternal scheme of things? Why do these scripturally wise detractors of the Holy One feel they can rouse further ill feelings against him by demanding a sign? Should he give some sign that he has not yet given? Is there some great heavenly portent that will prove he is the Son of God?

Jesus came, it is true, to give signs and to work miracles. It was part of his ministerial assignment, and in so doing he was acting in the power and authority of his Father. Signs are for the saints, not the world. Signs follow those that believe; they are not designed to convert the wicked and ungodly. Faith precedes the miracle. "I will show miracles, signs, and wonders, unto all those who believe on my name," the Lord says. "And whoso shall ask it in my name in faith, they shall cast out devils; they shall heal the sick; they shall cause the blind to receive their sight, and the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak, and the lame to walk. . . . But without faith shall not anything be shown forth except desolations upon Babylon." (D&C 35:8-11.)

There shall also be other signs, signs in the heavens above and in the earth beneath, wondrous portents that identify and bear record of things that are happening among men that affect their eternal salvation. But these also are understood only by those who have the gift and power of the Holy Ghost; they are understood by the saints only. The sign of the star was given to announce the birth of the Star of Israel, but only those who had faith, those who were waiting for the Consolation of Israel—the wise men from the East and a cluster of faithful souls in Palestine and in the Americas—only these few knew what it meant.

Those who seek signs—either to create faith or to feed their egos—whether in or out of the Church, shall fail in their search for divine approval. "He that seeketh signs shall see signs, but not unto salvation. . . . Faith cometh not by signs, but signs follow those that believe. Yea, signs come by faith, not by the will of men, nor as they please, but by the will of God. Yea, signs come by faith, unto mighty works, for without faith no man pleaseth God; and with whom God is angry he is not well pleased; wherefore, unto such he showeth no signs, only in wrath unto their condemnation." (D&C 63:7-11.)

For the scribes and Pharisees of all generations; for the wicked and ungodly in every age; for those without faith, who walk in worldly paths, there is only one sign, one alone to prove Christ's divinity, and that is the sign of the prophet Jonas. That sign is that Jesus was crucified, died, and rose again the third day in glorious immortality. It is that as Jonah of old spent three days and three nights in the belly of a whale, so shall the Son of Man spend a like period in an earthly tomb. It is that as the whale vomited Jonah from the blackness of a living tomb, so Jesus comes forth in a newness of life from a grave that cannot hold him. It is that the Son of Man—the Son of God—burst the bands of death, became the firstfruits of them that sleep, and ever liveth in immortal glory. The resurrection proves that Jesus is the Messiah; it is the sign, given of God, to all men of the truth and divinity of his work.

What sign does Deity give that there is a God? To the saints there are many, but to the wicked and ungodly there is only one—the fact of creation. God is the Creator, and all things denote there is a God. How could there be a creation without a Creator? Truly, the creation bears witness of the Creator.

What sign does he give that Christ is the Son of God? Again, to the saints there are many, but to the scribes and Pharisees of the world there is only one—the fact of resurrection. Christ is the Redeemer, and his redemption from death establishes his divinity. How could there be a resurrection without a Redeemer? Truly the resurrection bears witness of the Redeemer.

What sign does he give that the Holy Ghost is the witness and testator, the revealer of saving truth in all ages? Once again, where the saints are concerned the signs are many, but to worldly people—and the world cannot, without repentance, receive the Holy Ghost—there is only one sign. It is the gift of prophecy; it is the reality of prophetic insight; it is the fact that God reveals, beforehand, by the mouths of his holy prophets, all things that concern and affect the salvation of men on earth. The Holy Ghost is a revelator, and the fact of revelation and of prophecy and of spiritual gifts identifies him as the power and source whence they come. How could there be revelation without a revelator? The presence of the gifts of the Spirit bears witness of the third member of the Godhead.

Such are the signs—and there are none others—that God gives to the wicked and ungodly. If they believe and repent, if they are baptized and receive the Holy Ghost, if they walk uprightly before the Lord—then signs without end, miracles unceasing, wonders beyond mortal comprehension, all these flow unto them forever and ever. Such is the law that governs signs.

And so, heaping condemnation upon those then present, and speaking by way both of doctrine and of testimony, Jesus says:

For as Jonas was a sign unto the Ninevites, so shall also the Son of man be to this generation.

The queen of the south [the Queen of Sheba] shall rise up in the day of judgment with the men of this generation, and condemn them; for she came from the utmost parts of the earth, to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and, behold, a greater than Solomon is here.

The men of Nineve shall rise up in the day of judgment with this generation; and shall condemn it; for they repented at the preaching of Jonas; and, behold, a greater than Jonas is here.

We must not leave these stern and prophetic declarations of the Prophet of Nazareth—given to sinners about signs—without an acute awareness of the effect of adultery upon spirituality. Adultery so dulls the spiritual sensitivities of men that it becomes exceedingly hard for them to believe the truth when they hear it. Sexual immorality is second only to murder in the category of personal crimes. For those guilty of so gross an offense against God and his laws, the road back to cleanliness and purity is a steep and a rocky course. It can be traversed but the way is not easy.

Further: "Some sins cannot be separated; they are inseparably welded together. There never was a sign seeker who was not an adulterer, just as there never was an adulterer who was not also a liar. Once Lucifer gets a firm hold over one human weakness, he also applies his power to kindred weaknesses." (Commentary 1:277.) [^7]

Who Belongs to the Family of Jesus?

(Matthew 12:46-50; JST Matthew 12:44; Mark 3:31-35; JST Mark 3:26; Luke 8:19-21; 11:27-28; JST Luke 8:19-20; 11:29)

Our attention now turns to the Blessed Virgin and her other sons and daughters, the offspring of Mary and Joseph. Mary and some of Jesus' half-brothers seek to converse with him, but are unable to do so because of the throngs. He is told: "Thy mother and thy brethren stand without, desiring to speak with thee."

It seems to us, from the inspired records now extant among us, that the Master Teacher always used each successive event in his life as an occasion to teach doctrine and testify of his own divinity. So commonplace an event as the presence of his mother and some of her children—with whom he grew to maturity in Nazareth; with whom he played and worked and associated in the Galilean hills of yesteryear—became an occasion for a formal and profound pronouncement. Jesus said:

Who is my mother? and who are my brethren?

And he stretched forth his hand toward his disciples, and said, Behold my mother and my brethren!

And he gave them charge concerning her, saying, I go my way, for my Father hath sent me. And whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in heaven, the same is my brother, and sister, and mother.

Either at this point or at another time—how can we ever be sure?—"a certain woman of the company lifted up her voice, and said unto him, Blessed is the womb which bare thee, and the paps which thou hast sucked. And he said, Yea, and blessed are all they who hear the word of God, and keep it."

There are some things more important than familial inheritances. True, Mary was blessed because she bare God's Son, but all women can be blessed with blessed Mary if they keep the commandments of the blessed God. True, these children of Mary were Jesus' brothers and sisters, the fruit of the same womb in which his mortal body was created from the dust of the same earth, but all the disciples were also his brothers and sisters if they did the will of his Father who is in heaven.

The blessings of heaven are available—freely, without money and without price—to all men. All men cannot be born into this world as the sons of God, after the manner of the flesh, but all, through righteousness, can be adopted into the family of the Eternal God and become joint-heirs with Christ of the fulness of the glory and power of the Father. All people cannot be the literal seed of Mary, but all, through righteousness, can be adopted into the family of her Firstborn Son and become his brothers and sisters. Indeed, the very plan of salvation itself calls for a new birth, a birth to righteousness, by which all disciples, all saints, become the sons and daughters of Jesus Christ. They are born again; they become members of his family.

And all these blessings are available because Jesus was the Son of God. Even in announcing them, lest Mary or any of his blood-kindred feel too great an intimacy, or feel they should exercise control over the Firstborn of Mary, he speaks of his own Father as being in heaven, and pointedly says: "I go my way, for my Father hath sent me."

Who, then, are members of the family of Lucifer, and who of the family of the Lord Jesus? Are we not all the children of him whom we list to obey? Is it not, as Alma said: "If a man bringeth forth good works he hearkeneth unto the voice of the good shepherd, and he doth follow him; but whosoever bringeth forth evil works, the same becometh a child of the devil, for he hearkeneth unto his voice, and doth follow him." (Alma 5:41.)

---
Notas:
[^1] Hartley Coleridge, quoted, Farrar, p. 231.
[^2] "If 'this Man,' this strange, wandering, popular idol, with His strange, novel ways and words, Whom in politeness he must call 'Teacher,' Rabbi, were a Prophet, He would have known who the woman was, and, if He had known who she was, then would He never have allowed such approach." (Edersheim 1:567.)
[^3] "In effect Jesus is saying: 'Her sins were many, but she believed in me, has repented of her sins, was baptized by my disciples, and her sins were washed away in the waters of baptism. Now she has sought me out to exhibit the unbounded gratitude of one who was filthy, but is now clean. Her gratitude knows no bounds and her love is beyond measure, for she was forgiven of much. Had she been forgiven of but few sins, she would not have loved me so intensely.' " (Commentary 1:265.)
[^4] "She is not to be confused with the unnamed though repentant sinner who anointed Jesus' feet in the home of Simon. (Luke 7:36-50.) It is one of the basest slanders of all history to suppose that Mary of Magdala was a fallen woman and therefore to use the term Magdalene as an appellation descriptive of reformed prostitutes." (Commentary 1:266.)
[^5] It was of James's words—"If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given"—that Joseph Smith said: "Never did any passage of scripture come with more power to the heart of man than this did at this time to mine." He pondered upon it again and again, until, guided by the Spirit, he was led to offer the prayer which rent the heavens and opened the dispensation of the fulness of times. (JS-H 1:10-20.)
[^6] "How similarly the spiritually closed mind operates in all ages! These Jewish attempts, to justify adherence to a false religion, sound as though they had been made by the ministers of modern Christendom. 'We ourselves are righteous, and what can these Mormon Elders teach us. True it is that God spoke to prophets of old, but revelation has ceased; there is no modern communion with heaven. We have the Bible and are Christians, and that is sufficient for us.' But Jesus' counsel is: 'Tell them to humble themselves, repent of their sins, and pray to the Father in mighty prayer so they may learn where the truth really lies.' " (Commentary 1:249.)
[^7] 2 Ne. 9:41-43.
