Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1980)

Section 6

Footnotes

The Continuing Galilean Ministry

The Lord hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek; . . . to comfort all that mourn; To appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness; that they might be called trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he might be glorified. (Isa. 61:1-3.)

We now see Jesus going forth in the majesty and glory of his eternal Godhood—preaching, healing, and testifying.

We see him among his Galilean neighbors and friends, some of whom have great faith; others have souls darkened by sin and unbelief.

He speaks in parables, particularly to those who are not prepared to receive the word in plainness. They hear of a sower, of seed that grows by itself, of wheat and tares, of mustard seed and of leaven, of hidden treasure and a pearl of great price, and of the gospel net.

He stills a storm on the Sea of Galilee, heals a demoniac among the Gadarenes, raises the daughter of Jairus from death, heals the woman with the issue of blood, and causes the blind to see and the dumb to speak.

And in spite of it all, he is again rejected at Nazareth.

Then he instructs the Twelve and sends them forth, endowed with power from on high.

In sorrow we see the beloved Baptist beheaded by order of evil Antipas.

Then Jesus feeds the five thousand in a solitary place near Bethsaida-Julias, walks on the sea, and continues his miracles in the land of Gennesaret.

And finally, as the crowning event of this part of his ministry, we hear the sermon on the bread of life and the discourse on cleanliness.

How truly—according to the promises—did he replace mourning with the oil of joy, ashes with beauty, and the spirit of heaviness with the garment of praise!

O that all who saw and heard and felt what he then did might have believed in him—"that they might be called trees of righteousness" and "the planting of the Lord"!
