Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1980)

Chapter 49

Jesus Teaches in Parables

Give ear, O my people, to my law: incline your ears to the words of my mouth. I will open my mouth in a parable: I will utter dark sayings of old: Which we have heard and known, and our fathers have told us. (Ps. 78:1-3.)

Why Jesus Taught in Parables

(Matthew 13:1-3, 9-17, 34-35; JST Matthew 13:10-11, 13, 15-16; Mark 4:1-2, 9-12, 21-25, 33-34; JST Mark 4:9, 18-20, 26; Luke 8:4, 8, 16-18; JST Luke 8:18)

Every schoolboy knows Jesus taught in parables, but there is scarcely a learned theologian or an educated divine in all the universities of academia who knows why he chose this unique form of pedagogy. There are, of course, a great many scripturists who are aware of why he said he used parables, but their approach, almost without exception, is to explain that he could not possibly have meant what he said in the literal and true sense of the word, and therefore that he used parables for such and such a reason of their own devising.

It is only fair to say that the scriptural exegetes who have speculated and pontificated, in the religious literature of the day, as to why our Lord used parables, and as to what those parables mean, have not had the advantages of what latter-day revelation says on the matters at hand. Nonetheless, for whatever reason, the shimmering fantasies of the learned men, as they pertain to our Lord's use of parables, are of little worth to us.

In our continuing struggle to learn of him by whom salvation comes, we are about to encounter the beginning of the parables. We do not know if these are the first parables related by Jesus—it is, in fact, a little unreasonable to assume that no others have been related in the twenty months or so since his baptism—but at least these are the first major parables preserved for us in the scriptural record. And it was their use at this time that caused his disciples to ask: "Why speakest thou unto them in parables?"

As a necessary prelude to our analysis of the parables as they fall from the divine lips, we shall do well to have before us the social and historical circumstances that brought them forth, and also an understanding of their nature, use, and purpose in the gospel plan. The following items of history and principle will help us gain the perspective we need.

"Parables are short stories which point up and illustrate spiritual truths. Those spoken by Jesus deal with real events, or, if fictitious, are so consistent and probable that they may be viewed as the commonplace experiences of many people." (Commentary 1:283.)

"The essential feature of a parable is that of comparison or similitude, by which some ordinary, well-understood incident is used to illustrate a fact or principle not directly expressed in the story. . . . The narrative or incident upon which a parable is constructed may be an actual occurrence or fiction; but, if fictitious, the story must be consistent and probable, with no admixture of the unusual or miraculous. In this respect the parable differs from the fable, the latter being imaginative, exaggerated and improbable as to fact; moreover, the intent is unlike in the two, since the parable is designed to convey some great spiritual truth, while the so-called moral of the fable is at best suggestive only of worldly achievement and personal advantage. Stories of trees, animals and inanimate things talking together or with men are wholly fanciful; they are fables or apologues whether the outcome be depicted as good or bad; to the parable these show contrast, not similarity. The avowed purpose of the fable is rather to amuse than to teach. The parable may embody a narrative as in the instances of the sower and the tares, or merely an isolated incident, as in those of the mustard seed and the leaven.

"Allegories are distinguished from parables by greater length and detail of the story, and by the intimate admixture of the narrative with the lesson it is designed to teach; these are kept distinctly separate in the parable. Myths are fictitious stories, sometimes with historic basis of fact, but without symbolism of spiritual worth. A proverb is a short, sententious saying, in the nature of a maxim, connoting a definite truth or suggestion by comparison. Proverbs and parables are closely related, and in the Bible the terms are sometimes used interchangeably." (Talmage, pp. 298-99.)

Every gospel teacher—from the Chief Elder, who is Christ, to the least and lowest of his servants—must determine, in all teaching situations, what portion of eternal truth he will offer to his hearers of the moment. The gospel and its eternal truths are always the same: what was true two thousand years ago is true today; the truths that enabled Abraham to serve Jehovah and gain salvation are the same as those which enable us to serve Christ and gain a like reward. But not all people in all ages and under all circumstances are prepared to receive the fulness of all gospel truths. The Lord gives his word to men line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little, confirming their hope, building each new revelation upon the foundations of the past, giving his children only that portion of his word which they are able to bear.

When the elders of Israel go forth to proclaim the gospel to the world, they are subject to two commandments that the spiritually untutored might assume are contradictory. In one of them the Lord says, "Teach the principles of my gospel which are in the Bible and the Book of Mormon." (D&C 42:12.) Does this mean they are free to teach all they know about all of the doctrines found in the standard works? In another revelation, the Lord says: "Declare glad tidings, . . . And of tenets thou shalt not talk, but thou shalt declare repentance and faith on the Savior, and remission of sins by baptism and by fire, yea, even the Holy Ghost." (D&C 19:29-31.) The clear meaning, of course, is that the servants of the Lord go forth to teach what people are prepared to receive, nothing more. They are to declare glad tidings, to proclaim the message of the restoration, to teach the simple and easy doctrines, and to leave the mysteries alone. They are not to present lessons in calculus to students who must first learn arithmetic; they are not to reveal the mysteries of the kingdom until people believe the first principles; they are to give milk before meat.

Alma summarized the restrictions under which preachers of righteousness serve by saying: "It is given unto many to know the mysteries of God; nevertheless they are laid under a strict command that they shall not impart only according to the portion of his word which he doth grant unto the children of men, according to the heed and diligence which they give unto him." Such is the universal principle; it is not how much the teacher knows, but how much the student is prepared to receive. Strong and deep doctrine, spoken to rebellious people, drives them further away and widens the gulf between them and the saints of God.

Then Alma, in pointed and express language, describes, as it were, the scribes and Pharisees, on the one hand, and the faithful disciples who surrounded Jesus, on the other: "And therefore," he continues, "he that will harden his heart, the same receiveth the lesser portion of the word; and he that will not harden his heart, to him is given the greater portion of the word, until it is given unto him to know the mysteries of God until he know them in full. And they that will harden their hearts, to them is given the lesser portion of the word until they know nothing concerning his mysteries; and then they are taken captive by the devil, and led by his will down to destruction. Now this is what is meant by the chains of hell." (Alma 12:9-11.)

Even the true saints—the believing disciples, those who have accepted the gospel and received the gift of the Holy Ghost—are not prepared to receive all things. We have the fulness of the everlasting gospel, meaning we have every truth, power, priesthood, and key needed to enable us to gain the fulness of salvation in our Father's kingdom. But we do not have, and are not yet prepared to receive, the fulness of gospel truth.

This is perfectly illustrated by the fact that we do not have the sealed portion of the Book of Mormon. That treasurehouse of Holy Writ contains an account of the creation of the world, of the dealings of God with men in all ages, of the Second Coming of the Son of Man, and of the millennial era when the earth shall rest and Zion prosper to the full—all of which we are not prepared to receive. The doctrines revealed to the brother of Jared, and which are recorded in the sealed portion of the Book of Mormon, were had among the Jaredites; they were known to the Nephites during their Golden Era; certainly they were known and taught in Enoch's Zion; but when the Lehite people "dwindled in unbelief," Moroni was commanded to "hide them up." "They shall not go forth unto the Gentiles until the day that they shall repent of their iniquity, and become clean before the Lord," Moroni says.

We live in a preparatory day, a day in which we are preparing, it is hoped, to receive the further light and knowledge that a gracious God has in store for us. As Moroni records: "And in that day that they shall exercise faith in me, saith the Lord, even as the brother of Jared did, that they may become sanctified in me, then will I manifest unto them the things which the brother of Jared saw, even to the unfolding unto them all my revelations, saith Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Father of the heavens and of the earth, and all things that in them are." (Ether 4:1-7.)

By speaking in parables, Jesus is simply practicing what he has been preaching. In the Sermon on the Mount he told the Twelve they were to go forth into the world, preach the gospel, call upon men to repent, and invite them to join the Church. They were instructed, however, to keep the mysteries of the kingdom within themselves, and not to give that which was holy unto the dogs, or to cast their pearls before swine. Jesus told them that the world could not receive that which they themselves were scarcely able to bear, and that if they gave gospel pearls to the wicked and ungodly, such unbelieving and rebellious people would first reject the message, and then use the very truths they had heard to rend and destroy and wreak havoc among those whose faith was weak.

Now we find Jesus on the Galilean shore in the midst of a great congregation, gathered out of every city. Among them are the Twelve, many disciples who know he is the Messiah, and many others, influenced by the scribes and Pharisees, who reject him as an imposter and believe his miracles are wrought by an evil power. So great is the press of the people that he enters a ship, seats himself, and addresses the multitude standing on the shore. Many truths and much exhortation—as his custom is—fall from his lips, in addition to which, the record says, "He spake many things unto them in parables."

Later, being alone with the Twelve and certain other favored disciples, he is asked why he speaks in parables and what the parables mean. As to the choice of parables as a means of teaching, be it noted, the disciples did not ask, 'Why speakest thou unto us in parables?' but, "Why speakest thou unto them"—unto the scribes and Pharisees; unto the spies sent by the Sanhedrin to find fault with his every word; unto those whose hearts were hardened against the word—"Why speakest thou unto them in parables?" Jesus answered:

Because it is given unto you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given.

These words are from Matthew. But, better still, as Mark preserves the account, Jesus said:

Unto you it is given to know the mystery of the kingdom of God: but unto them that are without, all these things are done in parables.

That is to say, parables are for nonmembers of the Church, for those outside the kingdom, or, at best, as we shall see, for those who are weak in the faith; who are not prepared to receive the truth involved in plain words; from whom the full truth must, as yet, remain hidden. To the Twelve, Mary Magdalene, and the other faithful disciples, both male and female, who traveled and ministered with him, to all of the believing saints of his day—to them it was given to know the doctrine; for them it need not be hidden in a parable.

For whosoever receiveth, to him shall be given, and he shall have more abundance; But whosoever continueth not to receive, from him shall be taken away even that he hath.

Therefore speak I to them in parables: because they seeing see not; and hearing they hear not, neither do they understand.

And in them is fulfilled the prophecy of Esaias concerning them, which saith, By hearing, ye shall hear and shall not understand; and seeing, ye shall see and shall not perceive.

With it all, parables are majestic teaching devices, and they do reveal truth, and they do add light and understanding to those who already have the gift of understanding, as well as to those who are sincerely seeking truth. [^1] The doctrines of salvation are presented in their most compelling and convincing form when they are phrased in aptly chosen words, as when the Risen Lord ministered among the Nephites. Be it noted that he spake not unto them in parables; they were a people prepared for their King. The wicked and ungodly among them had been destroyed by the quakings and fires and whirlwinds and desolations in the Americas that attended the crucifixion, and those among the Nephites who remained were ready to receive the word of truth as it came in simplicity and plainness.

Yet parables, planted in the minds of truth seekers, help them remember the issues involved until such time as the full and plain knowledge parts the parabolic veil and stands revealed for all to see. And parables form a reservoir of knowledge about which even the saints can ponder and inquire as they seek to perfect and expand their limited views of gospel themes.

Continuing his denunciation of those to whom he must speak in parables because they are neither worthy nor qualified to hear the word in plainness, Jesus says:

For this people's heart is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes they have closed; lest at any time they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and should understand with their heart, and should be converted, and I should heal them.

Then Jesus makes the contrast and shows wherein his plain teachings and his parables, because these latter are also understood by his disciples, are of great worth unto those whose hearts are open.

But blessed are your eyes, for they see; and your ears, for they hear. And blessed are you because these things are come unto you, that you might understand them.

And verily, I say unto you, many righteous prophets have desired to see these days which you see, and have not seen them; and to hear that which you hear, and have not heard.

How blessed they were in that day to hear both the parables and the plain teachings! And yet how blessed are we to live in this day, a day when the word of God is again in the mouths of legal administrators, servants who now minister in the place and stead of him who filled his mission in Galilee and Judea and Perea and all Palestine!

Pure doctrine is of heavenly origin. When it is revealed in plainness and simplicity, it lights the way to eternal life, as for instance the clear statement that men must repent and be baptized to gain salvation. But when for one reason or another it is unwise to set forth this or that truth in all its blazing grandeur, it may yet be appropriate to reveal a type or a shadow, a similitude, a dim and dawning light, something that points toward the doctrine in all its revealed splendor. So often such types and shadows and similitudes are parables. They bear record of eternal truths and point the attention of gospel students to the doctrines involved without specifying what the doctrines are or how they operate.

Thus parables are not sources to search to learn doctrine. They may serve as illustrations of gospel principles; they may dramatize, graphically and persuasively, some gospel truths; but it is not their purpose to reveal doctrine, or, standing alone, to guide men along the course leading to eternal life. Parables can only be understood, in their full and complete meaning, after one knows the doctrines about which they speak. For instance, in the course of revealing some things relative to unity, the Lord, in latter-day revelation, gives a very simple parable:

And let every man esteem his brother as himself, and practise virtue and holiness before me.

And again I say unto you, let every man esteem his brother as himself.

For what man among you having twelve sons, and is no respecter of them, and they serve him obediently, and he saith unto the one: Be thou clothed in robes and sit thou here; and to the other: Be thou clothed in rags and sit thou there—and looketh upon his sons and saith I am just?

Behold, this I have given unto you as a parable and it is even as I am. I say unto you, be one; and if ye are not one ye are not mine. (D&C 38:24-27.)

Here, then, is a parable that illustrates something about the Lord. What does it mean? Is he speaking of time or eternity? Is it dealing with temporal or spiritual equality, or both? Do all men enter this life, or the next, with equal endowments? Does it have any reference to the twelve apostles, or the twelve tribes or Israel? In what sense must the Lord's people be one? And so on and so on. Parables are types and shadows—something to ponder and analyze and pray about. Indeed, this is one of their allures. They are a sort of religious puzzle awaiting solution, a sacred mystery waiting to be uncovered.

"Perhaps no other mode of teaching was so common among the Jews as that by Parables," Edersheim says. Their parables, however, "were almost entirely illustrations of what had been said or taught." Our Lord's parables were also illustrations, but they were much more. They shed a light of their own, or perhaps they shed the light of heaven abroad. "All Parables bear reference to well-known scenes, such as those of daily life; or to events, either real, or such as every one would expect in given circumstances, or as would be in accordance with prevailing notions.

"Such pictures, familiar to the popular mind"—especially in the case of Jesus' parables—"are in the Parable [itself] connected with corresponding spiritual realities. . . . There is that which distinguishes the Parable from the mere illustration. The latter conveys no more than—perhaps not so much as—that which was to be illustrated; while the Parable conveys this and a great deal beyond it to those, who can follow up its shadows to the light by which they have been cast. In truth, Parables are the outlined shadows—large, perhaps, and dim—as the light of heavenly things falls on well-known scenes, which correspond to, and have their higher counterpart in spiritual realities. . . . Things in earth and heaven are kindred, and the one may become to us Parables of the other." (Edersheim 1:580-82.)

We are now aware that parables present only that portion of the Lord's word which he in his wisdom feels to convey to us at any given time. In many cases this very act of limiting the amount of truth offered to men is itself an act of mercy. "For of him unto whom much is given much is required; and he who sins against the greater light shall receive the greater condemnation." (D&C 82:3.) To offer truths to wicked and ungodly creatures, which they will most assuredly reject, is to do more than cast pearls before swine. It is to make possible a greater condemnation upon those who reject the greater light.

"There is plainly shown an element of mercy in the parabolic mode of instruction adopted by our Lord under the conditions prevailing at the time. Had He always taught in explicit declaration, such as required no interpretation, many among His hearers would have come under condemnation, inasmuch as they were too weak in faith and unprepared in heart to break the bonds of traditionalism and the prejudice engendered by sin, so as to accept and obey the saving word. Their inability to comprehend the requirements of the gospel would in righteous measure give Mercy some claim upon them, while had they rejected the truth with full understanding, stern Justice would surely demand their condemnation." (Talmage, pp. 296-97.)

We now, as a prelude to our study of the parables as such, have considered their nature and character. We have reminded ourselves that the Lord gives to men only that portion of his word which they are prepared, spiritually, to receive, and we have seen how parables hide the doctrines of salvation from those whose eyes are not open to spiritual realities. We have also set forth how these wondrously phrased and perfectly presented parabolic utterances of Jesus do in fact reveal great spiritual truths to those whose hearts are open and whose souls hunger and thirst for the things of the Spirit, and we have even come to know that inspired parables are types and shadows of heavenly things, and that by them the light of heaven is cast earthward for the eternal betterment and blessing of all those upon whom its rays shine. And we have noted that it is an act of divine mercy to withhold from shriveled and spiritually sick souls the full light of heaven, lest its assured rejection further condemn the unreceptive and disbelieving among men.

There remains for us one added verity to consider, and it is, perhaps, the greatest and most important use to which parables are put. Jesus came to preach the gospel and bear the sins of all those who would believe his words and live his laws. He came to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, to bring good tidings to the meek, to open the prison doors of darkness and unbelief, and to let the light of heaven dwell in the hearts of men on earth. He came to give every man as much of the truth of heaven as each man's earthbound soul would permit him to receive.

If the righteousness that Jesus thus rained upon men fell on seams of rock and dunes of sand, it was sloughed off as of no worth; if it fell in the pleasant valley of the Jordan or within the gates of Eden, then it caused grain to grow and fruit to ripen and cattle to drink and live. Peter, James, and John were prepared—spiritually, intellectually, morally—to drink the downpouring of divine light in the form of pure doctrine, for they walked in the valley of the Jordan and sought for the gate of Eden. But when the heaven-sent and life-giving truths fell upon the scribal spies from the Sanhedrin, they brought forth no more fruit than would a desert cloudburst in a weary wasteland of rock and sand and sulphur.

And yet, perchance, there would be a day when even the desert would blossom as the rose; when springs of living water would burst forth in the rocky and sandy souls of those who now disbelieve the truth and reject the Purveyor. To them parables are a reminder of half-seen truths yet to be learned; they contain a few rays of spiritual light, hidden by the clouds of unbelief, which rays at any moment might burst through the misty veil to let light into human souls. They contain drops of truth, trickling down from eternal springs, from which eternal sources all are invited to come and drink and never thirst more.

Parables are a call to investigate the truth; to learn more; to inquire into the spiritual realities, which, through them, are but dimly viewed. Parables start truth seekers out in the direction of further light and knowledge and understanding; they invite men to ponder such truths as they are able to bear in the hope of learning more. Parables are a call to come unto Christ, to believe his doctrines, to live his laws, and to be saved in his kingdom. They teach arithmetic to those who have the capacity to learn calculus in due course. They are the mild milk of the word that prepares our spiritual digestive processes to feast upon the doctrinal meat of the kingdom.

And so, Jesus, having delivered the parable of the sower, without more ado says: "He that hath ears to hear, let him hear." That is to say: 'If you are capable of understanding this parable, then do so. Study, pray, ponder; seek enlightenment; attune yourself to the whisperings of the Spirit, until its full meaning and significance dawns upon you. In this way you will learn more of me and my gospel.'

Even the Twelve, however, felt the need for further guidance, which they then asked for and received. And after Jesus himself had interpreted—partially, at least—the parable of the sower, he said:

No man, when he hath lighted a candle, covereth it with a vessel, or putteth it under a bed; but setteth it on a candlestick, that they which enter in may see the light.

'I have given you this parable so that you may learn its meaning. It is as a candle set to give light in a house. I gave it so that you might learn more of my gospel; otherwise I would have hidden the candle under a vessel or a bed.' Or: 'No man who is a true minister, when he brings gospel light, covereth it with mystery and confusion (as is the case, for instance, with the sectarian creeds describing God), but he holds forth as much light before men as they are able to bear.' (Commentary 1:291.)

For there is nothing hid which shall not be manifested; neither was anything kept secret, but that it should in due time come abroad.

'For no parable, no teaching, no mystery, no hidden thing, is to be kept from the knowledge of the faithful; eventually all things shall be revealed, and the righteous shall know them.' (Commentary 1:291.) [^2] Then again, Jesus repeated: "If any man have ears to hear, let him hear," which is his plea to all to learn the meaning of his parables. But there is yet more to come. Jesus continues:

Take heed what ye hear; for with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you; and unto you that continue to receive, shall more be given; for he that receiveth, to him shall be given; but he that continueth not to receive, from him shall be taken even that which he hath.

'But take heed how ye hear and accept gospel truth, for you shall be rewarded with new revelation only if you are prepared to receive it. The measure of attention you give to the truths already revealed will dictate how much new truth shall be meted to you. If you continue to receive light and truth, and abide in them, eventually you shall be perfected in the truth and know all things. But if you do not continue to receive gospel light, and to walk in that light, from you shall be taken even that light which you once had, and you shall walk in darkness.' (Commentary 1:291-92.)

And so, with all these principles and this exhortation before us, we are now ready to taste the sweetness of the first series of major parables recorded by our New Testament friends.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The soil by the wayside. "According to Jewish authorities there was twofold sowing, as the seed was either cast by the hand or by means of cattle. In the latter case, a sack with holes was filled with corn and laid on the back of the animal, so that, as it moved onwards, the seed was thickly scattered. Thus it might well be, that it would fall indiscriminately on beaten roadway, on stony places but thinly covered with soil, or where the thorns had not been cleared away, or undergrowth from the thorn-hedge crept into the field, as well as on good ground." (Edersheim 1:586-87.)
[^2] The soil in stony places. In commenting about this parable, Joseph Smith said: "Men who have no principle of righteousness in themselves, and whose hearts are full of iniquity, and [who] have no desire for the principles of truth, do not understand the word of truth when they hear it. The devil taketh away the word of truth out of their hearts, because there is no desire for righteousness in them." (Teachings, p. 96.)
