Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1980)

Chapter 50

Parables Spoken by Jesus

Hear this, all ye people; give ear, all ye inhabitants of the world: Both low and high, rich and poor, together. My mouth shall speak of wisdom; and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding. I will incline mine ear to a parable. (Ps. 49:1-4.)

Parable of the Sower

(Matthew 13:3-9, 18-23; JST Matthew 13:5, 19, 21; Mark 4:3-9, 13-20; JST Mark 4:15-17; Luke 8:5-8, 11-15; JST Luke 8:12-13, 15)

"Behold, a sower went forth to sow"—to sow seeds of eternal truth in the souls of men; to sow the wonder-working word of Him whose name is Wonderful; to sow the seeds of eternal life in the hearts of men. And how beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of them who preach the gospel of peace, who say unto Zion: Thy God reigneth!

"A sower went out to sow his seed," and the seed he sows is "the word of the kingdom." Even now the Divine Sower, the Messenger of Salvation, is scattering his Father's word among them in soil of all sorts.

"The word of the kingdom"!—again we declare it: He is preaching the gospel; the plan of salvation; faith, repentance, and baptism; the receipt of the Holy Ghost; the everlasting word. He is speaking of a kingdom; a kingdom of God on earth; a church to be presided over by apostles and prophets; an organized body—surely the Lord's house is a house of order—that administers salvation to all who enter its strait door and mingle with its saintly citizens, the citizens of the kingdom. And how beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of the Lord who is the Author of Salvation, who himself preaches the gospel of peace, and who says unto Zion: I am thy God; come unto me.

But let the sower be Christ—who it is in this instance—or let it be any of the lesser sowers whom he calls to labor in his fields, the principle is the same. The seed is the word of God, the gospel of salvation. Jesus preaches it and he directs his servants so to do. And the seed is the same whether sown by the owner of the field or by the servants whom he employs. And as to whether the seed sprouts and grows and ripens and is harvested, such depends not upon the seed, but upon the soil. The seed is good, all the seed, whether sown by the Divine Sower or by those whom he sends to spread "the word of the kingdom." [^1]

Thus, this parable of the sower, as we are wont to call it, might more aptly be considered as the parable of the four kinds of soil. The growth of the seed depends upon the nature of the soil; it depends upon the hearts and minds and souls of the hearers of the word. "The imagery of it was derived, as usual, from the objects immediately before His eyes—the sown fields of Gennesareth; the springing corn in them; the hard-trodden paths which ran through them, on which no corn could grow; the innumerable birds which fluttered over them ready to feed upon the grain; the weak and withering struggle for life on the stony places; the tangling growth of luxuriant thistles in neglected corners; the deep loam of the general soil, on which already the golden ears stood thick and strong, giving promise of a sixty and hundred-fold return as they rippled under the balmy wind." (Farrar, pp. 244-45.) We know the seed is good; let us then look to the soil in which it is sown.

"And as he sowed, some fell by the way side; and it was trodden down, and the fowls of the air devoured it." Such was the parabolic story; the interpretation, given later by Jesus to the disciples only, was: "Those by the way side are they that hear; then cometh the devil, and taketh away the word out of their hearts, lest they should believe and be saved."

How sad are the prospects for those by the wayside; those whose souls are so hardened by false doctrines and evil deeds that the seed of the word cannot even sprout and begin to grow in their hearts. These are the scribes and Pharisees of society, the ministers of false religions, and the wicked and ungodly who love darkness rather than light because their deeds are evil. They were the ones in Jesus' day who bound themselves with the formalisms of Mosaic worship and refused to let the light of a new dispensation enter their hearts. They are the religionists in our day who close their ears to new revelation and choose to believe such doctrines as that men are saved by grace alone, without more, thus leaving them free to walk in worldliness and still, as they suppose, gain salvation. They are the wicked and ungodly in general, the liars and sorcerers and adulterers, the people who feed their souls on pornographic words and pictures. They are worldly people who are carnal, sensual, and devilish by nature, and who choose so to remain. Repentance is always open to all men, but those by the wayside choose to retain their hardened and rebellious natures. [^2]

The parable: "Some fell upon stony places, where they had not much earth; and forthwith they sprung up; and when the sun was up, they were scorched, because they had no deepness of earth; and because they had no root, they withered away."

The interpretation: "But he that received the seed into stony places, the same is he that heareth the word and readily with joy receiveth it, yet he hath not root in himself, and endureth but for a while; for when tribulation or persecution ariseth because of the word, by and by he is offended." Luke's account includes the expression that "they. . . for a while believe, and in a time of temptation fall away."

These are they who believe the word; they know the Book of Mormon is true, as it were; there is no question in their minds that Joseph Smith is a prophet; they have the testimony of Jesus in their souls; and they rejoice in the light from heaven that has come into their lives. But they do not press forward with a steadfastness in Christ; they do not continue to learn the doctrines of salvation; they do not pay their tithes and offerings and serve in the Church. They do not endure to the end. Persecution arises; trials and tribulations block their path; their temptations are greater than they can bear. Because their roots are not deeply embedded in gospel soil, the new plant withers. It cannot stand the scorching rays of the sun.

Luke says "it lacked moisture." The sacrifices required of the saints were too great. Though the word, at the first, seemed as a pearl of great price, other considerations waylaid the gospel pilgrims, and the labors expected of them no longer seemed worth the effort. They withered and died spiritually, and the fruit of eternal life never ripened in their lives.

The parable: "And some fell among thorns, and the thorns grew up, and choked it, and it yielded no fruit."

The interpretation: "And these are they who receive the word among thorns; such as hear the word, and the cares of this world, and the deceitfulness of riches, and the lusts of other things entering in, choke the word, and it becometh unfruitful." Luke's account adds the "pleasures of this life" as one of the things that choke the seeds so they "bring no fruit to perfection."

They hear and receive the word among thorns! The seed is good and the soil is good, but they choose to let thorns and thistles continue to grow along with the seeds of righteousness. They seek to serve both God and mammon at one and the same time. The plan of salvation calls for men to overcome this world and prepare for a better one which is to be, but the cares of this world lead them astray. The gospel calls for men to seek the riches of eternity and to let the wealth of this world take a place of secondary importance, but the deceitfulness of riches—the false sense of superiority they give—leads men in worldly rather than godly paths. The good word of God calls for men to bridle their passions, forsake all that is evil, and cleave unto all that is good, but the lusts of the flesh remaining in the hearts of believing men cannot do other than lead them on a downward course.

True saints seek, not the pleasures of this life—the things that money and power and learning confer—but the eternal joys born of the Spirit. The Lord wants no part-time saints. His people cannot have one foot in the kingdom and the other in the world and expect to survive spiritually. The Church and its interests must always take precedence in their lives; otherwise the thorns will choke the precious gospel plant; it will die and in due course be burned with the thorns.

The parable: "And other fell on good ground, and did yield fruit that sprang up and increased; and brought forth, some thirty, and some sixty, and some an hundred."

The interpretation: "But he that received seed into the good ground, is he that heareth the word and understandeth and endureth; which also beareth fruit, and bringeth forth, some an hundredfold, some sixty, and some thirty." In the Joseph Smith Translation, Luke has a variant reading: "But that which fell on the good ground are they, who receive the word in an honest and good heart, having heard the word, keep what they hear, and bring forth fruit with patience."

Hear, understand, endure, bring forth fruit; receive the word in an honest and good heart, keep the commandments, and bring forth fruit with patience. Such is the will of the Lord. "If the seed falls on productive, fertile soil, and if it is thereafter nurtured and cared for, it bringeth forth a harvest. But even here crops of equal value are not harvested by all the saints. There are many degrees of receptive belief; there are many gradations of effective cultivation. All men, the saints included, shall be judged according to their works; those who keep the whole gospel law shall bring forth an hundred fold and inherit the fulness of the Father's kingdom. Others shall gain lesser rewards in the mansions which are prepared." (Commentary 1:289.)

Parable of the Seed Growing by Itself

(Mark 4:26-29)

In his first recorded parable, that of the sower, we heard Jesus speak of sowing the seed of the gospel kingdom in all sorts of soil. Seed sown on hard and beaten paths was trodden under foot, or eaten by the fowls of heaven; it was seed that neither sprouted nor took root nor grew. Seed sown on stony ground found growth for a moment in the scanty covering of soil, but the sprouting plants withered and died when persecutions and tribulations and temptations beset the new converts. Seed sown amid the thorns and thistles of worldliness, after an initial growth, was smothered and choked by the cares and riches and lusts of the world so that it brought forth no fruit unto perfection. Only the seed sown in good soil, and which was nurtured and dunged and cultivated, brought forth abundantly the fruit of eternal life. In this parable of the sower, Jesus himself, in particular, and all of his servants, in general, were the sowers of the seed.

Now he speaks a second parable that grows out of the first. It is concerned with the seed sown in good soil, the seed that brings forth fruit, the seed that is reaped and gathered unto eternal life. And it is addressed to his servants, those sent forth by him to sow his seeds; in it he counsels them as to how they should act when they sow their seeds of salvation in the hearts of men.

"And he said, So is the kingdom of God, as if a man should cast seed into the ground; And should sleep, and rise night and day, and the seed should spring and grow up, he knoweth not how."

'My earthly kingdom; the church that I have established among men; that organization which is the church and kingdom of God on earth; the very organization among men which administers the gospel and offers salvation to all who believe and obey—this very kingdom of God—grows in this manner: My servants first cast seed into good soil; they preach the gospel to the honest in heart. Then they leave the event in the hands of that Lord whose seed it is; they go about their other business, or go elsewhere to preach the word. It is as though night and day pass; the sun sends forth his rays by day and the mists of the night water the seed; then it sprouts and grows. My servants know not how the conversion is brought to pass, only that the seed sown in good soil somehow brings souls into the kingdom.'

"For the earth bringeth forth fruit of herself; first the blade, then the ear, after that the full corn in the ear. But when the fruit is brought forth, immediately he putteth in the sickle, because the harvest is come."

Seeds sown in the soil of the earth and seeds sown in the souls of men, both spring forth by a power greater than that of the sower. Paul may plant and Apollos water, but it is God who giveth the increase. The life is in the seed, be it the corn sown in the soil or the word sown in the soul. As the earth brings forth, first the blade, then the ear, and finally the corn fully ripened for the harvest, so the good seed grows in the good soil of goodly souls, preparing them for the day when the servants of the Lord shall thrust in their sickles and reap, thus laying up in store saved souls for the Lord of the harvest.

Parable of the Wheat and the Tares

(Matthew 13:24-30, 36-43; JST Matthew 13:29, 39-44; D&C 86:1-7)

Jesus has now put forth one parable concerning the sower who sowed the seeds of eternal truth in diverse kinds of soil, and another concerning the seed of truth itself as it grows, miraculously and unaided by human hands, in the souls of the honest in heart. In each instance, we at least, and certainly even his Jewish hearers to some extent, can discern his meaning and intent. It is not as though he had told us in plain words, as his wont was among the Nephites, what profound truths he was then dispensing. But he has left us, in language of unexcelled excellence, parabolic illustrations upon which we can ponder and about which we can pray, until their full and glorious meanings burst through the storm clouds of darkness that hold back the radiance of the sun.

Having given us this much experience in the manner of presentation, in the use, and in the interpretation of his parables, Jesus now presents us with one of his more complex and difficult parabolic utterances. It is the parable of the wheat and the tares, one that required a special interpretation for the apostles of old, and one that required a latter-day revelation to enable us to bring its deep and hidden meanings to light. And mayhap, even yet, we await further spiritual enlightenment before its full significance is spread before us.

In this literary gem, preserved for us by our friend Matthew only, we learn how the Son of Man and his servants sowed good seed throughout the world; how Lucifer and his servants over-sowed the wheat fields with tares; how and why the wheat and the tares were permitted to grow together until the day of burning; and how the wicked will then be thrust into a furnace of fire, while the righteous shall shine forth in celestial splendor in the kingdom of the Father. The parable ends with the challenge: "Who hath ears to hear, let him hear." Let us then attune our ears to the wondrous words now spoken by Him at whose feet we rejoice to sit and whose teachings we so desire to savor. We shall view the parable and its interpretation point by point.

The parable: "The kingdom of heaven is likened unto a man which sowed good seed in his field."

The interpretation: "He that soweth the good seed is the Son of man; The field is the world; the good seed are the children of the kingdom."

The latter-day interpretation: "Verily, thus saith the Lord unto you my servants, concerning the parable of the wheat and of the tares: Behold, verily I say, the field was the world, and the apostles were the sowers of the seed."

The Church of Jesus Christ, the earthly organization through which salvation is offered to men; the kingdom of God on earth that prepares men for an inheritance in the kingdom of God in heaven; the organization that is in effect the kingdom of heaven on earth; this blessed and holy congregation of true believers—it is likened unto the Son of Man, and his holy apostles, and all his righteous servants who went forth into the world, preached the gospel, and made converts.

The whole world—not just Galilee and Judea and all of Canaan—the whole world is the field in which converts are made. The gospel and the Church and the kingdom and the blessings and the glory of it all, these are offered to all men. The seeds that are sown in all the world are the children of the kingdom. The sowers are not planting truths in human soil as in the parable of the sower; they are not dropping doctrinal gems in the hearts of men and then awaiting that Divine Providence which brings forth the blade and the ear and the ripened corn as in the parable of the seed growing by itself. Here the seeds sown are people; they are converts to the truth; they are members of the Church; they are the children of the earthly and heirs of the heavenly kingdom; and they are scattered upon all the face of the earth. They are here and there and everywhere, for the whole world is the field, and the apostles and they who ministered at their direction were commanded to go into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature. The words used are the same as in the other parables, but the symbolism and meaning and message are different.

The parable: "But while men slept, his enemy came and sowed tares among the wheat, and went his way."

The interpretation: "The tares are the children of the wicked one; The enemy that sowed them is the devil."

The latter-day interpretation: "And after they [the apostles and their fellow ministers of old] have fallen asleep the great persecutor of the church, the apostate, the whore, even Babylon, that maketh all nations to drink of her cup, in whose hearts the enemy, even Satan, sitteth to reign—behold he soweth the tares; wherefore, the tares choke the wheat and drive the church into the wilderness."

Satan sows tares in the field of the Lord; or, rather, he over-sows or sows on top of the wheat. And as the seeds sown by the Son of Man and his servants are the children of the kingdom, the true saints of God, so the seeds sown by Satan—the tares—are the children of the devil. They are followers of that wicked one; they are carnal and sensual people who choose a false system of religion because it permits them to gratify their passions and live after the manner of the world.

Be it noted that the tares—as far as this parable is concerned—are sown after the day of Jesus and his meridian ministers. The great apostasy came after the apostles had "fallen asleep." When there were no longer apostles and prophets to guide the Church, the Saints were tossed to and fro and carried about with every wind of doctrine. The tares choked the wheat; the children of the kingdom were led astray; and the Church was driven into the wilderness. [^3]

The parable: "But when the blade was sprung up, and brought forth fruit, then appeared the tares also. So the servants of the householder came and said unto him, Sir, didst not thou sow good seed in thy field? from whence then hath it tares? He said unto them, An enemy hath done this. The Servants said unto him, Wilt thou then that we go and gather them up?"

The latter-day interpretation: "But behold, in the last days, even now while the Lord is beginning to bring forth the word, and the blade is springing up and is yet tender—Behold, verily I say unto you, the angels are crying unto the Lord day and night, who are ready and waiting to be sent forth to reap down the fields."

This is a multi-dispensation parable. It had its beginning when Jesus and the apostles sowed the children of the kingdom in the nations of the earth. In and after their day tares—the children of Satan—were planted in the earthly field, and the tares choked out the wheat. Then the seed was sown again; the children of the kingdom again were found in the field; the blade sprang up amid the tares; and the servants of the Lord, as in former days, would have destroyed the tares, and even the angels cried out for the hastening of the harvest. [^4]

The parable: "But he said, Nay; lest while ye gather up the tares, ye root up also the wheat with them. Let both grow together until the harvest: and in the time of harvest I will say to the reapers, Gather ye together first the wheat into my barn; and the tares are bound in bundles to be burned."

The interpretation: "The harvest is the end of the world, or the destruction of the wicked. The reapers are the angels, or the messengers sent of heaven. As, therefore, the tares are gathered and burned in the fire, so shall it be in the end of this world, or the destruction of the wicked. For in that day, before the Son of man shall come, he shall send forth his angels and messengers of heaven. And they shall gather out of his kingdom all things which offend, and them which do iniquity, and shall cast them out among the wicked; and there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth. For the world shall be burned with fire. Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun, in the kingdom of their Father."

The latter-day interpretation: "But the Lord saith unto them, pluck not up the tares while the blade is yet tender (for verily your faith is weak), lest you destroy the wheat also. Therefore let the wheat and the tares grow together until the harvest is fully ripe; then ye shall first gather out the wheat from among the tares, and after the gathering of the wheat, behold and lo, the tares are bound in bundles, and the field remaineth to be burned."

The scope and sweep of the message here revealed is as broad as the earth and as enduring as the ages. The wheat is now being gathered out from among the tares. Israel is being gathered into the sheepfold of the Good Shepherd. Messengers from heaven—Peter, James, and John; Moses, Elijah, and Elias; and all the angelic host who have restored priesthoods, conferred keys, and given powers to men—have joined hands with mortals on earth to gather the elect and to seal up the law and bind up the testimony against those who are to be burned when the Son of Man comes. Soon the harvest will be fully ripe; the wheat will be stored in the Lord's barns; the tares will be bound in bundles; and the burning will commence. [^5]

Parable of the Mustard Seed

(Matthew 13:31-32; Mark 4:30-32; Luke 13:18-19)

Though each of the parables stands by itself to teach a designated portion of eternal truth, it takes them all together to place in perspective those truths with which they deal. In the parable of the sower, the good word of God was sown in divers soils and only a portion of the seed grew and brought forth fruit. In the parable of the wheat and the tares even that portion which grew was choked by thorns; the kingdom was destroyed for a time; and only the latter-day sowing anew of the saving seeds enabled the growth of that wheat which would be gathered into barns before the burning of the bundles of tares. In each of these parables there is an element of sorrow and sadness; evil triumphs in many hearts; multitudes reject the gospel seed; and other multitudes who had the truth changed themselves from the wheat of the kingdom to the tares of the devil, and the field was burned. But now, in the parable of the mustard seed, we shall see how the kingdom of God on earth shall grow and increase, how it shall be displayed for all to see, and how success shall attend its labors.

"The kingdom of heaven," Jesus said, "is like to a grain of mustard seed, which a man took, and sowed in his field: Which indeed is the least of all seeds: but when it is grown, it is the greatest among herbs, and becometh a tree, so that the birds of the air come and lodge in the branches thereof."

One of the great beauties of parables is that they may have many meanings and applications all of which are true and proper. Their full significance is and can be known only to those who have an over-all knowledge of the dealings of Deity with men, and who also are enlightened by the power of the same Spirit that guided the one who gave the parables. "Parables must have been utterly unintelligible to all who did not see in the humble, despised, Nazarene, and in His teachings, the Kingdom. But to those whose eyes, ears and hearts had been opened, they would carry most needed instruction and most precious comfort and assurance." (Edersheim 1:592.)

To the more enlightened among his Jewish hearers, Jesus' words in this parable would have given some concept at least of the great truths he sought to convey. Two of his expressions—that of "mustard seed" and, as Luke expresses it, "a great tree"—were well known and had clear meaning. Their use and application in the case at hand is, of course, quite another matter.

As to the first: "The expression, 'small as a mustardseed,' had become proverbial, and was used, not only by our Lord, but frequently by the Rabbis, to indicate the smallest amount, such as the least drop of blood, the least defilement, or the smallest remnant of sun-glow in the sky. 'But when it is grown, it is greater than the garden-herbs.' Indeed, it looks no longer like a garden-herb or shrub, but 'becomes,' or rather, appears like, 'a tree'—as St. Luke puts it, 'a great tree,' of course, not in comparison with other trees, but with garden-shrubs."

As to the second: "A tree, whose wide-spreading branches afforded lodgment to the birds of heaven, was a familiar Old Testament figure for a mighty kingdom that gave shelter to the nations. [Ezek. 31; Dan. 4.] Indeed, it is specifically used as an illustration of the Messianic Kingdom. [Ezek. 17:23.]" (Edersheim 1:592-93.)

To those in sectarian Christendom who have sufficient interest in scriptural study to seek for an interpretation of this parable, some such conclusion as this is generally reached: It contrasts the small and rising beginning of Christianity in Jesus' day with the worldwide dominion now enjoyed by those who suppose they are followers of the Nazarene. They assume, falsely, "that the Kingdom of Heaven, planted in the field of the world as the smallest seed, in the most humble and unpromising manner, would grow till it far outstripped all other similar plants, and gave shelter to all nations under heaven." (Edersheim 1:593.) [^6]

The most complete and best application and meaning, however, is preserved for us in the language of Joseph Smith. After quoting the words of the parable, he says: "Now we can discover plainly that this figure is given to represent the Church as it shall come forth in the last days. Behold, the Kingdom of Heaven is likened unto it. Now, what is like unto it?

"Let us take the Book of Mormon, which a man took and hid in his field, securing it by his faith, to spring up in the last days, or in due time; let us behold it coming forth out of the ground, which is indeed accounted the least of all seeds, but behold it branching forth, yea, even towering, with lofty branches, and God-like majesty, until it, like the mustard seed, becomes the greatest of all herbs. And it is truth, and it has sprouted and come forth out of the earth, and righteousness begins to look down from heaven, and God is sending down His powers, gifts and angels, to lodge in the branches thereof.

"The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a mustard seed. Behold, then is not this the Kingdom of Heaven that is raising its head in the last days in the majesty of God, even the Church of the Latter-day Saints." (Teachings, pp. 98-99.)

Parable of the Leaven

(Matthew 13:33; Luke 13:20-21)

Yet another portion of the eternal picture portrayed in parables is seen in the parable of the leaven. The mustard seed became a tree that displayed the kingdom of heaven on earth before the world, but the leaven worked silently, without observation, unknown to many among men, to establish the plans and purposes of Divine Providence. Jesus said simply: "The kingdom of heaven is like unto leaven, which a woman took, and hid in three measures of meal, till the whole was leavened."

In this parable of the leaven we see the glory and triumph of the kingdom in the hearts of men. The Messianic kingdom comes not in martial splendor; there are no rolling drums and tramping feet; the Son of David does not march before his armies; trumpets do not herald his coming, and standard bearers raise no visible ensign to the nations. The new kingdom, like leaven, is hidden in the hearts of men. The leaven of life, the leaven of righteousness, the leaven of the word of God—the yeast of eternal truth—is "kneaded" into the souls of men. Then its spreading, penetrating, life-giving effect enlarges the soul and "raises" sinners into saints.

Legal administrators teach the gospel and testify of its divinity; their testimonies, hidden in the hearts and minds of men, begin the soul-enlarging process of conversion. Lumps of lifeless dough live, and after being baked in the ovens of life become as desirable to the taste as the manna once rained from heaven upon the Lord's people. [^7]

Parable of the Hidden Treasure

(Matthew 13:44; JST Matthew 13:46)

After giving the parable of the leaven, Jesus sent the multitude away, went with his disciples into a house in Capernaum, and at the request of the disciples interpreted the parable of the wheat and the tares. [^8] Then he gave three more parables to the disciples alone. The first of these is the parable of the hidden treasure. "Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a treasure hid in a field," Jesus said. "And when a man hath found a treasure which is hid, he secureth it, and, straightway, for joy thereof, goeth and selleth all that he hath, and buyeth that field."

"By seeming accident a man sometimes discovers the gospel treasure. Unaware of the saving grace of our Lord, devoid of true religious understanding, overburdened with the cares of the world, hardened by sin, walking in an ungodly and carnal course—he suddenly stumbles onto Christ and the pure Christianity found in his true Church. Immediately all else seems as dross. Temporal wealth becomes but glittering tinsel as compared to the eternal riches of Christ. Then worldly things are forsaken; then no sacrifice is too great for the new convert, as he seeks a valid title to the treasures of the kingdom." (Commentary 1:300.) [^9]

A woman comes out of Sychar to draw water from Jacob's well and finds one there who gives her living water. Gentile nations, composed of people who have never heard of Christ and are devoid of any desire to gain the cleansing power of his blood, meet Paul and Silas and find a great treasure. Hosts of earth's pilgrims, traveling and wandering they know not where, with no knowledge of Joseph Smith and the restoration, chance to meet a Mormon missionary or move into a Mormon community, and suddenly the riches of eternity are opened to their view.

And so it is with the kingdom of heaven, with the only true and living church upon the face of the whole earth: Though it operates openly among men, though its gospel gifts and goodly fruits are seen on every hand, yet it is hidden from those whose hearts are not yet attuned to the Infinite; it is hidden until, of a sudden, the finder, scarcely having supposed that so great a treasure would be hidden in so unlikely a spot, makes a great discovery. The treasure is recognized for what it is, and it is available for the taking. Immediately the finder sells all that he hath—he cannot buy it for a lesser price; there is no fixed amount on a price tag; he cannot haggle and offer anything less than all he has; it is not for sale on a bargain counter; its purchase calls for the sacrifice of all things—and so the finder, be he rich or poor, sells all that he hath; he forsakes the world and its wealth; he turns from the worldliness of the past and walks in paths of righteousness; and he buyeth the field and possesseth the treasure. It is his. He found it.

Parable of the Pearl of Great Price

(Matthew 13:45-46)

"Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a merchant man, seeking goodly pearls: Who, when he had found one pearl of great price, went and sold all that he had, and bought it."

Now Jesus has somewhat more to say about how the struggling pilgrims of earth, far removed from their heavenly home, come to find the gospel, the most precious possession of life. The treasure hidden in the field is found by chance. Honest-hearted souls find themselves in contact with true ministers and the truths that from them flow, and they sell all that they have to purchase the newly discovered gospel of salvation.

But here Jesus speaks of earnest and devout investigators; of truth seekers who desire to better their circumstances; of people who consciously follow the dictates of their consciences; of those who follow the promptings and heed the whisperings of that Spirit, the light of Christ, which enlighteneth every man born into the world. These are those who know there is more to life than to eat, drink, and be merry. They are trying to cast off carnality and live by godly standards. They may be philanthropists or artists; they may serve on committees and join groups who work for freedom, social betterment, and the preservation of human rights; they study the Bible, seek truth, and join uplifting organizations, including various of the churches of the day. They are seeking goodly pearls.

After long and diligent search; after going from one level of light to heights of greater illumination; perhaps after joining one church or another in search of the peace that passeth understanding; after seeking truth with an open heart—after, shall we not say it, after reading and pondering and praying about the Book of Mormon; after investigating the prophetic claims of Joseph Smith and his successors—at the end of a long search, lo, the pearl of great price is found. It is the everlasting gospel. It is the Church and kingdom of God on earth. It is all that men can desire; its blessings are peace in this life and eternal life in the world to come.

Do investigators then sell all that they have to buy such a pearl? They can do nothing less. And the Lord, whose pearl it is, asks their all. As with those who find the hidden treasure, there is no haggling, no bargaining, no agreeing to come into the Church with this or that reservation, no offering of less than one's whole soul and all that the truth seekers have and are. What matters it if all the pearls of the past are sold, if all the causes and organizations, however "goodly," go by the board? The newly found pearl, the kingdom of heaven, will use all the talents and strength and abilities of those who give their all to gain it. [^10]

Parable of the Gospel Net

(Matthew 13:47-53; JST Matthew 13:50-51, 53)

The parable: "Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a net, that was cast into the sea, and gathered of every kind: Which, when it was full, they drew to shore, and sat down, and gathered the good into vessels, but cast the bad away."

The interpretation: "So shall it be at the end of the world. And the world is the children of the wicked. The angels shall come forth, and sever the wicked from the just, and shall cast them out into the world to be burned. There shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth."

What an awesome and ominous picture this is! The gospel net is cast into the sea; the fishers of men seek to draw all men into the kingdom. The catch is great, but it includes fish of all kinds, some of which are gathered in vessels to be saved, and others are cast away to be burned along with the wicked who were never caught in the gospel net. The net here meant is a draw net or a seine, which may be as much as half a mile in length; it is leaded below so it will sweep the bottom of the sea, while corks keep the top floating near the surface. As it is swept along the beach it gathers in fish of every sort without reference to their ultimate use or worth.

So it is with those who join the Church—they are ofttimes as diverse and varied as men can be. "Rich and poor, bond and free, Jew and Gentile, learned and ignorant, sincere and hypocritical, stable and wavering—men of all races, cultures, and backgrounds accept the gospel and seek its blessings." (Commentary 1:302.) Some are repentant and worthy and will be put in vessels; others are swept along by the tides of social pressure. Some are drawn in by the tight net of business necessity and economic advantage; yet others join with the saints to inherit property, marry selected persons, or gain political preferment. And all such shall be cast away with the wicked to be burned. There are many reasons for coming into the earthly kingdom of heaven; salvation is a personal matter, and only those who meet the divine standards will find eternal place and lot with the saints.

Though in the outward Church below Both wheat and tares together grow, Ere long will Jesus weed the crop And pluck the tares in anger up. [^11]

The wheat and the tares together grow! Such, we have seen, was the parable telling of the present intermixture of the righteous and the wicked in the earthly kingdom, meaning more particularly the world. Now, in the parable of the draw net, we see that same condition within the Church and kingdom itself. And try as we may—men being weak and mortal and fallible; sins being hidden and devious and unknown—until the Son of Man comes, the kingdom will not be wholly cleansed.

Those in the Church are not perfect, and more than church membership is needed to save and exalt. Baptism alone is not enough: thereafter the newly born babes in Christ must grow to a spiritual maturity; they "must press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope, and a love of God and of all men"; they must feast "upon the word of Christ, and endure to the end." (2 Ne. 31:20.) Those caught in the gospel net have power to become the sons of God; after baptism they must "work out" their "salvation with fear and trembling" before the Lord. (Philip. 2:12.) [^12]

As of this moment, there are tares among the wheat. "In a great house"—and God's house is his church, his earthly kingdom—"there are not only vessels of gold and of silver, but also of wood and of earth; and some to honour, and some to dishonour." (2 Tim. 2:20.) For truly, "they are not all Israel, which are of Israel." (Rom. 9:6.) "If a man therefore purge himself from these"—his sins, the sins committed after baptism, the burdens of iniquity that rest upon him, though he was drawn in by the great gospel net—"he shall be a vessel unto honour, sanctified, and meet for the master's use, and prepared unto every good work." (2 Tim. 2:21.) This, then, is the conclusion—and also the moral—of the parable: "Let every one that nameth the name of Christ depart from iniquity." (2 Tim. 2:19.)

Such is the parable of the gospel net. [^13] Following its recitation, and as he ended, for the moment, his preachments by parables, Jesus asked his disciples, "Have ye understood all these things? They say unto him, Yea, Lord." It is a mark of true discipleship to understand all scripture, the parables included; indeed, only those enlightened by the power of the Holy Ghost gain the full meaning and intent of the written word, for scripture is both given and understood by the same holy power, the power that comes from the Lord through his Spirit. [^14]

Then Jesus said unto them: "Every scribe well instructed in the things of the kingdom of heaven, is like unto a householder; a man, therefore, which bringeth forth out of his treasure that which is new and old."

They—the Twelve, all the disciples, both male and female—knew the meanings of the parables, the deep, hidden, glorious meanings of these gems of literary elucidation and of gospel knowledge. Ergo: They must teach and testify of these very things. As a householder who displays his treasures—both the old and the new; that which hath value because of its antiquity, and that which is of great worth because it is new and can be used—as a householder displays his treasures, so the disciples must bring forth out of the storehouses of their souls the eternal truths of the gospel and teach them to their fellowmen. "It becometh every man who hath been warned to warn his neighbor." (D&C 88:81.) [^15]

Truly, this Man, who spake as none other had ever done, fulfilled that "which was spoken by the prophet, saying, I will open my mouth in parables; I will utter things which have been kept secret from the foundation of the world." (Matt. 13:35.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The case of the vainglorious scribe. Hymns, no. 106.
[^2] The case of the reluctant disciple. "'No man having joined the Church of Jesus Christ is fit for salvation in the celestial kingdom unless he endures to the end in keeping the commandments.'" (Commentary 1:305 )
[^3] The case of the delaying disciple. In answer to those who argue that no miracle was involved during this darksome night on Gennesaret, Canon Farrar records these choicely chosen words: "If we believe that God rules; if we believe that Christ rose; if we have reason to hold, among the deepest convictions of our being, the certainty that God has not delegated His sovereignty or His providence to the final, unintelligent, pitiless, inevitable working of material forces; if we see on every page of the Evangelists the quiet simplicity of truthful and faithful witnesses; if we see in every year of succeeding history, and in every experience of individual life, a confirmation of the testimony which they delivered - then we shall neither clutch at rationalistic interpretations, nor be much troubled if others adopt them. He who believes, he who knows, the efficacy of prayer, in what other men may regard as the inevitable certainties or blindly-directed accidents of life - he who has felt how the voice of a Saviour, heard across the long generations, can calm wilder storms than ever buffeted into fury the bosom of the inland Lake - he who sees in the person of his Redeemer a fact more stupendous and more majestic than all those observed sequences which men endow with an imaginary omnipotence, and worship under the name of Law - to him, at least, there will be neither difficulty nor hesitation in supposing that Christ, on board that half-wrecked fishing boat, did utter His mandate, and that the wind and the sea obeyed; that His word was indeed more potent among the cosmic forces than miles of agitated water, or leagues of rushing wind." (Farrar, pp. 252-53.)
[^4] Matthew speaks of two demoniacs; Mark and Luke mention only one. Elder Talmage presents the usual sectarian explanation of this discrepancy by saying: "It is possible that one of the afflicted pair was in a condition so much worse than that of his companion that to him is accorded greater prominence in the narrative: or, one may have run away while the other remained." (Talmage, p. 310.) From the Inspired Version, however, we know there was only one; Matthew's account is corrected to conform to the accounts of Mark and Luke. If Elder Talmage had had access to this more perfect biblical account, his expressions relative to this and a number of other matters would have been different.
[^5] Taken as a whole, as I have written elsewhere, our accounts of the healing of the Gadarene demoniac teach the following truths: "(1) That evil spirits, actual beings from Lucifer's realm, gain literal entrance into mortal bodies; "(2) That they then have such power over those bodies as to control the physical acts performed, even to the framing of the very words spoken by the mouth of those so possessed; "(3) That persons possessed by evil spirits are subjected to the severest mental and physical sufferings and to the basest sort of degradation - all symbolical of the eternal torment to be imposed upon those who fall under Satan's control in the world to come; "(4) That devils remember Jesus from pre-existence, recognize him as the One who was then foreordained to be the Redeemer, and know that he came into mortality as the Son of God; "(5) That the desire to gain bodies is so great among Lucifer's minions as to cause them, not only to steal the mortal tabernacles of men, but to enter the bodies of animals; "(6) That the devils know their eventual destiny is to be cast out into an eternal hell from whence there is no return; "(7) That rebellious and worldly people are not converted to the truth by observing miracles; and "(8) That those cleansed from evil spirits can then be used on the Lord's errand to testify of his grace and goodness so that receptive persons may be led to believe in him." (Commentary 1:311.)
[^6] "The evident falsity of this interpretation is seen from the fact that the original, pure Christianity practiced by the primitive saints never did more than sprout its head above ground; within a relatively short time the original plant was trodden down, destroyed, and replaced by those noxious and thorny plants which make up the present churches of so-called Christendom. It is only in the dispensation of the fulness of times that the true Christian tree is to grow until it becomes 'a great tree'; it is only in this final age that the true gospel message is to roll forth until the knowledge of God covers the earth as the waters cover the sea. (D&C 65; Isa. 11.)" (Commentary 1:298.)
[^7] An application of this parable to the latter-day kingdom is given by the Prophet in these words: "It may be understood that the Church of the Latter-day Saints has taken its rise from a little leaven that was put into three witnesses. Behold, how much this is like the parable! It is fast leavening the lump, and will soon leaven the whole." (Teachings, p. 100.)
[^8] Whether our Lord gave all of the parables in the thirteenth chapter of Matthew in immediate consecutive order is a matter of some uncertainty. Two of them, the parable of the mustard seed and the parable of the leaven, are recorded by Luke in a different setting. It may be that Matthew grouped them all together for convenience in presentation, or, what is yet more probable, that Jesus repeated the same parables on numerous occasions to different congregations. There is no reason to suppose that a parable once given should never be spoken again; if the message was worth the attention of one congregation, so it would be of another. We should, however, no matter what view we take of the time and circumstances of their delivery, know assuredly that the message they contain and the doctrines they allude to are what is important to us.
[^9] This parable has also an allusion to the gathering of Israel in the last days. "The Saints work after this pattern," the Prophet said, after quoting the parable. "See the Church of the Latter-day Saints, selling all that they have, and gathering themselves together unto a place that they may purchase for an inheritance, that they may be together and bear each other's afflictions in the day of calamity." (Teachings, p. 101.)
[^10] "Seekers after truth may acquire much that is good and desirable, and not find the greatest truth of all, the truth that shall save them. Yet, if they seek persistently and with right intent, if they are really in quest of pearls and not of imitations, they shall find. Men who by search and research discover the truths of the kingdom of heaven may have to abandon many of their cherished traditions, and even their theories of imperfect philosophy and 'science falsely so called,' if they would possess themselves of the pearl of great price." (Talmage, pp. 293-94.)
[^11] 11. Hymns, no. 102.
[^12] 12. "All who are caught in the gospel net are not saved in the celestial kingdom; church membership alone gives no unconditional assurance of eternal life. (2 Ne. 31:16-21.) Rather, there will be a day of judgment, a day of sorting and dividing, a day when the wicked shall be cast out of the Church, 'out into the world to be burned.' For those then living the Second Coming will be an initial day of burning, sorting, and judgment (Matt. 25:31-46; D&C 63:54); for all men of all ages the ultimate day of sorting and dividing will occur, after all men have been raised from the dead, at the final great day of judgment. (2 Ne. 9:15-16.)" (Commentary 1:302.)
[^13] 13. Joseph Smith in applying this parable to latter-day conditions wrote: "Behold the seed of Joseph, spreading forth the Gospel net upon the face of the earth, gathering of every kind, that the good may be saved in vessels prepared for that purpose, and the angels will take care of the bad. So shall it be at the end of the world- the angels shall come forth and sever the wicked from among the just, and cast them into the furnace of fire, and there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth." (Teachings, p. 102.)
[^14] 14. With reference to the parables considered in this chapter, Joseph Smith said: "These things are so plain and so glorious, that every Saint in the last days must respond with a hearty Amen to them." (Teachings, p. 102.)
[^15] 15. These treasures of truth, old yet ever new, are exemplified by "the Book of Mormon coming forth out of the treasure of the heart. Also the covenants given to the Latter-day Saints, also the translation of the Bible- thus bringing forth out of the heart things new and old." (Teachings, p. 102.)
