Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1980)

Chapter 51

Jesus Ministers among the Gadarenes

Master, the tempest is raging! The billows are tossing high! The sky is o'er shadowed with blackness. No shelter or help is nigh.

Carest thou not that we perish? How canst thou lie asleep When each moment so madly is threatening A grave in the angry deep? [^1]

He Stills a Storm on the Sea of Galilee

(Mark 4:35-41; JST Mark 4:30; Matthew 8:18-27; Luke 8:22-25; 9:57-62; JST Luke 8:23)

Some six miles south and east of the shore of the ofttimes turbulent Galilean sea lay the prosperous city of Gadara where dwelt the Gadarenes (Gergesenes). Straight across the lake from Capernaum was Gergesa. Those who lived in these and other eastern areas must see the face and hear the voice of the Son of God. His work must not be done in a corner; every ear must hear his words, every eye must see his glory; all must have the privilege to believe, to follow, to obey, to be saved. We have no record of any visit by the Man from Nazareth to this area of the Decapolis except that which he now plans to make, but the miracle and wonder of his brief ministry among the rebellious of that area is such that neither they nor any who hear of it will ever be able to erase the memory.

It has been a long day. Jesus is weary. Great multitudes have pressed upon him, so much so that he delivered his public parables from a ship while the thronged congregation stood on the shore. Thereafter in a house in Capernaum he continued to preach in parables and otherwise to his disciples. Again on the seashore the multitude throngs about, hanging on every word, their souls crying out for the divine message.

It is now evening, and he says to his disciples, "Let us go over unto the other side of the lake." This decision apparently takes them by surprise, for it is only then that they "sent away the multitude." Then, as Mark says, "they took him even as he was in the ship," which seems to mean they departed without preparation in the way of food or clothing or traveling necessities. Whether their departure was a change in plans or the continuation of a course already foreknown in the mind of the Master we do not know; of this only we cannot doubt: Jesus, following the dictates of the Spirit, was continuing his foreordained ministry, and the coming events—the stilling that night of the Galilean storm, and the confrontation the next day with the legion of evil spirits—were among the most dramatic events of his ministry.

As Jesus and the elect few—certainly all or part of the Twelve among them; perhaps only the Twelve, because of space limitations—as these few hastened to push off from shore into the beckoning seclusion of the waters of Gennesaret, a sudden interruption halted their progress. Three men, apparently men of note and prominence, came forward to pledge their allegiance to the Master's cause and to offer their services in his behalf. Their individual offers and the divine responses invoked to each were so instructive as to warrant their inclusion in the writings of the synoptists. The proffers of service and our Lord's rejoinders were:

Swept along by the tide of popular acclaim, feeling the exhilaration that always attends a new and great and achieving movement, a certain scribe—a recognized religious leader, a prominent minister of the day, as it were—stepped forward to offer his services in the newly established church. "Master, I will follow thee whithersoever thou goest," he said.

From Jesus' response it seems clear that the offer was a self-serving plea for a position of preferment—a minister of the old dispensation seeking an equivalent rank in the new. "But in spite of the man's high position, in spite of his glowing promises, He who cared less than nothing for lip-service, and who preferred 'the modesty of fearful duty' to the 'rattling tongue of audacious eloquence,' coldly checked His would-be follower. He who had called the hated publican gave no encouragement to the reputable scribe. He did not reject the proffered service, but neither did He accept it. Perhaps 'in the man's flaring enthusiasm, He saw the smoke of egotistical self deceit.' He pointed out that His service was not one of wealth, or honour, or delight; not one in which any could hope for earthly gain." (Farrar, p. 248.)

In short, the Lord Jesus chooses his own ministers. All men who repent may enter his earthly kingdom and become heirs of the universal blessings thereby offered to all. Only those prepared by foreordination, chosen, as it were, from before the foundations of the world, are selected to lead and guide the destinies of the holy kingdom. And so, without denying church membership, but while withholding approval of the proffered ministerial assistance, Jesus said:

The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests; but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head.

When and while men serve on full-time missions as Jesus himself did for the more than three years here involved—all worldly matters slip away into relative insignificance. The Lord's ministers deny themselves of houses and lands and families and friends—of whatsoever need be—to carry on that work which excels in importance all other. There is no record that the scribe who sought to call himself to the ministry took any further steps to achieve his initially sought purpose.

In contrast to the scribe who sought for himself an ecclesiastical appointment in the new kingdom, we see now a disciple who was, in fact, called by Jesus to serve on a mission. "Follow me," came the divine word; 'teach my gospel; testify of me; build up my kingdom; forsake all for my name's sake.' This disciple—whose heart was known to Him who calls His own—had faith; he knew the worth of the pearl of great price; but he also had worldly interests that seemed important to him. "Lord, suffer me first to go and bury my father," he implored. Back came the divine word:

Let the dead bury their dead: but go thou and preach the kingdom of God.

'I have called you; forsake the things of this world and seek for those of a better. What is the life or death of family or friends to those who are taking life and salvation to a dying world? Let those who are spiritually dead bury those in whose bodies the breath of life no longer dwells. Go thou; preach the gospel of the kingdom; proclaim faith, repentance, baptism, and the gift of the Holy Ghost. Bring souls unto me, and you shall have rest with them in the kingdom of my Father.'

Yet another disciple—willing to serve, but concerned with the time and place of his call; willing to go on a mission and preach the gospel, but questioning the field of his present assignment—said: "Lord, I will follow thee; but let me first go bid them farewell, which are at home at my house." 'I will go, but let it be on my terms and conditions, not those of the Church.' To him Jesus gave the reply that has become proverbial for all time:

No man, having put his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God. [^2]

But now, at last, they set sail, traveling eastward across those blessed waters which are so much a part of the lives of the Holy One and his holy apostles. Yet even now, they are not alone; so great is his fame, so popular his appeal, and so compelling his presence, that many seek to follow him onto the turbulent waters and into the descending dusk. "There were also with him other little ships," Mark says. What happened to them as the events of the evening rose to their fearsome yet triumphant climax we know not. Perhaps they returned to a safe harbor and a secure anchor as the impending storm rose in violence over the surging waters; perhaps they too were buffeted by the violent winds, as their fearsome passengers dreaded the seeming death that lay ahead in the angry deep; and perhaps those who sailed in these lesser crafts also marveled and worshipped when the awesome decree went forth, "Peace, be still," and the violent waters of Gennesaret became calm.

In Galilee, of great and wondrous fame, is found the Sea of Galilee—the lake of Gennesaret, the sea of Tiberias—an inland mere of fresh, fish-filled water. Into it on the north flows the newborn Jordan; out of it on the south drains the mature and mighty river in which both John and Jesus baptized, and which meanders downward through a rich and fertile valley to the Dead Sea. This lake of Galilee, which Jesus so much loved and from whose life-giving waters the sons of Jonas and the sons of Zebedee, and many others of the disciples, made their living, is some thirteen miles long and seven miles wide. It is 695 feet below sea level and lies at the base, on the east and west, of rugged hills and mountains cut by canyons and gorges down which tempestuous winds and atmospheric downdraughts blow, making the otherwise calm waters subject to sudden and violent storms.

Such an atmospheric assault came forth in the lowering dusk of this memorable evening as Jesus and his intimates set forth toward Perea and the eastern shore. Whether the storm arose wholly without warning or the experienced sailors who governed the craft saw signs of the tempest ahead and yet launched their ship forth because the passenger whose will they sought to do had so commanded, we cannot tell. Nor does it matter, though we prefer to believe they set forth knowing that peril lay ahead because He willed it.

In any event, it is clear that the storm itself was unusually fierce. "There arose a great tempest in the sea," Matthew says, "insomuch that the ship was covered with the waves." Mark says: "There arose a great storm of wind, and the waves beat into the ship, so that it was now full"; and Luke adds that "they were filled with fear, and were in danger."

Through it all, we see the Mortal Messiah seeking the physical refreshment his tired body so much needs at the moment. "Jesus is asleep, for very weariness and hunger, in the stern of the ship, His head on that low wooden bench, while the heavens darken, the wild wind swoops down those mountain-gorges, howling with hungry rage over the trembling sea; the waves rise and toss, and lash and break over the ship, and beat into it, and the white foam washes at His feet. His Humanity here appears as true as when He lay cradled in the manger; His Divinity, as when the sages from the East laid their offerings at His Feet." (Edersheim 1:600.)

None fear floods and storm-lashed seas more than those who work with water and know its onrushing power and the utter helplessness of mortal strength before its overpowering waves. Is it any wonder that Jesus was awakened from what must have been a deep sleep with cries of, "Master, carest thou not that we perish?" as Mark records; "Master, master, we perish," as Luke has it; and, "Lord, save us: we perish," as Matthew records—all of which expressions must have been part of the earnest and fear-filled importunings of that dread moment.

Jesus, now awake, before he arises from the wooden bench whereon he lay, says to those who sought his help: "Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith?" After the storm is quelled, he will say to them again: "Where is your faith?" From this we need not suppose they were without faith. Their very importunings bore witness of their assurance that this man, whom they followed as the Messiah, could do whatever must be done to prevent disaster. Their lack of faith—as with all of us—was one of degree; had they believed with that fervor that might have been the case, they of themselves could have stilled the storm, without arousing their weary Lord from his needed rest.

But after this, "he arose, and rebuked the winds and the sea; and there was a great calm." The raging waters and the roaring winds ceased; the mighty waves became calm ripples. "Peace, be still," he said, and all was calm and serene. "When 'He was awakened' by the voice of His disciples, 'He rebuked the wind and the sea,' as Jehovah had of old ["He rebuked the Red sea also, and it was dried up"—Ps. 109]—just as He had 'rebuked' the fever, and the paroxysm of the demonised. For, all are His creatures, even when lashed to frenzy of the 'hostile power.' And the sea He commanded as if it were a sentient being: 'Be silent! Be silenced!' And immediately the wind was bound, the panting waves throbbed into stillness, and a great calm of rest fell upon the Lake. For, when Christ sleepeth, there is storm; when He waketh, great peace." (Edersheim 1:602.)

And they being afraid wondered, saying one to another, What manner of man is this! for he commandeth even the winds and water, and they obey him.

What manner of man, indeed! Heretofore he has cleansed lepers, cast out devils, and even given life to a cold corpse. Now the very elements obey his word. And yet it is not the miracles of themselves that cause the world to wonder; rather, it is the miracles coupled with the repeated personal witness that he is the Son of God, their Savior and Redeemer.

Others have performed miracles, always, however, in his name and by his authority; others have even controlled the elements, as he through them has willed it. Moses stretched forth his rod and the waters of the Red Sea parted. Whatever turbulence throbbed through their restless waves ceased at his word; the laws of gravity ceased to triumph and the very waters congealed, forming a wall on the right hand and on the left, between which the chosen seed then trod on dry ground. Enoch moved mountains and changed rivers from their courses. Elijah and Elisha smote the waters of Jordan with a holy mantle, and they divided hither and thither, leaving dry ground for their path. Unto the servants of the Lord "is given power to command the waters." (D&C 61:27.) It is not the miracle per se; it is the fact that Jesus, who performed the miracle, said he was God's Son—leaving the deed as proof of his words. [^3]

We cannot leave our brief consideration of this stupendous miracle, however, without at least opening the door to the symbolic uses to which it may be put. For instance, manifestly it teaches that the Lord Jesus is ever near his friends and will preserve them in perilous circumstances, even if their safety calls for control of the elements.

Also, the sea—a raging, restless sea—is a symbol of a sinful and wicked world. The beasts seen by Daniel in vision and used as types of worldly kingdoms came up out of the sea, a sea upon which the four winds of heaven strove. (Dan. 7.) And the Lord said to Isaiah: "The wicked are like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt. There is no peace, saith my God, to the wicked" (Isa. 57:20-21)—leaving us to conclude that when Christ calms the seas of life, peace enters the hearts of men.

Further, there are those also who have likened the Church itself to a ship, steered and sailed by apostles and prophets through the waves of the world, which rage and toss, violently and with force, against the tempested bark, and yet never prevail. The divine ship never sinks; its faithful passengers never drown in the angry deep, because Christ sails his own ship. He may seem to be asleep on a bench with a pillow under his head, but he is there. And when in times of great peril he is aroused by the pleas of his servants, once again he rebukes the winds and the waters; he delivers those who have faith in his name; he speaks peace to troubled souls; his voice is heard again, "Peace, be still."

Jesus Heals a Demoniac among the Gadarenes

(Mark 5:1-20; JST Mark 5:6, 11, 13-15, 17; Luke 8:26-39; JST Luke 8:27, 31-33, 35, 37; Matthew 8:28-34; JST Matthew 8:29-30)

Scarcely a ripple marred the calm surface of the lake of Gennesaret as the Jewish ship anchored near Gerasa (Gergesa) on the Perean side of the sea. Striving winds and raging billows and crashing waves—all part of the now-stilled storm—no longer beat upon the ship and the rock-strewn shore. He whose voice had spoken to matter unorganized and caused the earth to come rolling into existence; he who had gathered the waters into one place, calling the dry land earth and the gathering together of the waters sea—had spoken peace to the Galilean tempest, and all was calm. The elements were at rest.

Whether it was a late hour of the day of parables or an early hour of the day after, we do not know—only that the storm of the journey had been stilled and earth's elements were at peace. Jesus and his fellow preachers set foot on Perean soil and almost immediately they were confronted with a spiritual storm, a tempest of devilish opposition and human torment, that far overshadowed the recently silenced winds and quelled waves of their inland mere. They were met by a man out of the tombs who for a long time had been possessed by devils. He dwelt in no house, wore no clothing, and was "exceeding fierce," so much so "that no man might pass by that way." In his maddened and raging state "no man could bind him, no, not with chains: Because that he had been often bound with fetters and chains, and the chains had been plucked asunder by him, and the fetters broken in pieces: neither could any man tame him. And always, night and day, he was in the mountains, and in the tombs, crying, and cutting himself with stones." [^4]

This poor, shrieking, tormented creature—his body bruised and gashed and naked—impelled by some power or instinct beyond human ken, seeing Jesus afar off, ran to meet him. There they stood—the Prince of Peace who had spoken peace to the winds and the waves, and the maddened maniac whose every act was subject to the will of the demons from hell—there they stood, good and evil facing each other, the one about to act, the other to be acted upon. Then, on his own motion, Jesus spoke the word that would restore lost harmony to the suffering demoniac, that would quell and allay the strife within him, a strife more perilous than the pounding waves of the sea. "Come out of the man, thou unclean spirit," he said.

But there was no immediate obedience. Other purposes were yet to unfold. Rather, the suffering Gadarene fell down, worshipped Jesus, and, his voice framing the words placed on the tongue by the evil power, acclaimed: "What have I to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of the most high God?" There was no divine knowledge in the demented man; he neither knew nor in his present state cared whether Jesus was the Messiah. But the devils from the deep knew—and do know—that he is God's Son. Their memory of preexistence remains; they remember the day when, at his word, they fell as lightning from heaven. "The devils also believe, and tremble." (James 2:19.) Then from the mouth of the man came the blasphemous words of many devils, spoken as though there was but one: "I adjure thee by God, that thou torment me not." And also, this time speaking in the plural: "Art thou come hither to torment us before the time?" The devils, who know Jesus is the Lord, know also that their destiny is one of eternal torment, one in which they are cast out forever from the divine presence and from every ray of hope and light and betterment.

Jesus asked the man: "What is thy name?" or rather, "he commanded him saying, Declare thy name," and demons within him answered by his mouth: "My name is Legion: for we are many." Or: "He said, Legion: because many devils were entered into him." The poor soul was in complete subjection to the demoniac will; their words were his words, and his voice was their voice.

Knowing they had no choice but to come out of the man—for Jesus had so commanded—the devils "besought him much that he would not send them away out of the country." Apparently they were assigned to tempt those in that area and feared the wrath of Lucifer if they failed to bend to his will. Also, "they besought him that he would not command them to go out into the deep," meaning the eternal abyss, the abysmal pit of eternal torment, which shall be their eventual everlasting inheritance. "And he said unto them, Come out of the man."

Now there was, "a good way off," a great herd of swine, about two thousand in number, "feeding on the mountain." As Matthew records it, the demons said: "If thou cast us out, suffer us to go away into the herd of swine," and Jesus said, "Go." In Mark's account, the devils besought him, saying: "Send us into the swine, that we may enter into them. And forthwith Jesus gave them leave." Luke's conclusion is that "he suffered them" so to do.

Some cavilers exhibit a mocking concern as to whether Jesus commanded or merely permitted the devils to enter the swine, as though it made the slightest difference. They pretend to find in his act, whatever it was, an unwarranted destruction of the property of others. Surely it was an unethical if not an immoral act, they contend. If such it is assumed to be, so be it. But, realistically, who is to say that He who sends hail to beat down the ears of ripened corn, or storms to sink fish-filled boats, may not also send devils into swine to sweep them in a maddened surge to a watery grave?

But be that as it may be. "Then went the devils out of the man, and entered into the swine: and the herd ran violently down a steep place into the lake, and were choked." As to the locale, Edersheim tells us: "About a quarter of an hour to the south of Gersa [Gerasa] is a steep bluff, which descends abruptly on a narrow ledge of shore. A terrified herd running down this cliff could not have recovered its foothold, and must inevitably have been hurled into the Lake beneath. Again, the whole country around is burrowed with limestone caverns and rock-chambers for the dead, such as those which were the dwelling of the demonised." (Edersheim 1:607.)

Why did the demons desire to enter the bodies of the swine? Or, for that matter, how came they to take up tenancy in the body of the man? We cannot tell and do not know how it is that evil spirits—few or many—gain entrance into the bodies of mortal men. We do know that all things are governed by law, and that Satan is precluded from taking possession of the bodies of the prophets and other righteous people. Were it not so, the work of God would be thwarted—always and in all instances—for Lucifer leads the armies of hell against all men, and more especially against those who are instrumental in furthering the Lord's work.

There must be circumstances of depression and sin and physical weakness that, within the restrictions of divine control, permit evil spirits to enter human bodies. We do know their curse is to be denied tabernacles, and we surmise that the desire for such tenancy is so great that they, when permitted, even enter the bodies of beasts.

And it may be, in this instance, that the devils, ejected from their ill-gotten home by a power they could not resist, sought to thwart His work by the next-best expedient available to them—that of destroying the livelihood of many people, so they would rise up in anger against Him who destroyed their craft. And, in fact, this is what happened.

When they who fed the swine saw what was done, "they fled, and went and told it in the city and in the country." The word was noised about in Gerasa and Gadara and the whole countryside. All the people were stirred up to a high point of wonder and amazement. The owners of the swine, those who knew the healed demoniac, and all who heard of the wondrous happenings hastened "to see what was done." They "came to Jesus, and found the man, out of whom the devils were departed, sitting at the feet of Jesus, clothed, and in his right mind: and they were afraid."

Our evangelist friends tell us only what happened and the few spoken words that tie the whole miraculous series of events together. Hours must have elapsed before the word reached the inhabitants of the area, and yet other hours before the multitudes assembled near the sea to hear and see for themselves. It may even be that more than one day was involved. No doubt the assembling hosts came in groups, both large and small, and arrived at different times.

Jesus and those who were with him would not have done other than teach them the gospel of the kingdom. Such was the message they were proclaiming in every city and place where a single listening ear would hearken to their words. The accounts do tell us that after the people assembled to the place where Jesus and the healed man sat, the feeders and keepers of the swine recited again, for all to hear, how he that was possessed of the devils was healed and also concerning the swine. Nor can we suppose that Jesus and the disciples remained silent. Never was there a time when Jesus was not the center of all eyes, when his words did not ring with clarity in nearby ears. Never was there a teaching situation that he did not utilize to proclaim his gospel to every creature. We cannot doubt that the Gadarenes, on that day or those days, as the case may be, heard the word of truth from him who is the Truth.

But when all had been done that he came to do, when those who walked in darkness had seen a great light, when the doctrine had been taught and the testimony borne—with the healed demoniac there as a living witness of the truth of it all—then was Jesus rejected by the Gadarenes. "Then the whole multitude of the country of the Gadarenes round about besought him to depart from them; for they were taken with great fear."

"'And they were afraid'—more afraid of that Holy Presence than of the previous furies of the possessed. The man indeed was saved; but what of that, considering that some of their two thousand unclean beasts had perished! Their precious swine were evidently in danger; the greed and gluttony of every apostate Jew and low-bred Gentile in the place were clearly imperilled by receiving such a one as they saw that Jesus was. With disgraceful and urgent unanimity they entreated and implored Him to leave their coasts. Both heathens and Jews had recognised already the great truth that God sometimes answers bad prayers in His deepest anger. Jesus Himself had taught His disciples not to give that which was holy to the dogs, neither to cast their pearls before swine, 'lest they trample them under their feet, and then turn again and rend you.' He had gone across the lake for quiet and rest, desiring, though among lesser multitudes, to extend to these semi-heathens also the blessings of the kingdom of God. But they loved their sins and their swine, and with a perfect energy of deliberate preference for all that was base and mean, rejected such blessings, and entreated Him to go away. Sadly, but at once, He turned and left them. Gergesa was no place for Him; better the lonely hill-tops to the north of it; better the crowded strand on the other side." (Farrar, p. 259.)

But Jesus and his associates did not depart without leaving a witness. The healed man desired to attach himself to the missionary group and go over the lake to Capernaum. To him, however, Jesus said: "Go home to thy friends, and tell them how great things the Lord hath done for thee, and hath had compassion on thee." Of his subsequent missionary service we know only that "he departed, and began to publish in Decapolis, how great things Jesus had done for him; and all that heard him did marvel."

We cannot doubt that the purposes of the Gadarene ministry were fulfilled—in the stilling of the storm as they journeyed thitherward; in the healing of the possessed demoniac near Gerasa; in the teaching and testifying that grew out of the miracle; and in the continuing witness of the one by whose mouth Satan once spoke but out of which now came a witness of Christ that no man could refute. [^5]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] For a brief, initial analysis of the law of faith, reference may be made to Mormon Doctrine. 2nd ed., pp. 261-67.
[^2] The mode and manner of dress among the Jews of Jesus' day was itself a symbol of their religion and their way of life. Rabbis and leaders in particular took great pains to dress properly. We cannot doubt that Jesus and the apostles followed the standards of excellence in dress that then prevailed. This means that each of them - Jesus included - wore five standard articles of clothing. These were: (1) Headgear, which consisted either of a Sudar, or turban, or a Maaphoreth, "which seems to have served as a covering for the head, and to have descended over the back of the neck and shoulders, somewhat like the Indian pugaree." (2) Sandals. (3) An inner garment. Of that worn by Jesus, Edersheim says: "The Chaluq, or more probably the Kittuna, which formed his inner garment, must have been close-fitting, and descended to His feet, since it was not only so worn by teachers, but was regarded as absolutely necessary for any one who would publicly read or 'Targum' the Scriptures, or exercise any function in the Synagogue. As we know, it 'was without seam, woven from the top throughout;' and this closely accords with the texture of these garments." (4) A girdle. This was used to fasten the inner garment around the middle. (5) An outer garment. The square outer garment, or Tallith, was the one that carried "the customary fringes of four long white threads with one of hyacinth knotted together on each of the four corners." As we are aware, "the quaternion of soldiers who crucified Christ made division of the riches of His poverty, taking each one part of His dress, while for the fifth, which, if divided, would have been rent to pieces, they cast lots." (Edersheim 1:624-25.)
[^3] "Giving blessings and performing priesthood ordinances is often the most physically taxing labor which the Lord's true ministers ever perform. There is nothing perfunctory or casual about the performance of these holy ordinances; great physical exertion and intense mental concentration are part of the struggle to get that spirit of revelation so essential in an inspired blessing or other performance." (Commentary 1:319.) Joseph Smith, under date of March 14, 1843, wrote in his journal: "Elder Jedediah M. Grant enquired of me the cause of my turning pale and losing strength last night while blessing children. I told him that I saw that Lucifer would exert his influence to destroy the children that I was blessing, and I strove with all the faith and spirit that I had to seal upon them a blessing that would secure their lives upon the earth; and so much virtue went out of me into the children, that I became weak, from which I have not yet recovered; and I referred to the case of the woman touching the hem of the garment of Jesus. The virtue referred to is the spirit of life; and a man who exercises great faith in administering to the sick, blessing little children, or confirming, is liable to become weakened." (Teachings, pp. 280-81.)
[^4] "Doubtless she dreaded His anger, for the law expressly ordained that the touch of one afflicted as she was, caused ceremonial uncleanness till the evening. But His touch had cleansed her, not hers polluted Him." (Farrar, p. 271.)
[^5] "Frequently in opening the eyes of the blind, Jesus, as here, coupled his spoken command with some physical act. On this and other occasions he touched the sightless eyes. (Matt. 20:30-34.) In healing the man in Jerusalem who was blind from birth, he anointed the man's eyes with clay made with spittle and then had the man wash in the pool of Siloam. (John 9:6-7.) The blind man of Bethsaida was healed by application of saliva to his eyes. (Mark 8:22-26.) Similarly, in healing a deaf man with a speech impediment, Jesus both touched the man's tongue and put his own fingers into the man's ears. (Mark 7:32-37.) "None of these unusual and dissimilar acts are essential to the exercise of healing power. Healing miracles are performed by the power of faith and in the authority of the priesthood. By doing these physical acts, however, the Master's apparent purpose was to strengthen the faith of the blind or deaf person, persons who were denied the ability to gain increased assurance and resultant faith by seeing his countenance or hearing his words." (Commentary 1:320.)
