Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1980)

Chapter 52

A Continuing Ministry of Miracles

Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God; . . . he manifesteth himself unto all those who believe in him, . . . working mighty miracles, signs, and wonders, among the children of men according to their faith. (2 Ne. 26:12-13.)

Faith Precedes the Miracle

"It is by faith that miracles are wrought; . . . if these things have ceased, then has faith ceased also." (Moro. 7:37-38.) "If there be no faith among the children of men God can do no miracle among them." (Ether 12:12.)

"And who shall say that Jesus Christ did not many mighty miracles? . . . And the reason why he ceaseth to do miracles among the children of men is because that they dwindle in unbelief, and depart from the right way, and know not the God in whom they should trust." (Morm. 9:18-20.)

Miracles are the fruit of faith. Signs follow those who believe. If there is faith, there will be miracles; if there are no miracles, there is no faith. The two are inseparably intertwined with each other; they cannot be separated, and there cannot be one without the other. Faith and miracles go together, always and everlastingly. And faith precedes the miracle.

Faith is power, the power of God, the power by which the worlds were made. Where there is faith there is power, and where a people do not have power to heal the sick and perform miracles, they have no faith.

Faith is an eternal principle, an eternal law; it is built into the universe itself as a governing, controlling force; it is ordained of God and shall endure forever. It takes no special divine decree to cause the effects of the law of gravity to be manifest everywhere on earth at all times. The law has been established and the effects that flow from it are everlastingly the same. So it is with faith. He who has given a law unto all things has established faith as the power and force by which he and his shall operate in righteousness forever. No special divine decree is needed to utilize the power of faith; it is like gravity: anytime any person in any age conforms to the law involved, the ordained results will attend.

In this connection, be it also noted that among the gifts of the Spirit—where healings are involved—there are two gifts: one is faith to heal, the other, faith to be healed. Manifestly Jesus had faith to perform miracles under any and all circumstances and for whomsoever he chose; that his acts always conformed to holy and just principles is implicit in the very nature of things. We are aware that at times he performed miracles on his own motion and for his own purposes, as in the casting out of the legion of devils from the Gadarene demoniac and in the stilling of the storm on the lake of Gennesaret. But as we are about to see, except in special and unusual circumstances—and these were numerous in the life of Jesus—healing miracles are and should be performed as a result of the faith of the one receiving the divine blessing.

It is, of course, beyond our present purview to speak in extenso about faith and the signs and miracles that are its companions; such would be a volume by itself. [^1] But to envision why and how Jesus operated as he is about to do in his Galilean ministry, we must be reminded of at least the foregoing basic concepts.

Jesus Raises the Daughter of Jairus from Death

(Mark 5:21-24, 35-43; JST Mark 5:27-28; Luke 8:40-42, 49-56; JST Luke 8:51; Matthew 9:1, 18-19, 23-26; JST Matthew 9:24-25)

After his Gadarene ministry, Jesus sailed some seven miles westward across the now calm Galilean waters to Capernaum and its environs. Great throngs awaited him on the shore—reverential, respectful, worshipful—hungering for more of the heavenly manna that he dispensed so freely. Perhaps those who set sail in the many small ships that followed him into the storm-darkened night had been with him near Gerasa—seeing what was done to the demoniac and hearing what was said to the Gadarenes—so that they now, returning ahead of him, had alerted the Galileans of his coming. But however the people learned of his return, as the isles shall wait for his law, so they upon whom his countenance now shone also waited for his word.

Among those on the shore—all hungering and thirsting after righteousness; all anxious to feed their souls with more of the heavenly bread that fell from his lips; all rejoicing in the parables of the past and the miracles that had been wrought among them—among these were two who needed special help, two upon whom his countenance was about to shine as it did on but few people in Palestine. One was Jairus, a ruler of the synagogue in Capernaum, whose twelve-year-old daughter lay even then at death's door; the other, an unnamed woman suffering from an incurable feminine malady, an issue of blood that none could heal.

Jesus' miracles varied according to the needs and circumstances of those on whose behalf they were wrought. He performed the same gracious acts in one way on one occasion, in other ways at subsequent times—all to the end that those involved might be led along the path to eternal life in his Father's kingdom. He has just spoken peace to a Galilean tempest and called a legion of devils out of a wracked and tormented body, acting in each case on his own authority, taking no steps to build up the faith of the beneficiaries of his goodness. Each of these miracles manifest the absolute power inherent in him; sometimes Jesus healed the sick because he had faith to heal and not because they had faith to be healed.

But now in the case of Jairus's daughter and the woman with the issue of blood, we are about to see healings because those who sought the blessing had faith to be healed. And in each instance we shall see the Blessed One—bearing in himself, as it were, the sicknesses and infirmities of his brethren—we shall see him, with tender solicitude, encourage and increase the faith of those who seek his goodness; we shall see him strengthen their faith lest by any chance they fail to obtain the blessings they seek.

One of the first to meet Jesus as he came ashore was Jairus, "a ruler of the synagogue" in Capernaum. We know that Jesus had preached often and wrought miracles in that very house of worship, and we know that such preaching was done at the solicitation of the Jewish elders who held local synagogue rule. Thus Jesus and Jairus knew and respected each other; this devout Jew had heard Jesus preach, had believed his words, and had rejoiced in the knowledge of other miracles. Is it too much to suppose he was present on that glorious Capernaum Sabbath when Jesus cast the evil spirit from the man in the synagogue of that city?

But whatever their prior association, Jairus had faith in Christ, and coming this day, "he fell down at Jesus' feet" "and worshipped him." "My little daughter lieth at the point of death," he said. "I pray thee, come and lay thy hands on her, that she may be healed; and she shall live."

Can anyone doubt the faith of Jairus? Or that he knew and understood the ordinance of administration to the sick? "Come and lay thy hands on her," he pled, "and she shall live"! "Is any sick among you? let him call for the elders of the church; and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord: And the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up." (James 5:14-15.) "And the elders of the church, two or more, shall be called, and shall pray for and lay their hands upon them in my name." (D&C 42:44.)

Jesus' miracles were wrought in divers ways, with or without oil, with or without the laying on of hands, always as occasion required; but the request of Jairus that he come and conform to the ritual he had ordained in his Church, and which he had followed on selected occasions in the past, was the logical and proper request for him to make. The ordinance of laying on of hands, in divers spiritual connections, was common among the Jews, as it had been in all dispensations that went before.

Jesus' heart was touched, and he purposed within himself that Jairus's faith should not go unrewarded. "And Jesus went with him; and much people followed him, and thronged him." And it was in the midst of this pressing, surging multitude that the woman with the issue of blood slipped forward in secret to but touch the hem of his garment, an episode that delayed their progress toward the home of Jairus and of which we shall speak more particularly hereafter.

As Jesus ceased speaking to the woman and the reason for their delay vanished, "there came from the ruler of the synagogue's house certain which said, Thy daughter is dead: why troublest thou the Master any further?" Receiving this word, what would be more natural than for Jairus to thank Jesus for coming thus far, and excuse himself to return home to comfort his wife and arrange for the funeral.

Jesus, however, overheard the message. Immediately, before any thought of doubt or fear or resignation to the will of a seeming divine providence could arise, he said: "Be not afraid, only believe." "Fear not: believe only, and she shall be made whole." 'She is dead; no matter, I am the Lord also of the dead; if thou canst but believe, she shall live again.' This miracle is to be wrought, as healings generally are, because of the faith of the family members, not because Jesus had absolute power within himself and could, if he chose, speak to the winds or the devils and have them obey.

That Jairus's faith remained firm, perhaps even increased, we cannot doubt, for Jesus—taking only Peter, James, and John with him—continued to Jairus's home, to do that which only one having the power of God can do. Indeed, it is not too much to suppose that Jairus knew of the raising of the widow's son from death at Nain. Word of such wondrous deeds spread like wildfire through the whole country; such deeds of mercy were not done in a corner, and each one fed the faith of others who needed and desired like blessings.

Arriving at the place where the dead daughter now lay, Jesus with her parents and the three chief apostles entered the home "and found it occupied by the hired mourners and flute-players, who, as they beat their breasts, with mercenary clamour, insulted the dumbness of sincere sorrow, and the patient majesty of death." (Farrar, p. 272.) To this wailing chorus of mourners—some bowed in true grief, others chanting and shrieking their false sorrows as the actors they were paid to be—Jesus said: "Why make ye this ado, and weep? the damsel is not dead, but sleepeth."

"Not dead, but sleepeth"! That she was dead they well knew, "and they laughed him to scorn." Yet how much more refined and consoling it is to say "Lazarus sleepeth," though for days the processes of decomposition have been at work in the former home of his spirit. "True, she was dead as men view death, for her spirit had left her body. Yet in the kindly perspective of eternity, the dead are merely as those who are asleep; for a moment the body, without life, is unconscious to its surroundings; but soon—as when the sleeping soul, following a night of repose, gains consciousness with the rising sun—the body will awaken to a new life of resurrected immortality. How comforting to know that the dead are only sleeping and that those who rest in the Lord shall awake to everlasting life." (Commentary 1:316.)

Then Jesus put forth the shrieking wailers with their mourning minstrelsy, "took the damsel by the hand"—she was a maid of about twelve years of age—"and said unto her, Talitha cumi." "Damsel, I say unto thee, arise." 'Little maid, arise!' Then "her spirit came again"; the living, intelligent, sentient part of the human personality received a new mortal life; the spirit daughter of the Eternal Father entered again the body created from the dust of the earth. The maid arose; she walked; and Jesus "commanded to give her meat."

After the miracle, Jesus gave the parents certain instructions that are difficult for us to understand. "And her parents were astonished," Luke says, as well they should have been, "but he charged them that they should tell no man." Mark's account says "he charged them straitly that no man should know it." Matthew makes no mention of the restrictive counsel, but says only: "And the fame hereof went abroad into all that land."

We cannot suppose for a moment that Jesus was trying to keep this miracle secret. This wondrous deed that turned death into life; that bore record of the divinity of the One who even now was forecasting his own future victory over the grave; that could be performed only in righteousness and only by the power of God—this mighty miracle should, as Matthew says, send his fame into all the land.

Indeed, the parents could not enshroud in secrecy that which was already public knowledge; everyone in the whole area would soon know, because of the way Jesus himself had handled the successive events, that the little maid who once was dead now lived. Her death had been announced openly to the multitude as Jesus ended his conversation with the woman whom he healed of the issue of blood. Jesus himself had replied, openly and before the multitude, that notwithstanding her death she would "be made whole." All the people would soon know that she now lived, and would be expected to wonder how and by what means life had come to her again. The hired mourners, whose earnings had been aborted by the act of divine mercy, all knew of her death and would soon know that she now lived. The thing was not done in the dark; multitudes did and would know what the Master had wrought. Why then this charge of secrecy?

Perhaps, as is so often the case, the fragmentary accounts of our evangelist friends do not convey the full tenor and purport of the charge given by Jesus to the parents. We know, for instance, as a matter of standard gospel counsel, that those who enjoy the gifts of the Spirit and who possess the signs which always follow those who believe are commanded not to boast of these spiritual blessings. In our day, after naming the miraculous signs that always attend those who have faith, those who believe the very truths taught by Jesus anciently, the Lord says: "But a commandment I give unto them, that they shall not boast themselves of these things, neither speak them before the world; for these things are given unto you for your profit and for salvation." (D&C 84:73.) On another occasion the Lord in our day directed, "Talk not of judgments, neither boast of faith nor of mighty works." (D&C 105:24.)

Perhaps the charge to "tell no man" meant they were not to tell the account in a boastful way, lest a spirit of pride—a spirit of self-adopted superiority—should come into their souls. There were times when Jesus told the recipients of his healing power to go forth and testify of the goodness of God unto them, and other times when he limited the extent and detail of their witness. Without knowing the people and all the attendant circumstances, we cannot sit in judgment and determine why he gave differing directions to different people.

Jesus Heals the Woman with an Issue of Blood

(Mark 5:25-34; Luke 8:43-48; Matthew 9:20-22)

We come now to the staunching of the flow of feminine blood of an unnamed woman to whom legend has given the name Veronica. Of her we know only that she was a woman of great faith—probably already a baptized member of the Church—who "had an issue of blood twelve years, And had suffered many things of many physicians, and had spent all that she had, and was nothing bettered, but rather grew worse.

Too ashamed even to mention the nature of her affliction, yet knowing Jesus had power to heal, she pressed near him as he and Jairus walked together and said within herself: "If I may but touch his garment, I shall be whole." Too timid, too shy to claim audience before him or to ask him to center his divine attention on such a lowly one as she esteemed herself to be, yet she sought just to be near him, just to feel his presence, just to touch the hem of the sacred garments he wore. Then she would be healed, and he need not so much as slacken his stride as he went with the ruler of the synagogue to raise to life the maid whose whole span of life measured the same as the years of her disease.

That there was no healing power in the hem of Jesus' garment, nor in any of the physical things he possessed, nor in any relic from any source, however saintly, goes without saying. It is axiomatic. But on the other hand, anything that enables a person to draw near unto the Lord and to center his affection and trust in him may properly be used to increase faith and to gain the blessings that come in no other way. Even the Urim and Thummim itself, carried in the breastplate of the ancient high priests in Israel, was but an instrument that enabled them to center their faith in Jehovah and receive, by revelation, his mind and will. And so it was, to a lesser extent, with the fringes and tassels on the borders of the garments of the Rabbis in Jesus' day.

From the beginning the garments of the saints have enjoyed a special and sacred place in true worship. They cover that nakedness which when exposed leads to lewd and lascivious conduct. They stand as a symbol of modesty and decency and are a constant reminder to true believers of the restraints and controls placed by a divine providence upon their acts. Adam and Eve made for themselves aprons of fig leaves to cover their nakedness and preserve their modesty. The Lord himself made coats of skins to cover the bodies of our first parents, that they, being clothed and wholesome before him, might attain those feelings which foster reverence and worship.

And the Lord Jehovah commanded Moses to direct the children of Israel, through all their generations, to "make them fringes [tassels] in the borders [corners] of their garments, . . . and that they put upon the fringe of the borders a ribband of blue." Why and of what moment was such a dress code? We can see how the dress standards given to Adam and Eve taught modesty and placed the new mortals in a frame of mind to live and worship by proper standards. Immodest, ornate, and worldly dress is an invitation to unclean thoughts and immoral acts, which are foreign to that conduct and worship desired by Him whose we are. But why such minutely prescribed dress requirements as these given to ancient Israel? Jehovah gives the answer: "It shall be unto you for a fringe, that ye may look upon it, and remember all the commandments of the Lord, and do them; and that ye seek not after your own heart and your own eyes, after which ye use to go a whoring." That is: 'Your garments, your clothing, shall be a shield and a protection to you. They shall cover your nakedness and keep from you the lusts of the eyes and the lusts of the flesh, and the special adornments on them shall remind you continually to walk as becometh saints.' All this is to be, Jehovah decreed, "That ye may remember, and do all my commandments, and be holy unto your God." (Num. 15:37-41.)

Now we see Jehovah, as Jesus, ministering personally among the people, and—we cannot doubt—dressed in the manner in which he himself had of olden times decreed that faithful Israelites should dress. [^2] And now we see Veronica—if so she may be called—looking upon the fringes of his garments; remembering the ancient covenant that by so doing she was agreeing to keep the commandments; and feeling within herself that if she but touched the sacred fringes on the garments of him whom she accepted as God's Son, surely she would be healed. That such a desire should enter her heart was, under all the circumstances, both natural and proper. It was a sign—not of belief in magic or relics or any special power in the clothing itself, but of faith in him who wore the garments and who had designed them in such a way as to remind his people of their covenant to keep his commandments.

And so, she "came behind him, and touched the border of his garment: and immediately her issue of blood stanched." She was healed; she felt it in her body; her organs began to function according to the original plan and purposes of the great Creator; the hemorrhaging fountain of affliction no longer flowed. Overcome with emotion and gratitude she slipped back into the throng without a word.

"And Jesus, immediately knowing in himself that virtue had gone out of him, turned him about in the press, and said, Who touched my clothes?" There were immediate denials on the part of the disciples. Peter said, "Master, the multitude throng thee and press thee, and sayest thou, Who touched me?" [^3]

This question—"Who touched me?"—was asked not to gain information, but to encourage the timid suppliant to identify herself and to bear testimony of the healing power that had come into her life. And she, seeing her act was not hidden from him by whose power she was now made whole, came forward—trembling, fearful, grateful—fell at his feet, and declared to him and to all "for what cause she had touched him, and how she was healed immediately." Jesus confirmed how and in what manner and by what means she had been blessed. "Daughter, thy faith hath made thee whole," he said, "go in peace, and be whole of thy plague." [^4]

And so it is in the surging throngs of life. Many who are spiritually sick; who have had an issue of sorrow and sin, lo these many years; who spend their substance on the things of this world—many such are within arm's length of the Lord and need only to reach out and take hold of his church to find his healing power.

Jesus Causes the Blind to See and the Dumb to Speak

(Matthew 9:27-34; JST Matthew 9:36)

Jesus now journeys from Jairus's home to the house in Capernaum where he abides when in that part of Galilee. He is followed by two blind men who plead for sight. "Thou son of David, have mercy on us" is the plea of the sightless ones. Jesus makes no response; he has no apparent intention of causing the light of the sun to break through the seal that physical imperfection has placed upon eyes that see nothing but everlasting night. At least any act on his part must result from a clear and firm faith in the hearts of those who seek his healing goodness.

Up to this point in his mortal ministry, there is no recorded instance of Jesus opening blind eyes. Lame men have leaped, lepers have been cleansed, and dead bodies have been reanimated as mortal houses for eternal spirits, but there is not as yet a specific account of sightless eyes seeing. We suppose the fault is with the scriptural accounts that have come down to us, for the opening of blind eyes is singled out in the Messianic prophecies as among the great wonders he shall work. The Book of Mormon Messianic assurance is that Jesus would work mighty miracles, heal the sick, raise the dead, cause the lame to walk, "the blind to receive their sight," and the deaf to hear, and that he would cure all manner of diseases. (Mosiah 3:5.) The biblical promise, as given by Isaiah in a passage of wondrous beauty, and which applies to his coming as a mortal and in millennial glory, is found in these words: "Your God will come. . . . Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped. Then shall the lame man leap as an hart, and the tongue of the dumb sing." (Isa. 35:4-6.)

In the cases now before us, the two blind persons, having within themselves faith to be healed, follow Jesus into the house, continuing to importune for his healing power. "Believe ye that I am able to do this?" he asks them. Their answer is "Yea." "Then touched he their eyes, saying, According to your faith be it unto you. And their eyes were opened." [^5]

"And straitly he charged them, saying, Keep my commandments, and see ye tell no man in this place, that no man know it." "Healed persons are obligated to repay Deity for his beneficent goodness to them, insofar as they can, by devoted service in his cause. They have no right to turn again to evil practices or former false beliefs. Such would make a mockery of the sacred power exercised in their behalf. Jesus was not going about healing people and leaving them free to continue in the ungodly practices and beliefs of the Jews. After being made whole by the Master Physician, the healed persons were obligated to keep the commandments, to join the Church of Jesus Christ, if they had not already done so, and to endure in righteousness to the end so that an eventual celestial inheritance would be assured." (Commentary 1:321.)

The command of secrecy was of a limited nature. They were told to "tell no man in this place," which we assume means in Capernaum. Matthew tells us that they "spread abroad his fame in all that country," which apparently means a much larger area than Capernaum. How strictly the healed persons kept the charge of secrecy we do not know. Nor can we tell why it was imposed. Perhaps Capernaum proper was such a wicked city that to testify of more miracles in that place would have been casting pearls before swine, giving the unbelievers among them occasion to turn again and rend the Great Healer.

Apparently, however, the two healed persons did not keep the charge of secrecy as fully at least as Jesus desired. Of this somewhat human reaction Farrar phrases these words of rebuke and condemnation: "There are some who have admired their disobedience, and have attributed it to the enthusiasm of gratitude and admiration," he says. Those to whom he here refers are Catholic apologists who applaud rather than condemn the men for their breach of confidence. "But was it not rather the enthusiasm of a blatant wonder, the vulgarity of a chattering boast?" he asks. Then he sets forth this reasoning: "Did not the holy fire of devotion which a hallowed silence must have kept alive upon the altar of their hearts die away in the mere blaze of empty rumour? Did not He know best? Would not obedience have been better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams? Yes. It is possible to deceive ourselves; it is possible to offer to Christ a seeming service which disobeys His inmost precepts—to grieve Him, under the guise of honouring Him, by vain repetitions, and empty genuflexions, and bitter intolerance, and irreverent familiarity, and the hollow simulacrum of a dead devotion. Better, far better, to serve Him by doing the things He said than by a seeming zeal, often false in exact proportion to its obtrusiveness, for the glory of His name. These disobedient babblers, who talked so much of Him, did but offer Him the dishonouring service of a double heart; their violation of His commandment served only to hinder His usefulness, to trouble His spirit, and to precipitate His death." (Farrar, p. 273.)

As these two men left the house, glorying in their newly found sight, others "brought to him a dumb man possessed with a devil." He cast out the devil; the dumb spake; the multitudes marveled, saying, "It was never so seen in Israel." But the Pharisees continued their chant of hatred and evil by renewing the charge, "He casteth out devils through the prince of devils."

We read of no restriction being placed on this man as far as telling about his healing was concerned. But the Pharisaic reaction to it shows how knowledge of his miracles could interfere with Jesus' continuing ministry.

Jesus Is Again Rejected at Nazareth

(Mark 6:1-6; Matthew 13:54-58)

A year has passed since Jesus, preaching in the synagogue in Nazareth, announced that he came to fulfill Isaiah's great Messianic prophecies. Then it was that those of his own town "wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth"; asked, "Is not this Joseph's son?"; were told, "No prophet is accepted in his own country"; and, being condemned for their unbelief, rose in anger, thrust him from their city, and attempted to cast him headlong from the brow of a hill. (See chapter 34, herein.)

Now, in part at least, and with even less excuse for such a rebellious course, the Nazarenes are about to reject again the one person who could save and redeem them. Leaving Capernaum with his disciples, he returns to Nazareth and on the Sabbath day once more teaches in their synagogue. What he said we do not know, but as with the previous preachment, the people were astonished; they marveled at his gracious words, so much so that they began to ask: "From whence hath this man these things."

Further, they now knew of his miracles and the wonders that his hands had done throughout all the land. Word had reached them of the blind eyes that now saw; of the lepers whose flesh was made whole; of the Gadarene demoniac out of whom a legion of devils had been cast; of the stilling of the storm on the lake of Galilee; of the raising of the widow's son in Nain and Jairus's daughter in Capernaum, both of whose spirits had gone on to another sphere while their bodies lay cold and dead and decomposing. His fame was everywhere, and the reason for it was known to all. And so his Nazarene neighbors asked: "And what wisdom is this which is given unto him, that even such mighty works are wrought by his hands?" And further: "Is not this the carpenter, the son of Mary, the brother of James, and Joses, and of Juda, and Simon? and are not his sisters here with us?"

"And they were offended at him." Why? Why should anyone take offense because someone else goes about doing good? Why should men seek to slay a man because he raises the dead or stills a storm? Why should their spirits be stirred up within them because he preaches the Sermon on the Mount or gives forth with an endless flow of gracious words? These Nazarenes were witnesses against themselves. They heard his words and knew of his works, and yet they rejected him. It was not reason but emotion that motivated them. They were offended because their deeds were evil.

And so Jesus, who "marveled because of their unbelief," said unto them: "A prophet is not without honour, but in his own country, and among his own kin, and in his own house." His sisters still lived in Nazareth, married, we suppose, to Nazarenes; his mother and brothers had moved to Capernaum after the wedding feast at Cana; and of this whole body of kinfolk, only the Virgin Mother, as of this time, believed and knew of his divine mission.

And so, "he did not many mighty works there because of their unbelief," Matthew tells us. Mark is even more express: "He could there do no mighty work, save that he laid his hands upon a few sick folk, and healed them."

Truly, he who came with healing in his wings, to bear the sorrows and sickness of the people, limited his wonder-working miracles to those who by faith merited the inestimable blessings involved. And now Jesus—we cannot believe that it is other than in sadness—is leaving Nazareth for the last time. His own received him not. There is to be a brief moment for other ears to hear, and other eyes to see, and other hearts to be touched. He must continue to preach elsewhere, and he must send others forth to represent him, as he is now about to do.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "We believe that a man must be called of God, by prophecy, and by the laying on of hands, by those who are in authority, to preach the Gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof." (A of F 5.)
[^2] "Salvation is free." (2 Ne. 2:4.) "Come, my brethren, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters; and he that hath no money, come buy and eat; yea, come buy wine and milk without money and without price." (2 Ne. 9:50; Isa. 55:1.)
[^3] "In the providences of the Lord, the gospel, in the meridian of time, was offered first to the house of Israel and thereafter to the Gentiles. Jesus himself ministered primarily among his own kindred of the chosen seed. 'I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel,' he said. (Matt. 15:24.) Missionaries sent forth during Jesus' mortal ministry were commanded to confine their labors to their wayward kindred of Jacob's lineage. Later, after our Lord's resurrection, they were to receive the commandment to carry the message of salvation to all men. (Mark 16:14-20.)" (Commentary 1:325.)
[^4] What does it mean to say "The kingdom of heaven is at hand?" It means: "The Church of Jesus Christ is here; it has been organized and established; it is the kingdom of God on earth; enter into it through the waters of baptism, and be ye saved." (Commentary 1:325.) Identically the same message is carried by the elders in this day: "Ye shall go forth baptizing with water, saying: Repent ye, repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand." (D&C 42:7; 33:9-11; 39:19-20.)
[^5] Hospitality was a way of life among the Jews. By way of modern analogy it is reported: "When travelling in the East no one need ever scruple to go into the best house of any Arab village to which he comes, and he will always be received with profuse and gratuitous hospitality. From the moment we entered any house, it was regarded as our own. There is not an Arab you meet who will not empty for you the last drop in his water-skin, or share with you his last piece of black bread. The Rabbis said that Paradise was the reward of willing hospitality." (Farrar, n. 3, p. 276.) Similar but not wholly identical divine direction was given to missionaries in the early days of this dispensation. "Thou shalt take no purse nor scrip, neither staves, neither two coats," the Lord said, "for the church shall give unto thee in the very hour what thou needest for food and for raiment, and for shoes and for money, and for scrip." (D&C 24:18.) Also: "It is expedient that I give unto you this commandment, that ye become even as my friends in days when I was with them, traveling to preach the gospel in my power; For I suffered them not to have purse or scrip, neither two coats. Therefore, let no man among you, for this commandment is unto all the faithful who are called of God in the church unto the ministry, from this hour take purse or scrip, that goeth forth to proclaim this gospel of the kingdom." (D&C 84:77-78, 86.)
