Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1980)

Chapter 53

Jesus Sendeth Forth the Twelve

The twelve traveling councilors are called to be the Twelve Apostles, or special witnesses of the name of Christ in all the world, . . . to officiate in the name of the Lord, . . . to build up the church, and regulate all the affairs of the same in all nations. (D&C 107:23, 33.)

Jesus Reaps a Plenteous Harvest

(Matthew 9:35-38; Mark 6:6)

Again as always; now as afore; in season and out of season; from the rising of the sun until men slumber in the darkness of the night—everlastingly—Jesus is found, in one city and village after another, "preaching the gospel of the kingdom."

He has just left Nazareth—for the last time, as we suppose—having there been rejected again by his own. The light of his countenance shall not again shine upon those among whom he grew to maturity. To them he is Joseph's son and Mary's son; he is the brother of James and Joses and Simon and Judas, none of whom believe he is the Prophet of whom Moses spoke. To the Nazarenes he is a carpenter, the son of a carpenter, whose sisters yet dwell among them, and who themselves—his own flesh, those conceived in the same womb that bare him—think no differently of him than they do of their other brothers.

And so Jesus, accompanied by his disciples, is touring and preaching again in "all the cities and villages" of Galilee. He teaches in their synagogues and preaches on their streets. His message: the gospel—the gospel of his Father; the eternal plan of salvation ordained in the heavens above before the foundations of the world; the gospel that he has made his own and that now bears his name. He is telling men what they must do to be saved in his Father's kingdom. His message: 'Come unto me and be perfected in me; accept me as the Son of God and live my law; repent; be baptized in my name for the remission of your sins; receive the promise of the companionship of the Holy Spirit; and press forward all your days in doing good and working righteousness.'

His is "the gospel of the kingdom"—none other—the gospel that admits men, here and now, into the kingdom of God on earth, which is the Church, and which prepares them for an inheritance in the celestial kingdom of heaven hereafter. And as he preaches, he heals "every sickness and every disease among the people," meaning that those who accept him and believe his gospel are healed, and those who—as in Nazareth—reject him, among them he can do no mighty works. Signs follow those who believe. Jesus is making converts, and the sick and the decrepit and the diseased among them are being healed of their afflictions.

Success attends his labors; multitudes hang on his every word; there is more ministerial service to be performed than one man can do. He can preach in only one village at a time; there are others who need to be healed, others who cry out for the cleansing of their spirits and the healing of their bodies, others than those to whom he can minister personally. "When he saw the multitudes, he was moved with compassion on them, because they fainted, and were scattered abroad, as sheep having no shepherd."

This, in part at least, is the day seen by the prophets of old. Had not Jehovah said by the mouth of Ezekiel: "Woe be to the shepherds of Israel"—to the priests and Levites, to the scribes and Pharisees, to those who should have been guides and lights and teachers of the people—"Woe be to the shepherds of Israel that do feed themselves! should not the shepherds feed the flocks?" Had not Jehovah said of those who should have cared for his flock: "The diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed that which was sick, neither have ye bound up that which was broken, neither have ye brought again that which was driven away, neither have ye sought that which was lost."

Did not Jehovah promise by the mouth of Ezekiel: "Behold, I, even I, will both search my sheep, and seek them out. . . . I will feed my flock, and I will cause them to lie down, saith the Lord God. I will seek that which was lost, and bring again that which was driven away, and will bind up that which was broken, and will strengthen that which was sick. . . . And I will make with them a covenant of peace. . . . And ye my flock, the flock of my pasture, are men, and I am your God, saith the Lord God." (Ezek. 34:2, 4, 11, 15-16, 25, 31.)

Had not Jehovah said by the mouth of Jeremiah: "Woe be unto the pastors that destroy and scatter the sheep of my pasture! saith the Lord. . . . Ye have scattered my flock, and driven them away, and have not visited them. . . . And I will gather the remnant of my flock. . . . And I will set up shepherds over them which shall feed them: and they shall fear no more, nor be dismayed, neither shall they be lacking, saith the Lord. Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will raise unto David a righteous Branch." (Jer. 23:1-6.)

True, these divine prophecies shall see their most glorious fulfillment when Jehovah returns, continuing ever as the Branch of David, to bring again Israel into his fold in the last days, but even now he whom Jeremiah called "The Lord Our Righteousness," as he dwells in mortality among them, is reaching forth his arm to gather in his lost sheep. He is, for their day and generation, offering them the blessings of his earthly kingdom, to say nothing of the blessings of his Father's heavenly kingdom. He is setting up shepherds over them, that tender and loving care may be extended to all.

And so, viewing with compassion his fainting, scattered, diseased, and afflicted sheep, the Chief Shepherd—changing the figure from one of sheep and shepherds to one of fields and harvests—the Lord of the earthly harvest says: "The harvest truly is plenteous, but the labourers are few; Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he will send forth labourers into his harvest."

Others than he must now labor in the vineyards of the Lord that more souls may be prepared for the eternal harvest that lies ahead. More converts must be made, and they must be fellowshipped with the earthly saints. Others than he must nourish the newborn babes in Christ who have joined his church and become members of his kingdom; others than he must keep them "continually watchful unto prayer, relying alone upon the merits of Christ," as Moroni expresses it. (Moro. 6:4.) Others than he must counsel those who are now numbered among the Church of God to add to their faith virtue, "and to virtue knowledge; And to knowledge temperance; and to temperance patience; and to patience godliness; And to godliness brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness charity"—all to the end that an entrance might be "ministered" unto them "abundantly into the everlasting kingdom" in heaven, as Peter expresses it. (2 Pet. 1:1-11.) Others than he must counsel them to build on the foundation of faith and repentance and baptism and "go on unto perfection," as Paul expresses it. (Heb. 6:1-3.) And the first to be so chosen are the Twelve Apostles of the Lamb.

Apostles Sent Forth to Labor in the Vineyard

(Matthew 10:1, 5-15; JST Matthew 10:12; Mark 6:7-13; Luke 9:1-6)

Those chosen ones, the holy apostles—foreordained from before the foundations of the earth to be with Jesus in his mortal ministry; called anew by him as he traveled and taught in the land of their inheritance; ordained to the holy apostleship on a mountain near Capernaum—these special witnesses of the goodness and grace of the Son of God are now to be sent forth on missions.

That these chosen ones are prepared for the labors and sacrifices and persecutions that lie ahead we cannot doubt. Indeed we cannot conceive how any of the shepherds of Israel, any of the laborers in the vineyard of the Lord, could have been better prepared. Aside from their spiritual talents, acquired in ages past in the presence of God, they had all been the intimate associates—the students and disciples—of the Son of God for months or years, as the case may be. It may be that all of them walked and talked, and ate, slept and lived with him from the earliest days of his mortal ministry. It is logical so to assume. From the scanty snatches of historical data preserved for us from that day, however, we know at least the following:

John the Beloved, Andrew, Simon, Philip, and Nathanael—five of the Twelve—in February of A.D. 27, two years before, came to know, and so testified, that he was the Messiah. They, at that time, gladly put on the mantle of discipleship and began to walk in his paths, learn his ways, and minister on his errands. They were with him when he turned water into wine in Cana; when he attended the first Passover of his ministry, cleansed the temple, and wrought many miracles; when, for nine months, he traveled and preached and healed in Judea; when he ministered and taught in Samaria and then in Galilee. They were with him when he healed the nobleman's son and they heard his great Messianic sermon in the synagogue in Nazareth when his own people sought to kill him. They received the priesthood, performed baptisms, and were themselves preachers of righteousness. And although they are not identified by name, the other seven of the Twelve may have been participants in all or most of these earthly acts of the Divine One.

During January or February of A.D. 28, Jesus called Peter and Andrew, and James and John to special ministerial service. He made them fishers of men; they were with him on that glorious Sabbath in Capernaum when he healed multitudes (including Peter's mother-in-law) and preached much; they accompanied him as he traveled and preached throughout Galilee, as others of the future Twelve may have done also. Jesus healed lepers, forgave sins, raised paralytic persons to health—all in their presence.

In March of A.D. 28, Matthew was called to forsake his post as a publican tax collector and to follow Jesus. Miracles and teachings continued. And in the early summer of that year the Twelve were chosen and ordained. They all may have been with him all along—mingling among the reverent and worshipful disciples who rejoiced in his doctrines and gloried in his deeds—but certainly they were all with him henceforth. They saw the centurion's servant healed and the widow's son raised from death. They saw the blind and the dumb healed, heard his parables, and wondered and feared when he spoke peace to the tempestuous waves on Galilee. They knew of the Gadarene out of whom went a legion of devils, of the woman with the issue of blood, and of Jairus's daughter. Miracles seen by their eyes, doctrines heard by their ears, spiritual experiences felt in their souls—these were a way of life with the Twelve. They themselves had taught and ministered and prayed and labored. They were now prepared to go forth, two by two, and magnify their callings as apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ.

True ministers—those whose words and deeds have divine approval—are always endowed with power from on high. They always hold the holy priesthood, which is the power and authority of God, delegated to man on earth, to act in all things for the salvation of men. They never call themselves; they do not and cannot endow themselves with divine authority. They must be called of God. Even Christ "glorified not himself to be made an high priest" (Heb. 5:5); even he was called and given power and sent forth by his Father. [^1] Those who are called of God thus become his servants, his agents, his ambassadors. They are sent forth to do what he wants done and to represent him. Their words are his words and their acts his acts; when they serve within the field and scope of their authorization, it is as though the Lord himself had said or done whatever is involved.

And so Jesus "called his twelve disciples together, and gave them power and authority"—power and authority to preach the everlasting gospel; to proclaim the saving truths; to perform the ordinances of salvation—all so that men might be saved in his Father's kingdom. And in the very nature of things—it could not be otherwise—he "gave them power and authority over all devils, and to cure diseases." They had this power "to heal all manner of sickness and all manner of disease" because signs always follow faith; miracles always attend the preaching of the gospel; no man since the world was has had faith without having something along with it; and so, if any believed their words—and they taught the same gospel that He himself preached—there must be signs following. The sick must be healed; the dead must be raised; devils must be cast out; otherwise the power of God unto salvation, which is the gospel, would not be present. And so Jesus said to them, "Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out devils: freely ye have received, freely give." [^2]

To whom shall they preach? To all men? No. There will be a day when they will be sent to all men everywhere, for the message of salvation shall go to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people. All are the children of the Father; he loves them all, and he seeks to save them all. But there is an order of priority. Every man is to hear the gospel in his time and in his own season; some are entitled to hear it first, others at a later date. "Go," then, "to the lost sheep of the house of Israel." It is their right and privilege, as the seed of Abraham, to step ahead of the aliens who know not God. "Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not." Their day lies ahead; in due course the blessings of salvation shall be offered to them, but first, let the chosen seed open their hearts, if they will. [^3]

What shall they preach? "Preach the kingdom of God." Say: "The kingdom of heaven is at hand." That is: 'Preach the gospel of the kingdom; proclaim that salvation comes by me; command all Israel to repent and be baptized; exhort them to keep the commandments and perfect their lives; say what ye have heard me say. I am the light; do that which ye have seen me do.' [^4]

How are they to be sustained in their ministries? And how will their temporal needs be supplied? Those to whom they are sent will care for them, providing food, clothing, and shelter as their circumstances warrant. They are to rely on the Father; he will not let them go hungry or naked or without a place to lay their heads. They are to take neither gold nor silver nor brass in their purses. They are to carry no baskets of provisions—scrip, as such were called—nor bread to eat, nor "two coats apiece." The workman, they were told, was "worthy of his meat." [^5] They were denied the luxury of leather shoes and were not to carry staves; rather, their feet were to be shod with sandals, and they might carry a single staff. Their dress was to be simple and their needs few, leaving them free to devote all their time and strength to the preaching of the word.

Do all of the Jews, all of those who are of Israel, have an equal right to hear the gospel? Are the Twelve to divide their time equally among the people? No. Even among the lost sheep of the house of Israel some have preference over others. "And into whatsoever city or town ye shall enter, inquire who in it is worthy; and there abide till ye go thence." Just as Israel is to hear the message before it goes to the Gentiles, so those in Israel who are worthy, who desire righteousness, who are living according to the best light and knowledge they have—these are favored above their fellows; the gospel is to be taught to them first. Jesus is not sending his disciples out to find harlots and whoremongers and thieves and robbers—although any of these may repent and be saved—but he is sending them to find the honest in heart, the upright among men, those whose prior living has made them worthy to hear an apostolic voice. Such are the ones in whose homes the Twelve shall abide and where they shall leave their blessings.

"And when ye come into a house, salute it." Greet those who dwell therein with good will; honor them in all they have done that is good; offer to teach them the doctrines of salvation; account them worthy to receive the glad tidings that salvation can be theirs if they will believe and obey. Salute them in love and with an open heart, and seek to bring them into the kingdom of God on earth. [^6]

"And if the house be worthy, let your peace come upon it: but if it be not worthy, let your peace return to you." 'If those in the house are worthy; if they are seeking light and truth and knowledge; if they desire righteousness and are willing to repent and forsake the world—then make with them a covenant of peace (as Jehovah promised through Ezekiel); make with them the gospel covenant, which is the covenant of peace. Assure them that through the glad tidings of great joy—the tidings of peace on earth, good will to men—they shall gain peace in this life and eternal life in the world to come. Let thy peace, which is my peace, which is gospel peace—the peace that passeth understanding—rest upon them. But if they are not worthy, if they do not believe and obey, the offer of eternal peace will have no efficacy; your peace will return to you, and you shall go hence and seek other houses where perchance your peace may rest forever.'

"And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your words, when ye depart out of that house, or city, shake off the dust of your feet. Verily I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgment, than for that city."

It is an awesome and a fearful thing to reject the word of truth. When Jesus speaks and men receive not his gracious words, they are damned for their disbelief. When his servants speak and men reject the same truths, they also are damned. When legal administrators preach the gospel by the power of the Holy Ghost, their teachings are binding on earth and in heaven. Those who believe and obey are saved; those who believe not and who keep not the commandments are damned. Believers are sealed up unto eternal salvation; unbelievers are sealed up unto eternal damnation. As we hear Jesus instruct the Twelve, it is as though we are hearing again the fiery words of that John who came before to prepare the way: "He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life: and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God abideth on him." (John 3:36.)

In our day, as the Lord again sends laborers into his vineyards, as he again sends his servants to speak peace to the worthy and to condemn the ungodly, we hear him say: "They who go forth, bearing these tidings unto the inhabitants of the earth, to them is power given to seal both on earth and in heaven, the unbelieving and rebellious; Yea, verily, to seal them up unto the day when the wrath of God shall be poured out upon the wicked without measure—Unto the day when the Lord shall come to recompense unto every man according to his work, and measure to every man according to the measure which he has measured to his fellow man." (D&C 1:8-10.)

It is today as it was anciently. We preach the same gospel, we hold the same priesthood, and we are subject to the same divine direction. "In whatsoever place ye shall enter," the Lord tells us, "and they receive you not in my name, ye shall leave a cursing instead of a blessing, by casting off the dust of your feet against them as a testimony, and cleansing your feet by the wayside." (D&C 24:15.) It is as though those who reject the message are not worthy to receive even the dust that cleaves to an apostolic sandal.

And again: "Let all those take their journey, as I have commanded them," the Lord says, "going from house to house, and from village to village, and from city to city. And in whatsoever house ye enter, and they receive you, leave your blessing upon that house. And in whatsoever house ye enter, and they receive you not, ye shall depart speedily from that house, and shake off the dust of your feet as a testimony against them. And you shall be filled with joy and gladness; and know this, that in the day of judgment you shall be judges of that house, and condemn them; And it shall be more tolerable for the heathen in the day of judgment, than for that house; therefore, gird up your loins and be faithful, and ye shall overcome all things, and be lifted up at the last day." (D&C 75:18-22.) [^7]

Having been properly instructed, the apostles, as Luke tells us, "went through the towns, preaching the gospel, and healing everywhere." Mark tells us "they went out, and preached that men should repent. And they cast out many devils, and anointed with oil many that were sick, and healed them."

As it had been and was with their Master, so it was and would be with those whom he had chosen. They preached the gospel; they cried repentance; they anointed with oil; they healed the sick. Then as now the gospel was true, and among true believers signs followed. The Lord be praised.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] These are the words of the Risen Lord, spoken with reference to Paul.
[^2] These words were written by Paul and are descriptive of himself and the others of the Twelve in his day.
[^3] There is an old tradition, dating back almost to apostolic times, that Peter, at this point, asked: "But how then if the wolves should tear the lambs?" To this Jesus is said to have answered: "Let not the lambs fear the wolves when the lambs are once dead, and do you fear not those who can kill you and do nothing to you, but fear Him who after you are dead hath power over soul and body to cast them into the Gehenna of fire." (Farrar, p. 277.)
[^4] As to the hatred of the world for the saints, the Roman historian Tacitus says that Nero "inflicted the most cruel punishments upon a sect of people who were holden in abhorrence for their crimes, and called by the vulgar 'Christians.' The founder of that name was Christ, who suffered death in the reign of Tiberius, under his procurator Pontius Pilate . . . This pernicious superstition, thus checked for a while, broke out again; and spread not only over Judea where the evil originated, but through Rome also, whither everything bad upon earth finds its way and is practised. . . . A vast multitude were apprehended who were convicted, not so much of the crime of burning Rome, as of hatred to mankind. . . . They were criminals, deserving the severest punishments." (Cited. Dummelow, p. 662.)
[^5] "Those who preach the gospel are to do so boldly, without timidity or trepidation, not fearing the face of man, but with the courage of their convictions and in the fervor of their testimonies. 'Use boldness, but not overbearance,' Alma said. (Alma 38:10-12.) Truths learned in the day of preparation and schooling are to be broadcast from the housetops." (Commentary 1:333.)
[^6] The destruction of the soul in hell is a figurative expression. It is a spiritual death; it is to die as pertaining to the things of the Spirit and to be cast into outer darkness until the full penalty has been paid for sin. See Mormon Doctrine. 2nd ed., pp. 756-59, and related passages.
[^7] This interpreting paraphrasing of Jesus' words is my own, taken from Commentary 1:335-36.
