Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1980)

Chapter 54

Jesus Instructs the Twelve

He is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my name before the Gentiles, and kings, and the children of Israel: For I will shew him how great things he must suffer for my name's sake. (Acts 9:15-16.) [^1]

I think that God hath set forth us the apostles last, as it were appointed to death: for we are made a spectacle unto the world, and to angels, and to men. . . . Even unto this present hour we both hunger, and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain dwelling place; And labour, working with our own hands: being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we suffer it: Being defamed, we intreat: we are made as the filth of the world, and are the offscouring of all things unto this day. (1 Cor. 4:9-13.) [^2]

Apostles and Saints Face Persecutions and Trials

(Matthew 10:16-23; JST Matthew 10:14, 19-20; Luke 12:11-12; JST Luke 12:13)

Most of what Jesus said by way of commandment and instruction to the apostles, as he sent them forth on missions, was prophetic and eternal in nature. It applied not to the brief period—probably not more than three months—during which they traveled, two by two, through the cities and villages of Palestine, but to their lifelong ministries and to their successors in the apostolic office, including those who hold the same keys and powers today. Matthew preserves the most extended account of our Lord's words on this occasion, though some of what he recounts is recorded by Mark and Luke in other connections. That Jesus may have said some of the same things in different settings is of no moment one way or the other. For clarity and ease of presentation we shall consider the same expressions, wherever made, as though they were part of Matthew's one continuing account.

Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: be ye therefore wise as serpents [be ye therefore wise servants] and harmless as doves.

Jesus is not saying, 'Wolves shall come among you; wolves shall enter the flock; wolves shall rend the sheep; therefore, be wise in all you do.' What he does say is: 'Without are wolves—ravening, murderous, hunger-maddened wolves—and I send the sheep and the lambs of my flock out among them; ye are to leave the safety of the sheepcote and go out into the world where, except for my preserving care, ye shall be rent and destroyed. Therefore, be wise servants; give no unneeded offense; be to all to whom ye are sent as harmless as doves.' Neither the saints nor the apostles court persecution or martyrdom; rather, they do all they can, in honor, to avoid these Satan-spawned evils. Ordinarily the work progresses more rapidly and ascends to greater heights when peace and fair-mindedness prevail than when all the vomit and bitterness of hell are gushing forth upon the helpless sheep. [^3]

But beware of men: for they will deliver you up to the councils, and they will scourge you in their synagogues; And ye shall be brought before governors and kings for my sake, for a testimony against them and the Gentiles.

Queries: Persecution—the heritage of the faithful—whence does it come? Who wields the sword that slays the saints, and who hurls the spear that pierces the side of Him who hangs on the cross?

Answers: It is a joint undertaking; a confederacy of evil powers unite to do the deeds; all participants play their parts as actors on an evil stage. Satan is the ultimate author; priests and ministers of false religions stir up the basest of men, who in turn wield the sword, and the legal processes of both church and state combine to justify, approve, and authorize the insane madness that fights the truth.

Persecution is an essential part of the creeds of all false religions. There is an eternal law—a law as eternal as heaven and earth and the universe—that truth will prevail. Left to itself true religion—though it may be delayed or hindered in its progress—must and will prevail. The only effective weapon of false religions—and it yields only momentary success—is to persecute true believers.

'Hence, ye apostles, ye missionaries, ye ambassadors of Christ, beware of evil men. They will deliver you to the council, to the local Sanhedrins, to the Jewish elders and priests, who will sit in judgment on your new wine, which cannot be contained in old bottles. They will scourge you in the synagogues to the chanting accompaniment of a psalm. And further, ye shall be brought before Felix and Festus and Herod, and even before Caesar himself; ye shall be hailed before the judgment bars of men, and then shall ye bear a testimony which shall stand as a witness against them before the eternal bar of the Great Jehovah.'

Yes, strange as it may seem, persecution is a religious rite; and whereas the Jews scourged their heretics in their synagogues, to the accompaniment of psalmic music, today's ministers of false religions heap revilings and persecutions upon the saints to the accompaniment of chants that say: "Delusion, false prophets, wife-stealers, non-Christians," or whatever else Satan puts in their minds. Such was the mad mania that confronted the apostles anciently, and such is the reborn dementia which opposes them today.

But when they deliver you up, take no thought how or what ye shall speak: for it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall speak. For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh in you.

Or, as Luke has it: "The Holy Ghost shall teach you in the same hour what ye ought to say." This is a power that none but the saints of God possess. They alone have the gift of the Holy Ghost, which is the right to the constant companionship of that member of the Godhead based on faithfulness. No man of himself could possibly know what to say, either by way of doctrine or of testimony, when hailed before earthly tribunals or when standing in the congregations of the wicked, for no man knows the hearts of men. But God, who knows all things, promises, by the power of his Spirit, to put words into the mouths of his servants. "Neither take ye thought beforehand what ye shall say," is his word, "but treasure up in your minds continually the words of life, and it shall be given you in the very hour that portion that shall be meted unto every man." (D&C 84:85.) Peter and John before the Sanhedrin, after the healing of the man lame from his mother's womb, and Paul before Agrippa, testifying that Jesus rose from the dead, are but illustrations of the power of speech given to the Lord's servants when the need for divine help requires it.

And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the child: and the children shall rise up against their parents, and cause them to be put to death.

O the depravity and wickedness and moral degeneracy that is practiced in the name of religion! Lucifer would slay, if he could, every righteous person—none of the true saints would be left in mortality—and when depraved fanatics submit themselves to the will of the devil, they willingly deliver up unto death even their own family members.

And ye shall be hated of all the world for my name's sake; but he that endureth to the end shall be saved.

Though hated by all men; though the whole world oppose them; though every power of earth and hell combine to do them ill [^4]—yet the apostles (and all the saints) must endure in righteousness all their days to merit celestial salvation. They must "press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope, and a love of God and of all men, . . . feasting upon the word of Christ" (2 Ne. 31:20-21), doing good and working righteousness, if they are to gain eternal life. "I will prove you in all things," the Lord says to his saints, "whether you will abide in my covenant, even unto death, that you may be found worthy. For if ye will not abide in my covenant ye are not worthy of me." (D&C 98:14-15.)

But when they persecute you in one city, flee ye into another; for verily, I say unto you, Ye shall not have gone over the cities of Israel till the Son of man be come.

'Flee from persecution; do not court martyrdom; seek to live and spread the gospel; it is better to live for me than to die for me. There is work to be done; there are souls to be saved; you cannot carry forward my work on earth if you are dead. And so great is the labor, my servants will not have gone over the cities where scattered Israel is to be found till I come in my glory to gather the remainder of mine elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other.'

Teach the Gospel Boldly and in Plainness

(Matthew 10:24-33; JST Matthew 10:26; Luke 6:40; 12:1-7)

How will the people react to the teachings of the apostles? They are going forth to preach the gospel of the kingdom even as Jesus preaches it. They are going forth to heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, and cast out devils, even as Jesus does. They are to be his alter egos, to stand in his place and stead, to say what he would say and to do what he would do. How, then, will the people react to their words and deeds? Obviously they will respond as though Jesus himself were there. Already many have rejected Jesus; these same persons, and others of like mind and similar spiritual depravity, will now reject those who speak and heal in Jesus' stead. And so he counsels the Twelve, and, in principle, all of his followers:

The disciple is not above his master, nor the servant above his lord. It is enough for the disciple that he be as his master, and the servant as his lord. If they have called the master of the house Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of his household?

'Ye know how I have been received. The scribes and Pharisees reject my doctrine and disallow my testimony; they say I cast out devils and perform miracles by the power of the prince of devils; they have even called me Satan himself; and as it is with me, so shall it be with my disciples.' But that those who bear the ignominy shall also wear the crown, he affirmed by saying, as Luke has it: "The disciple is not above his master: but every one that is perfect shall be as his master." 'I am perfect; suffer and do as I suffer and do, and ye shall be perfect.' "And ye shall be even as I am, and I am even as the Father; and the Father and I are one." (3 Ne. 28:10.)

How then shall the disciples feel about the persecutions and evil speaking of those who serve another master? "Fear them not," Jesus says. Also: "Beware ye of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy," as Luke records in introducing the same thoughts, apparently repeated in a different setting, but having essentially the same meaning as when first spoken to the Twelve. 'Fear them not; go about your business; preach the gospel; do the things I sent you to do; let not opposition impede the work. Proclaim the gospel for all to hear.' [^5]

For there is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed; neither hid, that shall not be known. Therefore whatsoever ye have spoken in darkness shall be heard in the light; and that which ye have spoken in the ear in closets shall be proclaimed upon the housetops.

'You have learned the doctrines of salvation from me as we have walked alone between the villages of Galilee; we have conversed together in the deserts and on the mountains. What you have heard in darkness, you must now speak in the light; that which was hidden from the world is now to go to them. Go forth; proclaim my word in every ear.' "For verily the voice of the Lord is unto all men, and there is none to escape; and there is no eye that shall not see, neither ear that shall not hear; neither heart that shall not be penetrated." (D&C 1:2.)

And I say unto you my friends, Be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after that have no more that they can do.

"And whoso layeth down his life in my cause, for my name's sake, shall find it again, even life eternal." (D&C 98:13.) Why then should the disciples fear death?

But I will forewarn you whom ye shall fear: Fear him, which after he hath killed hath power to cast into hell: yea, I say unto you, Fear him.

'Fear the Lord; fear him who holds the keys of death and hell; fear to do evil, lest you lose your souls.' "Fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell." [^6]

Are not five sparrows sold for two farthings, and not one of them is forgotten before God? But even the very hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear not therefore: ye are of more value than many sparrows.

Based on all this—on the prophetic counsel that persecution awaits his ministers; on the pronouncement that the disciples shall be treated even as their Master; on the solemn exhortation to preach the gospel, and the yet more solemn warning to be faithful in life and in death—based on these teachings, Jesus now says:

Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him will I confess also before my Father which is in heaven. But whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in heaven.

God is his Father! Again and again he says it, and our salvation depends upon gaining for ourselves a sure testimony that such is the case. "Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwelleth in him, and he in God." (1 Jn. 4:15.) "If thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved." (Rom. 10:9.)

What Happens When the Gospel Is Preached?

(Matthew 10:34-42; 11:1; JST Matthew 10:34; Mark 9:41; Luke 12:49-53; JST Luke 12:58)

Does the gospel bring peace on earth and good will among men? Such is its design and intent; such was the assurance in the anthem of praise sung by the angelic choir to acclaim the birth of the Prince of Peace; and such is the inborn longing and hope of the saints of all the ages. But the reality is far removed from the ideal. The gospel both saves and damns; it brings peace to the penitent and sorrow to sinners. And when the righteous and the wicked all mingle together in one social milieu, the preaching of the gospel spawns anarchy and contention and warfare. The enemies of God and the opponents of true doctrine do not take kindly to the gospel of the kingdom, to the building up of the kingdom of God on earth. When the apostles preach the gospel, what will the effect be on a weary and wicked world? Jesus answers:

Think not that I am come to send peace on earth: I came not to send peace, but a sword.

Suppose ye that I am come to give peace on earth? I tell you, Nay; but rather division.

The gospel divides men. Those who believe and obey go in one direction; the unbelieving and rebellious choose an opposite course. From among the unbelievers come the persecutors, and the persecutors wield the sword against the saints. They have wielded it against our Lord; they will yet thrust its cutting edge into the flesh of the apostles; and many of the saints shall seal their testimonies with their own blood. Such is the effect, among the wicked and ungodly, of the preaching of the gospel.

For they are not well pleased with the Lord's doings; therefore I am come to send fire on the earth; and what is it to you, if I will that it be already kindled?

But I have a baptism to be baptized with; and how am I straitened till it be accomplished!

'I am come to send the flames of turmoil and persecution, the burning agony of family discord, wherever my gospel is preached in the world; and, lo, this fire is already kindled on every hand. But do not be perturbed, for even I have a baptism of blood and death to be baptized with, for my own familiar friend shall lift up his hand against me, one of my own official church family shall betray me; and what a burdensome pressure and responsibility rests upon me until I have accomplished this very mission and ordeal for which I came into the world.' [^7] As to the effect, even in the intimacy of the family circle, of the preaching of the gospel, Jesus says:

For I am come to set a man at variance against his father, and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter in law against her mother in law.

And a man's foes shall be they of his own household.

He that loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of me: and he that loveth son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me.

How severe the tests of life sometimes are! Mortals come here to be tried and tested, "to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them." (Abr. 3:25.) And if such necessitates a choice between father and mother, or son and daughter, and the saving power of the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, then so be it. But one thing is needful, and that is, to save our souls. No one is justified in maintaining family peace and unity if by so doing he must forsake the gospel and its saving truths.

And he that taketh not his cross, and followeth after me, is not worthy of me.

'I shall carry my cross to the place of crucifixion, where I shall die in pain and agony, die as earth's Chief Martyr. He that is not willing to take his own cross and, following me, carry it to a martyr's death on Calvary, is not worthy of me and of that eternal life which my Father has prepared for all the faithful.'

He who seeketh to save his life shall lose it: and he who loseth his life for my sake shall find it.

'He that saves himself from persecution and death by denying me and my gospel shall lose eternal life, while he who lays down his life for me and my gospel shall have eternal life.'

He that receiveth you receiveth me, and he that receiveth me receiveth him that sent me.

How great the importance to rivet these eternal truths in the hearts of men! No one ever receives and accepts the Lord Jesus Christ without also receiving and accepting the apostles and prophets who bear witness of him. Christ and his prophets are one; they rise or fall together. No one in Jesus' day could believe he was the Son of the Father without also believing in the Father of the Son; no one could believe he was the Messiah without also believing Peter, James, and John were his apostles, his friends, his witnesses. Jesus and his apostolic witnesses can no more be separated than can the Father and the Son. To believe in one is to believe in the other. This is the law of agency, every agent of the Lord standing in His place and stead, representing Him, saying and doing what He wants said and done.

In a passage of transcendent beauty, the Lord Jesus, in modern times, says to his servants, his agents, those whom he has chosen and called to minister in his name and for and on his behalf in this dispensation: "Behold, I send you out to reprove the world of all their unrighteous deeds, and to teach them of a judgment which is to come. And whoso receiveth you, there I will be also, for I will go before your face. I will be on your right hand and on your left, and my Spirit shall be in your hearts, and mine angels round about you, to bear you up. Whoso receiveth you receiveth me; and the same will feed you, and clothe you, and give you money. And he who feeds you, or clothes you, or gives you money, shall in nowise lose his reward. And he that doeth not these things is not my disciple; by this you may know my disciples." (D&C 84:87-91.)

He that receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet shall receive a prophet's reward; and he that receiveth a righteous man in the name of a righteous man shall receive a righteous man's reward.

And whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones a cup of cold water only in the name of a disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise lose his reward.

How sound and glorious this is! Receive a prophet for what he is and gain a prophet's reward. What is the reward received by prophets? That it is eternal life, the greatest of all the gifts of God, none will doubt. Thus, by accepting a true prophet men gain eternal life. Full acceptance presupposes obedience to whatever prophetic counsel and direction is forthcoming. The same reasoning applies to receiving a righteous man and gaining a righteous man's reward, which reward is exaltation in the highest heaven of the celestial world. And even those who perform but the slightest service for the Lord's anointed, or for the little ones of his earthly kingdom—doing so because those served are the chosen of Jehovah—shall be rewarded for their goodness.

And so endeth the instructions to the Twelve. Having so spoken, Jesus "departed thence to teach and to preach in their cities," and the traveling witnesses of his name went forth to teach and testify in the way he had commanded them.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Shakespeare, Henry VI, Part II, act 5, sc. 1.
[^2] These words, and those hereafter quoted in this chapter, aside from the scriptural quotations themselves, are taken from chapter 28 of Farrar, pp. 294-305. Though containing the usual speculative conclusions, from the standpoint of literary craftsmanship, this is one of Farrar's best essays. I have not hesitated to quote selected literary gems and to paraphrase others, as is also the case, occasionally, throughout this work, with particular reference to the writings of Edersheim and Farrar, two of the best sectarian authors. Short of receiving personal revelation on all points, no one author can think of all the meanings or set forth every nuance of thought on all points. Further, it seems a waste of literary talent not to preserve some of the thoughts and modes of expression that those of old, who wrote on the same subjects, were led by the spirit of truth to record. Those who are acquainted with the original sources - be they the two authors mentioned, or Josephus, Tacitus, or whosoever - will know that all authors have followed this practice. Elder Talmage does so in his scholarly work. It is also the course followed by the authors of the scriptures themselves, as when John the Apostle quotes and paraphrases, without identifying his original source, a prior account of John the Baptist, as is set forth in the first chapter of the Gospel of John.
[^3] There is an old tradition, dating back almost to apostolic times, that Peter, at this point, asked: "But how then if the wolves should tear the lambs?" To this Jesus is said to have answered: "Let not the lambs fear the wolves when the lambs are once dead, and do you fear not those who can kill you and do nothing to you, but fear Him who after you are dead hath power over soul and body to cast them into the Gehenna of fire." (Farrar, p. 277.)
[^4] As to the hatred of the world for the saints, the Roman historian Tacitus says that Nero "inflicted the most cruel punishments upon a sect of people who were holden in abhorrence for their crimes, and called by the vulgar 'Christians.' The founder of that name was Christ, who suffered death in the reign of Tiberius, under his procurator Pontius Pilate . . . This pernicious superstition, thus checked for a while, broke out again; and spread not only over Judea where the evil originated, but through Rome also, whither everything bad upon earth finds its way and is practised. . . . A vast multitude were apprehended who were convicted, not so much of the crime of burning Rome, as of hatred to mankind. . . . They were criminals, deserving the severest punishments." (Cited. Dummelow, p. 662.)
[^5] "Those who preach the gospel are to do so boldly, without timidity or trepidation, not fearing the face of man, but with the courage of their convictions and in the fervor of their testimonies. 'Use boldness, but not overbearance,' Alma said. (Alma 38:10-12.) Truths learned in the day of preparation and schooling are to be broadcast from the housetops." (Commentary 1:333.)
[^6] The destruction of the soul in hell is a figurative expression. It is a spiritual death; it is to die as pertaining to the things of the Spirit and to be cast into outer darkness until the full penalty has been paid for sin. See Mormon Doctrine. 2nd ed., pp. 756-59, and related passages.
[^7] This interpreting paraphrasing of Jesus' words is my own, taken from Commentary 1:335-36.
