Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1980)

Chapter 55

Herod Beheads the Blessed John

It is great sin to swear unto a sin; But greater sin to keep a sinful oath. Who can be bound be any solemn vow To do a murderous deed? [^1]

This Man Called John

We must now turn our attention to the ministry, mission, and martyrdom of the blessed Baptist—to him who prepared the way before the Blessed One; who served as an excellent Elias in time's meridian; and who is about to seal his testimony with his own blood. And when Jesus hears of the death of his kinsman—they were second cousins—and learns that a martyr's blood now stains a dungeon cell at Machaerus, it will have a marked effect on his own ministry.

Many things might he said of John Ben Zacharias—of this son of Zacharias and Elisabeth; of this man whose birthright it was to sit in Aaron's seat, the priestly ruler in Israel; of this man who did in fact seal up the old dispensation and usher in the new.

John Ben Zacharias—here is a man who sat in council with the Gods before ever the foundations of this earth were laid; who was a friend of Michael and Gabriel and Raphael; who made covenant with Abraham, and was an associate of Isaiah and Nephi and Joseph Smith in that seraphic sphere where the sons of God awaited their mortal probations.

John Ben Zacharias—here is a man who was seen in vision by Lehi and Nephi and Isaiah, each of whom foresaw his ministry and even foretold the very words he would speak: as the voice of one crying in the wilderness; as the baptizer of the One upon whom the Holy Spirit would descend bodily, in calmness and serenity, like a dove; as the witness of the divine sonship of the Lamb of God who taketh away the sins of the world.

John Ben Zacharias—here is a man whose birth was announced by that angelic ministrant who stands next to Michael in the holy hierarchy of the eternal worlds; whose mother was the aged Elisabeth, who, like Sarah, was past the childbearing years; and whose father, a pure Levite, would also suffer a martyr's death.

John Ben Zacharias—here is a man who was born in the hill country of Judea; who grew up in the desert areas of Hebron; who came from the deserts and wildernesses of Palestine, wearing the prophetic garb made of camel's hair, to proclaim repentance and to prepare the way before One who should come after.

This man called John; this holy and valiant Levite; this Elias; this forerunner; this voice crying in the wilderness; this one than whom there has not been a greater prophet—this man called John came to prepare the way before the Son of God.

He was filled with the Holy Ghost from his mother's womb and, in fact, bore his first mortal testimony of Jesus the Lord while he was yet in the womb of an aged mother.

He was ordained by an angel of God—Gabriel, we presume—when but eight days old, and given power to overthrow the kingdom of the Jews, and to make straight the way before the Lord.

He was himself baptized while yet in his childhood—it could not have been other than at eight years of age—and when he ministered and taught at Bethabara and Aenon and elsewhere, he in turn baptized many for the remission of their sins.

He held the Aaronic Priesthood—receiving it no doubt from his father—and was the last legal administrator of the Mosaic dispensation and the first divinely called and legally recognized agent of Jehovah in the newly-set-up Christian era.

He assembled great congregations of true believers—all Jerusalem came out to hear his prophetic words, and many heeded his call to repentance—but all who came to him were encouraged and invited—nay, commanded—to follow the One who came after who would baptize with fire and with the Holy Ghost.

His great cry—"Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world" (John 1:29)—and his doctrinal testimony—"He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life: and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God abideth on him" (John 3:36)—these were his crowning and oft-repeated declarations. There is no preaching to compare with sound doctrine mingled with pure testimony.

When this chosen and beloved prophet—John Ben Zacharias of the seed of Aaron—was imprisoned by that evil miscreant Antipas, then Jesus sent angels to his dungeon-bound kinsman to minister comfort and hope and eternal assurance. And we cannot doubt that this strait and severe prophet—who is akin to Adam and Abraham and Moses in faith and prophetic power—that this desert Elias not only entertained angels, as it is the right of one holding the Aaronic Priesthood so to do, but that he also beheld the visions of eternity and knew the things of God in a measure and to a degree seldom vouchsafed to mortal men.

This man called John stood, as no other has ever done, at the crossroads of history. He closed the door on the past and opened the door of the future. He proclaimed Jehovah's amen—the divine so-be-it; the heaven-sent it is over and done, as it were—as pertaining to the rituals and performances and ordinances of Moses, the greatest of Israel's prophets; and he opened the door to the simplicity and beauty of the fullness of the everlasting gospel.

How great is that prophet who can say to Moses: 'Thou man of God—thou mighty one like unto whom there was not again among the ancients such a prophet—Moses, thou man of God, be silent. No longer does thy law apply; no longer are your ordinances valid; sacrifices shall now cease; no longer shall those who sit in Aaron's seat make an atonement for the sins of repentant Israel. The law of Moses is now swallowed up by the law of Christ.'

How great is that prophet who can say to the Son of God: 'I am thy forerunner, thy Elias; my voice announces you to all who shall come after. By my priesthood I shall immerse you in baptism, and my act in so doing shall be binding on earth and in heaven. I am the friend of the Bridegroom. Great congregations shall come unto thee and be saved because of me.'

Praise be to God for the life and ministry of the blessed Baptist, of John the son of Zacharias—a ministry that is about to be ended with Herod's axe, so that John, dying before Christ, may serve as his forerunner among the departed dead and then rise with him in glorious immortality in the first resurrection to reign everlastingly in that heavenly kingdom where Gods and angels dwell.

Antipas Holds an Evil Feast

(Mark 6:21-29; JST Mark 6:22; Matthew 14:6-12)

Herod the Great, a polygamist having ten wives and numerous progeny—many of whom he murdered, and all of whose descendants inherited his evil, voluptuous, and ruthless ways—left one son whose deeds of infamy have attained a fame and a name of almost as great ill-repute as that of his dissolute father. This was Herod Antipas, the sycophant who, under Rome, ruled in Galilee. Herod the Great sought the life of Christ and ended up, in mad dementia, slaughtering the Innocents of Bethlehem, a crime so unspeakably evil and so unutterably irresponsible as to send eternal shudders through all Christendom; and yet so numerous were his murders and so great was the river of blood shed by him that the slaughter of Rachel's children in the coasts of Bethlehem scarcely merits a mention in secular sources. Herod Antipas took the life of Christ's forerunner under circumstances showing forth such weakness of character and such submission to lecherous passion that once again all Christendom is repelled at the horror and evil of it all.

"Herod Antipas, to whom, on the death of Herod the Great, had fallen the tetrarchy of Galilee, was about as weak and miserable a prince as ever disgraced the throne of an afflicted country. Cruel, crafty, voluptuous, like his father, he was also, unlike him, weak in war and vacillating in peace. In him, as in so many characters which stand conspicuous on the stage of history, infidelity and superstition went hand in hand. But the morbid terrors of a guilty conscience did not save him from the criminal extravagances of a violent will. He was a man in whom were mingled the worst features of the Roman, the Oriental, and the Greek." (Farrar, p. 295.)

Our present concern is with Herod Antipas and two other sons of Herod the Great: Aristobulus and Herod Philip, not the tetrarch, but one of the royal family who lived as a private citizen in Rome. Aristobulus had a daughter, Herodias, who married her uncle, Herod Philip, and they in turn had a grown daughter named Salome. Herod Antipas was married to a daughter of Aretas, Emir of Arabia.

On a visit to Rome, Herod Antipas became entangled with Herodias, his brother Philip's wife, and she left Philip to marry Antipas, taking Salome with her. Thus Herod Antipas married his sister-in-law, who was also his niece; and as a result, the daughter of Aretas left Antipas and returned to her father, who later waged a victorious war against his quondam son-in-law.

It was this incestuous and illegal marriage that caused John the Baptist to say to Herod Antipas: "It is not lawful for thee to have her." It was this firm pronouncement that caused the Baptist to gain the undying enmity of Herodias and of Salome, and it was this same declaration that caused Herod to arrest John and imprison him in the dungeons of Machaerus. "And when he would have put him to death, he feared the multitude, because they counted him as a prophet." (Matt. 14:4-5.)

Among the wicked and ungodly, riotous living is the norm; their aim in life is to eat, drink, and be merry, and that which sates one's appetite and gratifies one's passions is to be desired above all. "All that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life" (1 Jn. 2:16)—these are the things their souls desire. It is one of the signs of the times that those who know not God and seek not his face will be eating and drinking—eating as gluttons and drinking as drunkards—until the Son of Man comes.

And nowhere are the gluttons more greedy nor the drunkards more sottish than among the degraded royalty of imperial courts. The Caesars in Rome hold great banquets for the great and mighty among them. They swill up delicacies with swinish gluttony, take an emetic, vomit up their guzzlings, and commence to gorge themselves anew. Belshazzar appoints a great feast for a thousand of his lords. They and their wives and concubines drink wine from the golden vessels taken from the holy Temple of Jerusalem, and in the midst of it all, the handwriting on the wall spells out the doom of their kingdom. Herod Antipas, aping the debauchery of Rome—a debauchery that will soon revel in orgies of immorality and in gladiatorial combats between human combatants—Herod Antipas appoints a feast day to honor himself. The scriptural account says simply:

But when Herod's birthday was come, he made a supper for his lords, high captains, and the chief priest of Galilee.

And therein is set forth one of the signs of those times. The topers and gluttons who came together to eat and drink at Herod's board and to do honor to the tetrarch were his own rulers, the captains of his Roman mercenaries, and—mark it well—"the chief priest of Galilee." The leading Levites—Aaron's sons—were linking arms with their alien overlords. It was as when the Pharisees took counsel with the Herodians as to how they might destroy Jesus, because he healed a man with a withered hand on the Sabbath. And it is a far cry from the day of divine vengeance when fire came down from heaven and devoured Nadab and Abihu, Aaron's sons, because they offered strange fires, upon the altar, before the Lord. But perhaps even this which is to occur at Herod's feast is as handwriting on the wall foretelling his destruction, or as fire from heaven that will ultimately consume him, and his house, and Herodias, and Salome, and all who ally themselves with such as these.

Such feasts as this were not complete without entertainment, without something to feed the lusts and arouse the passions of those now gorged with food and half drunken with wine. Dancers, especially dancing women, were in great demand. Taking into account the sensuous nature of the Herods, the mean and vulgar demeanor of the military men, the adultery-centered proclivities of the chief priests; having in mind the depraved and vulgar displays Herod would have seen at Caesar's banquets; knowing of the perversions and sexual excesses found in all Oriental courts, and the loose and low moral standard of all the Gentiles and many of the Jews; being aware of all this, and more—over which a decent propriety must draw a curtain of silence—we have no difficulty envisioning the type of banquet entertainment that was presented at these kingly feasts.

As to how, in this instance, Salome became the featured dancer before Herod and his lords, we know not, but suppose that an evil Herodian craftily planned the sensuous spectacle, with an evil Salome both agreeing and taking delight in the prospect of exposing her body to the gawking eyes of her stepfather and his voluptuous friends. In any event, "when the banquet was over, when the guests were full of meat and flushed with wine, Salome herself, the daughter of Herodias, then in the prime of her lustrous beauty," danced—lewdly, lasciviously, seductively—before "those dissolute and half-intoxicated revellers." Then Herod, "in the delirium of his drunken approval, swore to this degraded girl, in the presence of his guests, that he would give her anything for which she asked, even to the half of his kingdom." (Farrar, p. 300.) [^2]

Hearing this, the lewd daughter of an adulterous mother hastened to her maternal parent for further instructions. "What shall I ask?" she queried. The crafty and conniving Herodias, to whom adultery and murder were but the normal accompaniments of her depraved and godless course, replied: "The head of John the Baptist."

Then went Salome "straightway with haste unto the king." Immediately with haste! "What a touch is that! and how apt a pupil did the wicked mother find in her wicked daughter!" Then stood Salome before Antipas and all his lords and said: "I will that thou give me by and by in a charger the head of John the Baptist." "Her indecent haste, her hideous petition, show that she shared the furies of her race." They show also how those enmeshed in immoral and lascivious living find it easy, perhaps natural, to make murder and every debasing crime a part of their way of life. 'Bring me here, now, as soon as the headsman's axe can fall, upon one of the golden dishes that grace thy table, the gory head of that Jew who dares to say it is not lawful for thee to have my mother as thy wife.'

Herod is stunned; he is plunged into sudden grief; his fawning friends are appalled. "It was a bitter termination of his birthday feast. Fear, policy, remorse, superstition, even whatever poor spark of better feeling remained unquenched under the dense white ashes of a heart consumed by evil passions, all made him shrink in disgust from this sudden execution. He must have felt that he had been duped out of his own will by the cunning stratagem of his unrelenting paramour."

Yet sin begets sin; pride builds upon pride; and he who is guilty of one offense cannot escape the commission of another, lest he be punished or held up to disrepute for the first. As with Pilate, who gave the order to crucify One whom he knew to be innocent, lest it be reported in Rome that the procurator was not Caesar's friend, so with Antipas, who feared to lose face with his nobles should he break his intemperate oath.

"If a single touch of manliness had been left in him he would have repudiated the request as one which did not fall either under the letter or spirit of his oath, since the life of one cannot be made the gift to another; or he would have boldly declared that if such was her choice, his oath was more honoured by being broken than by being kept. But a despicable pride and fear of man prevailed over his better impulses. More afraid of the criticisms of his guests than of the future torment of such conscience as was left him, he immediately sent an executioner to the prison, and so at the bidding of a dissolute coward, and to please the loathly fancies of a shameless girl, the axe fell, and the head of the noblest of the prophets was shorn away."

Thus came the murder, for how else can it be named? And then was brought the head of one who had now sealed his testimony with his own blood, one whose earth-sealed lips would now cry out in a better realm for that vengeance which a just God lays upon those who make martyrs of his prophets. Placed "on one of the golden dishes which graced the board," the marred visage of the man of God would forever haunt the souls of his murderers.

According to tradition, Herodias celebrated her victory by ordering "the headless trunk to be flung out over the battlements for dogs and vultures to devour." "And his disciples came, and took up the body, and buried it, and went and told Jesus."

The forerunner's work on earth was done. What rejoicing there must have been that day in paradise as he mingled with the spirits of just men made perfect, proclaiming to them that He by whom salvation comes would soon minister among them, would open their prison doors—for the separation of their spirits from their bodies seemed as a prison to them—and would bring forth his saints in glorious immortality.

"Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints." (Ps. 116:15.) Jehovah reigneth, and all things are going forward according to his plans and purposes.

Jesus Hears of John's Death

(Luke 9:7-9; Mark 6:14-16; Matthew 14:1-2, 13)

As a mortal among mortals, Jesus learned of John's death from the Baptist's disciples who, with loving care, had taken up "his corpse, and laid it in a tomb." Had necessity required, he would have learned the sad fate—a fate both sad and glorious, for he that layeth down his life for Christ and his cause shall gain eternal life—had necessity required, Jesus would have known by the power of the Spirit that his forerunner had died a martyr's death. We know of no reason, in this instance, however, why he should have received by revelation that knowledge which other mortals would learn from their fellow mortals.

As our friend Farrar has it, there was at this time "an atmosphere already darkened by the storm-clouds of gathering opposition," and in this atmosphere, "like the first note of a death-knell tolling ruin, there broke the intelligence of a dreadful martyrdom. The heaven-enkindled and shining lamp has suddenly been quenched in blood. The great Forerunner—he who was greatest of those born of women—the Prophet, and more than a prophet, had been foully murdered."

After noting that it was at about this time that the apostles reported their missions, Farrar says: "Another piece of intelligence reached Jesus; it was that the murderous tetrarch was inquiring about Him; wished to see Him; perhaps would send and demand His presence when he returned to his new palace, the Golden House of his new capital at Tiberias. For the mission of the Twelve had tended more than ever to spread a rumour of Him among the people, and speculation respecting Him was rife. All admitted that He had some high claim to attention. Some thought that He was Elijah, some Jeremiah, others one of the Prophets; but Herod had the most singular solution to the problem.

"It is said that when Theodoric had ordered the murder of Symmachus, he was haunted and finally maddened by the phantom of the old man's distorted features glaring at him from a dish on the table; nor can it have been otherwise with Herod Antipas. Into his banquet hall had been brought the head of one whom, in the depth of his inmost being, he felt to have been holy and just; and he had seen, with the solemn agony of death still resting on them, the stern features on which he had often gazed with awe. Did no reproach issue from those dead lips yet louder and more terrible than they had spoken in life? Were the accents which had uttered, 'It is not lawful for thee to have her,' frozen into silence, or did they seem to issue with supernatural energy from the bloodless lips?

"If we mistake not, that dissevered head was rarely thenceforth absent from Herod's haunted imagination from that day forward till he lay upon his dying bed. And now, when but a brief time afterwards, he heard of the fame of another Prophet—of a Prophet transcendently mightier, and one who wrought miracles, which John had never done—his guilty conscience shivered with superstitious dread, and to his intimates he began to whisper with horror, 'This is John the Baptist whom I beheaded: he is risen from the dead, and therefore these mighty works are wrought by him.' Had John sprung thus suddenly to life again to inflict a signal vengeance? Would he come to the strong towers of Machaerus at the head of a multitude in wild revolt? or glide through the gilded halls of Tiberias, terrible, at midnight, with ghostly tread? 'Hast thou found me, O mine enemy?' "

And so it was that Jesus, aware of Herod's hallucinations and not at this time courting persecution or premature arrest, "departed thence by ship into a desert place apart," where the feeding of the five thousand took place.

And as to John, his body returned to the dust whence it came; his spirit continued to speak among the spirits of the dead—awaiting the day when body and spirit, inseparably connected, would rise with Christ in immortal glory, even then to continue his labors in the work of the Holy One whose eternal witness he is.

And, further, as to John: acting under the direction of Peter, James, and John, his apostolic superiors, he came to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, on the fifteenth day of May, 1829, on the banks of the Susquehanna River in western New York, and there conferred upon them the ancient Levitical order in which he had ministered while in mortality.

Upon you my fellow servants, In the name of Messiah I confer the Priesthood of Aaron, Which holds the keys of the ministering of angels, And of the gospel of repentance, And of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; And this shall never be taken again from the earth, Until the sons of Levi do offer again An offering unto the Lord in righteousness. (D&C 13.)

And so once again there are those on earth who can sit in Aaron's seat; who, being subject to those who sit in Moses' seat, can prepare the way for that which—in the eternal providences of Him in whose hand is all power—is about to come to pass.

And again we say: Jehovah reigneth; blessed be his great and holy name, both now and forever. Amen.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Both he and the Twelve are greatly in need of physical rest. They have all been teaching and healing and traveling, almost with greater zeal than their strength permits. The Twelve have just returned from their missions and have told Jesus "all things, both what they had done, and what they had taught." They too had been preaching the gospel of the kingdom, casting out devils, healing the sick, perhaps even raising the dead, for such was included in the promises made to them. And so Jesus said unto them: "Come ye yourselves apart into a solitary place, and rest a while; for there were many coming and going, and they had no leisure, not so much as to eat. And they departed into a solitary place by ship, privately." He did it—and such an ordinary and prosaic reason it is!—because men were hungry and there was no food available to them. Unless men eat, they die; mortal meat is part of mortal life.
[^2] Their departure will have a much-needed quieting effect upon the people. Galilee is in turmoil because of the murder of the Baptist, whom the people revered as a prophet. It is not expedient for great multitudes to assemble around Jesus and the Twelve, lest the Herodians esteem these teachers and witnesses to be political agitators deserving the same arrest and imprisonment suffered by John. Josephus tells us that the seeming political agitations of John were the excuse used for his arrest. This must not now happen to Jesus or any of the Twelve. And at this time there might be a political uprising among the people if Jesus and his associates longer remain with them. They are considered as leaders by many, and the people are seeking a standard round which to rally. He acted out of love and compassion for his fellowmen. Though he would not turn stones into bread to appease his own hunger—a famishing, gnawing hunger born of forty days of fasting—yet for others, whose needs were less and whose hunger was but one day old, he would exercise his own divine power. As his Father makes the rains fall and the sun shine upon all his children, be they good or evil, so will the Son provide bread for those who have come to hear his words.
