Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1980)

Chapter 56

Jesus Feeds the Five Thousand

And it came to pass that he brake bread again and blessed it, and gave to the disciples to eat. And when they had eaten he commanded them that they should break bread, and give unto the multitude. And when they had given unto the multitude he also gave them wine to drink, and commanded them that they should give unto the multitude. Now, there had been no bread, neither wine, brought by the disciples, neither by the multitude; But he truly gave unto them bread to eat, and also wine to drink. And he said unto them: He that eateth this bread eateth of my body to his soul; and he that drinketh of this wine drinketh of my blood to his soul; and his soul shall never hunger nor thirst, but shall be filled. (3 Ne. 20:3-8.)

He Prepares a Table in the Wilderness

(Luke 9:10-11; JST Luke 9:10; Matthew 14:13; Mark 6:30-32; JST Mark 6:32-33)

Jesus now plans to feed five thousand men, "beside women and children," with five small barley loaves and two sardine-like fish. The spartan banquet—if such it may be called when contrasted with the gluttonous feasts at Machaerus—is to be held in a solitary meadow near Bethsaida-Julias to the north and east of the Sea of Galilee. As to the multiplying of the loaves and fishes, John tells us that Jesus "himself knew what he would do" beforehand (John 6:6), and that this foreknowledge applied also to the preparation for the desert feast we cannot doubt.

And so, before the miraculous banquet can be served, the table in the desert must be prepared. The question, "Can God furnish a table in the wilderness?" must be answered anew, as it was in the day of Moses when Jehovah served quail to all Israel. (Ps. 78:13-20.) Before the multiplying of the loaves and fishes, Jesus and his disciples must go to the expanse of "green grass" where the companies of fifty and of a hundred will sit; the guests must be invited; they must be famishing for want of food, with none available to them; the pressing need for divine intervention must be present; there must be a young lad there with five loaves and two fishes; Jesus must have taught and healed so that the miracle will bear witness of his doctrine and of his divinity; and then—all being in readiness—the wonder will occur.

It should not be thought a thing unreasonable among them that the Son of God would exercise his creative power to give meat to hungering men. Indeed, their tradition was that when the Messiah came he would—as Moses had done—give them bread from heaven, provide them water to drink, feed them flesh according to their needs. Others before had fed Israel miraculously when their needs were great. Should it not happen again?

Had not Moses, the servant of Jehovah—when they, lusting for the fleshpots of Egypt, said, "Why came we forth out of Egypt?"—had not he given all Israel, some three million of them, flesh for thirty days, until it came out of their nostrils and became loathsome unto them? (Num. 11:18-23, 31-33.) Had not Jehovah rained bread from heaven upon them, six days a week, for forty years, as they dwelt in the wilderness? (Ex. 16.)

Was not Elijah fed by the ravens as he hid himself by the brook Cherith? Did not the fowls of heaven bring him "bread and flesh in the morning, and bread and flesh in the evening," lest he die of the famine? And did he not say to the widow of Zarephath, "The barrel of meal shall not waste, neither shall the cruse of oil fail, until the day that the Lord sendeth rain upon the earth," and it was so? (1 Kgs. 17:1-16.)

And Elisha, upon whom the mantle of Elijah fell, did he not bring oil and bread and corn into being from the very elements, as it were? What of the widow whose husband had been a prophet and whose two sons were to be taken as bondmen by a creditor? Did not Elisha cause them to pour oil from one small vessel until many great vessels were full, so they might sell the great store of oil thus created and have sufficient means to meet their needs? And does not the scripture say of Elisha:

And there came a man from Baalshalisha, and brought the man of God bread of the firstfruits, twenty loaves of barley, and full ears of corn in the husk thereof. And he said, Give unto the people, that they may eat.

And his servitor said, What, should I set this before an hundred men? He said again, Give the people, that they may eat: for thus saith the Lord, They shall eat, and shall leave thereof.

So he set it before them and they did eat, and left thereof, according to the word of the Lord. (2 Kgs. 4:1-7, 42-44.)

Why, then, should it be thought a thing unreasonable among them that the Son of God himself should give them a simple peasant-type meal of barley loaves and fish? Had he not, for that matter, as they all knew, turned water into wine at Cana? Others acting in Jehovah's name had fed Jehovah's people in days of old. Why not Jehovah himself do now what his servants of old had done? Was not that which was done by the Messianic messengers of old but a type and a shadow of what would be when the Messiah, whose witnesses they were, came among men in power and glory, to save and redeem, both temporally and spiritually?

And so now, Jesus and his disciples leave Capernaum to go to Bethsaida-Julias; the preparations for the desert feeding of the hungry multitudes are going forward in a normal and natural way. There are, it would seem, at least five good and sufficient reasons why Jesus and his fellow itinerant preachers should make this journey. They are:

Jesus Teaches, Heals, and Feeds the Multitude

(John 6:1-15; JST John 6:12-13; Mark 6:33-46; JST Mark 6:36, 39; Matthew 14:14-23; Luke 9:11-17; JST Luke 9:10-13)

This miracle, with its attendant circumstances, is recounted by all four of the Evangelists. Each preserves his own views as to what transpired on this never-to-be-forgotten day, and all of the accounts taken together enable us to paint a vivid picture of the only scenes of this kind ever to transpire among men. The Man whose words we love and whose deeds we revere first taught his scattered sheep; then he healed those who were lame and maimed among them; after this, he fed them all with earthly manna; then he went off by himself to commune alone with his Father; and finally, he walked on the ridges of the waves as a tempestuous wind whipped the Galilean sea into a frothy and frenzied maelstrom.

John tells us the Feast of the Passover "was nigh," and Mark specifies that the multitudes sat on "green grass." It was spring—early April of A.D. 29—and great throngs of Galileans had left their fields and shops to travel to Jerusalem to worship the Lord and covenant anew to follow the God of their fathers. Thousands of pilgrims were free to dally in Capernaum or hasten to a solitary site near Bethsaida-Julias, where the voice of their own Galilean Prophet might be heard. Perhaps he would heal their sick as he had done elsewhere. Was he, in fact, the Messiah as both he and his confederates so often said? Public interest ran high, and the Eternal Paschal Lamb meant to teach the traveling throngs who were en route to sacrifice their own paschal offerings in Jerusalem.

Jesus and the Twelve took ship. From Capernaum to their east coast destination was six miles by water; it would be somewhat farther on land. "And he took them, and went aside privately into a solitary place belonging to the city called Bethsaida," Luke says. After disembarking, "Jesus went up into a mountain, and there he sat with his disciples," John adds.

Their departure was seen by the people, who followed on foot, out of all the cities; word of his destination went from mouth to mouth; a great congregation awaited him across from the Jordan and on the east of the lake. These all assembled in a green valley. John says that "a great multitude followed him, because they saw his miracles which he did on them that were diseased."

Perhaps Jesus and his party gained some rest, at least some respite from the crowds, as they crossed the sea and as they sat on the mountain. But when Jesus saw the multitudes, he "was moved with compassion toward them, because they were as sheep not having a shepherd; and he began to teach them many things." So says Mark. Luke says he "spake unto them of the kingdom of God."

Jesus was doing what he had done before. It was his age-old pattern; as he always did, he preached the gospel, summarized the plan of salvation, told the people in whom they must believe and what they must do to be saved. He told them who he was and who the Twelve were. How important it is to know this, and how often it is repeated by the inspired authors!

As he said at the first Passover of his ministry, 'Though men destroy this body, I shall rise again the third day'; as he said to Nicodemus, 'I am the Son of Man who came down from heaven; whosoever believeth in me shall not perish but have eternal life; I am the Only Begotten Son; through me all men may be saved'; as he said to the woman of Samaria at Jacob's Well, 'I that speak unto thee am the Messias'; as he said in the synagogue in Nazareth, 'I am he of whom Isaiah spake; in me are the Messianic prophecies fulfilled; I am the Messiah'; as he said in healing one sick of the palsy, 'I Jesus, who am God, forgive you of your sins'; as he said at the second Passover, after healing the impotent man at the pool of Bethesda, 'I am the Son of God; my Father and I are equal; the Father hath committed all judgment into my hands; he that believeth on me hath everlasting life; even the dead shall hear my voice; all men must honor me even as they honor the Father'—as he said day in and day out, everywhere and everlastingly, always, in season and out of season, early and late, to men, women, and children, to every living soul, so he said again to the multitude near Bethsaida-Julias: 'I am the Son of God; salvation comes by me; believe my words and live my law, and I will give you a place in my Father's kingdom.'

Again we say: How important it is to know this! Jesus preached the gospel first and healed afterwards; the healings came to those who believed his words and accepted him as God's Son. However much this runs counter to the speculative views of the divines, it yet remains as a basic reality that must be understood if we are to come anywhere near a true view of him who, though mortal for a season, is Lord of all everlastingly.

And so Jesus first preached the gospel to the multitudes who came to hear his word. Then, as Luke says, he "healed them that had need of healing," or as Matthew recounts, he "was moved with compassion toward them, and he healed their sick."

Sometime during the day, Jesus said to Philip, one of the Twelve: "Whence shall we buy bread, that these may eat?" That Jesus had no intention of buying bread but was simply testing Philip—and through him all of the Twelve—is clear from John's comment: "And this he said to prove him: for he himself knew what he would do." Philip answered: "Two hundred pennyworth of bread is not sufficient for them, that every one of them may take a little." That sum, obviously, was more than the disciples had in their common purse.

His conversation with Philip caused the apostles to discuss the matter among themselves, and to wonder what should be done. At some point in time, "One of his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter's brother, saith unto him, There is a lad here, which hath five barley loaves, and two small fishes; but what are they among so many?" And Philip's words are but a far-off echo of a servitor in another day who said: "What, should I set this"—this meal of twenty barley loaves and a few ears of corn in the husk—"before an hundred men?" And Jesus' coming response was but an echo of Elisha's word: "Give the people, that they may eat: for thus saith the Lord, They shall eat, and shall leave thereof." (2 Kgs. 4:43-44.)

Finally, following full discussion among themselves, and after their faith had been tested—and found wanting—"when the day began to wear away, then came the twelve, and said unto him, Send the multitude away, that they may go into the towns and country round about, and lodge, and get victuals; for we are here in a solitary place."

This, then, was their answer; and this was the perfect teaching moment, the time for divine intervention. Jesus said: "They need not depart; give ye them to eat." They said: "Shall we go and buy two hundred penny-worth of bread, and give them to eat?" Jesus said: "How many loaves have ye? go and see." The answer came: "We have but five loaves and two fishes; and except we should go and buy meat, we can provide no more food for all this multitude."

"And he commanded them to make all sit down by companies upon the green grass. And they sat down in ranks, by hundreds, and by fifties. And when he had taken the five loaves and the two fishes, he looked up to heaven, and blessed, and brake the loaves, and gave them to his disciples to set before them; and the two fishes divided he among them all. And they did all eat, and were filled."

"When they had eaten and were satisfied, he said unto his disciples, Gather up the fragments that remain, that nothing be lost. Therefore they gathered them together, and filled twelve baskets with the fragments of the five barley loaves, which remained over and above unto them that had eaten."

Thus was the miracle wrought; so was the deed done; and such are the attendant circumstances. The concordant testimony of four independent witnesses appends a solemn certitude to the wonder that has happened. Needless to say, the creative power thus exercised by him who for the moment is as a mortal is in fact the power of God.

As the reality of what was done this day in a green lowland place not far from Bethsaida-Julias (literally, the house of fishing, or, as we might say, Fisher-town) dawns upon us; as we ponder the wonder of it all, bread and fish springing instantly into being, from the very elements, because he willed it—as we marvel at such a miracle, we ask: Why and for what purpose was it done? What message are we to receive from this miracle of two millenniums ago? To all of this, these thoughts readily occur:

No doubt other points could be made, and the attentive student can search out his own types and shadows and applications, as he should; but what is here given illustrates, at least, what can be learned from any of the glorious teaching situations concerning Jesus our Lord.

"The miracle produced a profound impression. It was exactly in accordance with the current expectation, and the multitude began to whisper to each other that this must undoubtedly be 'that Prophet which should come into the world'; the Shiloh of Jacob's blessing; the Star and the Sceptre of Balaam's vision; the Prophet like unto Moses to whom they were to hearken; perhaps the Elijah promised by the dying breath of ancient prophecy; perhaps the Jeremiah of their tradition, come back to reveal the hiding-place of the Ark, and the Urim, and the sacred fire." (Farrar, pp. 310-11.)

And since he was "that Prophet"—the very Messiah; their Deliverer; the one through whom all Israel might be saved—what then? To the expectant throng—had they not heard his wondrous words, seen his miracles, and been fed to the full?—to them it seemed as if the hour of Jewish triumph had come at long last. They must "make him a king"; nay, he was king already; rather, they must "take him by force" and require that he act in his kingly capacity. Let the Roman yoke fall; here at last was one who could defeat the armies of Antipas and more. Here was one who could strike the death blow against that wretched man, Caesar, who reveled in his orgies and lusts in his Gentile city.

That such misdirected zeal must not go unchecked was perfectly clear to the one around whom the swell of zealotry surged. His disciples must withdraw lest they partake of this false spirit, and the people must disperse to ponder, in less excitable circumstances, the true meaning and significance of the doings of that day. "And straightway Jesus constrained his disciples to get into a ship, and to go before him unto the other side." He was insistent that they depart immediately. They must leave the environs of Bethsaida-Julias and go to that Bethsaida which is the companion city to Capernaum, the two cities, but four miles apart, sharing a common Galilean harbor. With his disciples en route back it was easier for Jesus to send the multitude away.

Then "he went up into a mountain apart to pray." He must thank his Father for the marvels of that day, for he of himself did only that which his Father commanded. He must counsel again with the great God whose Son he was, lest he overstep any of the bounds or vary so much as a hair's breadth from the course decreed by the Father. He must receive that spiritual refreshment and guidance which even he needed to bear the growing burden that rested upon his divine shoulders. From the hallowed spot where he communed with the Eternal he soon returned—perhaps having been so directed by him to whom he prayed—to walk on the surging waves of that lake which was so much a part of his life.
