Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1980)

Chapter 57

Jesus Walks on the Sea of Galilee

The waters saw thee, O God, the waters saw thee; they were afraid: the depths also were troubled. Thy way is in the sea, and thy path in the great waters. (Ps. 77:16, 19.)

The waters were gathered together, the floods stood upright as an heap, and the depths were congealed in the heart of the sea. (Ex. 15:8.)

Jehovah Rules the Waters

Working with waters has always been part of the prophetic way. By faith the worlds were made; by faith the elements are controlled; by faith the mountains move and the seas divide. And the waters of the world are always used to subserve the purposes of faithful men.

From that creative day when Jehovah, by his word, divided the waters above the firmament from those beneath the broad expanse of heaven; from that primeval day when he gathered the waters into one place, calling the dry land earth and the great waters seas; from that antediluvian day when he caused the rains to fall and water the parched land, to give life to plants and herbs, to give drink for man and beast—from that day water has always been used for the benefit and blessing of created things.

Water, the liquid that falls from the clouds as rain; the unstable substance that flows in great rivers and small streams; the moisture that accumulates in ponds and lakes and seas; the element without which there cannot be life—the birth of man itself being brought to pass by water and blood and the spirit—water, wondrous water, was made for man. It was made to supply his needed fluids and to cleanse his body; to give life to animals and fowls and plants; to serve as a home for fish; to form vapors of steam, storms of snow, and glaciers of ice; to be handled and used and governed—all in the interests of God's crowning creation, the being whom he made in his own image.

Truly, water was made for man, made for him to use for his own purposes. His is the power to control and govern it. With it he irrigates his gardens and gives drink to his flocks and herds. From it he catches fish, and over it he sails. He freezes it into ice to refrigerate his products; he vaporizes it into steam to drive great locomotives; he uses its power to generate electricity. He swims in it, skis on its frozen crystals, and skates on its congealed surface. Its uses are as varied and broad as the earth itself.

And water is subject not alone to the natural laws that man must learn and to which he must conform, but it is subject also to the eternal law of faith, a law that in the eternal sense is also a natural law. And further, water is used by the Lord to further his own purposes—to give life to men; to cleanse them from their sins; to drown them in death when his judgments are poured out.

"I, the Lord, in the beginning blessed the waters"—so our revelations record in a passage whose full meaning has not yet been given—"but in the last days, by the mouth of my servant John, I cursed the waters." (D&C 61:14.)

Perhaps the cursing here involved will attain its dooming destiny when the visions of the future that John saw become a reality. In one of these he saw that "a great mountain burning with fire was cast into the sea; and the third part of the sea became blood; And the third part of the creatures which were in the sea, and had life, died; and the third part of the ships were destroyed." (Rev. 8:8-9.) In another he saw that one of the angels who carry "the vials of the wrath of God, . . . poured out his vial upon the sea; and it became as the blood of a dead man; and every living soul died in the sea. And the third angel poured out his vial upon the rivers and fountains of waters; and they became blood." (Rev. 16:1-4.) And perhaps we are seeing even now a little trickling prelude of what John foretold as we struggle to maintain the natural purity of our rivers and seas into which great floods of contaminating chemicals and stinking refuse are poured as men seek to rid themselves of the rubbish and garbage of our so-called civilization.

"And, as I, the Lord, in the beginning cursed the land," our revelation continues, "even so in the last days have I blessed it, in its time, for the use of my saints, that they may partake the fatness thereof." (D&C 61:17.) That this blessing upon the land will attain its glorious fulfillment in the nearing millennial era is, of course, perfectly clear. In the meantime the first sprouting forth of the blessings that can grow from the soil are beginning to burst upon us as we learn better how to use the good earth from which we are fed.

But our concern, with reference to the miracle we are about to witness, is to know that Jehovah rules the waters, and that what he does to and with them—whether it be by his own voice or by the voice of his servants, it is the same.

Thus we see Jesus arranging for the immersion of Adam and his seed in water, that they may all come forth, born again, born anew from a second watery womb. We see baptism in water established as an eternal ordinance, with the waters in which it was performed in ancient Israel being called "the waters of Judah." (1 Ne. 20:1.) We see the saints, in all dispensations, in holy and sacred ordinances, sprinkled with water that they become clean from the carnality and evil of the world. We see men drink the sacramental wine and water in witness of the new covenant that God hath made with his people. And we hear a divine voice assure all men that whosoever so much as gives a cup of cold water to a prophet or righteous man—because he wears the prophetic mantle or walks in the paths of righteousness—shall in nowise lose his reward.

We see Enoch go forth and say to the mountains, 'Be thou removed,' and to the rivers, 'Turn thou into another course,' and it is so. We see a great land come up out of the depth of the sea to which the enemies of the people of God flee in the days of Enoch.

We see Jehovah, by the mouth of his servant Noah, sending in the floods until the valleys and hills and every high mountain are immersed in the surging torrents. It is the baptism of the earth. We see the earth divided in the days of Peleg—was it perchance by his mouth as he spoke Jehovah's word?—so that the dry lands that once were in one place become continents and islands surrounded by seas of water.

We see Moses, the man of God—by his own voice, which was the voice of Jehovah—stretch out his hand upon the waters of Egypt so they all turn to blood, including the waters that are in the Nile and in all the streams and rivers and ponds, and in all the pots and vessels. We see the fish die, smell the stench of the rivers, and know there is nothing for the Egyptians to drink.

We see Moses stretch forth his hand over the Red Sea and divide it so that all Israel, numbering in the millions, "went into the midst of the sea upon the dry ground: and the waters were a wall unto them on the right hand, and on their left." We learn that "the floods stood upright as an heap and the depths were congealed in the heart of the sea." (Ex. 14:19-31; 15:8.) And we see the pursuing armies of Pharaoh drowned in the depths of the sea as the congealing power is withdrawn and the floods surge forth in all their unchecked fury.

When Israel thirsts for water in their desert wilderness, we see Moses, at Meribah, smite the rock with his rod, so that rivers of fresh water gush forth, that all Israel and their beasts die not for want of water.

When Israel, under Joshua, march to the flooding banks of Jordan, as soon as the soles of the feet of them that bare the ark are dipped in the brim of the water, lo—as Joshua by his own mouth decreed—we see the waters stand up as a heap and all Israel pass over on dry ground.

When the Lord sent a famine in Israel, it was by the mouth of Elijah that he sealed the heavens for three years and six months, that it rained not; and it was by his word that the dews of heaven and the moisture of the clouds came again.

At the time of the translation of Elijah, when he was taken up into heaven in a chariot of fire without tasting death, we see, first, Elijah, and then Elisha—by their own mouths—smite the waters of Jordan with a mantle, so that they divide hither and thither, permitting the prophetic feet to go over on dry ground.

We see a faithful man in Israel felling a beam with a borrowed axe; the head comes off and falls into the water. Then at the word of the prophet Elisha—mark it well—"the iron did swim," and the axe head is recovered. (2 Kgs. 6:1-7.) Solid iron swims in water as though it were a cork because Jehovah and his prophets, by faith, have power over the waters.

And we shall yet see, for these things are in the future, the Son of Man at his coming—perhaps by the mouths of his servants the prophets—"command the great deep, and it shall be driven back into the north countries, and the islands shall become one land; . . . and the earth shall be like as it was in the days before it was divided." (D&C 133:23-24.) And then, after his coming, upon those nations that go not up year after year to Jerusalem to keep the Feast of Tabernacles, "even upon them shall be no rain." (Zech. 14:16-19.) The Lord will use the elements to punish the people in the millennial day even as he speaks in this day by "the voice of thunderings, and the voice of lightnings, and the voice of tempests, and the voice of the waves of the sea heaving themselves beyond their bounds." (D&C 88:90.)

We have spoken thus about the waters of the world—and there is much more that could be acclaimed—to show how the Lord uses them at will to bless and to curse, that it might not seem a thing incredible to now see two men walk upon the waters of Gennesaret. Jesus and Peter are about to defy the gravitational forces of nature and make the rolling waves and surging foam their footpath. Few miracles seem to excite such wonder and interest as does this one. And it is indeed such a miracle as is not elsewhere inscribed in the hearts of the saints, nor found in the records of the Lord's people, but it is one that accords with the manner and way in which Jesus—whether as Jehovah, or as a mortal, or as the Risen God—deals with the faithful. And it is one that we might expect of him who turns water into wine, who stills storms, and who has power over the elements.

"Be of Good Cheer; It Is I; Be Not Afraid"

(Matthew 14:24-33; Mark 6:47-52; JST Mark 6:50; John 6:16-21)

From the mountaintop where he prayed—shall we not rather say, communed and conversed—with his Father, Jesus saw the peril and strugglings of his beloved friends as they sought the safety of the western shore of the Galilean lake. They were seabound because he had "constrained" them so to travel. Their preference had been to remain with him and bask in the glory of that wondrous multiplying of five barley loaves and two small fish into a banquet that fed five thousand men, plus women and children, and yet left twelve baskets of uneaten food. His awareness of their plight must have come by the power of the Spirit rather than the natural eye, for they were more than four—perhaps were five or six—miles away. It was still night, and a tempestuous wind, blowing out of a darkened sky, was whipping the waves into a surging fury.

These noble souls who stood at Jesus' side, who believed his words and loved his law, who wrought miracles in his name, and who one day would bear witness of that blessed name before kings and rulers and before nations scarce then known to them—these chosen ones had embarked for Bethsaida and Capernaum, twin cities on the western shore of Galilee that shared a common harbor. Their seaborne journey, though not wholly a willing one, was at least one of obedient conformity to the Master's word. They had sailed in the calm of deepening dusk, only to encounter a storm of the night as the wild winds blew down the canyons and ravines and across the inland sea. Matthew says their "ship was . . . tossed with waves: for the wind was contrary." Mark says Jesus "saw them toiling in rowing," doing all in their power to avoid a disastrous shipwreck. And John says it was "dark, . . . And the sea arose by reason of a great wind that blew." In some eight or ten hours they traveled less than four miles from the shore.

Their peril was great. Even strong men cannot resist indefinitely the battering waves and the rolling power of a storm at sea. It was now the fourth watch of the night, sometime between three and six A.M. Jesus had left them to struggle and toil till their strength was spent. Now he came to the rescue. He came to them "walking on the sea"; his feet pressed on the crests of the waves; his weight was borne by the foaming liquid beneath his feet; it was as though the watery waves were a stone-set street. The iron swam when Elisha spoke; the waters of the Red Sea congealed at a word from Moses; the storm-tossed Sea of Galilee was as a dusty Galilean lane because Jesus willed it. He walked on the water—literally, actually, and in reality.

But even now he yet tests their faith by walking "as if he would have passed by them." "They all saw him, and were troubled." "It is a spirit," they said—and well might they so suppose, for since the world began there was no account of a mortal man, weighted down with flesh and bones and apparel, treading lightly on the waves of the sea. "They cried out for fear," as might be expected, for an added and unknown peril—a spirit from the unseen world—a peril beyond the winds and the waves with which they were acquainted, seemed more than they could then bear.

In answer to their cries Jesus spoke: "Be of good cheer," he said; "it is I; be not afraid."

Peter answered: "Lord if it be thou"—or better, 'Since it be thou'—bid me come unto thee on the water." A single word of response, spoken above the whistling wind and the noise of the boisterous waves beating against the ship, pierced the darkness and din of the storm: "Come." And come Peter did. He too walked on the water. Jesus and Peter were both supported by the liquid highway beneath them, a highway that surged and rolled as the wind-driven waves responded to the tempestuous forces that disturbed their calm.

"Over the vessel's side into the troubled waves he sprang, and while his eye was fixed on his Lord, the wind might toss his hair, and the spray might drench his robes, but all was well: but when, with wavering faith, he glanced from Him to the furious waves, and to the gulfy blackness underneath, then he began to sink, and in an accent of despair—how unlike his former confidence!—he faintly cried, 'Lord, save me!' Nor did Jesus fail. Instantly, with a smile of pity, He stretched out His hand, and grasped the hand of His drowning disciple, with the gentle rebuke, 'O thou of little faith, why didst thou doubt?' And so, his love satisfied, but His over-confidence rebuked, they climb—the Lord and His abashed Apostle—into the boat; and the wind lulled, and amid the ripple of the waves upon a moonlit shore, they were at the haven where they would be; and all—the crew as well as His disciples—were filled with deeper and deeper amazement, and some of them, addressing Him by a title which Nathanael alone [as far as the written record shows] had applied to Him before, exclaimed, 'Truly Thou art the Son of God.'" (Farrar, p. 313.)

Our synoptist authors tell us that when Jesus and Peter entered the ship, "the wind ceased," leaving us to believe that once again he stilled a Galilean storm with a word. At this point Matthew says: "Then they that were in the ship came and worshipped him, saying, Of a truth thou art the Son of God." We are left to conclude that those so doing were the sailors or other passengers, for the apostles had long since had such a witness in their souls. To the extent the chosen disciples joined in this worship, it was but a reaffirmation of that which they already knew, even as it is common among us to affirm and reaffirm our knowledge of the divine sonship of this same Holy Being.

Mark, however, says "they were sore amazed in themselves beyond measure, and wondered. For they considered not the miracle of the loaves: for their heart was hardened." It would appear that this amazement and wonder may have been the feelings of the disciples as well as the others who sailed in the battered bark. Why, in the light of all that has transpired in their lives, would there be a lingering strain of doubt and uncertainty in any disciple's mind? "The answer is found in the fact that the chosen disciples had not yet received the gift of the Holy Ghost. Though they were all pillars of spiritual strength and righteousness, save Judas only, yet 'the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God.' (1 Cor. 2:11.) Until the natural man becomes a new creature of the Holy Ghost, until man is born again, until his stony heart is touched by the Spirit of the living God, he cannot, by any power of his own, stand sure and steadfast in the cause of truth." (Commentary 1:348-49.)

It is no more difficult to believe that Jesus or Peter or any faithful person could walk on a tempestuous sea than it is to believe in any other miracle. "If, believing in God," as Farrar puts it, "we believe in a Divine Providence over the lives of men—and, believing in that Divine Providence, believe in the miraculous—and, believing in the miraculous, accept as truth the resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ—and, believing that resurrection, believe that He was indeed the Son of God—then, however deeply we may realise the beauty and the wonder and the power of natural laws, we realize yet more deeply the power of Him who holds those laws, and all which they have evolved, in the hollow of His hand; and to us the miraculous, when thus attested, will be in no way more stupendous than the natural, nor shall we find it an impossible conception that He who sent His Son to earth to die for us should have put all authority into His hand."

Continuing, Farrar gives this aptly expressed application of the miracle here recounted: "So then if, like Peter, we fix our eyes on Jesus, we too may walk triumphantly over the swelling waves of disbelief, and unterrified amid the rising winds of doubt; but if we turn away our eyes from Him in whom we have believed—if, as it is so easy to do, and as we are so much tempted to do, we look rather at the power and fury of those terrible and destructive elements than at Him who can help and save—then we too shall inevitably sink. Oh, if we feel, often and often, that the water-floods threaten to drown us, and the deep to swallow up the tossed vessel of our Church and Faith, may it again and again be granted us to hear amid the storm and the darkness, the voices prophesying war, those two sweetest of the Savior's utterances—

'Fear not. Only believe.' 'It is I. Be not afraid.'" [^1]

Jesus Heals in the Land of Gennesaret

(Matthew 14:34-36; Mark 6:53-56)

Gennesaret, meaning garden of riches, was a small region in Galilee, located on the western shore of the lake near Capernaum. It was also a city, perhaps Tiberias, south of Capernaum and Magdala. Rich soil and plenteous harvests supported a large population scattered in many villages and cities. It was here, apparently because the storm had driven them southward from their intended landing in the Capernaum-Bethsaida area, that Jesus and his disciples disembarked after the miracle of the walking on the sea. [^2]

Jesus and his party were well known, and almost immediately they were surrounded by believing and worshipful souls who sought to hear his words and feel his power. Messengers "ran through that whole region round about"; people everywhere heard of his presence; and believing multitudes hastened to him, carrying on pallets "those that were sick," and bringing to him "all that were diseased." It was a day of rejoicing and miracles. Those who were diseased and sick, so great was their faith, "besought him that they might only touch the hem of his garment," that their maladies might be cured. [^3] And they were blessed according to their desires, for "as many as touched were made perfectly whole."

Through all their villages and cities and country it was the same; the sick were placed in the streets where they needed but to touch the border of his garment to have health and vigor and cleanliness and strength surge anew through their diseased bodies. [^4] This day was a pleasing and blessed interlude between the storm of the night and the coming confrontation in the synagogue of Capernaum when hatred and opposition would spring forth even among many of those who had eaten the loaves and feasted on the fishes. And it is to the deep and profound teachings of that contentious scene that we shall next turn our attention—teachings that marked the turning point in the mortal ministry of the Mortal Messiah.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] He set the stage, prepared the way, and provided the symbolism that would enable him to teach, under circumstances in which none could ever forget his words, that there was an eternal bread, a spiritual food, a hidden manna, which men must eat to gain eternal life; and Nephi's related statement is, "feasting upon the word of Christ," such being the bread from heaven of which all men must eat if they are to hear the heavenly voice acclaim: "Ye shall have eternal life." (2 Ne. 31:20.)
[^2] He fanned the flames of Messianic expectancy into a raging fire—here at last was the Coming One who would feed them as Moses (so they supposed) had fed their fathers. "A few, doubtless, had worthier thoughts, but, to the mass, the Messiah's kingdom was as gross as Mahomet's paradise. They were to be gathered together into the garden of Eden, to eat, and drink, and satisfy themselves all their days, with houses of precious stones, beds of silk, and rivers flowing with wine, and spicy oil for all. It was that He might gain all this for them that they had wished to set Him up as king." (Geikie, pp. 516-17.) These words - "him hath God the Father sealed" - "which seem almost inexplicable in this connection," as Edersheim notes, "become clear when we remember that this was a well-known Jewish expression. According to the Rabbis. 'the seal of God was Truth.' . . . Thus the words of Christ would convey to His hearers that for the real meat, which would endure to eternal life - for the better Messianic banquet - they must come to Him, because God had impressed upon Him His own seal of truth, and so authenticated His Teaching and Mission." (Edersheim 2:28-29.)
[^3] "The idea of eating, as a metaphor for receiving spiritual benefit, was familiar to Christ's hearers, and was as readily understood as our expressions of 'devouring a book,' or 'drinking in' instruction. In Isaiah 3:1, the words 'the whole stay of bread,' were explained by the Rabbis as referring to their own teaching, and they laid it down as a rule, that wherever, in Ecclesiastes, allusion was made to food or drink, it meant study of the Law, and the practice of good works. It was a saying among them - 'In the time of the Messiah the Israelites will be fed by Him.' Nothing was more common in the schools and synagogues than the phrases of eating and drinking, in a metaphorical sense. 'Messiah is not likely to come to Israel,' said Hillel, 'for they have already eaten Him' - that is, greedily received His words - 'in the days of Hezekiah.' A current conventionalism in the synagogues was that the just would 'eat the Shekinah.' It was peculiar to the Jews to be taught in such metaphorical language. Their Rabbis never spoke in plain words." (Geikie, p. 519.)
[^4] "Moses had given them manna from heaven; Jesus as yet - they hinted - had only given them barley-loaves of earth. But if He were the true Messiah, was He not, according to all the legends of their nation, to enrich and crown them, and to banquet them on pomegranates from Eden, and 'a vineyard of red wine,' and upon the flesh of Behemoth and Leviathan, and the great bird Bar Juchne?" (Farrar, p. 317.)
