Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1980)

Chapter 58

The Sermon on the Bread of Life

And thou shalt remember all the way which the Lord thy God led thee these forty years in the wilderness, to humble thee, and to prove thee, to know what was in thine heart, whether thou wouldest keep his commandments, or no. And he humbled thee, and suffered thee to hunger, and fed thee with manna, which thou knewest not, neither did thy fathers know; that he might make thee know that man doth not live by bread only, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of the Lord doth man live. (Deut. 8:2-3.)

To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the hidden manna. (Rev. 2:17.)

Manna Is for All Men

Jesus is about to speak of "the hidden manna" which none but those who believe and obey shall ever taste. For forty years Israel ate manna—bread from heaven—which all men saw. This "manna was as coriander seed, and the colour thereof as the colour of bdellium." It fell as dew upon the camp of Israel, each night except the one preceding the Sabbath. The people gathered it in containers, ground it in mills, beat it in mortars, baked it in pans, and made cakes of bread. It tasted like fresh oil, was the staple diet of the people, and preserved them from famine and death. For twelve thousand days—six days a week, fifty-two weeks a year, for forty years—Israel ate manna to their hearts' content. "I will rain bread from heaven for you," Jehovah said: and rain it, he did, a rain of temporal food suited for the digestive processes of mortal people who must eat or die. (Ex. 16:4-36; Num. 11:4-9.)

And so Israel ate and lived—temporally. Among them, from time to time, were those who understood that their diet of heaven-sent bread came in similitude of a greater food, a "hidden manna," an unseen heavenly bread, of which men must eat if they are to be fed spiritually. As men die temporally for want of temporal bread, so they die spiritually for want of spiritual food.

Israel's daily diet of manna—and they collected enough on the sixth day to satisfy their needs on the Sabbath—was given not alone to feed their bellies, but to test them spiritually. It came to the people, to all of them, from the Lord—to prove them, to signify what was in their hearts, to establish whether they would keep the commandments or continue to walk after the manner of the Egyptians whose fleshpots they had forsaken to eat the manna of the wilderness. "Man does not live by bread only," Moses proclaimed. Let there be temporal bread lest there be temporal death. But man lives—spiritually and eternally—only when he feasts upon "hidden manna," when he lives "by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of the Lord." (Deut. 8:2-3.) [^1]

Jesus, not for twelve thousand consecutive days as did Jehovah to their fathers, but for one glorious meal, rained bread from heaven. He fed, not the millions in all the camps of ancient Israel, but a few, a mere five thousand men plus women and children, in an isolated place near Bethsaida-Julias. Yet in the miracle of the loaves and fishes was manifest the same gracious goodness shown forth upon all Israel anciently: (1) Food came to hungry mouths to satisfy their temporal needs; and (2) it was done to bear record of that heavenly bread, that hidden manna, that spiritual food, of which all men must eat if they are to gain eternal life. This meaning of the miracle is what Jesus is about to expound in a synagogue, in a wicked city, to Israelites whose rebellion and unbelief ranks with that of their fathers in Moses' day.

And as the Lord tested Israel by means of the ancient manna, so Jesus is about to test Jewish Israel by expounding the meaning of the miracle in which they had gained such a great initial feeling of rejoicing. He is going to see whether they will "keep his commandments, or no"; and as it was anciently, so shall it now be. A few will believe and obey; most of the people will seek only to glut their souls with the bread of the world, which sustains life among those who are carnal, sensual, and devilish. The things of the Spirit—spiritual food—is not for them, as they will soon attest.

Only yesterday on the green fields near Bethsaida-Julias, on the eastern side of the Lake of Gennesaret, Jesus the Messiah, doing what no mortal of himself had power to do, fed the multitude with temporal food. From the beginning of his ministry to that day his popular appeal had swept over the land as a flood. His doctrine and his deeds testified of his divinity. All men, save those whose hearts were bound by the chains of priestcraft, flocked to his standard and desired his help and blessings.

There was a tradition, taught by the Rabbis and firmly entrenched in the public mind, that when Messiah came, he would feed them with bread from heaven. "The miracle of the manna had become a subject of the proudest remembrances and the fondest legends of the nation. 'God,' says the Talmud, 'made manna to descend for them, in which were all manner of tastes. Every Israelite found in it what best pleased him. The young tasted bread, the old honey, and the children oil.' It had even become a fixed belief that the Messiah, when He came, would signalize His advent by a repetition of this stupendous miracle. 'As the first Saviour—the deliverer from Egyptian bondage,' said the Rabbis, 'caused manna to fall for Israel from heaven, so the second Saviour—the Messiah—will also cause manna to descend for them once more." (Geikie, pp. 516-17.)

Thus, when Jesus multiplied the five barley loaves and the two small fishes, it was as though the traditional sign had been given. The peak of his popular appeal had come. In their eyes he stood on the summit. He was the Messiah, they reasoned, and must reign as their king. They must take him by force, if need be, and install him as the Deliverer who would break the Gentile yoke, to say nothing of providing them with bread from heaven as it had been in the day of Moses. No doubt many of them had doubts and anxious moments as they reflected during the night on his utter refusal to receive the Messianic mantle proffered by them.

And so now in the synagogue in Capernaum—the synagogue built by the good centurion whose son was healed; the synagogue ruled by Jairus, whose daughter was raised from death; the synagogue upon whose "lintel has been discovered . . . the device of a pot of manna, ornamented with a flowing pattern of vine leaves and clusters of grapes" (Edersheim 2:29)—in this setting Jesus will teach them of the hidden manna of which the loaves and fishes were but a symbol. And here his popularity will plummet. This sermon will mark the parting of the ways between him and the people generally. Previous opposition centered primarily in the scribes and Pharisees, the Rabbis and rulers, the Sadducees and Herodians; now the generality of the people will harden their hearts against Him who refused to conform to their concept of a temporal ruler.

It is a day of sorrow and a day of crises. Indeed: "The dawn of that day broke on one of the saddest episodes of our Saviour's life. It was a day in the synagogue at Capernaum on which He deliberately scattered the mists and exhalations of such spurious popularity as the Miracle of the Loaves had gathered about His person and His work, and put not only His idle followers, but some even of His nearer disciples, to a test under which their love for Him entirely failed. That discourse in the synagogue forms a marked crisis in His career. It was followed by manifestations of surprised dislike which were as the first mutterings [among the people generally] of that storm of hatred and persecution which was henceforth to burst over His head." (Farrar, p. 315.)

Jesus Brings the Hidden Manna

(John 6:22-47; JST John 6:26-27, 40, 44)

By preparing a table in the wilderness where a hungering host was fed as though manna had again been rained from heaven, Jesus did two things:

Thus, as we have seen, they had, in the swelling emotion of the moment, sought to place a kingly crown upon that head whose only earthly crown was to be one of thorns. Their failure so to do sowed the seeds of doubt and dismay in many minds. Following this failure to start the rebellion against Rome that in their view would have led to the triumph of the Jews over all others, they had seen the disciples depart for the western shore in the only available boat. With some reluctance the excited multitude, at Jesus' behest, had themselves dispersed to seek lodging in the nearby cities and villages. Jesus, as they knew, had remained with them on the eastern side of the then placid waters, waters that would soon be whipped into a storm-tossed fury by the tempestuous winds of the night. When the morning came Jesus was gone. Later other boats came from Tiberias, and in them many of the people found passage back to Capernaum; others, no doubt, walked back to their home locales or continued as pilgrims, bound toward Jerusalem and their annual Passover.

Those who returned by the other boats must have numbered among them the Galileans who were more particularly offended by Jesus' refusal to accept a crown from their self-seeking hands. When they found him—apparently already in the synagogue—with an abruptness bordering on discourtesy, certainly with a demeanor lacking in civility, they asked: "Rabbi, when camest thou hither?"

That Jesus had spent the night communing with his Father; that he had walked on the fearful waves which all but sank the boat wherein the disciples rowed and struggled to stay afloat; that a sudden calm attended his entrance into the storm-tossed ship; that the blessed party had landed in the area of Gennesaret where multitudes flocked together to hear his words and feel his love; that messengers had run through all the region round about so their sick and diseased might be carried and brought to his presence; that he had healed them all, even those who but touched the hem of his garment—none of these things were as yet known to the harsh interrogators who had followed him in small boats from the fields where the table in the wilderness had been set, and where he had told them plainly that he would not be a judge and a divider over them in the temporal sense. Nor did Jesus feel any need to account to them for his goings and comings and his words and deeds. Waving their impertinent query aside, he answered:

Verily, verily, I say unto you, Ye seek me, not because ye desire to keep my sayings, neither because ye saw the miracles, but because ye did eat of the loaves and were filled.

Labor not for the meat which perisheth, but for that meat which endureth unto everlasting life, which the Son of Man hath power to give unto you; for him hath God the Father sealed.

As jackals devour their prey and are no longer ravished by the pangs of hunger; as wolves drink in the blood and gulp down the torn flesh of sheep to sate their ravenous appetites; and as oxen in their stalls are satisfied by the fodder put before them, so those who now confront Jesus had filled their bellies at his table and now desired to repeat the process.

'Give us corn without sowing, harvests without reaping, bread without baking. No longer need we labor at our oars and struggle with our nets when two small fish, at the Messiah's touch, will feed thousands. The Deliverer is here; he will feed us as Moses fed our fathers. Give us loaves and fishes forever, and in thy beneficent goodness add raisins and oil and wine to our diet. Surely we shall now feast more sumptuously than Herod himself.'

For them the whole point of the miracle of the loaves was lost. Their need was to keep his sayings, to feast upon the words of Christ, to drink from the Eternal Fountain. Loaves and fishes perish, but there is a food which is eternal, "which endureth unto everlasting life." This is the food he is prepared to give them; it is the everlasting word, the word of truth, the gospel of salvation. As the woman of Samaria was invited to drink living water and never thirst more; so they were invited to eat living bread and never hunger more. This bread was available, without money and without price, from the Son of Man, "for him hath God the Father sealed." Or in other words: "Him hath God the Father marked out or authenticated as his only Son; that is, he is the One, chosen, appointed, and openly approved (by unnumbered signs and evidences) to give the spiritual meat which endureth to everlasting life, for he is the Son of that holy Man who is the Father." (Commentary 1:351.) [^2]

That Jesus' words—profound and deep as we might at first blush assume them to be—were understood by his Jewish hearers is perfectly clear from their response. It was the practice of all the Rabbis to speak in metaphors, and all the people were extensively schooled in understanding their hidden sayings. [^3] Jesus' words meant, to them, that there was some added "labor" to be performed, something more than all the rituals and performances of their Mosaic system, if they were to gain eternal blessings. "What shall we do, that we might work the works of God?" they asked. 'What do you require of us more than we are already doing?'

His answer came back with all the authority and finality of Jehovah, speaking amid the fires and thunder of Sinai; his answering words were driven into their hearts with all the power of logic and divine wisdom. They were at the heart and core and center of true worship. There was indeed something more they must do; God their Father required it of them; it was, in fact, the very foundation upon which all else rested. He said:

This is the work of God, that ye believe on him whom he hath sent.

"Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved." (Acts 16:31.)

"If thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved." (Rom. 10:9.)

This is the work of God! "This is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.)

"Jesus Christ . . . hath abolished death, and hath brought life and immortality to light through the gospel." (2 Tim. 1:10.)

'Believe in Christ; believe that I am he; believe my gospel; give heed to the doctrines I have taught from Dan to Beersheba; this is the will of God concerning you.'

They knew the meaning of his words, but, in spite of all that had happened, they did not believe in their hearts that he was the one who would break the bands of death and bring life and immortality to all men. If he were what he claimed to be, let him prove his divinity. "What sign shewest thou then, that we may see, and believe thee? what dost thou work?" [^4] Let him expand the miracle of the loaves until it fulfilled their tradition of what the Messiah would do. What was one meal as compared to a continual diet of heavenly food? Their tradition was that their Messiah would bring again manna from heaven. "For, all that the first deliverer Moses had done, the second—Messiah—would also do. And here, over their Synagogue, was the pot of manna—symbol of what God had done, earnest of what the Messiah would do: that pot of manna, which was now among the things hidden, but which Elijah, when he came, would restore again!

"Here, then, was a real sign. In their view the events of yesterday must lead up to some such sign, if they had any real meaning. They had been told to believe on Him, as the One authenticated by God with the seal of truth, and Who would give them meat to eternal life. By what sign would Christ corroborate His assertion, that they might see and believe? What work would He do to vindicate His claim?" (Edersheim 2:29-30.)

"Our fathers did eat manna in the desert; as it is written, He gave them bread from heaven to eat," they said. (John 6:31.) "To understand the reasoning of the Jews, implied but not fully expressed, as also the answer of Jesus, it is necessary to bear in mind . . . that it was the oft and most anciently expressed opinion that, although God had given them this bread out of heaven, yet it was given through the merits of Moses, and ceased with his death." (Edersheim 2:30.)

Up to this point in this discussion, the name of Moses has not been used either by Jesus or the Jews—only a reference to the manna that came from God that all concerned knew to have been in the days of Moses. Jesus, however, aware of their tradition that the manna had come "through the merits of Moses," now affirms:

Verily, verily, I say unto you, Moses gave you not that bread from heaven; but my Father giveth you the true bread from heaven.

'Think not that Moses, through any merit of his own, gave manna to Israel; it was I, Jehovah, who so blessed my people. But now the Father himself, who is Lord above all, gives you the Eternal Bread.'

For the bread of God is he which cometh down from heaven, and giveth life unto the world.

Again we must be aware of the Jewish tradition. It was that though their fathers had eaten manna, such was a figure of something greater. In their view: "The real bread from heaven was the Law." (Edersheim 2:30.) And so again those in conversation with Jesus could not have done other than suppose he was offering them something in addition to what they already had, something in addition to the law of Moses with all its rituals and performances. If such newly offered bread was to give "life unto the world"—and be it remembered that he is the life and the light of men, and that it is his gospel which brings life and immortality to light—if the offered bread was to bring life, surely they wanted such a reward. And so they said: "Lord, evermore give us this bread." Then came the great pronouncement:

I am the bread of life: he that cometh to me shall never hunger; and he that believeth on me shall never thirst.

Salvation is in Christ; in one way or another the message goes forth. He is the bread that men must eat. They must feast upon his word. Those who do so shall be filled with the Holy Ghost.

But I said unto you, That ye also have seen me, and believe not.

O that they had believed in him! O that all men today might believe in him—believe in him as he is revealed and made known by the apostles and prophets whom he has sent forth to testify of his goodness and grace for this present day! And all who do believe shall receive the rewards of which he now speaks:

All that the Father giveth me shall come to me; and him that cometh to me I will in no wise cast out.

For I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me.

And this is the Father's will which hath sent me, that of all which he hath given me I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day.

And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one which seeth the Son, and believeth on him, may have everlasting life: and I will raise him up in the resurrection of the just.

Thus does Jesus bear testimony of his own divine Sonship and of that salvation which comes because of his atoning sacrifice. He is the Son of God. He came to do the will of the Father. All those who are given him by the Father shall be saved. All who believe in him shall have eternal life. He will raise them up in the resurrection of the just.

The testimony he bears is true; the witness he gives cannot be denied; the doctrine he teaches shall stand forever. How truth is flowing forth this day, direct from the great Fountain Head.

He looks! and ten thousands of angels rejoice, And myriads wait for his word; He speaks! and eternity, filled with his voice, Re-echoes the praise of the Lord. [^5]

But there are those who will not eat though the banquet tables are heaped high with the bounties of life; there are those who will not drink though the streams of living water overflow their banks; there are those who will not believe though God himself, by his own voice, teaches and testifies. Many of them are in Jairus's synagogue this day. They murmur; they complain; they find fault. They are offended because he said, "I am the bread which came down from heaven."

Above all, they are galled and embittered over his claim of divine Sonship. This always is the chief rock of offense and the main stone of stumbling for rebellious people. "Is not this Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know? how is it then that he saith, I come down from heaven?"

"Jesus never met these murmurs about His supposed parentage and place of birth by revealing to the common crowds the high mystery of His earthly origin." It sufficed for them to hear the witness borne that he was the Son of the Highest; let the details of his coming be reserved for those whose spiritual stature would enable them to receive the mysteries of godliness. These murmurings, as with all those that are forthcoming from rebellious people, were met "by a stronger, fuller, clearer declaration of the very truth which they rejected." (Farrar, p. 318.) To their seething sayings Jesus responded:

Murmur not among yourselves. No man can come unto me, except he doeth the will of my Father who hath sent me. And this is the will of him who hath sent me, that ye receive the Son; for the Father beareth record of him; and he who receiveth the testimony, and doeth the will of him who sent me, I will raise up in the resurrection of the just.

Again the witness borne is plain, clear, and without ambiguity. He is the Son of God, and he so certifies, both in metaphors that their Jewish training permits them to understand, and in plain words that their Jewish disbelief will not let them misunderstand. He continues:

It is written in the prophets, And they shall be all taught of God. Every man therefore that hath heard, and hath learned of the Father, cometh unto me.

'But ye receive not my Father, and shall not be found in his kingdom, for no man can receive the Father except he first receive the Son whom the Father hath sent. And ye shall be condemned by your own prophets, for they have written of the righteous, And they shall all be taught by God. Now ye are not taught by God, neither do ye know him, nor his truths, nor his laws, for ye receive not him whom the Father hath sent into the world. Every man therefore that heareth and believeth the words of the Son shall thereby come unto the Father also, and such shall be taught by the Holy Spirit sent forth from God to bear record of the Father and the Son.'

Not that any man hath seen the Father, save he which is of God, he hath seen the Father.

'Think not because the prophets have written of the righteous, And they shall all be taught of God, that ye shall see him or be taught by him, except ye repent and believe in the Son. For no man shall see the Father except the Son and he to whom the Son shall reveal him; yea, only those who are born of God shall see the Father, for no others can enter his presence.'

Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth on me hath everlasting life.

'Solemnly and soberly I say unto you, He that believeth in me as the very Son of God, and who receiveth my gospel, obeying all the laws and ordinances thereof, and who endureth in righteousness and truth unto the end, behold, he shall have everlasting life, which is exaltation in my Father's kingdom.' (Commentary 1:356.)

Eating His Flesh and Drinking His Blood

(John 6:48-59; JST John 6:48-50, 54-55)

We come now to the crowning teaching of the sermon on the bread of life, which is, that men are saved by eating the flesh and drinking the blood of the Son of God. With this proclamation, Jesus pushes back the walls of the synagogue so that his words go forth to all men on all the earth in all ages. His teachings are not alone for a handful of Galileans, not alone for the few million Jews who knew the meaning of the imagery used, but for all men of all nations no matter when or where they live. Eating the flesh and drinking the blood of Him who came down from heaven to shed his blood and mar his flesh is a mystery that can only be understood by the saints as they are enlightened by the power of the Spirit.

At this point in the sermon, Jesus raises the metaphors he is using—those figures of speech which suggest a resemblance of one thing to another—raises them into a gospel similitude. Our Jewish friends of old understood fully the metaphors—"the metaphors which Jesus used had not, to an educated Jew, one-hundredth part of the strangeness which they have to us" (Farrar, p. 319)—but these same Jewish religionists rejected outright the similitude which he offered them. We, on the other hand, with a little training can understand the imagery he uses, and we must accept and apply the similitude if we are to be saved. If we may be permitted to paraphrase the words of Paul relative to the eternal nature of the gospel, we might say: "For unto us was the gospel preached, as well as unto them: but the word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that heard it." (Heb. 4:2.) And so Jesus continues:

I am that bread of life. This is the bread which cometh down from heaven, that a man may eat thereof; and not die. Your fathers did eat manna in the wilderness, and are dead.

I am the living bread which came down from heaven: if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world.

The bread of life, of life eternal, living bread, the bread which came down from heaven—such is the language he uses to describe himself; and since his body is one of flesh and blood, to eat the heaven-sent bread, men must eat his flesh, the flesh he "will give for the life of the world," the flesh to be broken in his infinite and eternal atoning sacrifice. Knowing what Jesus' words meant but being wholly unable to understand how they applied to salvation and to the works they must do to gain eternal life, the Jews "strove among themselves, saying, How can this man give us his flesh to eat?" Then Jesus said:

Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you.

Whoso eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, hath eternal life; and I will raise him up in the resurrection of the just at the last day. For my flesh is meat indeed and my blood is drink indeed.

"To eat the flesh and drink the blood of the Son of God is, first, to accept him in the most literal and full sense, with no reservation whatever, as the personal offspring in the flesh of the Eternal Father; and, secondly, it is to keep the commandments of the Son by accepting his gospel, joining his Church, and enduring in obedience and righteousness unto the end. Those who by this course eat his flesh and drink his blood shall have eternal life, meaning exaltation in the highest heaven of the celestial world. Speaking of ancient Israel, for instance, Paul says: They 'did all eat the same spiritual meat; And did all drink the same spiritual drink: for they drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them: and that Rock was Christ.' (1 Cor. 10:3-4.)

"In the waters of baptism the saints take upon themselves the name of Christ (that is, they accept him fully and completely as the Son of God and the Savior of men), and they then covenant to keep his commandments and obey his laws. (Mosiah 18:7-10.) To keep his saints in constant remembrance of their obligation to accept and obey him—or in other words, to eat his flesh and drink his blood—the Lord has given them the sacramental ordinance. This ordinance, performed in remembrance of his broken flesh and spilled blood, is the means provided for men, formally and repeatedly, to assert their belief in the divinity of Christ, and to affirm their determination to serve him and keep his commandments; or, in other words, in this ordinance—in a spiritual, but not a literal sense—men eat his flesh and drink his blood. Hence, after instituting the sacramental ordinance among the Nephites, Jesus commanded: 'Ye shall not suffer any one knowingly to partake of my flesh and blood unworthily, when ye shall minister it; For whoso eateth and drinketh my flesh and blood unworthily eateth and drinketh damnation to his soul; therefore if ye know that a man is unworthy to eat and drink of my flesh and blood ye shall forbid him.' (3 Ne. 18:28-29.)" (Commentary 1:358-59.)

And then finally:

He that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, dwelleth in me, and I in him.

As the living Father hath sent me, and I live by the Father: so he that eateth me, even he shall live by me.

This is the bread which came down from heaven: not as your fathers did eat manna, and are dead: he that eateth of this bread shall live for ever.

The message is now delivered to the Jews and to us. The meaning is clear; the doctrine is strong; the effects of the teaching—either belief or disbelief; obedience or disobedience; eternal life or eternal death—such are now in the hands of those who have heard the message. And that the message may live anew in our hearts, we are commanded to go to the house of prayer on the Lord's day and there partake of the sacramental emblems, offered to us in similitude of the spilt blood and broken flesh of Him whose blood we must drink and whose flesh we must eat, if we are to be his and have life with him as he has life with his Father.

Jesus Winnows the Grain

(John 6:60-71; JST John 6:65)

"One mightier than I cometh," proclaimed the blessed Baptist. 'He comes to baptize with fire and confer the unspeakable gift of the Holy Ghost; to take away the sins of the world; to save and exalt the sons of men! He comes to preach the gospel to the poor; to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison doors to them that are bound! He comes to be lifted up upon the cross, and, even as he has been lifted up of men, to draw all men to him on conditions of repentance! He comes to seek that which is lost and to save all those who will believe his words and live his law.'

"One mightier than I cometh," is the divine word of our Lord's Elias. 'He comes not to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be saved. His reward is with him and his work before him. He is the Savior of all men, especially of those who believe; and all who believe in him, who feast upon his words, who keep his commandments—who eat his flesh and drink his blood—shall have eternal life.'

But he cannot save those who believe and obey without also damning those who disbelieve and disobey. If men are freed from sin and saved from eternal torment by obedience to his word, on the one hand, they are also left in the bondage of sin—bound by the chains of hell—by disobedience to his law, on the other. If they put off the natural man and become clean by the power of the Holy Ghost, they also remain carnal, sensual, and devilish if that sanctifying power never enters their souls. And so, though he came to save, with all the righteous being rewarded, the effect of his coming is that the wicked shall be damned because they are not saved.

And so: "One mightier than I cometh," saith the Baptist, "Whose fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his floor, and will gather the wheat into his garner; but the chaff he will burn with fire unquenchable." (Luke 3:16-17.)

The Coming One—Jesus, our Blessed Lord—has now come; and in this sermon on the bread of life, as never before in his ministry, he has taken the winnowing fan of judgment in his hand to blow the chaff from the wheat. He is sifting out the hearts of men before his judgment seat. The eternal harvest has begun and shall not cease until the threshing floor of the world is thoroughly purged, with every straw of chaff blown away, leaving only the wheat to be garnered into a heavenly granary. And the chaff he will burn with fire unquenchable! So prophesied the Baptist, and the fulfillment is a matter of record this day in Capernaum.

"The Baptist had spoken of the fan in the hand of his great successor: this discourse was the realization of the figure. Those who had hoped to find a popular political leader in Him saw their dreams melt away: those who had no true sympathy for His life and words had an excuse for leaving Him. None who were not bound to Him by sincere loyalty and devotion had any longer a motive for following Him. Fierce patriotism burning for insurrection, mean self-interest seeking worldly advantage, and vulgar curiosity craving excitement, were equally disappointed. It was the first vivid instance of 'the offence of the Cross'—henceforth to become the special stumbling-block of the nation.

"The wishes and hopes of the crowds who had called themselves disciples had proved self-deceptions. They expected from the Messiah quite other favors than the identity of spiritual nature symbolized by the eating of His flesh and drinking His blood. The bloody death implied in the metaphor was in direct contradiction to all their ideas. A lowly and suffering Messiah thus unmistakably set before them was revolting to their national pride and gross material tastes. 'We have heard out of the law,' said some, a little later, 'that the Christ abideth for ever, and how sayest thou the Son of man must be "lifted up"—that is, crucified?' 'That be far from Thee, Lord: this shall not be unto Thee,' said even Peter almost at the last, when he heard from his Master's lips of the Cross, so near at hand.

"The Messiah of popular conception would use force to establish His kingdom, but Jesus, while claiming the Messiahship, spoke only of self-sacrifice. Outward glory and material wealth were the national dream: he spoke only of inward purity. If He would not head them with Almighty power, to get Judea for the Jews, they would not have Him. Their idea of the kingdom of God was the exact opposite of His." (Geikie, p. 520.)

"There is a teaching which is, and is intended to be, not only instructive but probationary; of which the immediate purpose is not only to teach, but to test. Such had been the object of this memorable discourse. To comprehend it rightly required an effort not only of the understanding, but also of the will. It was meant to put an end to the merely selfish hopes of that 'rabble of obtrusive chiliasts' whose irreverent devotion was a mere cloak for worldliness; it was meant also to place before the Jewish authorities words which they were too full of hatred and materialism to understand. But its sifting power went deeper than this. Some even of the disciples found the saying harsh and repulsive." (Farrar, p. 321.)

"This is an hard saying; who can hear it?" said the disciples. 'Must we indeed forsake the law of Moses—which the Rabbis say is the bread which came down from heaven—and center all our hope of salvation in this One Man? Is he alone to replace all of the teachings and ordinances of our fathers? Must we forsake the whole past, feast upon his words, eat his flesh and drink his blood to gain eternal life? Is there no other way?'

Knowing "in himself that his disciples murmured" at his teachings, Jesus said: "Doth this offend you?" And offend them it did, for even they—even those who believed he was more than a man; who believed he was sent of the Father to teach truth and perform miracles; who believed that he was the One of whom Moses and the prophets had spoken—even they had not yet purged themselves of all their old Jewish notions about a temporal Messiah. Even they—receiving truth line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little, as all men must—even they were not prepared to turn away from Moses and the law and believe that salvation came in the person of the one who now invited them to eat his flesh and drink his blood.

Jesus' reaction to their unbelief—their lack of full conversion—was normal and what we have come to expect of him. He reaffirmed the truth of his sayings—there must be no wavering or doubt in any believer's mind—and spoke of even greater witnesses that were yet to come.

What and if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before?

'If ye cannot believe my sayings that I am the living Bread which came down from heaven to give life to men, what will ye think when ye see me ascend up into heaven to sit on the right hand of my Father and reign with almighty power forever?'

It is the spirit that quickeneth; the flesh profiteth nothing: the words that I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are life. But there are some of you that believe not.

'All these things which I have spoken unto you are spiritual and lead to eternal life, and they can only be understood by those who are spiritually enlightened. The Spirit must quicken your understanding if you are to comprehend the things of God. No man by his own intellect and reason can understand the things of the Spirit; the wisdom of the world, standing alone, profiteth nothing in comprehending the things of God. And there are some among you who rely on your own wisdom rather than the whisperings of the Spirit, and as a consequence some of you believe not my words.' (Commentary 1:362.)

At this point John, in whose writings alone are all these deep and wondrous sayings preserved, says by way of explanation: "For Jesus knew from the beginning who they were that believed not, and who should betray him." Jesus continues:

Therefore said I unto you, that no man can come unto me, except he doeth the will of my Father who hath sent me.

'And he said, It was for this reason that I said unto you, that no man can come unto me, except he doeth the will of my Father who hath sent me, for only those who do the will of my Father by keeping the commandments can receive the Spirit which shall bear record to them that all things which I have said about myself are true.' (Commentary 1:362.)

"From that time many of his disciples went back, and walked no more with him." The teaching which was intended to be not only instructive but also probationary had served its purpose. "By the simple expedient of teaching strong doctrine to the hosts who followed him, Jesus was able to separate the chaff from the wheat and choose out those who were worthy of membership in his earthly kingdom. . . . Unable to believe and accept his strong and plain assertions about eating his flesh and drinking his blood, even many classified as disciples fell away. And this process of sifting, trial, and testing was to continue with increasing intensity for the final climactic year of his mortal ministry." (Commentary 1:361.)

No doubt among the disciples who fell away were both believing investigators and those who had committed themselves by covenant, made in the waters of baptism, to love and serve him all their days. The test of strong doctrine is given to truth seekers both before and after they enter the Church. "This testing and sifting process has ever been part of the Lord's system. Men have been placed on earth to be tried and tested, 'to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them.' (Abr. 3:25.) After they accept the gospel and join the Church, this testing process continues, indeed, is often intensified. 'I have decreed in my heart, saith the Lord, that I will prove you in all things, whether you will abide in my covenant, even unto death, that you may be found worthy. For if ye will not abide in my covenant ye are not worthy of me.' (D&C 98:14-15.)" (Commentary 1:361.) [^6]

"And so this was the great crisis in the History of the Christ. We have traced the gradual growth and development of the popular movement, till the murder of the Baptist stirred popular feeling to its inmost depth. With his death it seemed as if the Messianic hope, awakened by his preaching and testimony to Christ, were fading from view. It was a terrible disappointment, not easily borne. Now must it be decided, whether Jesus was really the Messiah. His Works, notwithstanding what the Pharisees said, seemed to prove it. Then let it appear; let it come, stroke upon stroke—each louder and more effective than the other—till the land rang with the shout of victory and the world itself re-echoed it. And so it seemed. That miraculous feeding—that wilderness cry of Hosanna to the Galilean King-Messiah from the thousands of Galilean voices—what were they but its beginning?

"All the greater was the disappointment: first, in the repression of the movement—so to speak, the retreat of the Messiah, His voluntary abdication, rather, His defeat; then, next day [or shortly thereafter, as we shall set forth in chapter 59], the incongruousness of a King, Whose few unlearned followers, in their ignorance and un-Jewish neglect of most sacred ordinances, outraged every Jewish feeling, and whose conduct was even vindicated by their Master in a general attack on all traditionalism, that basis of Judaism—as it might be represented, to the contempt of religion and even of common truthfulness in the denunciation of solemn vows! This was not the Messiah Whom the many—nay, Whom almost any—would own.

"Here, then, we are at the parting of the two ways; and, just because it was the hour of decision, did Christ so clearly set forth the highest truths concerning Himself, in opposition to the views which the multitude entertained about the Messiah." (Edersheim 2:35-36.)

"Then said Jesus unto the twelve, Will ye also go away? Then Simon Peter answered him, Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast the words of eternal life. And we believe and are sure that thou art that Christ, the Son of the living God."

Peter knew; the Twelve knew (Judas only, perhaps, excepted); Mary Magdalene, who is identified by name as a traveling companion of Jesus and the Twelve, knew; many other disciples, both men and women, knew—and their knowledge came by revelation from the Holy Spirit of God. Only those who have the testimony of Jesus, which is the spirit of prophecy; only those who are in tune with the Infinite by the power of the Spirit; only those whose souls are alive with the light and truth of heaven, who hunger and thirst after righteousness, who love the Lord and keep his commandments—these only can withstand the buffetings and trials of life and drink in the strong doctrine that saves souls.

"Thou hast the words of eternal life." The words of light and truth which chart the course and mark the way—these come from Christ. These words, and these only lead to eternal life in his Father's kingdom. Only those—having opportunity so to do—who believe the words of eternal life in this world shall gain eternal glory in the world to come.

"We believe and are sure." 'Our testimony comes by the power of the Spirit. Doubt and uncertainty are as foreign to us as the gibberish of alien tongues. The voice of the Spirit has spoken to our spirits. We are sure. There is absolute certainty in our souls.'

"Thou art that Christ, the Son of the living God." 'Whatever notions the dissembling multitude may have about a Messiah and Deliverer who wears a coat of armor and wields a sword of vengeance; whatever the hungering hosts may believe as to a Messiah who will feed us daily from heaven as our fathers were fed; however others may choose to follow the traditions of the past and adhere to the letter of a dead law, rather than believe that salvation comes by you—no matter what others say or do, to us thou art "that Christ" who of old was promised, who is "the Son of the living God."'

"Lord, to whom shall we go?" How well Peter spoke! Where else can true disciples ever go to find peace in this life and a hope of eternal life in the world to come? The truth is with the saints; the gospel saves; light and revelation are shed forth upon the Lord's people. Where can a dissembling disciple go but to darkness and death and damnation?

"It is thus, also, that many of us, whose thoughts may have been sorely tossed, and whose foundations terribly assailed, may have found our first resting-place in the assured, unassailable spiritual experience of the past. Whither can we go for Words of Eternal Life, if not to Christ? If He fails us, then all hope of the Eternal is gone. But He has the Words of Eternal life—and we believed when they first came to us; nay, we know that He is the Holy One of God. And this conveys all that faith needs for further learning. The rest will He show, when He is transfigured in our sight." (Edersheim 2:36.)

Then, as a sad denouement to a sermon that had severed the sunshine disciples and the fair-weather friends from those who were steeled to withstand the storms of life, Jesus said: "Have not I chosen you twelve, and one of you is a devil?" And then our apostolic author adds: "He spake of Judas Iscariot the son of Simon: for he it was that should betray him, being one of the twelve."

From this hour our Lord's life was charted in the course leading to the cross. Heretofore the common people had heard him gladly, however much their teachers and rulers had assailed his teachings and ridiculed his miracles. Now he was sifting out the hearts of men—believers and unbelievers alike—and most were failing the test. "The greater the popular expectancy and disappointment had been, the greater the reaction and the enmity that followed. The hour of decision was past, and the hand on the dial pointed to the hour of His Death." (Edersheim 2:36.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] They said, falsely, that he was a sinner. 2 Cor. 6:15.
[^2] They said, falsely, that he performed his miracles by the power of Beelzebub—nay, more, that he was the Incarnation of Satan. See the companion volume to this work: The Promised Messiah - The First Coming of Christ.
[^3] They said, falsely, that he was guilty of blasphemy in claiming equality with God; in testifying that he was the Son of the living God; in teaching that he was God. This concept that the traditions of the elders supersede, are greater than, and take precedence over the word of God is, in my judgment, the devil's substitute for the true doctrine that the inspired utterances of living oracles are binding upon the Lord's people and have equal standing with the written word. This true doctrine is predicated upon the fact that inspired men speak as moved upon by the Holy Ghost, which, of course, is precisely and exactly what happens when prophets give forth that which we call scripture. The traditions of the elders - as is also the case with the traditions of an apostate Christendom - are wholly devoid of the least scintilla of inspiration. They are, as Jesus said, "the commandments of men." As I have written elsewhere: "This same process of transforming truth into traditions - of changing the law of God into 'the doctrines and commandments of men,' by the interpretations and additions of uninspired teachers - is precisely what took place in the great apostasy of the Christian Era. To the pure and simple doctrines of Christ, the scribes and priests of early Christendom added such things as: selling indulgences, which freed the wicked from past sins and authorized them to commit future crimes without divine penalty; forgiving sins (supposedly) through repeated and perfunctory confessions; praying departed persons out of purgatory; burning candles for the dead; praying to Mary or other so-called saints, rather than to the Lord, worshiping of images; turning of sacramental emblems into the literal flesh and blood of Jesus (transubstantiation); laying up a reservoir of good works in heaven which the so-called Church can sell to those who need them (supererogation); sacrificing Jesus over again in the mass; forbidding priests and other church officials to marry; doing penance to gain forgiveness of sins; adorning houses of worship with costly materials; wearing of expensive robes and costumes by priests and other church officers; using elaborate ministerial titles; augmenting the Church treasury by gambling; and so forth. "All these, and many other like traditions, are counted of more importance by some than the law of God as originally given by the Master. Indeed, the so-called Christian Church today is founded in large part on the traditions of the 'elders' rather than on the revelations of heaven." (Commentary 1:366-67.)
[^4] Isaiah's words as found in our Old Testament read: "Forasmuch as this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honour me, but have removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men: Therefore, behold, I will proceed to do a marvelous work among this people, even a marvelous work and a wonder." (Isa. 29:13-14.) In his confrontation on cleanliness Jesus obviously targumed a portion of Isaiah's words and applied them to the scribes and Pharisees and their followers. The intended glorious fulfillment of the words of Israel's ancient seer was, of course, reserved for the latter days when the gospel would be restored for the final time. Jesus' use of the passage here illustrates perfectly the principle that many prophetic utterances have dual or multiple instances of fulfillment. When he appeared with his Father to usher in the dispensation of the fulness of times, the Lord Jesus said to his latter-day prophet that the modern "professors" of religion - the modern scribes and Pharisees, as it were - "were all corrupt," and that "they draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me, they teach for doctrines the commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof." (JS-H 1:219.) "There is no salvation in worship as such, even though it be directed to the true God; worship based on false principles is in vain. Men may worship Deity their whole life long, according to their traditions and rituals, and never gain true faith, forgiveness of sin, or sanctifying grace. Worship leads to salvation only when it conforms to the revealed, divine pattern, only when it is based on the rock foundation of eternal truth. 'Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven.' (Matt. 7:21.) There is no salvation in false worship." (Commentary 1:368.)
[^5] Those who truly honor their parents, in the full gospel sense, shall in fact dwell forever upon their promised land, for the meek shall inherit the earth forever in the celestial day. (D&C 88:17.)
[^6] "In this dispensation, the promulgation of the law of plural marriage had an effect similar to the presentation of the doctrine of the Bread of Life in the meridian dispensation. Opposition from without the Church increased, while some unstable members of the kingdom itself found themselves unable to accept the fulness of the revealed program of the Lord. There were many important reasons why the Lord revealed the doctrine of plurality of wives. But if plural marriage had served no other purpose than to sift the chaff from the wheat, than to keep the unstable and semi-faithful people from the fulness of gospel blessings, it would have been more than justified." (Commentary 1:361-62.)
