Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1980)

Chapter 59

The Discourse upon Cleanliness

The Jews were a stiffnecked people; . . . because of their blindness, which blindness came by looking beyond the mark, they must needs fall. (Jacob 4:14.)

Because of priestcrafts and iniquities, they at Jerusalem will stiffen their necks against him, that he be crucified. (2 Ne. 10:5.)

Priestcrafts are that men preach and set themselves up for a light unto the world, that they may get gain and praise of the world: but they seek not the welfare of Zion. (2 Ne. 26:29.)

"What Concord Hath Christ with Belial?" [^1]

It is the hour of the third Passover—the third Passover time during the ministry of the Mortal Messiah when all the sons of the law are commanded to go up to Jerusalem and appear before the Lord in his holy house.

It is the set time for all Israel to eat a paschal lamb, every family by itself apart—in remembrance of their deliverance from the bondage of Egypt; as a token that they have forsaken the world and chosen to live apart from other nations, as a people dedicated to the service of Jehovah; and in similitude of the promised sacrifice of the Lamb of God who cometh to take away the sins of the world.

It is the appointed time for the chosen people to renew their covenants with Jehovah, to pledge anew their allegiance to the God of their fathers, and to step forth in a newness of life. Out of these eight days—the days of the Feast of the Passover and of the Feast of Unleavened Bread—will come a renewed determination to honor Moses and keep his law; and with this refurbishing of the Israelite way of life will come also a reborn determination to oppose every force or person that challenges their law and threatens their traditions.

There is no indication that Jesus went from Capernaum to Jerusalem with the zealous throngs of Galilean pilgrims. Apparently he did not because it was a time when the Jews sought to kill him, nor can we tell whether the Twelve took leave of the Master or not, whether they went to the City of the Great King to keep the not-yet-fulfilled law of Moses. But this much seems clear: After this Passover the rulers from Jerusalem—who heretofore had appointed spies and informers to dog his every footstep and overhear his every word—these priest-ridden rulers now sent new delegations to spy and to confront and to contend. Their zeal to oppose that which threatened their craft had been reborn in the emotion and worship at the Passover.

And so it is also an hour of sorrow and darkness—an hour in which the sifting process begun with the sermon on the bread of life will continue, will, indeed, rise in a mighty crescendo until, a year hence, a chorus of cries will chant "Crucify him, crucify him," and will contaminate forever the land and the people.

It is also an hour of crises, of the parting of the ways, of the division of a people. Heretofore virulence and hatred have been somewhat limited; only the rulers of the people have thirsted for his blood. Now the spirit of darkness and death is beginning to brood over whole cities and areas; whole multitudes are infected with the virus of apostasy and persecution and destruction. It is an hour when we shall see tribes and congregations, blinded by priestcrafts and looking beyond the mark, join with their rulers to oppose the Cause of truth and righteousness.

"Looking beyond the mark!" Such was the sin of the whole nation. Preserved from Egyptian bondage by the miracle at the Red Sea; born as a people during forty years of wilderness wanderings; entering their promised land when Joshua led them over Jordan; serving Jehovah as directed by their judges and prophets, Israel, the chosen seed, had been bathed in the light and revelation of heaven. They once knew the will of Jehovah; they once had the law of Moses in all its beauty and perfection; they once walked as pleased their Maker. But now—after the Babylonian captivity; after the long night of alien domination; after a long period without revelation; after an apostate era in which traditions and legends had become more important than the eternal word recorded in their scriptures—now after such a period, they were looking beyond the mark. They had added to the ancient law a maze of tradition and legend. They had created ordinances and performances and rituals that had no foundation in revealed writ. They were doing more than need be done in the way of rituals and performances. Like Madab and Abihu they were offering strange fires upon their altars. They were looking beyond the mark; salvation did not come in the way they supposed; it was not the outgrowth of their ritualistic absurdities; it came in a much easier and simpler way.

"I press toward the mark," Paul says, "for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus." (Philip. 3:14.) That too was all that the Jews needed to do; they must center their affection on the Messiah who ministered among them, not on the myriad ordinances and performances that had been added to what Moses gave them.

"Priestcrafts and iniquities!" These were at the root of their problem. Their rulers had developed an oral law that surpassed in importance the word of Jehovah given on Sinai; traditions became more important than truth; and personal righteousness faded away. It was an hour when men loved darkness rather than light because their deeds were evil. Priestcrafts and iniquities! It was an hour of persecution and rebellion, of darkness and dire days ahead.

Persecution is one of the chief weapons in the hands of false priests; they use it to preserve their false religions. Truth stands on its own; error must be defended by the sword. False ministers fear the truth because by it their crafts are in danger. They practice priestcrafts to get gain and the praise of the world, neither of which will be theirs if true religion sweeps them into a deserved oblivion. It is with them as it was with Demetrius, the silversmith, who made silver shrines for the worship of Diana. When Paul preached the gospel in Ephesus, "saying that they be no gods, which are made with hands," Demetrius responded by proclaiming that by such teaching, "not only this our craft is in danger to be set at nought; but also that the temple of the great goddess Diana should be despised, and her magnificence should be destroyed, whom all Asia and the world worshippeth." (Acts 19:21-41.) Similarly, if Jesus' new and revolutionary doctrines prevail, what would become of the priests and Levites? If publicans and fishermen become the new preachers, what of the scribes and Rabbis?

Persecutors can always justify—in their own minds—their own destructive courses. Those who raised their voices against Jesus; who testified falsely of his teachings; who sought to destroy his influence with the people—all such were doing what seemed right to them in their own minds. Nearly all propositions can be sustained to some extent or other, with arguments and reasons, when intellectuality and not spirituality is the governing standard.

With reference to Jesus, the question, then, is not simply "Why was he persecuted?"—for the basic answer to that is the evil that dwelt in the hearts of the people—but, "How did they rationalize their conduct? What intellectual reasons did they give to make it seem that what they were doing was the will of him whom they supposed they worshipped?" From the Jewish standpoint, Jesus was persecuted—and finally slain—for what were, to them, three perfectly valid reasons:

This is, in fact, a perfectly valid premise, not for persecution but at least for rejection. Nothing justifies persecution; but if he were a sinner, he could not be the Messiah, the Holy One of Israel, the one sent of God to deliver his people. The Messianic prophecies foretold of a Messiah in whose mouth there would be no deceit; who would bring truth and light and gospel knowledge to his people; who would qualify as a light and a guide to all men. [^2] If Jesus was a deceiver; if he was misleading the people; if his doctrine would damn rather than save—then he must be unmasked; his lies must be revealed; his iniquities must be made manifest. And it was then the duty of the Sanhedrin to bring his hidden evils and his false doctrines to light.

There is no question about the concept that the Messiah would rise above carnal things and not wallow in the mire of iniquity. The issue at hand was whether Jesus himself was a sinner or not. One day soon, facing this problem squarely, and aware of his own sinless life, he will issue the challenge, "Which of you convinceth me of sin?" (John 8:46.) At this point we need only recount why they contended he was a sinner, and the mere recitation of their reasons will suffice for us—though, in fairness, we must admit, not for them—to show the shallow and baseless nature of their reasoning.

There were some minor complaints that he was a glutton and a winebibber, because he ate and drank as others did; there was the charge that he and his disciples did not abide by the Pharisaic law of the fast; and there was considerable murmuring because he consorted with publicans and sinners, eating with them in their banquets, calling a prominent publican as one of the Twelve, and permitting a fallen woman to anoint his feet with oil. But all of this was of no great moment, and certainly would not suffice to raise a public hue and cry against him.

There were, however, two major activities that incensed and enraged the rulers of the people and the molders of public opinion. Both of these were violations of their traditions—not of any basic laws imposed by Deity, but the traditions of the elders—and both, in the eyes of the people, warranted the death penalty. One was his repeated Sabbath violations, as they supposed, and the other was the matter of eating with unwashen hands and the many formalities related thereto.

As to his Sabbath violations, and those of the disciples, we have already noted some of the traditions involved and have seen the discomfiture of his detractors when they challenged his conduct and that of his disciples. While passing through a field of corn on the Sabbath, the disciples plucked some ripened ears, rubbed them in their hands, and blew away the chaff. These acts—considered to be both reaping and threshing—were so criminally offensive and of such a magnitude in Jewish eyes as to call for the death penalty. Jesus defended his disciples by citing the case of David eating the shewbread and announcing that "the sabbath was made for man, and not man for the sabbath," and that the "Son of man is Lord even of the sabbath." (Mark 2:27-28.)

Many times Jesus himself sought occasion to perform miraculous healings on their holy day, as when, at the second Passover, he healed the impotent man at the pool of Bethesda, an act that so enraged the Jews that they sought to kill him; or, as on the occasion in the Galilean synagogue when the question was asked: 'Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath days?" and he responded by asking, "Is it lawful to do good on the sabbath days, or to do evil? to save life, or to kill?" and by then saying to a man with a withered hand, "Stretch forth thine hand. And he stretched it out: and his hand was restored whole as the other." (Mark 3:2, 4-5.) And again the Pharisees sought how they might destroy him. In these and other like incidents, as we have seen, it was the violation of the Rabbi-imposed traditions relative to the Sabbath that brought down the wrath of Jewry upon the head of Jesus.

As to the matters of eating with unwashen hands and of avoiding responsibility for parental care by saying, "It is corban," we are about to see the depths to which ritualistic religion can sink. And this time we shall also see an open, almost defiant, break with the whole body of ritualistic absurdities imposed in the name of tradition.

"They accounted for the miracles of Christ as wrought by the power of Satan, whose special representative—almost incarnation—they declared Jesus to be. This would not only turn the evidential force of these signs into an argument against Christ, but vindicate the resistance of the Pharisees to His claims." (Edersheim 2:8.) But, as we have also seen, Satan cannot cast out Satan, for a house divided against itself will fall, and the imputation of satanic power still leaves all men with the need to decide whether the Holy Ghost or Satan spake by Jesus' mouth. That each person must determine this for himself is what life is all about; such is the very nature of this probationary estate.

As to this crowning charge we shall have more, much more, to say hereafter. It lies at the heart and core of revealed religion. If our witness is true that he is God's Almighty Son, then salvation is in Christ and his is the only name given under heaven whereby salvation comes. If our witness—and his—is false, and thus blasphemous, then Christianity is a monstrous fraud and fallen man remains unredeemed. If our witness is false, man is still in his sins; there is no reconciliation with God; and the man sick of the palsy to whom he said, "Son, be of good cheer; thy sins be forgiven thee" (Matt. 9:2), remains as sin-stained as he ever was; and, for that matter, if our witness is false, this paralytic did not arise, take up his bed, and go to his own house.

For the present we need only observe that this "last charge against Jesus, which finally decided the action of the Council, could only be fully made at the close of His career. It might be formulated so as to meet the views of either the Pharisees or Sadducees. To the former it might be presented as a blasphemous claim to equality with God—the Very Son of the Living God. To the Sadducees it would appear as a movement on the part of a most dangerous enthusiast—if honest and self-deceived, all the more dangerous; one of those pseudo-Messiahs who led away the ignorant, superstitious, and excitable people; and which, if unchecked, would result in persecutions and terrible vengeance by the Romans, and in loss of the last remnants of their national independence." (Edersheim 2:8-9.)

And so, as we attune our ears to hear the discourse on cleanliness, we are reminded that Jesus has already begun the harvesting process. It started with the sermon on the bread of life. He is winnowing the grain, sifting the chaff from the wheat, garnering the wheat into the granaries of the Lord, and preparing the chaff for fire unquenchable. In the discourse on cleanliness he will identify the chaff, and, sorrowfully, it will consist of the generality of the people. But, joyfully, the harvested wheat, now free from husks and chaff, shall soon go on to the safety and security of the eternal granaries.

Will not Jesus on this day say to the faithful, as it were: "Be ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers: for what fellowship hath righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion hath light with darkness? And what concord hath Christ with Belial? or what part hath he that believeth with an infidel? And what agreement hath the temple of God with idols?" (2 Cor. 6:14-16.) The saints of the living God must come out of Babylon, separate themselves from the world, and be saints indeed. The foundations have lone since been laid and it no longer suffices for believing disciples to stand with one foot on the sands of tradition and the other on the rock of revealed truth. The house of the Lord, if it is to stand forever, must be built on the rock of eternal truth and upon no other foundation.

The Ceremonial Washings of Rabbinism

(Mark 7:1-8; JST Mark 7:4, 7; Matthew 15:1-2, 7-9; JST Matthew 15:8)

Heretofore—with some inward revulsion—we have seen what the ritualistic robots of Rabbinism did to the Sabbath day. We have seen how they turned a day of freedom and worship and rejoicing into one of Rabbinical rules and restrictions. No longer were the Jews free to worship the Lord their God with a clear conscience on this holy day. Rather, the restrictions were so rigid, the controls so complete, the prohibitions so profuse, that it was as though man had been made for the Sabbath. Their failures on that day—for no man could keep all of the restrictions involved—created a great guilt complex over the whole nation. In some respects—for them—it was providential that the Sabbath came only one day in seven.

Now—again with some inward revulsion—we turn our attention to the ceremonial washings of Rabbinism; to the daily, almost hourly, ritualistic ablutions which alone, as they supposed, kept uncleanness from their doors. Man cannot eat with unwashen hands and be saved; judgment, mercy, and truth are as nothing compared to the Levitical lavings of the body; ceremonial washings are more important than keeping the commandments! So said the Rabbis, and such were the traditions of the elders, as we shall now see.

It is the time of the third Passover—April of A.D. 29—the time when the people are being refreshed spiritually and built up anew in religious zeal. There is not the slightest intimation that Jesus himself went to Jerusalem to appear before the Lord in his holy house, as he had done twice before during his ministry, and as he will do a year hence when he is to be sacrificed as the eternal Paschal Lamb. Whether the Twelve and the inner circle of disciples went by themselves is questionable. The Passover season was one of three festive occasions during the year when every adult male was expected to worship the Lord in the Holy City, but Jesus and his disciples are now openly breaking with the traditions of the past. It is logical to assume they chose not to face the mob spirit that would have confronted them within the hallowed walls of Herod's Temple.

That the Galileans attending the Passover gave firsthand accounts of our Lord's recent teachings and miracles we cannot doubt. His earlier teachings and miracles would have been well known. But now among all the millions of Passover pilgrims word would have soon spread of the feeding of the five thousand, the walking on the water, the healings in the land of Gennesaret, and the sermon on the bread of life. On previous occasions the chief priests and religious leaders had sent deputations to spy and harass. They must do so again. The prior assaults had been based on claims of Sabbath violations and had carried the charge that he cast out devils and performed miracles by the power of Satan. These assaults had failed. Now they would charge those of the New Order with eating when ceremonially unclean.

As to this ceremonial uncleanness, Mark says simply: "For the Pharisees, and all the Jews, except they wash their hands oft, eat not, holding the tradition of the elders. And when they come from the market, except they wash their bodies, they eat not. And many other things there be, which they have received to hold, as the washing of cups, and pots, brasen vessels, and of tables."

As with the restrictions relative to the Sabbath, so with their ceremonial washings, volumes could be written reciting the policies procedures, and absurdities involved. We shall, however, simply sample the source material. It will suffice for our purposes to know that failure to comply with these ceremonial washings ranked with apostasy and murder in criminality. Those so offending were deserving of death in the Rabbinical view, and to openly defy and challenge such sacred ceremonies created an impasse and raised an issue that was not subject to mediation. People either kept the traditions of the elders and retained their Jewish standing, or, failing so to do, they joined the degenerate Gentiles and traveled an irreversible course to a heathen hell.

"The law of Moses required purifications in certain cases, but the Rabbis had perverted the spirit of Leviticus in this, as in other things, for they taught that food and drink could not be taken with a good conscience when there was the possibility of ceremonial defilement. If every conceivable precaution had not been taken, the person or the vessel used might have contracted impurity, which would thus be conveyed to the food, and through the food to the body, and by it to the soul. Hence it had been long a custom, and latterly a strict law, that before every meal not only the hands but even the dishes, couches, and tables should be scrupulously washed.

"The legal washing of the hands before eating was especially sacred to the Rabbinist; not to do so was a crime as great as to eat the flesh of swine. 'He who neglects hand-washing,' says the book Sohar, 'deserves to be punished here and hereafter.' 'He is to be destroyed out of the world, for in hand-washing is contained the secret of the ten commandments.' 'He is guilty of death.' 'Three sins bring poverty after them,' says the Mishnah, 'and to slight hand-washing is one.' 'He who eats bread without hand-washing,' says Rabbi Jose, 'is as if he went in to a harlot.' The later Schulchan Aruch, enumerates twenty-six rules for this rite in the morning alone. It is better to go four miles to water than to incur guilt by neglecting hand-washing,' says the Talmud. 'He who does not wash his hands after eating,' it says, 'is as bad as a murderer.' The devil Schibta sits on unwashed hands and on the bread. It was a special mark of the Pharisees that 'they ate their daily bread with due purification,' and to neglect doing so was to be despised as unclean. . . .

"The Talmud maintains that 'any one living in the land of Israel, eating his daily food in purification, speaking the Hebrew of the day, and [engaging in] morning and evening praying duly with the phylacteries, is certain that he will eat bread in the kingdom of God.'

"It was laid down that the hands were first to be washed clean. The tips of the ten fingers were then joined and lifted up so that the water ran down to the elbows, then turned down so that it might run off to the ground. Fresh water was poured on them as they were lifted up, and twice again as they hung down. The washing itself was to be done by rubbing the fist of one hand in the hollow of the other. When the hands were washed before eating they must be held upwards; when after it, downwards, but so that the water should not run beyond the knuckles. The vessel used must be held first in the right, then in the left hand; the water was to be poured first on the right, then on the left hand, and at every third time the words repeated, 'Blessed art Thou who hast given us the command to wash the hands.' It was keenly disputed whether the cup of blessing or the hand-washing should come first; whether the towel used should be laid on the table or on the couch; and whether the table was to be cleared before the final washing or after it.

"This anxious trifling over the infinitely little was, however, only part of a system. If a Pharisee proposed to eat common food, it was enough that the hands were washed by water poured on them. Before eating Terumah—the holy tithes and the shew-bread—they must be dipped completely in the water, and before the portions of the holy offerings could be tasted, a bath must be taken. Hand-washing before prayer, or touching anything in the morning, was as rigidly observed, for evil spirits might have defiled the hands in the night. To touch the mouth, nose, ear, eyes, or the one hand with the other, before the rite, was to incur the risk of disease in the part touched. The occasions that demanded the observance were countless: it must be done even after cutting the nails, or killing a flea. The more water used, the more piety. 'He who uses abundant water for hand-washing,' says R. Chasda, 'will have abundant riches.' If one had not been out it was enough to pour water on the hands; but one coming in from without needed to plunge his hands into the water, for he knew not what uncleanness might have been near him while in the streets, and this plunging could not be done except in a spot where there were not less than sixty gallons of water.

"The same scrupulous, superstitious minuteness extended to possible defilements of all the household details of daily life. Dishes, hollow or flat, of whatever material, knives, tables, and couches, were constantly subjected to purifications, lest they should have contracted any Levitical defilement by being used by some one unclean." (Geikie, pp. 524-26.)

This digest of a portion of the rules governing ceremonial washings sets the scene and enables us to understand the significance of Mark's account of the confrontation on cleanliness. Scribes and Pharisees came to Jesus from Jerusalem. They had heard how he fed five thousand men with five barley loaves and two small fish, how the whole multitude was filled, how there were twelve baskets of fragments remaining, and how—O horrible thought!—the people had not washed their hands both before and after the miraculously supplied repast. How can this miracle be of God, they reasoned, when He who performed it did not also require the proper ceremonial washings!

And further, as these Judeans now "saw some of his disciples eat bread with defiled, that is to say, with unwashen, hands," as Mark says, "they found fault" yet again. "Why walk not thy disciples according to the tradition of the elders, but eat bread with unwashen hands?" they asked. Here was an issue on which they were prepared to do battle. Their craft was in danger, and all men knew that ceremonial washings were essential to salvation, and that without them there was naught but sorrow and damnation!

"The traditions of the elders!" Scarcely does Satan have a more persuasive means of leading men from the glorious gospel truths set forth in the scriptures than to supplant and override these eternal verities with oral traditions. It is worthy of note that these scribes and Pharisees knew full well that their rituals and ceremonies grew out of the traditions of their fathers and were not taken from the written word given to Moses, whom they so greatly revered.

"The authority for this endless, mechanical religionism was the commands or 'traditions' of the Fathers, handed down from the days of the Great Synagogue, but ascribed with pious exaggeration to the Almighty, who, it was said, had delivered them orally to Moses on Mount Sinai. Interpretations, expositions, and discussions of all kinds were based, not only on every separate word, or on every letter, but even on every comma and semicolon, to create new laws and observances, and where these were not enough, oral traditions, said to have been delivered by God to Moses on Sinai, were invented to justify new refinements. These 'traditions' were constantly increased, and formed a New Law, which passed from mouth to mouth, and from generation to generation, till, at last, public schools rose for its study and development, of which the most famous were those of Hillel and Schammai, in the generation before Jesus, and even, perhaps, in His early childhood. In His lifetime it was still a fundamental rule that they should not be committed to writing. It was left to Rabbi Judah, the Holy, to commence the collection and formal engrossing of the almost countless fragments of which it consisted, and from his weary labour ultimately rose the huge folios of the Talmud.

"As in the case of the Brahminical theocracy of India, that of Judea attached more importance to the ceremonial precepts of its schools than to the sacred text on which they were based. Wherever Scripture and Tradition seemed opposed, the latter was treated as the higher authority. Pharisaism openly proclaimed this, and set itself, as the Gospel expresses it, in the chair of Moses, displacing the great lawgiver. 'It is a greater offence,' says the Mischnah, 'to teach anything contrary to the voice of the Rabbis, than to contradict Scripture itself. He who says [i.e. speaks] contrary to Scripture, "Is not lawful to wear the Tephillin" '—the little leather boxes containing texts of Scripture, bound, during prayer, on the forehead and on the arm—'is not to be punished as a troubler. But he who says there should be five divisions in the Totaphoth'—another name for the Tephillin, or phylacteries—'and thus teaches differently from the Rabbis, is guilty.' 'He who expounds the Scriptures in opposition to the Tradition,' says R. Eleazar, 'has no share in the world to come.' The mass of Rabbinical prescriptions—not the Scripture—was regarded as the basis of religion, 'for the Covenant of God was declared to have been made with Israel on account of the oral Law, as it is written, "After the tenor of these words I have made a covenant with thee and with Israel." [Ex. 34:27.] For God knew that, in after ages, Israel would be carried away among strange people, who would copy off the written Law, and therefore, he gave them the oral Law, that his will might be kept secret among themselves.' Those who gave themselves to the knowledge of the Traditions 'saw a great light,' for God enlightened their eyes, and showed them how they ought to act in relation to lawful and unlawful things, clean and unclean, which are not told thus fully and clearly in Scripture. It was, perhaps, good to give one's self to the reading of the Scripture, but he who reads diligently the Traditions receives a reward from God, and he who gives himself to the Commentaries on these traditions has the greatest reward of all. 'The Bible was like water, the Traditions like wine, the Commentaries on them like spiced wine.' 'My son,' says the Talmud, 'give more heed to the words of the Rabbis than to the words of the Law.' So exactly alike is Ultramontanism in every age, and in all religions!" (Geikie, pp. 526-27.) [^3]

There is and can be only one answer to the charge that he and his disciples keep not "the tradition of the elders" because they "eat bread with unwashen hands." It is: 'The tradition is false; it is not of God; it leads men to destruction. I and my disciples are guiltless in this thing, but your religion is man made, and your worship is in vain. Repent or be damned.' Taking the offensive, Jesus, accordingly, says:

Well hath Esaias prophesied of you hypocrites, as it is written, This people honoureth me with their lips, but their heart is far from me.

Howbeit, in vain do they worship me, teaching the doctrines and commandments of men.

For laying aside the commandment of God, ye hold the tradition of men, as the washing of pots and cups: and many other such like things ye do. [^4]

"It Is Corban"

(Mark 7:9-13, 19; JST Mark 7:9-13; Matthew 15:3-6; JST Matthew 15:4-5)

Our Lord's younger brother—James, a son of Joseph and Mary; a devout Jew during Jesus' lifetime; later a converted Christian and an apostle of Him whose brother he was—this wise and good man, not many years hence, will write these words: "Pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, To visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world." (James 1:27.)

Pure religion! It is to put into living operation all the principles of eternal truth that dwell in the heart of the Great Jehovah. As an abstract principle faith is nothing; it is of no more worth than an abstract principle of mathematics. But faith in the heart of a man—a living, vibrant faith—can raise the dead, create worlds, and save souls. Love is nothing until it operates in the lives of men. Religion has saving power only when it dwells in a human heart, when it changes a human soul. Pure religion is to operate and use the eternal truths that flow from the Author of truth.

Pure religion revolves around, centers in, and operates primarily through the family unit. The whole purpose of revealed religion is to enable men to create for themselves eternal family units patterned after the family of God the Eternal Father. This life is the time appointed during which we learn how to live in the family unit with all the love and affection that must exist in an eternal family unit. And so Jehovah says to his people: "Honour thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be long upon the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee." (Ex. 20:12.) [^5] And as though this were not enough, the further decree comes: "And he that curseth [revileth] his father, or his mother, shall surely be put to death." (Ex. 21:17; Lev. 20:9.)

How do we honor our parents? By emulating their righteous lives; by walking in the light as they are in the light; by keeping the faith and being true and steadfast as they are. And further, by caring for their temporal and physical needs in their aging years. We have no better illustration of the operation of this principle than is shown forth by the dying words of One on a cross who said to a sorrowing mother, "Woman, behold thy son," and to an intimate friend, "Behold thy mother," with the result that "from that hour that disciple took her unto his own home." (John 19:26-27.)

All these principles pertaining to parental honor and care were known to the Jews; all these things were written in their law; and all these things they chose, by their traditions, not to do. Pure religion was far from them; eternal principles found little good soil in the hearts of those in that day. Thus we hear Jesus say to his scribal antagonists and his Pharisaic enemies:

Yea, altogether ye reject the commandment of God, that ye may keep your own tradition. Full well is it written of you, by the prophets whom ye have rejected. They testified these things of a truth, and their blood shall be upon you.

"By professing to believe in the prophets, while in practice rejecting their teachings, the Jews were in reality rejecting the prophets. Thus, those Jews were placing themselves in the same position which their fathers occupied when those fathers slew the prophets; and so the blood of the prophets would be required at the hands of the Jews and their fathers, for both rejected them. Similarly, some today, by rejecting the teachings of the ancient apostles and prophets, are classifying themselves as people who would have slain the holy men of old, and so the blood of the true martyrs of religion shall be upon them." (Commentary 1:368.)

Ye have kept not the ordinances of God; for Moses said, Honor thy father and thy mother; and whoso curseth father or mother, let him die the death of the transgressor, as it is written in your law; but ye keep not the law.

Ye say, If a man shall say to his father or mother, Corban, that is to say, a gift, by whatsoever thou mightest be profited by me, he is of age. And ye suffer him no more to do aught for his father or his mother; making the word of God of none effect through your tradition, which ye have delivered; and many such like things do ye.

This is the picture Jesus is painting: Parents, perhaps aged and decrepit, are hungry, naked, and homeless. They cry out for a crust of bread; they need a homespun robe to cover their nakedness; they have not where to lay their heads during the long cold nights. But they have children—children who are prosperous and well to do; whose fields are fruitful; whose granaries are full; whose flocks graze on a thousand hills. Surely there is enough for all and to spare. But no, the children say: "It is corban." That is: 'We have vowed it to sacred purposes. You, our parents, may go cold and hungry and homeless; our property is not available to help you. We have a great zeal toward the Lord, and our property is vowed to him; and we cannot break our vows.'

Or: 'It is corban; I have vowed that my property shall be as if it were dedicated to sacred purposes, and though I may continue to use it all my life, you shall have none of it because of my vow.'

Or: 'It is corban; I have vowed that "whatsoever thou mightest be profited by" cannot be used for your benefit; that is, I have vowed that my property shall not be used for your support; and it is more important that I keep my vow than that I fulfill my obligation to support my parents. The oral traditions of the elders take precedence over the divine law written by Moses.'

It seems difficult to believe that religion could sink to such depths, and that a people who professed to serve the Jehovah of their fathers could so easily clear their consciences and feel themselves free from keeping his law. Already Jesus has called them hypocrites and said their worship is in vain, and these are only the beginning of the harsh invectives he will hurl upon their sin-ridden souls.

What Defiles a Man?

(Mark 7:14-23; JST Mark 7:15; Matthew 15:10-20; Luke 6:39)

How and in what manner are men defiled—and thus damned? According to the Rabbinic way of worship, defilement came by violating the Levitical law; by treading upon the traditions of the elders; by eating with unwashed hands; by failing to conform to the ritualistic formalisms of the day.

What must men do to remain undefiled—and thus be saved? Again the answer is found in the field of tradition and superstition. Wash all pots and vessels before eating; scrub the tables whereon food is placed; cleanse the couches on which the diners recline. Carry no burden on the Sabbath; speak the approved Hebrew. These—and such like—are the laws by obedience to which salvation comes. It is not what is in a man's heart that counts, but how well he conforms to all of the minutia and trivia of their religious formalism.

Jesus, however, is now prepared to reject and denounce the traditions of the elders and all of the evils that grow out of them. The scribal spies from Jerusalem have raised the issue of ceremonial washings; they say that those who eat with unwashed hands—"and many other such like things"—are defiled. Jesus meets the issue squarely. He calls the multitude unto him. "Hearken unto me every one of you, and understand," he says. "Not that which goeth into the mouth defileth a man; but that which cometh out of the mouth, this defileth a man" "If any man have ears to hear, let him hear."

These cutting words, along with others of like severity, incensed and outraged the Rabbinic religionists. If these words were true, their system of worship was false. "Knowest thou that the Pharisees were offended, after they heard this saying?" the disciples said to Jesus. His answer:

Every plant, which my heavenly Father hath not planted, shall be rooted up.

Let them alone: they be blind leaders of the blind. And if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch.

Well might these words be written in the hearts of all false ministers with a pen of steel. False religions shall be rooted up; they shall wither and die and be as the chaff of a summer threshing floor. And those blind ministers whose eyes have not been opened by the light from on high, together with all others who close their eyes to the truth, shall fall in a ditch of that evil master whom they choose to serve.

Thus Jesus declares open war upon the scribes, upon the Pharisees, and upon all who hearken to the preachments and follow the counsel of those self-appointed interpreters and dispensers of the law. The assault is not alone upon the ceremonial sin of eating with unwashed hands; it is a frontal attack upon all their rituals and performances. The scribes set aside the sayings of Moses. Their traditions make the word of God of no effect! Hillel and Shammai overrule the Lord Jehovah!

Thus Jesus "arraigned Pharisaism, the dominant, orthodoxy, as a whole. The system, so famous, so arrogant, so intensely Jewish, was only an invention of man; a subversion of the law it claimed to represent, an antagonism to the prophets as well as to Moses, the spiritual ruin of the nation! . . . It was vital that the people who followed the Rabbis and priests should know what the religion and morals thus taught by them were worth. The truth could not find open ears while men's hearts were misled and prejudiced by such instructors. No one would seek inward renewal who had been taught to care only for externals, and to ignore the sin and corruption within. Pharisaism was a creed of moral cosmetics and religious masks, as all ritual systems must ever be." (Geikie, p. 530.)

Jesus and his disciples are now in a house apart from the multitude. Peter speaks: "Declare unto us this parable." Jesus responds:

Are ye also yet without understanding? Do not ye yet understand, that whatsoever entereth in at the mouth goeth into the belly, and is cast out into the draught?

But those things which proceed out of the mouth come forth from the heart; and they defile the man.

For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witness, blasphemies: These are the things which defile a man: but to eat with unwashen hands defileth not a man.

Such is Matthew's account; Mark adds to the list of inner evils covetousness, wickedness, deceit, lasciviousness, an evil eye, pride, and foolishness. The meaning is clear, and Jesus has preached a sermon that no believing saint shall ever forget. Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh and "as he thinketh in his heart, so is he." (Prov. 23:7.)

Mark also inserts in his account an inspired interpreting phrase that shows how fully and completely the sayings of this day are intended to overthrow even the true Mosaic system, to say nothing of the traditions that were added by the Rabbinists. Jesus speaks of that which "entereth . . . into the belly, and goeth out into the draught," and Mark adds that He does so "purging all meats," or in other words, as a better translation of the original manuscript has it, "making all meats clean."

In other words, though Moses of old had divided meats into clean and unclean—those which might be eaten and those which were forbidden—Jesus made all meats clean; all might be eaten. "It is nothing less than the plainest teaching ever given by Christ on the final abrogation of the Levitic Law," as Farrar so well says. "In the Levitic Law the distinction between clean and unclean meats was fundamental. Since the days of Ezra it had been insisted on with ever greater scrupulosity and everdeepening fanaticism.

"This, then, He said, sweeping aside Levitical ordinances as things which had no eternal validity, and 'making all meats clean.' St. Paul had to fight out to the bitter end the battle against the Judaism which attached importance to meats and drinks, and carnal ordinances which affect things which perish in the using, rather than to righteousness, temperance, justice, and the weightier matters of the Law; but Christ had already laid down the principles on which the battle was to be decided, and had uttered His fiat as to its eternal issue." (Farrar, p. 346.)

And we might add that Luke, who set forth the meaning and intent of our Lord's words here given, was also privileged to record in the Acts of the Apostles the vision of Peter affirming the same truth. Peter, as a prelude to the preaching of the gospel to the Gentiles, saw a great sheet descend from heaven whereon were "all manner of four-footed beasts of the earth, and wild beasts, and creeping things, and fowls of the air." A heavenly voice commanded: "Rise, Peter; kill, and eat." He replied: "Not so, Lord; for I have never eaten any thing that is common or unclean." Then came the divine fiat: "What God hath cleansed, that call not thou common." (Acts 10:9-15. Italics added.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] They said, falsely, that he was a sinner. 2 Cor. 6:15.
[^2] They said, falsely, that he performed his miracles by the power of Beelzebub—nay, more, that he was the Incarnation of Satan. See the companion volume to this work: The Promised Messiah - The First Coming of Christ.
[^3] They said, falsely, that he was guilty of blasphemy in claiming equality with God; in testifying that he was the Son of the living God; in teaching that he was God. This concept that the traditions of the elders supersede, are greater than, and take precedence over the word of God is, in my judgment, the devil's substitute for the true doctrine that the inspired utterances of living oracles are binding upon the Lord's people and have equal standing with the written word. This true doctrine is predicated upon the fact that inspired men speak as moved upon by the Holy Ghost, which, of course, is precisely and exactly what happens when prophets give forth that which we call scripture. The traditions of the elders - as is also the case with the traditions of an apostate Christendom - are wholly devoid of the least scintilla of inspiration. They are, as Jesus said, "the commandments of men." As I have written elsewhere: "This same process of transforming truth into traditions - of changing the law of God into 'the doctrines and commandments of men,' by the interpretations and additions of uninspired teachers - is precisely what took place in the great apostasy of the Christian Era. To the pure and simple doctrines of Christ, the scribes and priests of early Christendom added such things as: selling indulgences, which freed the wicked from past sins and authorized them to commit future crimes without divine penalty; forgiving sins (supposedly) through repeated and perfunctory confessions; praying departed persons out of purgatory; burning candles for the dead; praying to Mary or other so-called saints, rather than to the Lord, worshiping of images; turning of sacramental emblems into the literal flesh and blood of Jesus (transubstantiation); laying up a reservoir of good works in heaven which the so-called Church can sell to those who need them (supererogation); sacrificing Jesus over again in the mass; forbidding priests and other church officials to marry; doing penance to gain forgiveness of sins; adorning houses of worship with costly materials; wearing of expensive robes and costumes by priests and other church officers; using elaborate ministerial titles; augmenting the Church treasury by gambling; and so forth. "All these, and many other like traditions, are counted of more importance by some than the law of God as originally given by the Master. Indeed, the so-called Christian Church today is founded in large part on the traditions of the 'elders' rather than on the revelations of heaven." (Commentary 1:366-67.)
[^4] Isaiah's words as found in our Old Testament read: "Forasmuch as this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honour me, but have removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men: Therefore, behold, I will proceed to do a marvelous work among this people, even a marvelous work and a wonder." (Isa. 29:13-14.) In his confrontation on cleanliness Jesus obviously targumed a portion of Isaiah's words and applied them to the scribes and Pharisees and their followers. The intended glorious fulfillment of the words of Israel's ancient seer was, of course, reserved for the latter days when the gospel would be restored for the final time. Jesus' use of the passage here illustrates perfectly the principle that many prophetic utterances have dual or multiple instances of fulfillment. When he appeared with his Father to usher in the dispensation of the fulness of times, the Lord Jesus said to his latter-day prophet that the modern "professors" of religion - the modern scribes and Pharisees, as it were - "were all corrupt," and that "they draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me, they teach for doctrines the commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof." (JS-H 1:219.) "There is no salvation in worship as such, even though it be directed to the true God; worship based on false principles is in vain. Men may worship Deity their whole life long, according to their traditions and rituals, and never gain true faith, forgiveness of sin, or sanctifying grace. Worship leads to salvation only when it conforms to the revealed, divine pattern, only when it is based on the rock foundation of eternal truth. 'Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven.' (Matt. 7:21.) There is no salvation in false worship." (Commentary 1:368.)
[^5] Those who truly honor their parents, in the full gospel sense, shall in fact dwell forever upon their promised land, for the meek shall inherit the earth forever in the celestial day. (D&C 88:17.)
