Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 3 ( 1960)

Introduction

One of the main reasons for the publication of these Answers to Gospel Questions has been to stimulate the members of the Church to do more of their own searching. The Plan of Salvation is the most wonderful and beautiful subject to contemplate and study that there is in all the universe. It is the tendency of a majority of the human family to seek more after the things of this world and to accumulate things which pertain to this world which must eventually perish. The weightier matters, as explained by Paul, are neglected. "For the flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh: and these are contrary one to the other." (Galatians 5:17.)

However, we have been taught to seek first the kingdom of God and to learn of his ways, that we shall not walk in darkness. The Lord revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith a profound truth, the meaning of which is far beyond the learning of the great and the mighty philosophers in the world. This truth, if the Lord had revealed none other, surpasses all the revelations expounded by the natural thinking of uninspired mortal men, in its wisdom, magnitude and majesty. It holds out to the earnest seeker for eternal life a stimulating thought that should buoy him up and make him desirous to obtain the goal which is offered through faithful obedience to the divine will. It is as follows:

And again, he that receiveth the word of truth, doth he receive it by the Spirit of truth or some other way?

If it be some other way it is not of God.

Therefore, why is it that ye cannot understand and know, that he that receiveth the word by the Spirit of truth receiveth it as it is preached by the Spirit of truth?

Wherefore, he that preacheth and he that receiveth, understand one another, and both are edified and rejoice together.

And that which doth not edify is not of God, and is darkness.

That which is of God is light, and he that receiveth light, and continueth in God, receiveth more light; and that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day. (D. & C. 50:19-24.)

Here is a promise to all those who keep the commandments the Lord has given us that they will grow in knowledge and wisdom to the fulness. Again it is written:

The Spirit of truth is of God. I am the Spirit of truth, and John bore record of me, saying: He received a fulness of truth, yea, even of all truth;

And no man receiveth a fulness unless he keepeth his commandments.

He that keepeth his commandments receiveth truth and light, until he is glorified in truth and knoweth all things. (D. & C. 93:26-28.)

Here is a promise that those who are willing to receive the commandments of God and learn them and keep them, may become like him, and the time will come when they, too, will be bathed in light and have knowledge of all things. Yet we discover that many members of the Church are indifferent to the commandments and do not seek that knowledge that will exalt them. The Prophet Joseph Smith has written:

Whatever principle of intelligence we attain unto in this life, it will rise with us in the resurrection; and if a person gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage in the world to come. There is a law irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated; and when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated. (DHC, Vol. V, p. 325. See also D. & C. 130:18-21.)

Again the Prophet wrote:

There are a great many wise men and women too in our midst who are too wise to be taught; therefore they must die in their ignorance, and in the resurrection they will find their mistake. Many seal up the door of heaven by saying, "So far God may reveal and I will believe."

All men who become heirs of God and joint heirs with Jesus Christ will have to receive the fulness of the ordinances of his kingdom; and those who will not receive all the ordinances will come short of the fulness of that glory, if they do not lose the whole. (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 309.)

Members of the Church who have the guidance of the Spirit of the Lord are seeking to obtain this knowledge which is essential to exaltation, but we have many among us who lack the faith and who do not seek for knowledge. These are liable to become the prey of those who lie in wait to deceive, and thus lose their salvation.

—JOSEPH FIELDING SMITH, JR.
