Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 3 ( 1960)

1

Importance of the Sacrament Meeting

Question: "I have always felt that the partaking of the sacrament was one of the most important duties devolving upon the members of the Church. Moreover, that when we partake, our thoughts should be centered upon the nature of the covenants embodied in the prayers. No other thing should be permitted to distract our minds or draw our attention from this sacred service. My observation convinces me that the sacred attitude and solemnity which this ordinance requires are not always observed. What steps can be taken to instil into the hearts of members of the Church a more devout and sacred attitude in the observance of this ordinance?"

Answer: The Savior instituted the sacrament at the Feast of the Passover on the night he was with his apostles immediately preceding his arrest and condemnation. There in this upper room he gave his apostles important instruction and introduced the sacrament as a means by which they should remember him to the end of time. From the time of the fall of Adam until this final passover, the Lord had given the law of sacrifice by the shedding of the blood of animals and birds, as the angel revealed, as "a similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father," (Moses 5:7.) and it was to be observed until the coming of Jesus Christ. In this sacrifice they were to be reminded of the great sacrifice which was to come. After the atonement of Jesus on the cross, this shedding of blood was to cease and from that time forth his true followers were to remember him and the reason for his death upon the cross, and these tokens representing his body and his blood which was shed, were given instead of animal sacrifice. Henceforth his followers were to meet in solemn assembly and partake of the bread in remembrance of his body and the wine (After the organization of the Church in 1830, the Lord gave a revelation to the church in which he said: "For behold, I say unto you, that it mattereth not what he shall eat or what ye shall drink when ye partake of the sacrament, if it so be that ye do it with an eye single to my glory—remembering unto the Father my body which was laid down for you, and my blood which was shed for the remission of your sins. "Wherefore, a commandment I give unto you, that you shall not purchase wine neither strong drink of your enemies. "Wherefore, you shall partake of none except it is made new among you; yea, in this my Father's kingdom which shall be built up on the earth." (D. & C. 27:2-4.) From this time on this instruction was followed, and the Lord instructed the Prophet Joseph Smith that pure water could be used instead of wine. As far as our record shows water was first used in the Kirtland Temple in the solemn assemblies held there.) in remembrance of his blood which was shed for them.

PROPER SPIRIT ESSENTIAL

Nothing should ever be introduced in the sacrament meeting that would detract from this ordinance. The members of the Church should assemble in the spirit of faith and prayer. Their minds should be centered on the sacrament. There should be no whispering or other conversation, for this is a sin. The mind of each member should dwell on the prayers and the fulness of their meaning. Those who officiate in the blessing of the emblems should feel the solemnity of the occasion and the sacredness of the ordinance, just as if the Lord were present in person with them. Each member of the Church should have in mind the three great covenants that are made by partaking of these tokens, which are:

First: That they are willing to take upon them the name of the Son,

Second: That they will always remember him.

Third: That they will keep his commandments, which he has given them.

How do we take upon us the name of the Son? The Church is called by his name, and we are to remember that by partaking of the sacrament, we acknowledge his hand in our redemption from death, which is the gift to all men, and in the remission of our individual sins which comes through our obedience in keeping his commandments.

King Benjamin has given us an excellent understanding of what is meant by taking upon us the name of the Son. Because of the covenant we make, we are spiritually begotten sons and daughters of Jesus Christ. We become his sons and his daughters, because he has redeemed us and given us life, thus defeating the power of the grave. Said he:

And under this head ye are made free, and there is no other head whereby ye can be made free. There is no other name given whereby salvation cometh; therefore, I would that ye should take upon you the name of Christ, all you that have entered into the covenant with God that ye should be obedient unto the end of your lives.

And it shall come to pass that whosoever doeth this shall be found at the right hand of God, for he shall know the name by which he is called; for he shall be called by the name of Christ.

And now it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall not take upon him the name of Christ must be called by some other name; therefore, he findeth himself on the left hand of God.

And I would that ye should remember also, that this is the name that I said I should give unto you that never should be blotted out, except it be through transgression; therefore, take heed that ye do not transgress, that the name be not blotted out of your hearts.

I say unto you, I would that ye should remember to retain the name written always in your hearts, that ye are not found on the left hand of God, but that ye hear and know the voice by which ye shall be called, and also, the name by which he shall call you. (Mosiah 5:8-12.)

COMMANDED TO REMEMBER THE SAVIOR

To "always remember him," does not mean simply to remember that he was crucified; but to keep in mind constantly the reasons why, and what blessings have come to each of us through his death and resurrection. We are to remember the great suffering and what it cost him to make the great atonement. We are to remember that he did it because of his love, not only for those who believe on him, but also for the whole world:

For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. (John 3:16.)

Through this atonement the resurrection becomes universal, and every soul shall have his body restored to his spirit, inseparably joined, never again to be divided. Moreover, there come to the true believers redemption from their sins and the blessing of eternal life, which is to dwell in the presence of God. These are the things we are to remember.

MUST KEEP COMMANDMENTS

The third thing to remember is that we covenant to keep his commandments. How can a member of the Church partake of the sacrament and renew these covenants, and then go forth from this sacred assembly, and deliberately break any of the divine commandments! In doing such a thing we bring condemnation to our souls. Far better for members of the Church never to partake of these emblems, thus renewing these three covenants, than to partake of them and then go forth to commit sin. It is, however, a solemn commandment from the Lord, that we do partake of the sacrament. Those who repeatedly and constantly disregard this commandment and remain away from this sacrament meeting, will lose the Spirit of the Lord, for his Spirit will not dwell in those who fail to renew these covenants in a consistent manner. This is the doctrine that Paul tried to teach the Corinthian members of the Church.
