Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 3 ( 1960)

3

Are Children Born in Sin?

Question: "In a discussion with a gentleman of another faith, he made the statement that a child is born in sin. That the conceiving of a child even in lawful wedlock is a sin. Of course I have been taught differently and voiced our teachings on the original sin of Adam and Eve, and then made the statement, 'To my knowledge, there is not any scripture in the Bible that states that a child which is born in lawful wedlock is born in sin, thus making the child guilty of sin.' This person showed me a statement in Psalm 51:5, which reads: 'Behold, I was shapen in iniquity; and in sin did my mother conceive me.'

"I have studied the scriptures, have read the numerous other literature which strengthened my testimony in relation to original sin, but I cannot explain the statement of David in this passage, when he was the youngest of several children. Several of the non-members are waiting for me to prove I am right. I have satisfied them as to our belief on original sin. They also refer to the fact that it was a Jewish belief that the woman had to go through a purification period and ceremony after childbirth, and if it is not a sin why was it necessary for this purification?"

Answer: No matter what David said, he was not born in sin. The opening verses of this psalm give us the key to the nature of David's remark. They are as follows:

Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving-kindness: according unto the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my transgressions.

Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.

For I acknowledge my transgressions: and my sin is ever before me.

Against thee, thee only, have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight: that thou mightest be justified when thou speakest, and be clear when thou judgest.

Behold, I was shapen in iniquity; and in sin did my mother conceive me. (Psalm 51:1-5.)

In the midst of his sorrow because he violated the moral law, he may have felt his sin keenly and in this manner expressed himself, but this did not make the statement true that his parents were guilty of sin and that he partook of it in his birth. Let it be remembered also that David was speaking only for and of himself, and that his words cannot in justice be universally applied.

A COMMANDMENT FROM GOD WHO CANNOT SIN

Little children are not born in sin when their parents are lawfully married. The first commandment given to Adam was that he and Eve should multiply and fill the earth. After the flood this same commandment was reiterated and was required of Noah and his posterity. To declare that children born in lawful wedlock come into the world through a sinful act, is making our Eternal Father guilty of commanding that a sin be committed, hence he would be a party to the sin. We read that our Eternal Father is just; he cannot lie, and that his words are faithful and true. Therefore it is contrary to all that has been revealed for our Father to command his children that they commit a sin in bringing children into the world, and you are justified in saying that there is no scripture which supports it.

It is a false doctrine which prevails in the world that children have to be cleansed from original sin. Those who teach such a doctrine fail to comprehend the nature of the atonement of Jesus Christ. Adam and Eve brought death into the world by partaking of fruit which was forbidden. This act brought death upon them, and their posterity inherited death so that we all have to die some time. To restore mankind to life, the uniting again of the spirit with the body, thus atoning for Adam's transgression, was the mission of Jesus Christ. He came and paid that debt and through his sacrifice on the cross he has redeemed all from death and has given them the gift of the resurrection. The posterity of Adam in no way whatever is subject to original sin, and there is no act required of them to cleanse them from such a sin.

THE LORD DID NOT CONDEMN LITTLE CHILDREN

The Lord has informed us in very positive language that little children are not under the penalty of any sin. Even should their parents be guilty that does not place any sin on the soul of the child. It is an eternal law that a person is to be punished for his own sins, and not for the transgressions of others, even should it be a child's parents. When little children were brought to the Lord to be blessed, the disciples endeavored to prevent them, but the Savior rebuked them, saying:

Suffer little children, and forbid them not, to come unto me: for of such is the kingdom of heaven. (Matthew 19:14.)

And again:

Verily I say unto you, Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.

Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child, the same is greatest in the kingdom of heaven.

And whoso shall receive one such little child in my name receiveth me.

But whoso shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me, it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea. (Matthew 18:3-6.)

These passages quoted from Matthew indicate most emphatically that little children are not under the cloud of sin. The Lord made that very clear in a revelation to the Church given May 6, 1833, in Kirtland, Ohio. It is as follows:

Every spirit of man was innocent in the beginning; and God having redeemed man from the fall, men became again, in their infant state, innocent before God. (D. & C. 93:38.)

Again we have the word of the Lord as follows:

Little children cannot repent; wherefore, it is awful wickedness to deny the pure mercies of God unto them, for they are all alive in him because of his mercy.

And he that saith that little children need baptism denieth the mercies of Christ, and setteth at naught the atonement of of him and the power of his redemption.

Wo unto such, for they are in danger of death, hell, and an endless torment. I speak it boldly; God hath commanded me. Listen unto them and give heed, or they stand against you at the judgment-seat of Christ. (Moroni 8:19-21.)

PURIFICATION CEREMONY BELONGED TO MOSAIC LAW

In regard to the practice in Israel of purification of mothers when children were born and the offering of sacrifice of doves it should be remembered that this was a part of the law given to Moses. It was more a practice of a sanitary nature, not the cleansing of the mother because a sin had been committed. Your attention is called to the fact that this practice was in keeping with many other ceremonies which belonged to the law of Moses as recorded in the books of Exodus and Leviticus. These practices, such as the "purification" of a mother did not exist before the time of Moses and ended when Christ fulfilled the law. We have never been commanded in this day to revive them.

But, behold, I say unto you, that little children are redeemed from the foundation of the world through mine Only Begotten:

Wherefore, they cannot sin, for power is not given unto Satan to tempt little children, until they begin to become accountable before me. (D. & C. 29:46-47.)
