Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 3 ( 1960)

4

The Status of Retarded Children

Question: "As an employee in a training school I have stood beside one of the cribs and wondered, with pity and compassion in my heart, what stand or explanation the Authorities of the Church have in regard to these retarded children.

"I have been told that President Brigham Young said they were valiant and loyal followers of God before they came here; that they did not have to make any progress while on this earth. All they had to do was come here and take a mortal body, and when they left here they would go straight to the celestial kingdom.

"Will you please tell me what is right?"

Answer: I do not have before me any statement made by President Brigham Young dealing with this problem. It is very likely that President Brigham Young did make some statement dealing with this subject, but whether so or not, we have the word of the Lord that aids us in our conclusion.

We have good reason to believe that all spirits while in the pre-existence were perfect in form, having all their faculties and mental powers unimpaired. It is difficult to believe that in that existence spirits were deficient, for that was a perfect world notwithstanding each spirit had his or her free agency. The reason for these deformities in body and mind are therefore physical. In other words they are confined to the mortal existence, and they are due to physical injury or impairment which comes because of accident or sickness before birth. We have a case in point in the healing of the man who was born blind. The disciples came to the Savior and asked the question whether this man was suffering this blindness as a punishment because of some personal sin before he was born or was it due to the sin of his parents? The Savior's answer was that neither the parents nor this man had sinned to bring upon him the pre-natal blindness. It, like all other cases of deficient powers, was due to a physical condition over which child or parents had no control.

REDEEMED WITHOUT BAPTISM

The Lord has made it known by revelation that children born with retarded minds shall receive blessings just like little children who die in infancy. They are free from sin, because their minds are not capable of a correct understanding of right and wrong. Mormon, when writing to his son Moroni on the subject of baptism places deficient children in the same category with little children who are under the age of accountability, they do not require baptism, for the atonement of Jesus Christ takes care of them equally with little children who die before the age of accountability, as follows:

For behold that all little children are alive in Christ, and also all they that are without the law. For the power of redemption cometh on all them that have no law; wherefore, he that is not condemned, or he that is under no condemnation, cannot repent; and unto such baptism availeth nothing. (Moroni 8:22.)

Again the Lord has stated:

And again, I say unto you, that whoso having knowledge, have I not commanded to repent?

And he that hath no understanding, it remaineth in me to do according as it is written. . . . (D. & C. 29:49-50. )

Therefore The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints considers all deficient children with retarded capacity to understand, just the same as little children under the age of accountability. They are redeemed without baptism and will go to the celestial kingdom of God, there, we believe, to have their faculties or other deficiencies restored according to the Father's mercy and justice.
