Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 3 ( 1960)

5

Salvation of Women Whose Husbands Will Not Embrace the Gospel

Question: "I have tried to be a good Church member and have a strong testimony of the gospel, and the older I get the stronger is my faith. I am married to a non-member. We have three children. Two are married and were married in the temple, and the third is going to be. My husband does not show the slightest interest in the Church; in fact, he shows some resentment against it. I used to plead with him but have learned that it does no good.

"I can live my life out this way, but what will happen to me and my children, who are faithful members, in the resurrection? I want my children and my grandchildren more than anyone can know, but how can this be accomplished if conditions remain as they are?"

Answer: This is one of the saddest conditions that we are confronted with in the Church. The Lord has revealed that the marriage covenant should be eternal. This is the definite statement he gave to the Pharisees when they made inquiry of him as follows:

. . . Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife for every cause?

And he answered and said unto them, Have ye not read, that he which made them in the beginning made them male and female.

And said, For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife: and they twain shall be one flesh?

Wherefore they are no more twain, but one flesh. What therefore God hath joined together, let not man put asunder. (Matthew 19:3-6.)

Here is a clear statement that the marriage covenant, when properly performed, is eternal. It is not to be annulled and come to an end at death. The first marriage performed on earth was the marriage of Eve to Adam, and this was before there was any death, therefore it was intended to be forever. The Lord has revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith his law concerning marriage, and that it is to be an everlasting covenant. Those who are so married will become members of the family of God, for those who receive the exaltation will be members of his great family, as stated by Paul. (Ephesians 3:14-15.) They are to become joint heirs with Christ receiving the fulness of the Father's kingdom. (Romans 8:14-17.)

THE LORD REWARDS ACCORDING TO FAITH AND DEVOTION

Here we have a case where there is a faithful mother who has by her integrity kept her children in the faith, but who is married to an unbelieving husband. Naturally she is worried and wonders how she may retain her family in the eternity to come. The Lord has made this matter perfectly clear, and in answer to this sister's question we can say to her, and to the many others in like circumstances: If you remain faithful and true, the Lord will take your faith and devotion into account and reward you according to your works.

It is a deplorable matter when a husband and wife are married for time only which according to the covenant they have taken must end at death, and then to have the wife wish and long for the blessings of husband and children in eternity. The laws of the Christian world, all denominations, except The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, proclaim the edict that all marriages must end at death, thus they include a bill of divorcement with every marriage. This naturally brings sorrow to a woman who loves both husband and children and who has received the truth. Naturally she wonders what her condition and relationship to her family will be hereafter. However there is some comfort to women in this status, the Lord revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith, in answer to his prayer in the following words, his justice and mercy to all such unhappy souls:

All who have died without a knowledge of this Gospel who would have received it if they had been permitted to tarry, shall be heirs of the celestial kingdom of God; also all that shall die henceforth without a knowledge of it, who would have received it with all their hearts, shall be heirs of that kingdom, for I, the Lord, will judge all men according to their works, according to the desire of their hearts. (D.H.C., Vol. 2, p. 380.)

When the wife is faithful and desires to obey the divine law and the husband is rebellious, or unwilling to obey the will of the Lord, if she maintains her integrity to the best of her ability, she will be given to another husband in eternity and will receive all the blessings of the celestial kingdom.
