Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 3 ( 1960)

6

Keeping the Whole Law

Question: "Kindly explain what James meant when he said: 'For whosoever shall keep the whole law and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all'? (James 2:10.) This appears to be a very severe doctrine, to say a man is guilty of breaking all of the commandments if he has only broken one. To some of us this appears an injustice."

Answer: In order to understand the significance of this saying, one should be familiar with all that James said. He was making a plea to the members of the Church to be faithful in all things. This epistle is one of exceeding excellence in the presentation of the question of full obedience to the commandments of the Lord. He points out many of the weaknesses of men and pleads for a better and more faithful observance of the laws of the Lord which are so essential to our exaltation. He names many of the commandments, and admonishes all to be "doers of the word, not hearers only." In that day, as in the present, there were many who failed to hearken to and observe the commandments the Lord had given them. Every member of the Church today, as it should have been when James wrote, should be "swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath," and lay aside "all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, and receive with meekness the engrafted word, which is able to save your souls," for the doers of the word, not the hearers only shall be saved.

THE KINGDOM OF GOD IS ONE

After giving this counsel and teaching the members to be faithful in all things, he said, "For whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all." (James 2:10.) James did not mean that a man who stole was guilty of murder, or that one who lied was guilty of unchastity. He was endeavoring to impress upon the minds of the members that the kingdom of God is one. Its laws are perfect. No unclean person can enter there. Since it is a perfect kingdom, its laws must be obeyed. There can be no disunity, no opposition in that kingdom. Being an immortal kingdom with laws that have been proved through the eternities, they are perfect, therefore there is no room for varied opinions in relation to its government, such as we find in human man-made governments. These laws cannot be changed, for eternal things have been tried and tested and therefore are eternal. They are based on justice and mercy with the perfect love of God. Therefore each who enters the kingdom must of his own free will accept all of the laws and be obedient to them, finding himself in complete accord with all. Anything short of this would cause confusion. Therefore the words of James are true. Unless a man can abide strictly in complete accord, he cannot enter there, and in the words of James, he is guilty of all. In other words if there is one divine law that he does not keep he is barred from participating in the kingdom, and figuratively guilty of all, since he is denied all.

COMPLETE WORTHINESS REQUIRED

We may present this example, crude though it may be. We light our buildings with electric power. Suppose we have prepared all things by which light is obtained, except in one point. We have the proper connections with the source of power, the wiring is perfect, the switches are all in place, but we fail to place a light globe in the socket. Or perhaps there is a disconnected switch. Result? We get no light. In other words all of the laws pertaining to the obtaining of electric light must be observed. So in the celestial kingdom, we must be worthy in every point, or we fail to receive the blessing. The kingdom of God must exist in absolute unity. Every law must be obeyed, and no member of the Church can have a place there unless he is in full accord. There came a rebellion once with disastrous results, and there had to be a cleansing.

Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect. (Matthew 5:48.)

And no unclean thing can enter into his kingdom; therefore nothing entereth into his rest save it be those who have washed their garments in my blood, because of their faith, and the repentance of all their sins, and their faithfulness unto the end. (III Nephi 27:19.)
