Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 3 ( 1960)

7

What Is a Testimony?

Question: "Will you kindly tell me what is a testimony of the gospel, and what must one do to obtain one?"

Testimony/According to the dictionary, a testimony is a "Statement or affirmation of a fact, as before a court; evidence, proof."

Testimony/Witnesses give testimony before a court, and on the credibility of the witness, judgment is given. A testimony may come through the senses of hearing, seeing, or feeling. In relation to the gospel, a testimony is a revelation to the individual who earnestly seeks one by prayer, study, and faith. It is the impression or speaking of the Holy Ghost to the soul in a convincing, positive manner. It is something which is far more penetrating than impressions from any other source, but it cannot fully be described.

Testimony/Moroni, when closing his record, or history of the Nephite nation, as contained in the Book of Mormon, instructs each individual who is fortunate enough to read the Book of Mormon, in these positive words:

Testimony/And when ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost.

Testimony/And by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things. (Moroni 10:4-5.)

Testimony/THE SPIRIT OF THE LORD WILL NOT ARGUE WITH MEN

Testimony/However it should be kept in mind that the person seeking for this knowledge will not have the privilege of repeated manifestations. He is not entitled to the continual guidance of the Holy Ghost. The Lord will reveal the truth once; then when this testimony has been given, the person should accept the truth and receive the gospel by baptism and the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. The Lord said the world could not receive this Spirit (John 14:17.) although an initial manifestation is given to every earnest seeker for the truth. Cornelius received a manifestation in strict conformity to the instruction given by Moroni, and had he turned away there would have been no further light or direction for him. The Spirit of the Lord will not argue with men, nor abide in them, except they yield obedience to the Lord's commandments.

Testimony/It is the duty of each member of the Church to live humbly, sincerely, and in strict obedience to the commandments that have been given. If this is done, a man will know the truth. Evidently there are many members of the Church who have not received a testimony simply because they do not make their lives conform to the requirements of the gospel. The Spirit of the Lord cannot dwell in unclean tabernacles, and because of this the knowledge which is promised is not received. Then again, there are members of the Church who take no time to inform themselves by study and faith, and all such are without the inspiration which the faithful are promised. When this is the case, those who are guilty are easily deceived and are in danger of turning away to false doctrines and theories of men. The Lord has given us the key by which the truth may be known and error detected. Said he:

Testimony/. . . My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me.

Testimony/If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself. (John 7:16-17.)

Testimony/Again he said:

Testimony/. . . If ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed;

Testimony/And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free. (John 8:31-32.)

Testimony/GREATNESS OF THE HOLY GHOST'S POWER

Testimony/So powerful can be the manifestations of the Holy Ghost, and the impressions be so indelibly impressed upon the righteous soul, that the Lord has pronounced the greatest of punishments upon those who, having once received the light which comes through the Holy Ghost, and then have turned away and denied his truth.

Testimony/Wherefore I say unto you, All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men: but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men.

Testimony/And whosoever speaketh a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him: but whosoever speaketh against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the world to come. (Matthew 12:31-32.)

Testimony/Both Peter and Paul have borne witness to the truth of this declaration. Peter said to the members of the Church:

Testimony/For if after they have escaped the pollutions of the world through the knowledge of the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, they are again entangled therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse with them than the beginning.

Testimony/For it had been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than, after they have known it, to turn from the holy commandment delivered unto them. (II Peter 2:20-21.)

Testimony/Paul's declaration is even more emphatic:

Testimony/For it is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost,

Testimony/And have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come,

Testimony/If they shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance; seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame. (Hebrews 6:4-6.)

Testimony/A TESTIMONY IS CONVINCING KNOWLEDGE OF TRUTH

Testimony/Therefore, I repeat, a testimony of the gospel is a convincing knowledge given by revelation to the individual who humbly seeks the truth. Its convincing power is so great that there can be no doubt left in the mind when the Spirit has spoken. It is the only way that a person can truly know that Jesus is the Christ and that his gospel is true. There are millions of people on the earth who believe that Jesus lived and died and that his work was for the salvation of souls; but unless they have complied with his commandments and have accepted his truth as it has been restored, they do not know and cannot know the full significance of his mission and its benefits to mankind. Only through humble repentance and submission to the plan of salvation can this be made known. The way is open to all if they will receive his truth and accept his ordinances and abide faithfully in them.
