Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 3 ( 1960)

8

Knowledge of the Pre-existence

Question: "How much knowledge did we have in the pre-existence in relation to this mortal life and the requirements that would be made of us to live in accordance with the principles of the gospel? In other words, was the gospel plan made known to all and did they have a clear understanding that this world would be a place of trial, rewards, and punishments in keeping with our conduct here; or was this knowledge made known to just a few? This question is prompted because there are so many millions born into this world under adverse circumstances and where the possibility of hearing the plan of salvation is extremely remote."

Answer: While very little has been revealed of the pre-existence and the memory of all that took place was withdrawn when we came into this world, yet there is sufficient revelation of the pre-existence to make plain to us that the plan of salvation was made known to all; otherwise how could there come a rebellion that would turn away one-third of the spirits in heaven? It is true that the ancient scriptures have come to us with the knowledge of the pre-existence in a state of fog. This is due to the fact, which was revealed to Nephi, that many of the clearest and most precious truths were eliminated through Satan's power over the souls of men. However, there are several passages in the Bible which reveal the pre-existence. In relation to the mission of our Savior, this is perfectly clear, but not quite so clear in relation to mankind. Of such passages here are a few:

BIBLE EVIDENCES FOR MAN'S PRE-EXISTENCE

Thus the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the host of them. . . .

These are the generations of the heavens and of the earth when they were created, in the day that the Lord God made the earth and the heavens,

And every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it grew: for the Lord God had not caused it to rain upon the earth, and there was not a man to till the ground. (Genesis 2:1, 4, 5.)

Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was: and the spirit shall return unto God, who gave it. (Ecclesiastes 12:7.)

Then the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee; and before thou camest forth out of the womb I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee a prophet unto the nations. (Jeremiah 1:4-5.)

And as Jesus passed by, he saw a man which was blind from his birth.

And his disciples asked him, saying, Master, who did sin, this man, or his parents, that he was born blind?

Jesus answered, Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents: but that the works of God should be made manifest. . . . (John 9:1-3.)

And the angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, he hath preserved in everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment of the great day. (Jude 6.)

And there was war in heaven: Michael and his angels fought against the dragon; and the dragon fought and his angels,

And prevailed not; neither was their place found any more in heaven.

And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world: he was cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him. (Revelation 12:7-9.)

We learn from the prophecy of Isaiah that the Lord named Cyrus, the Persian king, some two hundred years before he was born, Isaiah 44:28 and 45:1.

EVIDENCES FROM THE PEARL OF GREAT PRICE

In the Pearl of Great Price many of the obscure passages found in the Bible are made clear. These passages in Genesis are amplified in relation to the pre-existence as follows:

And now, behold, I say unto you, that these are the generations of the heaven and of the earth, when they were created, in the day that I, the Lord God, made the heaven and the earth;

And every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it grew. For I, the Lord God, created all things, of which I have spoken, spiritually, before they were naturally upon the face of the earth. For I, the Lord God, had not caused it to rain upon the face of the earth. And I, the Lord God, had created all the children of men; and not yet a man to till the ground; for in heaven created I them; and there was not yet flesh upon the earth, neither in the water, neither in the air; . . . (Moses 3:4-5.)

These passages are cited to show that there was a pre-existence and that the spirits of men were there. When the plan of salvation was presented, without any question it was presented to all, not to a selected few. For the proper understanding of these events we have to rely upon modern revelation in which the knowledge is restored. In the Book of Moses we read:

And I, the Lord God, spake unto Moses, saying: That Satan, whom thou hast commanded in the name of mine Only Begotten, is the same which was from the beginning, and he came before me, saying—Behold, here am I, send me, I will be thy son, and I will redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost, and surely I will do it; wherefore give me thine honor.

But, behold, my Beloved Son, which was my Beloved and Chosen from the beginning, said unto me—Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever.

Wherefore, because that Satan rebelled against me, and sought to destroy the agency of man, which I, the Lord God, had given him, and also, that I should give unto him mine own power; by the power of mine Only Begotten, I caused that he should be cast down;

And he became Satan, yea, even the devil, the father of all lies, to deceive and to blind men, and to lead them captive at his will, even as many as would not hearken unto my voice. (Moses 4:1-4.)

The same account was revealed to Abraham, who wrote:

And there stood one among them that was like unto God, and he said unto those who were with him: We will go down, for there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell;

And we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them;

And they who keep their first estate shall be added upon; and they who keep not their first estate shall not have glory in the same kingdom with those who keep their first estate; and they who keep their second estate shall have glory added upon their heads forever and ever.

And the Lord said: Whom shall I send? And one answered like unto the Son of Man: Here am I, send me. And another answered and said: Here am I, send me. And the Lord said: I will send the first.

And the second was angry, and kept not his first estate; and, at that day many followed after him. (Abraham 3:24-28.)

From these scriptures we learn that our Father called a council, and the plan of salvation was presented to all. Lucifer rebelled and led away one-third of the spirits, and they were cast out with him. It is not the fault of our Eternal Father that throughout the world there are the many millions who are born without the light of the gospel. In the very beginning the commandment was given to Adam to teach his children the plan of salvation. This Adam did, and we read:

PLAN OF SALVATION PRESENTED TO ALL SPIRITS

And Adam and Eve blessed the name of God, and they made all things known unto their sons and their daughters.

And Satan came among them, saying: I am also a son of God; and he commanded them saying: Believe it not; and they believed it not, and they loved Satan more than God. And men began from that time forth to be carnal, sensual, and devilish. (Moses 5:12-13.)

It was necessary that all should have the plan of salvation placed before them in that spirit existence, otherwise there could have been no rebellion against the plan and if all had not had the privilege of receiving or rejecting it, there could have been no punishment for rebellion.

It is not because our Father wants men to be born in lands where the gospel does not reach that they are born there. Spirits have to come into this world for the purpose of receiving bodies of flesh and bones, tabernacles for their eternal spirits. It is due to man's rebellion that the light of truth is not universal. There is, however, in the gospel plan one great blessing showing forth the justice and mercy of our Eternal Father. It is the promise that the gospel must be taught to every soul, for it is written:

For verily the voice of the Lord is unto all men, and there is none to escape; and there is no eye that shall not see, neither ear that shall not hear, neither heart that shall not be penetrated.

And the rebellious shall be pierced with much sorrow; for their iniquities shall be spoken upon the housetops, and their secret acts shall be revealed. (D. & C. 1:2-3.)

This great promise can be fulfilled only by carrying the gospel to the dead who lived and died without the opportunity of receiving it. Therefore the plan was prepared in the beginning that the gospel should be taken to the dead, who died without a knowledge of it.
