Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 3 ( 1960)

10

Did Jesus Perform Baptisms?

Question: "In our textbook, 'Our Lord of The Gospels,' Section 36, we are referred to John 3:22, which reads: 'After these things came Jesus, and his disciples into the land of Judea and there he tarried with them, and baptized.' Then in John 4:1-2, we read:

" 'When therefore the Lord knew how the Pharisees had heard that Jesus made and baptized more disciples than John,

" '(Though Jesus himself baptized not, but his disciples).'

"Question: Did Jesus himself baptize or did he only instruct his apostles and have them baptize?"

Answer: The fact is well-established that our Savior held all the keys and authority of the priesthood, and had the divine right to officiate in each and all of the ordinances of the gospel; nor was it beneath his dignity to administer in any capacity whatsoever he desired. Much of his time was taken in administering to the sick, giving eyesight to the blind, raising the dead, healing lepers, and bestowing blessings upon the multitudes who thronged around him. There can be little question as to his authority to do any work that pertained to his ministry. In the third chapter of John, it states definitely that he baptized. In the fourth chapter, as it has come through faulty translations, it states that he did not baptize, or implies as much in most modern translations. Unfortunately we do not have any original manuscript.

THE COMMENT OF DR. ADAM CLARKE

Dr. Adam Clarke in his Commentary states the following:

. . . It is not clear that Christ did baptize any with water: but his disciples did; chap. IV:2, and what they did by his authority and command, is attributed to himself. It is a common custom in all countries and in all languages, to attribute the operations of those who are under the government and direction of another, to him by whom they are directed and governed. Some however suppose, that Christ at first did not baptize; but when he got disciples, he left this work to them; and thus these two places are to be understood:—1. This place, of Christ's baptizing before he called the twelve disciples: and 2. chap. IV:2, of the baptism administered by the disciples after they had been called to the work by Christ. (Clarke's Commentary on John 4:1-4, Volume V, p. 509.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith has interpreted this passage in John 4:1-4, as follows:

When therefore the Pharisees had heard that Jesus made and baptized more disciples than John,

They sought more diligently some means that they might put him to death; for many received John as a prophet, but they believed not on Jesus.

Now the Lord knew this, though he himself baptized not as many as his disciples,

For he suffered them for an example, preferring one another. (Inspired Version.)
