Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 3 ( 1960)

12

Are the Dead Called Home?

Question: "From time to time we hear speakers at funerals state that God had called the dead person home, which is the reason for that person's death. We are trying to harmonize the doctrine of free agency with this statement, but find difficulty in doing so. Is there any help you can give?"

Answer: One of the greatest blessings given to mankind is the gift of free agency. Without it there could be no salvation. It was Satan's plan to take away from the spirits assigned to come to this earth this great eternal blessing. Under false pretenses he offered to save all the children of our Eternal Father, without any exception, on the terms that our Eternal Father would surrender his throne to him. Such a salvation would have required each individual to surrender his divine gift of freedom of thought and action, therefore it could be no salvation at all. With the divine privilege of accepting or rejecting the eternal plan which had been prepared, each soul is placed in the category of freedom of action and will. Hence each soul is subject to the rewards and punishment based on individual conduct.

DISOBEDIENCE TO LAW MAY SHORTEN LIFE

One of the great commandments is as follows:

Honour thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be long upon the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee. (Exodus 20:12.)

Paul commenting on this said:

Children, obey your parents in the Lord: for this is right.

Honour thy father and mother; which is the first commandment with promise;

That it may be well with thee, and thou mayest live long on the earth. (Ephesians 6:1-3.)

In giving counsel to the Corinthian Saints, who had been guilty of violating the sacred observance of the sacrament, Paul further said:

For he that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh damnation to himself, not discerning the Lord's body.

For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep. (I Corinthians 11:29-30.)

Evidently Paul meant that many had passed away because of their violation of this commandment. There can be little question raised contrary to the fact that men shorten their lives by violation of the commandments of the Lord. The use of narcotics, liquors, and other drugs and stimulants inevitably weakens and impairs the functions of the body, thus shortening the span of life.

Even good, faithful persons, who disregard the laws of health, may shorten the life span which otherwise could have been theirs. Moreover, we are all subject to the ravages of disease, disaster, accidents that could, and often do, shorten life.

ACCIDENTAL DEATHS ARE UNTIMELY

Death/zNearly every day we read of innocent persons dying in automobile accidents, by drowning in some stream or lake, or in some other danger, death has overtaken them, and it was no fault of their own. We are all subject to the various vicissitudes and conditions in life which confront us which could not be foreseen. It would be contrary to sound thinking to assume that the Lord has decreed that these individuals had been called home by such accidents or calamities, and that "fate" had ordered it so.

Death/It is true that some have been "called home" by sudden death. This was the case with the Prophet Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum. They had finished their work and the keys of authority, by divine revelation, had been lawfully bestowed upon the twelve. Joseph and Hyrum were in the vigor of their manhood, but the time had come for them to lay down their lives, for it was decreed in the heavens that their passing from this world should be by martyrdom. They had to seal their testimony with their blood and make that testimony binding upon an unbelieving world.

Death/NOT ALL DEATHS ARE BY DIVINE DECREE

Death/No one in reason would deny the right of our Eternal Father to call an individual home, should he will it. Nor would he argue that to take a person from the mortal life in his youth or early childhood, would be unjust, because it deprived the individual of the pleasures and sorrows of mortality, and the experiences to be gained here. He may call any person "home" at any time he chooses, whether in infancy, childhood, youth, or old age. We are all subject to the will of our Heavenly Father, but we cannot in truth declare that all the righteous dead were "called home" by divine decree.
