Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 3 ( 1960)

13

War and the Gospel of Jesus Christ

Question: "In our missionary labors we are frequently being confronted with the problem of war, especially when we begin presenting the Book of Mormon. Since these people are nonmembers, we have to base our religious views on the Bible teachings. We meet many people who believe that the members of the true Church of Jesus Christ taught love and goodwill towards all men and when we go to war we kill and are not fulfilling the commandments. If we were really Christians, they say, we would rather give our lives than kill our brothers. We would appreciate an answer to this problem."

Answer: It is true that the Lord taught all men everywhere to love one another and not go to war. The first commandment is:

Hear, O Israel: the Lord our God is one Lord:

And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might. (Deuteronomy 6:4-5.)

The second commandment is:

Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. (Matthew 22:39.)

This would be an ideal world, filled with righteousness, if all men would keep these two great commandments; but men have turned away from the true worship of the Living God. They do not love their neighbor as themselves. Because of this condition wickedness prevails in the earth. Nations rise against nations, and war has plagued the earth from the beginning. This condition will continue until the coming of Jesus Christ as Lord of lords and King of kings. When that day arrives, all who cannot live in peace with their neighbors and worship the King of peace, will, of necessity, be removed. All indications in the world today point to the fact that the day of his coming is drawing near. He has said:

For nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom: and there shall be famines, and pestilences, and earthquakes, in divers places.

All these are the beginning of sorrows. (Matthew 24:7-8.)

PEACE WILL NOT BE ESTABLISHED UNTIL MILLENNIUM

However the promises are made that when this reign of peace shall come, there shall be no more war, "and they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruninghooks: nation shall not lift up a sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more." (Micah 4:3.)

Our question is, however, is there ever a time when war, or the taking up of arms is justified?

Yes, there are such times. There have been many instances when the Lord has justified the taking up of arms and has approved his people in their obedience to such action. When it becomes necessary for a righteous people to take arms against their enemies who are the aggressors, in protection of their lives and in defense of their possessions, the Lord has approved. If you will read the scriptures carefully, you will discover that the Lord commanded his chosen people to prepare for war and even to be the aggressors in the accomplishment of his purposes. Here are a few examples:

And Israel vowed a vow unto the Lord, and said, If thou wilt indeed deliver this people into my hand, then I will utterly destroy their cities.

And the Lord hearkened to the voice of Israel, and delivered up the Canaanites; and they utterly destroyed them and their cities: and he called the name of the place Hormah. (Numbers 21:2-3.)

And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

Avenge the children of Israel of the Midianites: afterward shalt thou be gathered unto thy people.

And Moses spake unto the people, saying, Arm some of yourselves unto the war, and let them go against the Midianites, and avenge the Lord of Midian. (Numbers 31:1-3.)

When the Lord thy God shall bring thee into the land whither thou goest to possess it, and hath cast out many nations before thee, and the Hittites, and the Girgashites, and the Amorites, and the Canaanites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, seven nations greater and mightier than thou;

And when the Lord thy God shall deliver them before thee; thou shalt smite them, and utterly destroy them; thou shalt make no covenant with them, nor shew mercy unto them.

Neither shalt thou make marriages with them; thy daughter thou shalt not give unto his son, nor his daughter shalt thou take unto thy son. (Deuteronomy 7:1-3.)

All through the Old Testament you will find commandments which were given to Israel to go to war. There were good reasons for this which may be discovered by reading these parts of the Bible.

THE LORD UPHOLDS THE RIGHTEOUS

The Lord has always upheld a people which righteously defends itself against wicked aggression. He has said that he cleansed this American continent by the shedding of blood and justified the American colonists in their war of the American Revolution. Through Samuel, the Lord commanded Israel to make war on Israel's enemies.

We are taught that there was war in heaven when Satan rebelled and was driven out. We are informed that Michael will fight the great battle with Lucifer at the end of the world, so there are times when war becomes necessary. We are under commandment to obey the laws of the countries in which we live, and many times on this account people are forced to take up arms against their wishes, but the Lord will justify them because they are subject to the law of the country where they live and of necessity have to obey.

The Lord said to the Prophet Joseph Smith:

I have sworn in my wrath, and decreed wars upon the face of the earth, and the wicked shall slay the wicked, and fear shall come upon every man; (D. & C. 63:33.)

The Lord has given to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints a law by which they, as a people, are to be governed. This is the law which would apply to his people in any age of the world.

And again I say unto you, if ye observe to do whatsoever I command you, I, the Lord, will turn away all wrath and indignation from you, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against you.

Now, I speak unto you concerning your families—if men will smite you, or your families, once, and ye bear it patiently and revile not against them, neither seek revenge, ye shall be rewarded;

But if ye bear it not patiently, it shall be accounted unto you as being meted out as a just measure unto you.

And again, if your enemy shall smite you the second time, and you revile not against your enemy, and bear it patiently, your reward shall be an hundredfold.

And again, if he shall smite you the third time, and ye bear it patiently, your reward shall be doubled unto you four-fold;

And these three testimonies shall stand against your enemy if he repent not, and shall not be blotted out.

And now, verily I say unto you, if that enemy shall escape my vengeance, that he be not brought into judgment before me, then ye shall see to it that ye warn him in my name, that he come no more upon you, neither upon your family, even your children's children unto the third and fourth generation.

And then, if he shall come upon you or your children, or your children's children unto the third and fourth generation, I have delivered thine enemy into thine hands;

And then if thou wilt spare him, thou shalt be rewarded for thy righteousness; and also thy children and thy children's children unto the third and fourth generation.

Nevertheless, thine enemy is in thine hands; and if thou rewardest him according to his works thou art justified; if he has sought thy life, and thy life is endangered by him, thine enemy is in thine hands and thou art justified.

Behold, this is the law I gave unto my servant Nephi, and thy fathers, Joseph, and Jacob, and Isaac, and Abraham, and all mine ancient prophets and apostles.

And again, this is the law that I gave unto mine ancients, that they should not go out unto battle against any nation, kindred, tongue, or people, save I, the Lord, commanded them.

And if any nation, tongue, or people should proclaim war against them, they should first lift a standard of peace unto that people, nation, or tongue;

And if that people did not accept the offering of peace, neither the second nor the third time, they should bring these testimonies before the Lord;

Then I, the Lord, would give unto them a commandment, and justify them in going out to battle against that nation, tongue, or people.

And I, the Lord, would fight their battles, and their children's battles, and their children's children's, until they had avenged themselves on all their enemies, to the third and fourth generation.

Behold, this is an ensample unto all people, saith the Lord your God, for justification before me. (D. & C. 98:22-38. )

THE VIEWPOINT OF PRESIDENT JOHN TAYLOR

It is no worse to have our Eternal Father command us to go to war and to destroy the lives of the wicked in war, than it is for him to bring fire from heaven to accomplish the same purpose, as he did on the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah; or to destroy cities as he did by earthquake and fire as recorded in the Book of Mormon; or to bring upon the world a flood to cleanse the earth of its wickedness. President John Taylor has given us reasons for the Lord's accomplishment of his purposes in the following words:

"If thy brother, the son of thy mother, or thy son, or thy daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend, which is as thine own soul, entice thee secretly, saying, Let us go and serve other gods, which thou hast not known, thou, nor thy fathers;

"Namely, of the gods of the people which are round about you, nigh unto thee, or far off from thee, from the one end of the earth even unto the other end of the earth; Thou shalt not consent unto him, or hearken unto him; neither shalt thine eye pity him, neither shalt thou spare, neither shalt thou conceal him:

"But thou shalt surely kill him; thine hand shall be first upon him to put him to death, and afterwards the hand of all the people.

"And thou shalt stone him with stones, that he die; because he hath sought to thrust thee away from the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage." (Deuteronomy 13:6-10.)

Here, then, it is stated, that if brother, son, wife or any one, wish to lead thee from God, thou shalt destroy them; and why? Because in forsaking God, they lose sight of their eternal existence, corrupt themselves, and entail misery on their posterity. Hence it was better to destroy a few individuals, than to entail misery on many. And hence the inhabitants of the old world and of the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah were destroyed, because it was better for them to die, and thus be deprived of their agency, which they abused, then entail so much misery on their posterity, and bring ruin upon millions of unborn persons. (John Taylor, The Government of God, p. 53.)
