Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 3 ( 1960)

15

Differences in Genealogical Lineage

Question: "I wish to receive an answer to the following question: Is it possible for all the members of a family, including father and mother, to be of the tribe of Ephraim and one son in that family to be of the tribe of Manasseh?"

Answer: It is very possible that a patriarch in giving blessings to a family may declare that one or more may be of a different lineage from the others through the inspiration which he receives. We have in our archives, blessings showing this difference to exist in families. Without giving this question careful thought one might conclude that the patriarch had spoken without inspiration, but such would be an incorrect conclusion.

The fact is that we, each and all, have descended through a mixed lineage. No one can lay claim to a perfect descent from father to son through just one lineage. The Lord blessed Abraham and said:

THE GREATNESS OF ABRAHAM'S POSTERITY

And I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee above measure, and make thy name great among all nations, and thou shalt be a blessing unto thy seed after thee, that in their hands they shall bear this ministry and Priesthood unto all nations;

And I will bless them through thy name; for as many as receive this Gospel shall be . . . accounted thy seed, and shall rise up and bless thee, as their father;

And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee; and in thee (that is, in thy Priesthood) and in thy seed (that is, thy Priesthood ), for I give unto thee a promise that this right shall continue in thee, and in thy seed after thee (that is to say, the literal seed, or the seed of the body) shall all the families of the earth be blessed, even with the blessings of the Gospel, which are the blessings of salvation, even of life eternal. (Abraham 2:9-11.)

Therefore, through the scattering of Israel among the nations, the blood of Israel was mixed with the Gentile nations, fulfilling the promise made to Abraham. Most of the members of the Church, although they are designated as descendants of Abraham, through Israel, also have in their veins Gentile blood. This is to say, no one is a direct descendant through Ephraim through each generation, or through Manasseh or any other one of the sons of Jacob, without having acquired the blood of some other tribe in Israel in that descent.

INTERMARRIAGE WAS COMMON AMONG TRIBES

When Israel came out of Egypt, Moses separated them into twelve tribes, and by virtue of this inheritance they were assigned to certain parts of the land of Palestine. However, the members of these tribes were not compelled to marry within their particular tribe. Neither were the Israelites placed under any edict that they had to remain on inheritances within the borders of the territory assigned to their particular tribe.

There is no question that they were at liberty to move from place to place and to marry as they chose among the several tribes. When the ten tribes were taken away into Assyria, it does not mean that all of the members of these ten tribes were transported and that none were left. The Israelites had the privilege of moving from place to place and of intermarrying as they pleased among the tribes of Israel. Therefore, perhaps none of them came down through the ages with a pure descent from any one of the sons of Israel. Without doubt there were those in the tribe of Ephraim who married into the tribe of Judah, or Manasseh, and those of the tribe of Manasseh that could have married into the tribe of Ephraim, and so on among the other tribes of Israel.

Moreover we have learned that the Lord said that he would scatter Israel among the Gentile nations, and by doing so he would bless the Gentile nations with the blood of Abraham. Today we are preaching the gospel in the world and we are gathering out, according to the revelations given to Isaiah, Jeremiah, and other prophets, the scattered sheep of the house of Israel. These scattered sheep are coming forth mixed with Gentile blood from their Gentile forefathers. Under all the circumstances it is very possible that the majority, almost without exception, of those who come into the Church in this dispensation have the blood of two or more of the tribes of Israel as well as the blood of the Gentiles.

ALL PERSONS BORN THROUGH A MIXED RELATIONSHIP

The Book of Mormon states that Joseph Smith the Prophet was a descendant of Joseph, son of Jacob. By revelation we learn also that he is of the tribe of Ephraim, but it is evident that he also had some Gentile blood in him, for it is written in the Book of Mormon, that it came forth, "by way of the Gentile," (I Nephi 13:35, 39.) and it came by Joseph Smith. It is reasonable, therefore, to understand that we one and all have come through a mixed relationship, and that the blood of Ephraim and also of Manasseh could be in the veins of many of us, likewise the blood of others of the twelve tribes of Israel, and that none of us had come through the ages with clear exclusive descent from father to son through any one of the tribes.

In giving blessings the patriarch then is directing the lineage through the blood that predominates, and there could be one son who would be designated as of Ephraim and his brother, of the same father and mother, could correctly be said to be of the blood of Manasseh, or of Benjamin, or of any other member of the tribes of Israel. One of the best examples of this difference in blood is recorded in the Book of Genesis. It is the birth of Esau and Jacob. They were twin brothers, yet, according to what is revealed they were as far apart as though they had been born to parents of different nationalities. Perhaps this is explained by Mendel's Law governing the differences in parental offspring.
