Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 3 ( 1960)

16

Paul's Counsel on Women Speaking in Churches

Question: "In studying the New Testament, I came to two passages written by Paul as follows:

" 'Let your women keep silence in the churches: for it is not permitted unto them to speak; but they are commanded to be under obedience, as also saith the law.

" 'And if they will learn any thing, let them ask their husbands at home: for it is a shame for women to speak in the church.' (I Cor. 14:34-35.)

" 'I will therefore that men pray every where, lifting up holy hands, without wrath and doubting.

" 'In like manner also, that women adorn themselves in modest apparel, with shamefacedness and sobriety; not with broided hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly array;

" 'But (which becometh women professing godliness) with good works.

" 'Let the woman learn in silence with all subjection.

" 'But I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over the man, but to be in silence.

" 'For Adam was first formed, then Eve.'" (1 Tim. 2:8-13.)

Answer: Times have changed from what they were in the days of Paul. The counsel that Paul gave in the branches of the Church in his day was in strict conformity to the law of the times in which he lived. In the beginning it was not so. Paul intimates that Eve was silent because she was created after Adam, but we may read in the Pearl of Great Price that after the consequences brought upon Adam and Eve by the fall, Eve preached the discourse. It is brief but wonderfully full of meaning and is as follows:

. . . Were it not for our transgression we never should have had seed, and never should have known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient. (Moses 5:11.)

And Adam and Eve blessed the name of God, and they made all things known unto their sons and their daughters. (Moses 5:12.) ( Italics added. )

EVE COMMANDED TO TEACH HER CHILDREN

We learn from this that Eve as well as Adam received revelation and commandment to teach their children in the ways of eternal life. Then we learn that Miriam, the sister of Moses and Aaron, was a prophetess who played an important part in the exodus from Egypt. She led the women in a triumphal song after the deliverance from Egypt. (Exodus 15:20.) We also read in the Book of Judges where Israel was taken captive, or into bondage, by the Canaanites. Deborah, another prophetess, led the armies of Israel to victory and she judged Israel. (Judges 4:4, 24; 5:1-3.) We also read of Hannah, the mother of Samuel, who went to the Lord in the temple, or tabernacle, and prayed for a son and the Lord hearkened to her pleading. (Samuel 1:11-28.) In the Book of Judges we also read of the wife of Manoah who received a visitation from an angel who gave instruction and said she should have a son who would judge Israel. This manifestation was repeated in the presence of her husband. (Judges 13:2-21.)

Joel also prophesied in the following words that in the last day the Lord would pour out his spirit:

And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions:

And also upon the servants and upon the handmaids in those days will I pour out my spirit. (Joel 2:28-29.)

FAITHFUL WOMEN HAVE GIVEN COUNSEL

In the New Testament we read of a great number of faithful women who sought and gave counsel. Many of these followed the Lord and ministered to him. Anna, the daughter of Phanuel, was a prophetess (Luke 2:37.) " . . . which departed not from the temple, but served God with fastings and prayers night and day," and she taught those who were present of the redemption which should come through this infant son. Even in the days of Paul there were a number of notable women who ministered to the needs of the brethren, and it appears that to some of these there had been given authority.

In the days of Paul, however, it was the universal custom that women should play no part in political government or minister in churches. Israel, without doubt, gathered some ideas from the Gentile governments with which they associated. The Jewish people, after the return from the captivity, adopted some of the customs and practices common among their captors which were contrary to the former government in Israel. Many man-made rituals and technicalities were added to the law. The custom that women should remain silent may have been borrowed from their pagan neighbors with such additions as the Jewish priests added to the Jewish law.

PAUL'S VIEW WAS BASED ON JEWISH TRADITION

It is recorded in some of the encyclopedias that Paul based his thinking upon certain Jewish traditions and customs that had accumulated through the years. It was an ordinance that women were not permitted to teach, even to ask questions in any of their assemblies. According to Clarke's Commentary, the rabbins taught that "a woman should do nothing but the use of her staff," and Rabbi Eliezer is credited with the statement that it would be better, "to let the words [records] of the law be burned, rather than that they should be delivered to women." Therefore Jewish women were not permitted to hold any public office, to speak in any gatherings, or even to ask questions in any public assembly. Paul was strictly conforming to this law.

In this dispensation the Lord gave commandment that the sisters of the Church should be organized, that they should hold meetings, teach each other the gospel of the kingdom, administer to the poor, the needy, and the distressed. They were to nurse the sick and those who needed comfort.

Our Relief Society came by divine revelation. This is true also of the Mutual Improvement and Primary organizations. The foolish notions which were practiced by the Jews and others anciently have no place in the kingdom of God today. The Lord has promised to all, males and females alike, the gift of the Holy Ghost on conditions of faithfulness, humility, and true repentance. They are required to study and to know the truths of the gospel and to prepare themselves by study, faith, and obedience to all commandments to seek for light and truth that they may be entitled to celestial glory.
