Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 3 ( 1960)

17

Why Are Baptisms for the Dead Performed Below the Surface of the Earth?

Question: "While discussing the doctrines of salvation for the dead, one of the brethren stated that baptism for the dead must be performed in fonts that are below the level of the ground. If this is so, will you kindly tell us the reason why? Some of our number could not understand why a baptism for the dead would not be valid no matter where it was performed, even if it was not in a temple. Will you kindly inform us on this matter?"

Answer: The proper place for baptism for the dead is in a temple built especially for that purpose. In fact, all of the ordinances in behalf of the dead are to be performed in temples, as are most of the sacred ordinances for the living. This is the commandment the Lord gave to the Church. There had been occasions when sacred ordinances were performed outside of temples when there was the emergency and no temple of the Lord. This is true of the coming of the Father and the Son to the Prophet Joseph Smith, and the manifestation was in a grove. When there was no sacred temple, the Lord made himself manifest to the prophets of old, in sacred places and most generally on mountaintops. It was on a mountaintop where the Lord revealed himself to Moses and called him to his great work. It was on the mountain that our Lord took Peter, James, and John, when they were endowed and received their great vision. It was on Mount Horeb where the Lord appeared to Moses and on Shelem (Ether 3:1.) where he appeared to the brother of Jared and gave him commandments and showed him his body, and in the wilderness where priesthood was restored in this dispensation because there was no temple. In cases of emergency the Lord used such places as groves, the wilderness, or the highest mountains, there to reveal himself and bestow keys of priesthood to his prophets.

TEMPLE REQUIRED FOR RESTORATION OF KEYS

The authorities of the Church were commanded to make haste and build a house to the Lord in Kirtland, where he could come and restore keys of priesthood and of dispensations, this in the days of their poverty. By sacrifice and under the most trying difficulties the Kirtland Temple was erected, and after its dedication many of the ancient prophets came and bestowed the keys of their dispensations, but there was no provision made in the Kirtland Temple for baptism for the dead nor for any ordinances for the dead. It was, however, in this sacred house where the keys for the salvation of the dead were conferred and the turning of the key of salvation for the fathers by their children were revealed.

It was not until 1840 that the doctrine of salvation of the dead was fully revealed, and the Saints were taught that this ordinance could be performed by them in behalf of their dead kindred. In an epistle to the twelve apostles, who were then in Europe, the Prophet wrote:

I first mentioned the doctrine in public when preaching the funeral sermon of Brother Seymour Brunson; and have since then given general instructions in the Church on the subject. The Saints have the privilege of being baptized for those of their relatives who are dead, who they believe would have embraced the gospel, if they had been privileged with hearing it, and who have received the gospel in the spirit, through the instrumentality of those who have been commissioned to preach to them while in prison. (Essentials in Church History, p. 305.)

The privilege was then given to the members of the Church to be baptized for their dead in the Mississippi River. This privilege continued until the general conference October 3, 1841, when the Prophet said:

There shall be no more baptisms for the dead, until the ordinance can be attended to in the Lord's House; and the Church shall not hold another General Conference, until they can meet in said house, for thus saith the Lord. (Ibid., p. 310.)

On the eighth day of November following, the font in the Nauvoo Temple was dedicated, and baptisms for the dead ceased outside of a temple. The reason why the font is placed below the surface of the ground is stated by revelation as follows:

INSTRUCTIONS GIVEN THROUGH REVELATION

Herein is glory and honor, and immortality and eternal life—

The ordinance of baptism by water, to be immersed therein in order to answer to the likeness of the dead, that one principle might accord with the other; to be immersed in water and come forth out of the water is in the likeness of the resurrection of the dead in coming forth out of their graves; hence, this ordinance was instituted to form a relationship with the ordinance of baptism for the dead, being in likeness of the dead.

Consequently, the baptismal font was instituted as a similitude of the grave, and was commanded to be in a place underneath where the living are wont to assemble, to show forth the living and the dead, and that all things may have their likeness, and that they may accord one with another—that which is earthly conforming to that which is heavenly, as Paul hath declared, 1 Corinthians 15:46, 47, and 48: (D. & C. 128:12-13.)
