Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 3 ( 1960)

18

Why Did the Lord Permit the Destruction of the Book of Commandments?

Question: "A question that has disturbed me greatly is why the Lord permitted the mob to destroy the press, and the Book of Commandments when it was so nearly ready for publication, and the revelations had been approved by the Lord; the sheets had been dedicated to the Lord; and the people had worked so hard to finance and print them. There must be a reason, but I do not understand it."

Answer: In the beginning our Eternal Father gave to man his agency. This great gift permits every soul to act on his own judgment or desire. He may be obedient to law and order, righteousness and truth, or he may take the opposite course without interference from our Father in heaven. Because of this agency, and the activity of Satan, (Moses 5:13.) wickedness has prevailed in the world from the beginning. Contrary to the commandments of the Lord that men should live in peace and righteousness and respect the rights of others, they have used this agency to rebel against God and commit all manner of sin. The mission of Lucifer, as we all should know, is to fight truth and destroy the works of the Lord and the salvation of mankind if he can.

In the destruction of the printed sheets of the Book of Commandments it was the intention of the mob to destroy the work of the Lord which had been started. Perhaps they thought they had succeeded. The destruction of the press and the printed copies of the revelations did not retard the work which continued to progress and spread in various parts of the world. The plottings and evil intentions of the enemies of truth never succeed in the end. Their victories are always temporary and the Lord overrules them.

BOOK OF COMMANDMENTS PUBLISHED IN 1835

This destruction of the Book of Commandments occurred in July 1833, but the publication of the revelations was retarded only until 1835, when the first edition of the Doctrine and Covenants was published in Kirtland, Ohio. This publication contained the revelations that had been printed in Independence and others that had been subsequently received, therefore it was better than the Book of Commandments would have been. The destruction of the printed copies in Independence delayed the publication temporarily, but it permitted these evil-minded men to fill the measure of their wickedness.

How different it was in the attempt of wicked men to destroy the plates of the Book of Mormon. Every plot failed, and every attempt to destroy the manuscript and prevent the publication came to naught, and the Lord protected the publication to the end.

A great loss has come to the world in the mutilation of the original records of the ancient prophets. We may, however, be sure that the Lord has preserved in his own way the records and writings of the ancient prophets, and he has promised to reveal them in their purity in his own way and time, (Ether 4:6-7.) but he permitted Satan and his emissaries to remove from these records many of the most plain and precious parts, and because of this the inhabitants of the world stumble in unbelief and darkness and Satan has great power over them. (I Nephi 13:24-29.) We may not always see clearly, and thus we stumble and cherish false ideas in relation to the work of the Lord. Perhaps in the apostate condition of the world, the Lord permitted the enemies of truth to remove these plain and wonderful truths, for in their darkened minds and lacking of divine direction, they would not have understood them.

We should all be assured that the Lord has never relinquished his control and his power to bring to pass his purposes according to his will in his own due time and manner. He permits men to go just so far, and then he stops them if they have plans that are contrary to his decrees.
