Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 3 ( 1960)

19

Why Do the Authorities of the Church Engage in Business?

Question: "While I was conversing with a gentleman who does not belong to the Church, he raised the question, 'Why is it that the Authorities of the Church engage in business that belongs strictly to the business world?' He said this practice is contrary to the custom throughout the Christian world and is so out of harmony with the spiritual and religious needs of the members that it brings upon us universal criticism. He also felt that it was wrong and that the Church Authorities should devote their entire time to the teaching of the gospel and the spiritual welfare of the members as ministers do in other churches. This problem is new to us and we would like to receive the answer."

Answer: The idea that ministers of religion should depend on a salary and donations furnished by their congregations comes out of a long practice in the religious world. It was not so in the beginning when ministers labored with their hands for a living and blessed the people by encouraging words and spiritual counsel. In the true Church in ancient times this modern system was not the custom. The fact is that the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has many functions, not merely that of delivering discourses and giving counsel. From the very beginning the servants of the Lord depended upon their own industry for their support. Paul furnished a good example of this, for he practiced his trade as he traveled from place to place among the members of the Church without depending on the members. He did not receive a salary for his preaching. (Acts 18:3, 20:34; I Corinthians 4:12; I Thessalonians 2:9.)

Abraham, who because of his faithfulness was promised that the blessings of the gospel and the priesthood should descend through his lineage to the latest times, was a stockman, tending herds and flocks for his support and the support of those who depended upon him. It may be thought that Abraham's concern was solely with his family, but a more careful reading of the scriptures will reveal that he was at the head of a great company, and from it he was able to muster a force large enough to defeat the invading kings and rescue Lot from them. It was the same with the prophets in Israel. We do not read of any of them being employed with a salary, but they labored with their hands. The Lord commanded Moses to teach the Israelites to be industrious and show them the way.

THE LORD'S PEOPLE WERE INDUSTRIOUS

All through the ages the Lord taught his people to be industrious, and he gave them revelation from time to time directing them in matters of this kind. The idea that in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints the Authorities are breaking the rules and engaging in selfish enterprises for the purpose of getting wealthy, is an erroneous notion. The Lord taught his people by revelation through the Prophet Joseph Smith, that the members of the Church should be industrious and that their leading brethren should set an example in that direction.

It is, however, by divine revelation that the industries among the Latter-day Saints have been developed, and their leading men have set before them this example. It is by divine commandment that President Brigham Young and his brethren established the first commercial department store that was to be found in the borders of the United States.

Did they do this with the thought in mind of becoming wealthy? Verily, no. The propelling thought back of it was to give employment, to furnish the members of the Church the necessities of life at reasonable rates and thus be benefited and protected from those who came to sell goods at excessive profits.

It was by revelation that Israel in the days of Moses and the prophets were required to build and cultivate the land and be industrious. It is by that same kind of inspiration that modern Zion has been built and prospered.

COMPENSATION COMES FROM INVESTMENTS

Thoughts, such as these expressed by this gentleman, come through misunderstanding. Is it not better for the Authorities of the Church to receive compensation out of these industries and investments than to take it out of the tithing of the people? I am informed that the General Authorities of the Church are in no way paid out of the tithing of the Latter-day Saints. The tithes are used for the purposes for which they were originally intended. The compensation coming from these investments help to pay for the building of chapels, temples, and other edifices, thus lessening the burden that otherwise would be placed upon the people. When the true condition is thoroughly understood, the criticism which so frequently arises should cease.

Unfortunately there are those who seem to take delight in offering criticism and in finding fault without knowing the true conditions. Perhaps other churches would be better off, spiritually and temporally, if their ministers assisted the members in establishing industries and thus helped them financially to better their conditions. It can be said also that the officers of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints who labor without salaries coming out of the pockets of the members, are just as spiritually minded, have just as good judgment and wisdom in directing the temporal as well as the spiritual welfare of the people, as are any of the ministers who spend their entire time in what may be called spiritual counsel. For instance, the bishops of our wards and the presidents of our stakes and other officers give their time freely without any monetary compensation paid by members of the Church. It is equally true that the young men and women who are distributed over the face of the earth as missionaries of the Church pay their own way, or their parents do. We do not have a paid ministry, yet these brethren put in as much time in spiritual and Church duties, as do ministers of other denominations who devote their entire time, and in addition, they are under the necessity of earning their own living by their daily employment in industry. They do this because they have an abiding testimony of the divinity of the work the Church requires of them.
