Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 3 ( 1960)

20

Does Satan Have Power to Answer Prayer?

Question: "In a fireside meeting in our branch the question was asked: 'Does Satan have power to answer our prayers?' Some of those present stated that it was their opinion that he did, but that he would do so to deceive us. Others felt that if our prayers were sincere, Satan could have no power to intervene and give us false answers. Since there was a division of opinion we would like to have an answer to the question."

Answer: That Satan has great power to deceive is a demonstrated fact. We read in the scriptures where he exercises his power to deceive and lead mankind astray on numerous occasions. When Adam and Eve were driven from the Garden of Eden, the Lord sent an angel to instruct them in the plan of salvation, and they were commanded to teach these things to their children, which they faithfully did; but Satan came among them and said: "I am also a son of God; and he commanded them, saying: Believe it not; and they believed it not, and they loved Satan more than God. And men began from that time forth to be carnal, sensual, and devilish." (Moses 5:13.) He tried to destroy our Redeemer also through temptation and in this he failed. When the time had arrived for the restoration of the gospel in this dispensation, Satan evidently knew of it and did all in his power to destroy the Prophet Joseph Smith before the coming of the Father and the Son with the message of salvation.

SATAN'S MISSION IS TO DESTROY

Satan's mission is to destroy. When he rebelled at the council in heaven, he determined to destroy the work of the Lord and subject all mankind to his power. It must be admitted that in a great measure he has accomplished his purpose, for he has persuaded the vast majority of the inhabitants of the earth to turn away from the divinely revealed truth. He will lay temptations in the path of every individual to cause them to commit sin. He has taught the world false doctrines under the guise of truth and many have followed him. He appeared to Moses saying:

. . . Moses, son of man, worship me.

And it came to pass that Moses looked upon Satan and said: Who art thou? For behold, I am a son of God, in the similitude of his Only Begotten; and where is thy glory, that I should worship thee? (Moses 1:12-13.)

We should be on guard always to resist Satan's advances. He will appear to us in the person of a friend or a relative in whom we have confidence. He has power to place thoughts in our minds and to whisper to us in unspoken impressions to entice us to satisfy our appetites or desires and in various other ways he plays upon our weaknesses and desires. Nephi understood this clearly and by the gift of prophecy left a warning for the present generations calling on us to be on guard and prepared to resist Satan's advances. Here are some of his words to the present generation:

For the kingdom of the devil must shake, and they which belong to it must needs be stirred up unto repentance, or the devil will grasp them with his everlasting chains, and they be stirred up to anger, and perish;

For behold, at that day shall he rage in the hearts of the children of men, and stir them up to anger against that which is good.

And others will he pacify, and lull them away into carnal security, that they will say: All is well in Zion; yea, Zion prospereth, all is well—and thus the devil cheateth their souls, and leadeth them away carefully down to hell.

And behold, others he flattereth away, and telleth them there is no hell; and he saith unto them: I am no devil, for there is none—and thus he whispereth in their ears, until he grasps them with his awful chains, from whence there is no deliverance. (II Nephi 28:19-22.)

RESIST EVERY UNWHOLESOME THOUGHT

We should not consider his power too lightly, but in the sincerity of our souls resist every impression, every unwholesome thought or desire and every persuasion to do wrong that may come from any source whatever, even from our most cherished friends. Satan knows all the tricks and has had long experience in persuading people to do evil. Nephi has also given us the following wholesome advice:

And now, my beloved brethren, I perceive that ye ponder still in your hearts; and it grieveth me that I must speak concerning this thing. For if ye would hearken unto the Spirit which teacheth a man to pray ye would know that ye must pray; for the evil spirit teacheth not a man to pray, but teacheth him that he must not pray.

But behold, I say unto you that ye must pray always, and not faint; that ye must not perform any thing unto the Lord save in the first place ye shall pray unto the Father in the name of Christ, that he will consecrate thy performance unto thee, that thy performance may be for the welfare of thy soul. (II Nephi 32:8-9.)

We learn that it is a commandment from the Lord that we seek him constantly in humble prayer. When the Savior was with his disciples he taught them to pray and he set the example before them in frequent prayers to his Father. We may be sure, since it is a commandment from the Lord, that there is virtue in prayer, and when we seek the Lord it should be in the spirit of humility and reverence. In the Sermon on the Mount, Jesus said to his disciples:

Ask and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you: . . .

Or what man is there of you, whom if his son ask bread, will he give him a stone? (Matthew 7:7, 9.)

And again:

But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you. (Matthew 6:33.)

When his authority was questioned by the Jews, Jesus answered them and said,

If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself. (John 7:17.)

FAITHFUL WILL NOT BE DECEIVED

We may feel perfectly sure that the Lord would not command us to pray and then permit Satan to interfere and deceive us, if we have the spirit of humility and faith to approach our Father for his blessings. It is written in the revelations given to the Church,

And again, verily I say unto you, my friends, I leave these sayings with you to ponder in your hearts, with this commandment which I give unto you, that ye shall call upon me while I am near—

Draw near unto me and I will draw near unto you; seek me diligently and ye shall find me; ask, and ye shall receive; knock, and it shall be opened unto you.

Whatsoever ye ask the Father in my name it shall be given unto you, that is expedient for you;

And if ye ask anything that is not expedient for you, it shall turn unto your condemnation. (D.&C. 88:62-65.)

We are thus advised not to ask for things that are not expedient. Too many times in prayers things may be asked for which are not expedient but to gratify our vanity or foolish desires, and then if answered the prayer could be to our hurt. We have a wonderful example of this in the case of Martin Harris, when he persisted, after the Lord had refused his request and on his repeated seeking the request was granted. The result of this became a plague to him and even to the Prophet Joseph Smith all their lives. Then again, the promise is sure that the Lord will not deny the humble petition which is offered, and it may not be expedient in some prayers that the answer be given as requested. Moreover, it is true that the Lord is not always near. The man who has ignored the Lord, who has not kept his commandments, and who does not pray, may find it a very difficult thing to obtain an answer to his earnest prayer when in distress, and the answer is sorely needed.

PARENTS' DUTY TO TEACH CHILDREN TO PRAY

The Lord also said: "He that seeketh me early shall find me, and shall not be forsaken." (D. & C. 88:83.) It is the duty of parents to teach their children to pray as soon as they commence to understand. Let them form the habit of approaching their Father in heaven, and with the understanding of the reason for prayer. If this habit is formed in childhood, it may remain through mature years, and the man or woman who has earnestly sought the Lord and thanked him for blessings, may expect that the Lord will not forsake them in the hour of need. Members of the Church should reflect frequently on the admonition of Amulek, as recorded in Alma, chapter thirty-four, in the Book of Mormon.

We may be definitely sure that the Lord will not permit Satan to deceive the earnest seeker after truth when he sincerely prays.
