Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 3 ( 1960)

21

Resurrection Since the Resurrection of Our Lord

Question: "We know that there was a resurrection at the time the Savior arose from the tomb and that there will be one at his second coming. There is no scriptural evidence that I can find that shows there is still a resurrection going on. How do we explain the fact that Moroni, Peter, James, and John are resurrected beings, who came to the Prophet Joseph Smith? The scriptures speak of the first resurrection being at the second coming of Christ. This means, of course, first resurrection to us, since there has been a resurrection for those who were worthy who lived before the coming of our Lord."

Answer: It is true that there could not be any resurrection preceding the resurrection of our Lord, for as Paul has expressed it, the Savior became the first fruits of them that slept. He held the keys of the resurrection and through his mercy the resurrection is a free gift to all, " . . . for as in Adam all die, even so, in Christ shall all be made alive." (I Corinthians 15:22.)

There are several pointed prophecies in relation to the resurrection recorded in the Bible, but most of them are indefinite as to time. The Lord revealed to Isaiah the restoration of the dead to immortality, also to Ezekiel, Daniel, and others, but most of these passages are indefinite as to point of time. Some of the clearest revelations are found in the Book of Mormon and in our time in the Doctrine and Covenants.

In his conversation with Martha just before the restoration of Lazarus, the Lord made one of the most profound statements on the resurrection with positive assurance of its reality in the following words:

I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believeth in me though he were dead, yet shall he live:

And whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die. Believest thou this? (John 11:25-26.)

CHRIST PROCLAIMED A UNIVERSAL RESURRECTION

To the Jews he proclaimed the universal resurrection in the following words:

Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that heareth my word, and believeth on him that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not come unto condemnation; but is passed from death unto life.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God; and they that hear shall live.

For as the Father hath life in himself; so hath he given to the Son to have life in himself;

And hath given him authority to execute judgment also, because he is the Son of man.

Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice,

And shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation. (John 5:23-29.)

John, who had opened to his vision the great events pertaining to the history of this world, the coming of Christ as King of kings and the universal resurrection, has recorded this:

And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; and the books were opened: and another book was opened, which is the book of life: and the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to their works.

And the sea gave up the dead which were in it; and death and hell delivered up the dead which were in them: and they were judged every man according to their works.

And death and hell were cast into the lake of fire. This is the second death. (Revelation 20:12-14.)

MANY DENY A UNIVERSAL RESURRECTION

This is all stated preliminary to the consideration of the question which is propounded. The reason being that there are many who deny the universal resurrection, and teach that the wicked are to be consumed and cease to exist, which is a doctrine that is foreign to the intent of the prophecies in the scriptures.

The Savior was emphatic in his statement that all should come forth, the righteous to receive the blessings of his kingdom, and the wicked to be punished for their rebellion. We may be sure that in his mercy, the Lord will do for all the best that can be done. Some will merit the exaltation, others punishment until they have paid the "uttermost farthing." The exaltation will be given to those who have kept the commandments and have been faithful to every covenant and obligation upon which the exaltation rests. Others will be assigned to such degree of glory, or lack of it, according to the deeds committed in the flesh; but the mercy of our Eternal Father and his Son Jesus Christ will give to all mankind, except those who have denied the Holy Spirit after they have received the blessings, some place where he will make them just as happy as he can in the terrestrial, telestial, or some other place, suited to their condition and capacity.

THE RESURRECTION FOLLOWING THE TIME OF OUR LORD

The resurrection at the time of our Lord brought forth from the dead all those who had proved themselves worthy through the keeping of his commandments. The Prophet Abinadi has given us a clear statement in relation to these in the following words:

For were it not for the redemption which he hath made for his people, which was prepared from the foundation of the world, I say unto you, were it not for this, all mankind would have perished.

But behold, the bands of death shall be broken, and the Son reigneth, and hath power over the dead; therefore, he bringeth to pass the resurrection of the dead.

And there cometh a resurrection, even a first resurrection; yea, even a resurrection of those that have been, and who are, and who shall be, even until the resurrection of Christ—for so shall he be called.

And now, the resurrection of all the prophets, and all those that have believed in their words, of all those that have kept the commandments of God, shall come forth in the first resurrection; therefore, they are the first resurrection.

They are raised to dwell with God who has redeemed them; thus they have eternal life through Christ, who has broken the bands of death.

And these are those who have part in the first resurrection; and these are they that have died before Christ came, in their ignorance, not having salvation declared unto them. And thus the Lord bringeth about the resurrection of these; and they have a part in the first resurrection, or have eternal life, being redeemed by the Lord.

And little children also have eternal life.

But behold, and fear, and tremble before God, for ye ought to tremble; for the Lord redeemeth none such that rebel against him and die in their sins; yea, even all those who have perished in their sins ever since the world began, that have wilfully rebelled against God, that have known the commandments of God, and would not keep them; these are they that have no part in the first resurrection. (Mosiah 15:19-26.)

JOHN'S VISION OF THE SAVIOR'S SECOND COMING

John, in his vision, saw the time of the coming of Christ. He calls it the first resurrection, because it is the first resurrection for those who have lived and will yet live down to the coming of the Savior as King of kings and Lord of lords. Of these he wrote:

Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection: on such the second death hath no power, but they shall be priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years. (Revelation 20:6.)

This is the resurrection as recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants.

And they who have slept in their graves shall come forth, for their graves shall be opened; and they also shall be caught up to meet him in the midst of the pillar of heaven—

They are Christ's, the first fruits, they who shall descend with him first, and they who are on the earth and in their graves, who are first caught up to meet him; and this by the voice of the sounding of the trump of the angel of God.

And after this another angel shall sound, which is the second trump; and then cometh the redemption of those who are Christ's at his coming; who have received their part in the prison which is prepared for them, that they might receive the gospel, and be judged according to men in the flesh. (D. & C. 88:96-99.)

THE FINAL RESURRECTION IS FOR THE UNWORTHY

The final resurrection which is of those who are unworthy, will come at the close of the millennium, or the end of the world; for it is decreed that even these shall live again, but will be assigned to their own place according to their works.

After this explanation we come to the point of the question. Why did Moroni, Peter, James, and John, receive the resurrection before the sound of the trump of the angel of God calling forth the dead in the first resurrection? The question is in error in including John with these other brethren. John has not, we understand, yet received the resurrection, for he was promised he should remain until the second coming of Christ. The simple answer in the case of Peter, James, Moroni, and perhaps some others is, they were called forth because there was important work for them to do as resurrected beings. The Lord reserves the right to call forth from the dead any soul without waiting for the general resurrection at any period of time if he has special work for him to do as in the case of Peter, James, Moroni, and perhaps some others of whom we are not informed. The power of Jesus Christ was made manifest in these cases for he holds the keys of the resurrection. However, we should conclude that the general resurrection is not now going on or there could not be a morning of the resurrection when the Savior comes.

Those who believe in the mission of Jesus Christ understand that he is, 1, "The Resurrection and the Life"; 2, that he had power in himself to lay down his life and take it again. With this authority he was given power to destroy death and restore every soul to immortality. While the scriptures speak of the first resurrection and the second, and even the third, these expressions do not preclude the power and authority of our Lord to call forth from the dead any one whom he pleases without waiting for a general resurrection.

RESURRECTION OF JOHN THE BAPTIST AND ELIJAH

At the time Jesus arose, he called forth John the Baptist; also Elijah, who had been translated in the days of Elisha who succeeded him. The Lord revealed this to the Prophet Joseph Smith, and it is recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants (133:55).

We know definitely that Moroni came to the Prophet in all the glory of the resurrection. The description the Prophet gives of him is evidence of that fact. Moreover, we have the direct testimony of the Prophet Joseph Smith which was published in the Elders Journal (Elders Journal, Vol. I, pp. 28-29.) as follows:

Q. How and where did you obtain the Book of Mormon?!

A. Moroni, who deposited the plates in a hill in Manchester, Ontario County, New York, being dead and raised again therefrom appeared to me, and told me where they were, and gave me direction how to obtain them. I obtained them and the Urim and Thummim and with them by the means of which I translated the plates; and thus came the Book of Mormon. !—Documentary History, Vol. 3:28.

Here we have the direct testimony of the Prophet that Moroni came to him, having died and having received the resurrection. This should be sufficient, at least in the case of Moroni. Every member of the Church is aware of the fact that John the Baptist was beheaded, due to the personal hate of a wicked woman. This occurred shortly before the death of Jesus, therefore John was entitled to, and received, the resurrection at the resurrection of Christ.

There is a prevailing notion in the world that Elijah was taken into heaven without passing through mortal death. This could not be before the resurrection of Jesus, who became the "first fruits of the resurrection." Elijah was a translated person, just like John the Revelator and the three Nephites. A translated person is not a resurrected person, but is still connected with the mortal world, as explained by Jesus to the Nephites as recorded in 3 Nephi 28:8-9. John the Revelator is still in that state and will be until the second coming of the Lord.

THE APPEARANCE OF PETER, JAMES, AND JOHN

Peter and James, each having suffered martyrdom, have passed through the resurrection. This is made clear in the History of the Church. They came to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery as glorified resurrected personages. Shortly after the coming of John the Baptist with the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery received the Melchizedek Priesthood under the hands of Peter, James, and John. There is a statement in the Gospel of John, written of his gospel account, which intimates that the Lord gave him power to remain until the second coming. There is a revelation in the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 7, which confirms this thought.

We also have a letter on file written by Oliver Cowdery in Tiffiny, Ohio, to his brother-in-law, Phineas Young, in which Oliver declares that Peter, James, and John laid their hands upon the heads of Joseph Smith and himself, when they conferred upon the Prophet and Oliver, the Melchizedek Priesthood. If Peter and James had come to these brethren as spirits, they would not have laid their hands upon them when restoring the priesthood.
