Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 3 ( 1960)

22

The Fulness of the Gospel

Question: "In one of our meetings recently the question arose in relation to the following statement in the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 20, verses 8 to 10.

" 'And gave him power from on high, by the means which were before prepared, to translate the Book of Mormon;

" 'Which contains a record of a fallen people, and the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles and to the Jews also;

" 'Which was given by inspiration, and is confirmed to others by the ministering of angels, and is declared unto the world by them.'

"One of the brethren felt that there was an error in this statement because there was no reference in the Book of Mormon to temple ordinances as well as to other things essential to our salvation and the salvation of the dead. Our instructor replied that undoubtedly the fulness of the gospel would be found in that part of the plates which have not yet been translated, but this explanation was not satisfactory to the members of the class. Will you please help us to a better understanding?"

Answer: It is in order for the members of the class to seek for a better answer. It is rather strange that one would consider that the Lord had stated an untruth when giving this revelation. It is not the Lord who is at fault, but the fault of those who question this statement.

Now should there be in the minds of any member the thought that Joseph Smith had deceived the people by recording something in the name of the Lord which was not in full accord with the facts? Let us take a more careful and prayerful view, and we will discover that there is no error in the revelation but that the Lord declared that which is verily true.

THE LORD'S MEANING OF 'A FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL'

First of all, let us consider what the Lord means by "a fulness of the gospel." He did not mean to convey the impression that every truth belonging to exaltation in the kingdom of God had been delivered to the Nephites and was recorded in the Book of Mormon, to be delivered to Gentiles and Jews in this dispensation. Neither would this statement imply that every truth belonging to the celestial kingdom and exaltation therein was to be found within the covers of the Book of Mormon. There are many truths belonging to the exaltation that have not been revealed, nor will they be revealed to man while he is in mortality. We must concede it to be a fact that there are many things related to the exaltation which cannot be received now and do not concern mortal man. These truths were not given to the Nephites; neither can they be given to us in this present day, for they do not in any way apply to the needs of the mortal condition, nor could we comprehend them while we are in mortality. These things belong to the kingdom of God and will be revealed to those who attain to the celestial exaltation.

Paul has given us the key to the situation in the following words written to the Corinthian members of the Church:

I knew a man in Christ above fourteen years ago, (whether in the body, I cannot tell, or whether out of the body, I cannot tell: God knoweth; ) such an one caught up to the third heaven.

And I knew such a man, (whether in the body, or out of the body, I cannot tell: God knoweth;)

How that he was caught up into paradise, and heard unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for a man to utter. (II Corinthians 12:2-4.)

MANY TRUTHS RESERVED FOR IMMORTAL GLORY

It is evident that there are many things that belong to the exaltation which are reserved for immortal glorified souls. The fulness of the gospel then, as expressed in the Doctrine and Covenants, has reference to the principles of salvation by which we attain unto this glory. Therefore the Lord has revealed in the Book of Mormon all that is needful to direct people who are willing to hearken to its precepts, to a fulness of the blessings of the kingdom of God. The Book of Mormon then, does contain all the truths which are essential for Gentiles and Jews or any other people, to prepare them for this glorious exaltation in the celestial kingdom of God.

It is beyond dispute, or should be, that the Book of Mormon teaches that the first principles of the gospel are, faith in God; repentance from sin; baptism for the remission of sins; the gift of the Holy Ghost, obedience to divine law and that man cannot be saved in ignorance of these divine truths. It teaches that "wickedness never was happiness," and that no man can be saved without repentance of sin. The Lord said in very definite terms to his disciples:

. . . no unclean thing can enter into his kingdom; therefore nothing entereth into his rest save it be those who have washed their garments in my blood, because of their faith, and the repentance of all their sins, and their faithfulness unto the end. (III Nephi 27:19.)

NOT ALL TRUTHS ARE INTENDED FOR THE WORLDLY

In the Book of Mormon we find the clearest statement on the resurrection of the dead ever revealed to man. Let it be remembered that there are some truths made manifest in covenants, that are not intended for the world. These naturally, do not appear in the Book of Mormon. The Savior taught his disciples many things which they were not to reveal to the world which belong solely to those who have made their covenants in righteousness. Things of this kind do not appear in the Book of Mormon, or the Bible, or any other published book.

If there is no reference in the Book of Mormon in relation to baptism for the dead, we ask the question, why should there be? Is not baptism for the dead exactly the same principle that it is for the living? The answer is naturally "Yes." There was no baptism for the dead until after the resurrection of our Lord. This ordinance for the dead was not performed until Jesus had opened the way. Therefore if there is no mention of baptism for the dead in the Book of Mormon, that does not prove that they, after the resurrection of Jesus, could not, in cases where it was necessary, perform such ordinances, since they had the fulness of the priesthood.

Then we should remember that for some two hundred years after the visitation of the Lord to the Nephite nation, all observed the principles of the gospel. Children under the proper age were not baptized, and we may well believe that in that age of universal righteousness, children who had reached the age of accountability were not neglected.

STATEMENT OF THE LORD IS PROPER

We may conclude that the statement of the Lord in the Doctrine and Covenants is not violated because baptism after the resurrection of our Lord is just the same ordinance which it was before his resurrection, and as far as the dead are concerned, it is merely an extension to the dead of a principle that had come down through the ages from the beginning.

It is our responsibility to perform all the ordinances essential for the dead, no matter when they lived or when they died, from the time of Adam down to the present time. We have been taught that this is our responsibility and that the Lord in his due time, after we have done all in our power, will make it possible by revelation for the salvation of all the worthy dead through all ages of time. The great work of the millennium will be this labor.

This criticism here raised by a member of the class, has come up for discussion periodically in past years. Can we not put an end to this fruitless and unnecessary discussion? Several years ago President Charles W. Penrose, in a general conference of the Church, gave expression to the following words:

COUNSEL GIVEN BY PRESIDENT CHARLES W. PENROSE

Now, some of our brethren have taken up quite a discussion as to the fulness of the everlasting gospel. We are told that the Book of Mormon contains the fulness of the gospel, that those who like to get up a dispute, say that the Book of Mormon does not contain any reference to the work of salvation for the dead and that there are many other things pertaining to the gospel that are not developed in that book, and yet we are told that the book contains "the fulness of the everlasting gospel." Well, what is the fulness of the gospel? You read carefully the revelation in regard to the three glories, Section 76, in the Doctrine and Covenants, and you find there defined what the gospel is. There God, the Eternal Father, and Jesus Christ, his Son, and the Holy Ghost, are held up as the three Persons in the Trinity—the one God, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, all three being one God. When people believe in that doctrine and obey the ordinances which are spoken of in the same list of principles, you get the fulness of the gospel for this reason: If you really believe so as to have faith in our Eternal Father and in his Son, Jesus Christ, the Redeemer, and will hear him, you will learn ail about what is needed to be done for the salvation of the living and redemption of the dead.

When people believe and repent and are baptized by divine authority, and the Holy Ghost is conferred upon them as a gift, they receive the everlasting gospel. We used to call it, and it is now called in the revelations, the "gift of the Holy Ghost," the Holy Spirit that proceeds from the Father through the immensity of space, which guides, directs, enlightens, which is light in and of itself, which is the Spirit of intelligence, the light of truth. (General Conference Report, April 1922, pp. 27-28.)
