Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 3 ( 1960)

23

"Your Blood of Your Lives"

Question: "Is the eating of blood and food therefrom, such as blood sausage and blood pudding, forbidden by the law of the Lord today? In Genesis 9:4, and from Paul's enjoinder against partaking of blood I deduce that this teaching is part of the everlasting covenant, and not a principle that passed with the fulfilment of the Mosaic law. Is this conclusion correct?"

Answer: Definitely your conclusion is correct. The blood plays a far more important part in this mortal world, whether it is the blood of human beings or the blood of other creatures, than is generally understood. It is the life-giving fluid of the mortal body; but it has in it the seeds of death as well as the sustaining power of mortal life. Its duties are many and varied, but it is not the purpose here to recount them. Notwithstanding its great importance to the physical body, it is, above all else, a mortal element.

When Adam and Eve were placed in the Garden of Eden, there was no blood in their bodies. Their lives were quickened by spirit; therefore they were in a state where they could have lived forever, and so likewise could every other mortal creature. (II Nephi 2:2-25.) When Adam fell, the change came upon all other living things and even the earth itself became mortal, and all things including the earth were redeemed from death through the atonement of Jesus Christ.

It was the Lord who gave to Noah and his posterity the privilege of eating the flesh of living creatures.

Every moving thing that liveth shall be meat for you; even as the green herb have I given you all things.

But the flesh with the life thereof, which is the blood thereof, shall ye not eat.

And surely your blood of your lives will I require; at the hand of every beast will I require it, and at the hand of man; at the hand of every man's brother will I require the life of man.

Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed: for in the image of God made he man. (Genesis 9:3-6.)

THE INSPIRED VERSION ACCOUNT

The way the Lord revealed this passage to Joseph Smith the Prophet is much better than as we find it in the Old Testament. It is as follows:

Every moving thing that liveth shall be meat for you; even as the green herb have I given you all things.

But the blood of all flesh which I have given you for meat, shall be shed upon the ground, which taketh life thereof, and the blood ye shall not eat.

And surely, blood shall not be shed, only for meat, to save your lives; and the blood of every beast will I require at your hands.

And whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed; for man shall not shed the blood of man.

For a commandment I give, that every man's brother shall preserve the life of man, for in mine own image have I made man. (Idem., Inspired Version.)

In giving counsel to Israel the Lord pointed out the reason why blood should not be eaten:

And whatsoever man there be of the house of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn among you, that eateth any manner of blood, I will even set my face against that soul that eateth blood, and will cut him off from among his people.

For the life of the flesh is in the blood: and I have given it to you upon the altar to make an atonement for your souls; for it is the blood that maketh an atonement for the soul.

Therefore I said unto the children of Israel, No soul of you shall eat blood, neither shall any stranger that sojourneth among you eat blood.

And whatsoever man there be of the children of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn among you, which hunteth and catcheth any beast or fowl that may be eaten; he shall even pour out the blood thereof, and cover it with dust.

For it is the life of all flesh; the blood of it is for the life thereof: therefore I said unto the children of Israel, Ye shall eat the blood of no manner of flesh: for the life of all flesh is the blood thereof: whosoever eateth it shall be cut off. (Leviticus 17:10-14. Compare Deuteronomy 12:23-25.)

Paul understood this law and taught it to the members of the Church in his day in the following words:

For when Moses had spoken every precept to all the people according to the law, he took the blood of calves and of goats, with water, and scarlet wool, and hyssop, and sprinkled both the book, and all the people,

Saying, This is the blood of the testament which God hath enjoined unto you.

Moreover, he sprinkled with blood both the tabernacle, and all the vessels of the ministry.

And almost all things are by the law purged with blood; and without the shedding of blood is no remission. (Hebrews 9:19-22.)

REMISSION OF SINS THROUGH SHEDDING OF BLOOD

Here is a clear statement that the remission of sins cannot come except by the shedding of blood. In ancient times sacrifices were made by the shedding of the blood of clean animals. This shedding of blood was twofold in its application. It pointed forward to the great sacrifice that was to be made by our Redeemer, and it also became a purifying agency which helped to remind Israel of sins and how to overcome them.

Since it was by the creation of blood that mortality came, it is by the sacrifice of blood that the redemption from death was accomplished, and all creatures freed from Satan's grasp. In no other way could the sacrifice for redemption of the world from death be accomplished. Blood being the agent of mortality, it had to be returned to Satan and to death, whence it came. Have we ever stopped to think of the deplorable condition this mortal world was in due to the partaking of the fruit by Adam? Jacob, son of Lehi, has given us a vivid picture of the condition which mankind was in as follows:

O the wisdom of God, his mercy and grace! For behold, if the flesh should rise no more our spirits must become subject to that angel who fell from before the presence of the Eternal God, and became the devil, to rise no more.

And our spirits must have become like unto him, and we become devils, angels to a devil, to be shut out from the presence of God, and to remain with the father of lies, in misery, like unto himself; yea, to that being who beguiled our first parents, who transformeth himself nigh unto an angel of light, and stirreth up the children of men unto secret combinations of murder and all manner of secret works of darkness. (II Nephi 9:8-9.)

No doubt Satan felt that he had accomplished his purpose in bringing death, and therefore the entire posterity of Adam would become subject unto him. The Beloved Son of God was chosen before the foundation of the world to redeem mankind. It had to be a redemption by the shedding of blood; also it had to be by a God, who had power over death, one who could lay down his body by the shedding of his blood, and then take his body up again by the inherent power which was in him. Jesus obtained his blood from his mother Mary; he obtained his power over death from his Father. Therefore he could and did voluntarily surrender himself to his enemies who crucified him by the shedding of his blood. When he arose from the tomb, he was free from blood, and his body had become subject to eternal law henceforth and forever.

A PRINCIPLE MISUNDERSTOOD

There is a growing notion in the world today that it is adding a crime to a crime to take the life of those who deliberately murder—a cruel retaliation which cannot benefit the murdered person and likewise the murderer can reap no benefits therefrom. The real purpose which the Lord gave for the taking of life has long been forgotten. The taking of the life of the murderer was never intended to be a benefit to the murdered person or even a benefit to humanity. It was intended to be a benefit to the murderer himself. There are sins which cannot be forgiven, except by the guilty person paying a price by the shedding of his blood. Capital punishment was to benefit the guilty to obtain a better resurrection when the sin had been one unto death. This doctrine was understood in the early days when the first laws for the government of the Territory of Utah were being framed. After deliberating on this point, the law was fixed so that a murderer could make his choice whether he was shot or hanged. Considerable discussion was indulged in and the following excerpt grew out of that discussion:

But what have priests to do with hanging? Perhaps nothing directly; only to hear the culprit say his prayers, or try to pray out of existence an unpardonable sin. The profession of hangman is not very congenial to their feelings; but indirectly they may justly be held responsible. They have set themselves up as teachers of the laws of God, and the gospel; and if they have not taught the doctrine of the halter, when they have seen the nation hanging their culprits, strangling them with their blood in them, they have not stepped forward as the dignity and nature of their office required, and taught their rulers better; and when men professing to be teachers of righteousness, see their neighbors doing wrong ignorantly, and they neglect to warn them, the wrong rests upon the heads of those who thus neglect; and the priests of the United States, and Christendom generally having neglected their duty in this thing, the blood of all men who have been hanged in those nations, by legal authority, may justly be required at the hands of their priests.

What saith the great law book on the subject? When Cain killed his brother, we have no account that any law had been given against murder; but his sentence was to be a fugitive and vagabond in the midst of the earth, as a warning to others, and a mark was set upon him, by the Lawgiver Himself, lest any one should slay him. In process of time the law came:—'Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed.' And the reason is given: because that in the 'blood is the life of the flesh.' The mere act of the designedly killing an innocent man, is the same to him whether it be done by poison, strangling or the sword, it is murder, and is punishable by death; and that punishment should be the letting out of the murderer's blood upon the earth; that the smoke thereof may ascend towards heaven, as the only way for a remission of the crime; and eternity must unfold how far even that may tend to its intended effect.

Without the shedding of blood there is no remission of sins. In the whole Jewish economy, there was nothing strangled permitted to be used, either as food; or for sacrifice; it was an abomination. If Jesus had been strangled, hanged, or poisoned, so that his blood had remained in him his death would have brought forth no atonement for the sins of the world. He himself might have been saved because he was holy, and needed no atonement; but if his blood had not been shed, he would not have become a Savior to others; and it was just as necessary that the blood of a murderer should be shed, to bring about his salvation, as it was that the Savior's blood should be shed, to bring about the salvation of the world; and the priests, who have not taught this doctrine, when they have seen the people strangling their fellow beings, are responsible; (at this instant Gov. Young explained, 'perhaps they are ignorant, and know no better,' when the speaker resumed:) and should they plead the excuse of ignorance themselves, a double curse will rest upon them for pretending to the most exalted profession, when they were ignorant of its duties not having been called of God as was Aaron. (Millennial Star 13:230-231.)
