Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 3 ( 1960)

25

The Twelve with Christ in His Ministry

Question: "I have often wanted to ask about the interpretation of the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 29:12, concerning the firm decree of the Savior that 'mine apostles, the twelve which were with me in my ministry at Jerusalem, shall stand at my right hand at the day of my coming in a pillar of fire, being clothed with robes of righteousness, with crowns upon their heads, in glory even as I am, to judge the whole house of Israel, even as many as have loved me and kept my commandments, and none else.'

"It seems from this confirmation of the New Testament that Judas will also be one of the twelve. This seems somewhat difficult to understand, yet the words are definite. Is there anything to be said about this scripture in bringing it into agreement with the deed committed by Judas in betraying Jesus and later taking his own life? Would the doctrine of individual blood atonement be the answer, or are we to accept the fact as stated in the revelation that Judas will be one of the twelve?"

Answer: This is a clear example how one innocently may be deceived by a failure to understand correctly the scriptures. Judas does not in any manner enter into this promise. There is no mystery in relation to the Savior's statement that the twelve who were with him in Jerusalem would stand on his right hand at the day of his coming, being clothed with robes of righteousness to judge the whole house of Israel who have kept the commandments of the Lord.

MATTHIAS WAS WITH CHRIST IN HIS MINISTRY

Please recall what is written in the Book of Acts at the time of the choosing of Matthias, which reads as follows:

Wherefore of these men which have companied with us all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out among us,

Beginning from the baptism of John, unto that same day that he was taken up from us, must one be ordained to be a witness with us of his resurrection.

And they appointed two, Joseph called Barsabas, who was surnamed Justus, and Matthias.

And they prayed, and said, Thou, Lord, which knowest the hearts of all men, shew whether of these two thou hast chosen,

That he may take part of this ministry and apostleship, from which Judas by transgression fell, that he might go to his own place.

And they gave forth their lots; and the lot fell upon Matthias; and he was numbered with the eleven apostles. (Acts 1:21-26.)

This petition to the Father shows clearly that Judas fell and therefore another was chosen to take his place, to which Judas could, under no circumstances, be restored. Furthermore, Matthias filled all the requirements spoken of in the revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith. He was one who had been with the Lord during his ministry from the baptism by John to the day of the crucifixion. How else could the Lord express it? He was speaking long after the evil act of Judas, and the scriptures definitely state that Judas lost his place, therefore the Lord in the revelation meant none other than Matthias.
