Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 3 ( 1960)

27

Priesthood Necessary for Men to See God

Question: "It is my understanding that the word of God is all truth, and that being the case, it will always support and not contradict itself. On the assumption that this is true I would like to know the explanation for Doctrine and Covenants, Section 84:20-22. This being true, how do you account for the fact that Joseph Smith saw God the Father and Jesus Christ prior to receiving the priesthood?"

Answer: We may be agreed that the word of God is truth and that he never reveals to man a falsehood. There are times, however, when mortal man interprets what the Lord has revealed not understanding all the facts and has to purge from his mind cherished notions which are in conflict with what the Father has revealed. The revelation in question was given September 22 and 23, 1832, in Kirtland, Ohio, and is in relation to the descent of the priesthood from Adam to the time of Moses and is as follows:

And this greater priesthood administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God.

Therefore, in the ordinances thereof, the power of godliness is manifest.

And without the ordinances thereof, and the authority of the priesthood, the power of godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh;

For without this no man can see the face of God, even the Father, and live.

Now this Moses plainly taught to the children of Israel in the wilderness, and sought diligently to sanctify his people that they might behold the face of God;

But they hardened their hearts and could not endure his presence; therefore, the Lord in his wrath, for his anger was kindled against them, swore that they should not enter into his rest while in the wilderness, which rest is the fulness of his glory. (D. & C. 84:19-24.)

THE KINGDOM OF GOD IS ORDERLY

Let us remember that this revelation was given in 1832, over three years after the Melchizedek Priesthood was restored by Peter, James, and John, and two years and five months after the organization of the Church. Now the Lord did not say that he could not appear to man in the flesh when there was no man on earth holding the Melchizedek Priesthood, or a day of apostasy when the divine authority had been withdrawn from men. He did appear to the Prophet Joseph Smith when he was a youth and when there was no mortal man on the earth holding that priesthood. Should that condition arise again—which it will not—then the Father could appear to man and set things in order; but when the priesthood is here, and there is someone appointed to administer in its ordinances, there is no occasion for the Father to come to any man not holding the priesthood and minister unto him. Those seeking light and truth could receive a manifestation of the truth, or even the appearance of an angel, or even the Son of God himself, but there would never arise any occasion for the Father to manifest himself to such a person. The kingdom of God is orderly, and since this divine authority is now here, the way into the kingdom is clear.

When Adam was driven out of the Garden of Eden, our Heavenly Father withdrew from men, and Jesus Christ, his Son, and our Redeemer, became our Advocate with the Father and our Mediator. Since that time all revelation has come through Jesus Christ. (See Answers to Gospel Questions, Vol. 1, p. 13.)

A WITNESS FOR THE FATHER AND THE SON

Perhaps a few thoughts in relation to the coming of both the Father and the Son to the Prophet Joseph Smith in the wonderful manifestation will be interesting here. It should be remembered that the entire Christian world in 1820 had lost the true doctrine concerning God. The simple truth which was understood so clearly by the apostles and saints of old had been lost in the mysteries of an apostate world. All the ancient prophets, and the apostles of Jesus Christ had a clear understanding that the Father and the Son were separate personages, as our scriptures so clearly teach. Through apostasy this knowledge was lost, and in the year 325 A.D., a strange doctrine was introduced and soon spread throughout the Christian world. This doctrine confounded the persons of the Godhead, and distorted the true doctrine of God, so that in the year 1820, God had become a mystery, and both Father and Son were considered to be one unknowable effusion of spirit, without body, parts, or passions. The coming of the Father and the Son placed on the earth a divine witness who was able by knowledge to restore to the world the true nature of God.
