Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 3 ( 1960)

28

The Lord's Denunciation of Idolatry

Question: "Why did the Lord speak so vehemently against the worship of idols in ancient times, and the bowing down to graven images when these images merely represented some god whom the people worship? Again: How do we reconcile the statement in the Eleventh Article of Faith with the command given to Moses to destroy the places where the idolaters worshiped and to throw down their altars and break their images as written in the twelfth chapter of Deuteronomy?"

Answer: In explaining these questions there are several things that have to be considered. The Eleventh Article of Faith, given by the Prophet Joseph Smith, is a just principle, in full accord with the law of free agency. The Lord does not rob men of their privilege to worship whatsoever they please as long as other laws and practices guaranteed to men are not violated. However, when these idolatrous practices result in interference with the free agency of others and endanger their lives, then the Lord has the right to step in and correct the situation by using his chosen servants even with force. Latter-day Saints, therefore, believe that each human soul may have the right to worship as he will, as long as he does not interfere with the divine rights of others.

The Prophet Joseph Smith on one occasion declared that he would contend for the right of a Catholic or Protestant to worship according to his desire, for this is the privilege that the Lord has guaranteed to each of us.

No one is compelled to believe in the Gospel of Jesus Christ. He may worship idols, animals, birds or reptiles, if he so desires, without interfering with the freedom to worship allowed to others. In fact many of the ancient peoples held animals in sacred honor as gods; or they may have bowed down to the sun and the moon, and should any desire to hold to such a worship today, we, the Latter-day Saints, would not interfere. Naturally, we would consider any worship of that kind to be extremely stupid, but in accord to the law of agency.

LAND RIGHTLY BELONGED TO SEED OF ABRAHAM

In regard to the actions of Israel they were only doing that which the Lord had commanded them. The idolaters who occupied the land were in a sense interlopers, as the Lord had given the land to Abraham and his seed as an everlasting possession, and the time had come for them to possess it. While the Lord has commanded us to acknowledge the right of peoples to worship as they wish, he has reserved to himself the right to cleanse the land whenever its inhabitants have filled the cup of their iniquity. At times the Lord called down fire from heaven to cover the iniquity of the wicked; at other times he used armies. In the case under discussion, the Lord was using the armies of Israel, and they had been commanded to break down the altars and drive the idolaters from the land by divine edict. Moreover, it should be remembered that this idolatry which was practiced resorted to the custom of human sacrifice and other iniquitous practices, so that the anger of the Lord was kindled against them.

There remains also this other fact: When the Lord promised this land to Abraham, he informed him that his possession, or that of his descendants, would not come until the iniquity of the Amorites was full, and this would be a period of four hundred years. (Genesis 15:16.) This time had now come, and the land was to be cleansed to make room for Israel.

There can be little opposing thought to the fact that the Lord does look upon idolatry as one of the greatest of abominations. Israel was his chosen people, and they were to be kept free from the contaminating influences of abominable peoples. The Lord was very pronounced in his instruction to Israel that they were to keep aloof from such people and their worship of idols.

OUR DUTY TO WORSHIP THE LIVING GOD

The second commandment of the decalogue of necessity is most emphatic. It is the duty of every man to worship the Living God. He has called upon all men everywhere to worship him. From the very beginning he has revealed his divine law to men through his servants the prophets. In the very beginning he commanded Adam to teach his children the law of the gospel. We read that Adam did so, but then came Satan and said to them: "Believe it not; and they believed it not, and they loved Satan more than God." (Moses 5:13.) Then after the earth was cleansed by water, Noah received the same commandment, but Satan came again, and it was not many years after the flood when the great majority of mankind were following Satan again, and so it has been from the beginning.

Idolatry goes back to the earliest period of human history. We know that the inhabitants of the earth were destroyed in the flood for their iniquity. When the Lord made a new start, the teachings of Noah and his sons were soon forgotten by the vast majority of mankind. The worship of idols was soon introduced and became so prevalent that the Lord called Abraham and made covenants with him and his children after him, and Israel became a chosen people. The Lord endeavored to keep them clean and righteous, and therefore cleansed the land of its iniquity including idolatry to make room for Israel. However, not all of the nations with this iniquitous practice were eliminated from the promised land, and they became a plague and a temptation to Israel.

PRESENT AGE IS NOT FREE FROM IDOLATRY

In this wonderful age, which we call an age of remarkable enlightenment, idolatry prevails; not only among those we are in the habit of calling heathens, but in every civilized country on the globe. Yet the Lord has commanded:

Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath or that is in the water under the earth:

Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them: for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me. (Exodus 20:4-5) .
