Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 3 ( 1960)

30

Why Does Not God Create Intelligence and Prevent Evil?

Question: "If God is all powerful, why is he not able to create intelligence? In the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 93, verse 29, we read that 'intelligence or the light of truth was not created nor indeed can be.' If he is all powerful, why does he permit evil to rule in the world?"

Answer: Perhaps the time will not come while mortality endures that questions of this kind will not be propounded. The first thought that comes is that such questions should be ignored, but as they recur from time to time perhaps it is wisdom to answer them. Moreover, we might present other questions that belong in the same category. Did the Lord create time or space? How foolish such a question appears. The Lord has endowed men with some degree of intelligence or spirit of reason which he expects them to use.

The Lord revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith this great truth: That matter is co-eternal with God and always existed. It would have been more reasonable to have presented this question, since many in the Christian world are imbued with the idea that God created matter out of nothing.

INTELLIGENCE CO-ETERNAL WITH GOD

If the Lord declares that intelligence, something which we do not fully understand, was co-eternal with him and always existed, there is no argument that we can or should present to contradict it. Why he cannot create intelligence is simply because intelligence, like time and space, always existed, and therefore did not have to be created. However, intelligences spoken of in the Book of Abraham were created, for these are spirit children of God, begotten sons.

Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones; (Abraham 3:22.)

From among these the Father chose his rulers.

How foolish it is to declare that God, our Eternal Father, is not all-powerful because there are some things that were not created, but which always existed. The fact is that he has put all such things to use. He has organized, arranged, and controls and works in harmony with all things which eternally existed.

OPPOSITION NECESSARY

In answer to the second question the simple answer is that if our Eternal Father refused to permit evil to exist in the world, he would destroy one of the greatest gifts ever given to man—the gift of free agency. Take this great gift away and there could be no rewards or punishments; no exaltation and no condemnation. The result would be chaos, confusion. This is indeed the very plan that Lucifer presented in the great council in heaven. It is absolutely necessary to permit evil as well as it is necessary to reward good. Without the great gift of free agency, heaven would be destroyed and hell and Satan would gain the victory. There is a divine law that will bring rewards and punishment.

For it must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things. If not so, my first-born in the wilderness, righteousness could not be brought to pass, neither wickedness, neither holiness nor misery, neither good nor bad. Wherefore, all things must needs be a compound in one, wherefore, if it should be one body it must needs remain as dead, having no life neither death, nor corruption nor incorruption, happiness nor misery, neither sense nor insensibility.

Wherefore, it must needs have been created for a thing of naught; wherefore there would have been no purpose in the end of its creation. Wherefore, this thing must needs destroy the wisdom of God and his eternal purposes, and also the power, and the mercy, and the justice of God.

And if ye shall say there is no law, ye shall also say there is no sin. If ye shall say there is no sin, ye shall say there is no righteousness. And if there be no righteousness there be no happiness. And if there be no righteousness nor happiness there be no punishment nor misery. And if these things are not there is no God. And if there is no God we are not, neither the earth; for there could have been no creation of things, neither to act nor to be acted upon; wherefore, all things must have vanished away. (II Nephi 2:11-13.)

GOD IS NOT LIMITED BY JUSTICE

Our Eternal Father is not limited by justice but acts in accordance with the laws of justice, and gives rewards and punishments on divine principles according to eternal laws. The Lord says he knows all things, and we may be sure that his plan is just and true.

Alma has given us this philosophy which is just and true:

Now have we not reason to rejoice? Yea, I say unto you, there never were men that had so great reason to rejoice as we, since the world began; yea, and my joy is carried away, even unto boasting in my God; for he has all power, all wisdom, and all understanding; he comprehendeth all things, and he is a merciful Being, even unto salvation, to those who will repent and believe on His name. (Alma 26:35.)
