Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 3 ( 1960)

31

Answers to Critics of the Resurrection

Question: "Critics of the resurrection and the existence of the spirit frequently quote from Ecclesiastes 9:4-10, particularly stressing verses 5 and 10—'For the living know that they shall die: but the dead know not anything, neither have they any more a reward; for the memory of them is forgotten.' 'Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might; for there is no work, no device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave, whither thou goest.' And from Isaiah 38:18: 'For the grave cannot praise thee, death cannot celebrate thee: they that go down into the pit cannot hope for the truth.' Other references are quoted from Ezekiel 18:4 and 20: 'The soul that sinneth, it shall die.' What explanation can be offered for these verses?"

Answer: The evidence of the resurrection is so abundant in the New Testament, that it is easy to meet the question so far as the resurrection is concerned. There are many promises in the Old Testament that there shall come a resurrection of the dead, and we are informed that at the resurrection of our Savior, the graves were opened and the dead came forth. (Matthew 27:52-53.)

There is no problem here. In relation to the thought that is given by some that there is no spirit in our bodies, and that when we die the body goes back to the dust there to remain forever, or perchance in the case of some, to receive a resurrection, there is ample biblical evidence that contradicts this thought. The writer of Ecclesiastes was speaking of this life only when he wrote these verses. The sixth verse of Ecclesiastes makes this clear:

Also their love, and their hatred, and their envy, is now perished; neither have they any more a portion for ever in any thing that is done under the sun. (Ecclesiastes 9:6.)

LIVING SOON FORGET THE DEAD

The dead are soon forgotten. It is not long after a man is gone, no matter how renowned he may have been, he is forgotten; and things done "under the sun" they who are dead are not any longer interested in, nor do they have any portion in them. A man cannot take with him any portion of this world's goods, but as Job declared in substance: Naked came he into the world, and naked he goes out of it. (Job 1:21.) This, however, does not prove, and evidently the writer in the Old Testament did not intend to prove, that there was no existence after death of the eternal spirit. The dead are forgotten by whom? By the living.

In the consideration of this discourse by the Preacher, Solomon, it should be kept in mind that the entire discourse is in relation to vanity—the vanities of this life, and is not one considering the blessings and nature of eternity. He points out the blessings to be obtained by a righteous life, and the evils of a life of vanity. The thought behind his expression: "Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might; for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave, whither thou goest," is an admonition to us all, to apply our time and our talents to doing good and to bringing to pass righteousness while we sojourn in this mortal life, for it will be impossible for us to mend our ways and seek to do the things that have been neglected, in the grave. The words of Solomon have by some been willfully or ignorantly distorted. The closing words of this discourse are:

For God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil. (Ecclesiastes 12:14.)

NO LABOR PERFORMED IN A GRAVE

The words of Amulek to the Nephites are worthy of our consideration at this point:

For behold, this life is the time for men to prepare to meet God; yea, behold the day of this life is the day for men to perform their labors.

And now, as I said unto you before, as ye have had so many witnesses, therefore, I beseech of you that ye do not procrastinate the day of your repentance until the end; for after this day of life, which is given us to prepare for eternity, behold, if we do not improve our time while in this life, then cometh the night of darkness wherein there can be no labor performed. (Alma 34:32-33.)

When it is understood properly, this discourse by Solomon is wonderful, faith-promoting, and should be considered in its true light by all. Unfortunately Solomon himself failed to heed its instruction.

If a person hears the gospel and rejects it, then the grave, so far as he is concerned, brings him darkness, and for him there is no labor performed. Remember that the writer of Ecclesiastes was not considering the resurrection, but was dealing with this present life and the consequence of man's vanity and his following the things that give pleasure but do not bring him nearer to God.

There are too many references in the Bible to spirits and their existence for us to place faith in these false teachers. We need only to refer to the casting out of devils by our Lord. These were spirits who did not keep their first estate and hence were denied the privilege of receiving bodies. They stole bodies when they could, and Jesus had to cast them out.

THE WORD OF THE LORD IS SUFFICIENT

The word of the Lord to his disciples after his resurrection should be sufficient evidence:

And as they thus spake, Jesus himself stood in the midst of them, and saith unto them, Peace be unto you.

But they were terrified and affrighted, and supposed that they had seen a spirit. (Luke 24:36-37.)

The Lord would have corrected this by saying there are no spirits, if this teaching were true, but he did not. He placed the stamp of approval on the existence of spirits by declaring that they did not have flesh and bones as they saw he had.

And he said unto them, Why are ye troubled? and why do thoughts arise in your hearts?

Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have. (Luke 24:38-39.)

Thus he endorsed the existence of spirits. Moreover, he went to the spirit world, according to Peter, and for the three days his body was in the tomb, he taught the spirits in that spirit world. (I Peter 3:18-19.)

Who shall give account to him that is ready to judge the quick and the dead.

For for this cause was the gospel preached also to them that are dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit. (I Peter 4:5-6.)

We all lived in the presence of God before we came here. When we die, our spirits will still exist, and in that spirit world the wicked will suffer torment for their sins.
