Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 3 ( 1960)

32

The Doxology of the Lord's Prayer

Question: "Is it true that the doxology of the Lord's Prayer ('For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever, amen') was not part of the prayer as Christ gave it, but was added by someone who copied or translated the Bible? If this is true, under what conditions and by what authority (if any) was it added? Also, if this part was added, how do we justify the fact that it appears in the Book of Mormon word for word exactly as it is in Matthew, King James Version?

"An investigator claims this expression in the Lord's Prayer is an unauthorized interpolation which cannot be found in any known manuscript. He claims that Joseph Smith must have copied these words from the Bible in ignorance, that they were not Christ's, therefore the Book of Mormon is a fraud."

Answer: This investigator is jumping to conclusions. What is wrong with the expression? Does it not add to the dignity and completeness of the meaning of the prayer? There is nothing in this doxology that is not true and perfectly reasonable, and you may be sure the Lord did not end his prayer so abruptly, so something would be missing without this benediction to the prayer,

We assume that your friend is like the Pharisees of old, and is trying to destroy the revealed truth of this record without making it a matter of earnest prayer in which, if he were able, the Lord could reveal to him the truth. It may be true that this saying is not found in many known manuscripts, but this does not prove that it is false and was placed in the prayer by translators who realized the need of such an ending. It should be remembered that the manuscripts that are known are of rather recent date. There is no original manuscript known. Perhaps the English translators did have some manuscript, for surely the disputed words are such as the Savior would use in offering the prayer which lacks much if these words are eliminated.

EVIDENCE FROM VARIOUS TRANSLATIONS

Let us consider the fact that these words are found in the Danish, Swedish, Norwegian, Dutch, Spanish and German translations. This is important. Did they copy from the King James Version? These disputed words are without doubt unadulterated gospel. Here is a quotation from Dr. Adam Clarke's Commentary, which is one of the best.

For thine is the Kingdom, etc. The whole of this doxology is rejected by Wetstein, Griesbach and the most eminent critics. The authorities on which it is rejected may be seen in Griesbach and Wetstein, particularly in the second edition.... It is variously written in the several manuscripts and omitted by most of the fathers, both Greek and Latin. As the doxology is at least very ancient, and was in use among the Jews, as well as all the other petitions of this excellent prayer, it should not, in my opinion be left out of the text, merely because some manuscripts have omitted it, and it has been variously written in others. (Clarke's Commentary on Matthew 6:13, Volume V, p. 73.)

Here is one of the most distinguished commentaries in the world, which maintains that this statement was in some manuscripts, and is a common expression, and the author refers the reader to Lightfoot and Schoetgen.

If you wish further information I refer you to Scott's Commentary, another noted treatise on the Bible. I quote from this commentary:

This clause (the concluding doxology,) is not in St. Luke, nor in many copies of St. Matthew: Yet there are sufficient reasons for receiving it as a part of the Lord's prayer; as being in the Syriak version and owned in the Greek liturgies, and being in most ancient copies: and because it is very unlikely that the holy fathers of the Greek church should presume to add their own inventions, to a form of our Lord's own composing. But it is probable, that our Lord delivered this form twice, upon different occasions, might add this clause the first time, and leave it out at the second; and that the Latin copies, which are full of errors (My italics) might leave it out in both, lest the evangelist should seem to differ in a matter so considerable. Whitby.— It is perfectly scriptural, and so replete with instruction, that the internal evidence of its authenticity is unanswerable. (Scott's Bible Commentary on Matthew 6:13, Volume III, p. 23.)

So, you see, there were manuscripts that had this in, therefore the English translators did have access to manuscripts with it in and did not place it there of their own volition. Naturally the Catholic Bible and those prepared by the Latins would not have it.
