Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 3 ( 1960)

33

Did the Lord Harden Pharaoh's Heart?

Question: "Recently I read your statement that the Lord does not harden the hearts of men. I learned from reading the Book of Exodus that God did harden Pharaoh's heart. What explanation can you offer for your discrepancy of view with the Bible?"

Answer: The Lord does not harden the hearts of men, they harden their own hearts. In the scriptures where it says the Lord hardened Pharaoh's heart, it is a mistranslation in every case. In the corrected verses of the Inspired Version the Lord said to Moses:

And Pharaoh will harden his heart, as I said unto thee; and thou shalt multiply my signs, and my wonders, in the land of Egypt. (Exodus 7:3, Inspired Version. Compare with King James Version.)

In the same chapter it reads:

And Pharaoh hardened his heart, that he hearkened not unto them; as the Lord had said.

And the Lord said unto Moses, Pharaoh's heart is hardened, he refuseth to let the people go. (Exodus 7:13-14, Inspired Version.)

In the eighth chapter it is written:

Then the magicians said unto Pharaoh, This is the finger of God; and Pharaoh's heart was hardened, and he hearkened not unto them; as the Lord had said, . . .

And Pharaoh hardened his heart at this time also, neither would he let the people go. (Exodus 8:19, 32, King James Version or Inspired Version.)

In Chapter 10:

And the Lord said unto Moses, Go in unto Pharaoh; for he hath hardened his heart, and the hearts of his servants, therefore I will show these my signs before him. (Exodus 10:1, Inspired Version.)

These are the proper translations. Now from Chapter 4:

And the Lord said unto Moses, When thou goest to return into Egypt, see that thou do all those wonders before Pharaoh, which I have put in thine hand, and I will prosper thee; but Pharaoh will harden his heart, and he will not let the people go. (Exodus 4:21, Inspired Version.)

Now I refer you to the Epistle of James:

Blessed is the man that endureth temptation: for when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord hath promised to them that love him.

Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God: for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempteth he any man:

But every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust, and enticed.

Then when lust hath conceived, it bringeth forth sin: and sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth death. (James 1:12-15.)
