Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 3 ( 1960)

34

"Elias Is Noah"

Question: "In your recent conference address on prophets and keys of the priesthood you stated that Elias was Noah. Will you please give further clarification of this statement?" (Information for this question was prepared on request of the Church News Editor. Additional material has been added for this publication.)

Answer: The Lord revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith many things in relation to the ancient prophets and the keys which they held. In a discourse on the Priesthood July 2, 1839, the Prophet made known what the Lord had revealed to him in relation to the missions of the ancient prophets and seers. In the course of his remarks he said this:

The Priesthood was first given to Adam; he obtained the First Presidency, and held the keys of it from generation to generation. He obtained it in the Creation, before the world was formed, as in Gen. 1: 26-28. He had dominion given him over every living creature. He is Michael, the Archangel, spoken of in the Scriptures. Then to Noah, who is Gabriel; he stands next in authority to Adam in the Priesthood; he was called of God to this office, and was the father of all living in his day, and to him was given the dominion. These men held keys first on earth, and then in heaven. . . .

Daniel in his seventh chapter speaks of the Ancient of Days; he means the oldest man, our Father Adam, Michael, he will call his children together and hold a council with them to prepare them for the coming of the Son of Man. He (Adam) is the father of the human family, and presides over the spirits of all men, and all that have had the keys must stand before him in the grand council. This may take place before some of us leave this stage of action. The Son of Man stands before him, and there is given him glory and dominion. Adam delivers up his stewardship to Christ, that which was delivered to him as holding the keys of the universe, but retains his standing as head of the human family. . . . (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 157.)

The Priesthood is everlasting. The Savior, Moses, and Elias, gave the keys to Peter, James and John, on the mount, when they were transfigured before him. . . . (Ibid., p. 158; Matthew 17:1-4, 9-13; DHC, Vol. 3, p. 387; Doctrines of Salvation, Vol. 2, pp. 108-112. Elias in these references should be interpreted Elijah.)

NOAH ALSO KNOWN AS THE ANGEL GABRIEL

Luke reveals the coming of the angel Gabriel to Zacharias to inform him that his wife would bear a son. He also appeared to Mary and announced the birth of our Lord and Savior. (Luke 1:11, 19, 26-27.)

Gabriel then is Noah according to this revelation.

Then we discover in the revelation given to the Prophet Joseph Smith in August 1830, that it was Elias who came to Zacharias and announced the birth of John the Baptist.

And also with Elias, to whom I have committed the keys of bringing to pass the restoration of all things spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets since the world began, concerning the last days;

And also John the son of Zacharias, which Zacharias he (Elias) visited and gave promise that he should have a son, and his name should be John, and he should be filled with the spirit of Elias; (D. & C. 27:6-7. See verse 9 for distinction between the first mentioned Elias and Elijah.)

This is the same Elias who held the keys of the dispensation of Abraham and who came to the Prophet Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, April 3, 1836, in the Kirtland Temple and restored the keys of Abraham's dispensation. To quote the reference:

After this, Elias appeared, and committed the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham, saying that in us and our seed all generations after us should be blessed. (D. & C. 110:12.)

In harmony with this reference is the information gained from Section 128 of the Doctrine and Covenants:

And again, what do we hear? Glad tidings from Cumorah! Moroni, an angel from heaven, declaring the fulfilment of the prophets—the book to be revealed. A voice of the Lord in the wilderness of Fayette, Seneca county, declaring the three witnesses to bear record of the book! The voice of Michael on the banks of the Susquehanna, detecting the devil when he appeared as an angel of light! The voice of Peter, James, and John in the wilderness between Harmony, Susquehanna county, and Colesville, Broome county, on the Susquehanna river, declaring themselves as possessing the keys of the kingdom, and of the dispensation of the fulness of times!

. . . And the voice of Michael, the archangel; the voice of Gabriel, and of Raphael, and of divers angels, from Michael or Adam down to the present time, all declaring their dispensation, their rights, their keys, their honors, their majesty and glory, and the power of their priesthood; giving line upon line, precept upon precept; here a little, and there a little; giving us consolation by holding forth that which is to come, confirming our hope. (D. & C. 128:20, 21.)

From these scriptures we learn that Noah is Gabriel and that he came to the Prophet Joseph Smith in his calling as an Elias and restored the keys of the dispensation in which the Lord made covenant with Abraham and his posterity after him to the latest generations.

The term Elias means forerunner. Noah, Elijah, John the Baptist and John the Revelator have been referred to as Elias in scripture, though the references to Elijah by this name are mistranslated. (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 340; D. & C. 77:9, 14.)

Summarizing the facts—Joseph Smith revealed that Gabriel was Noah; Luke declared that it was the angel Gabriel who appeared to Zacharias and Mary; and the Lord has declared that Elias appeared to Zacharias and Joseph Smith. Therefore, Elias is Noah.
