Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 3 ( 1960)

35

A Mother in Heaven

Question: "Will you please give us the background of the 'theory' advanced of 'a Mother in Heaven'? Some feel that God is great enough to create spirits without any assistance, and if not, why then was not a Mother mentioned among the Godhead?"

Mother in Heaven/It may be true that the Bible does not speak of a mother in heaven, nor does the Doctrine and Covenants when speaking of the revelations of the Lord to the Church. Permit me to call attention to the fact that mothers and wives are seldom mentioned in the Bible, although they are on certain occasions. The fact that there is no reference to a mother in heaven either in the Bible, Book of Mormon or Doctrine and Covenants, is not sufficient proof that no such thing as a mother did exist there. If we had a Father, which we did, for all of these records speak of him, then does not good common sense tell us that we must have had a mother there also?

Mother in Heaven/When we stop to think of it, there are passages which strongly imply that we did have a mother there. Let me call your attention to some passages of scripture. First, Paul speaking to the Greeks on Mars Hill had this to say:

Mother in Heaven/For in him we live, and move, and have our being; as certain also of your own poets have said, For we are also his offspring. (Acts 17:28.)

Mother in Heaven/JESUS HAD A FATHER AND A MOTHER

Mother in Heaven/If we are his offspring, then how did we become such, if we had no mother to give us spirit birth? We know that Jesus had a Father and that he had a mother, for the scriptures tell us so. Have you thought this passage through?

Mother in Heaven/Furthermore we have had fathers of our flesh which corrected us, and we gave them reverence: shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the Father of spirits, and live? (Hebrews 12:9.)

Mother in Heaven/It is my turn to ask a question. How can we be the offspring of God, how can he be the Father of our spirits, unless we had a mother and were born? The Doctrine and Covenants states that we are all begotten sons and daughters unto God.

Mother in Heaven/For we saw him, even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father—

Mother in Heaven/That by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughter unto God. (D. & C. 76:23-24.)

Mother in Heaven/Moreover, the Doctrine and Covenants definitely teaches the eternity of the marriage covenant and that those so married who are faithful will have claim on each other in eternity. Their children will belong to them, and they will have the gift of "a fulness and a continuation of the seeds forever and ever. Then shall they be gods, because they have no end." (D. & C. 132:19-20.) This great honor gives them the blessing of "eternal lives," but to those who have to remain separately they partake of "the deaths," because they do not "continue," that is, have no posterity in eternity. Now they will be blessed with the same blessings as those held by our Eternal Father—eternal increase. (See Moses 1:39.)

Mother in Heaven/In Genesis we read:

Mother in Heaven/And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness:

Mother in Heaven/So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them. (Genesis 1:26-27.)

Mother in Heaven/Is it not feasible to believe that female spirits were created in the image of a "Mother in Heaven"?

Mother in Heaven/
