Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 3 ( 1960)

37

Authenticity of Paul's Pastoral Letters

Question: "Though not a member of the same church as you, I nevertheless have come to seek out inspired offerings of members of your faith when in need of inspiration.

"The Methodist Men's Bible Class of which I am a member has been studying rather intensely the New Testament including background settings developed by the teacher. My problem for your consideration is the claim that the pastoral epistles, I and II Timothy and Titus, were not actually written by Paul. Rather, they were writings produced at a later period ascribed to Paul for sake of lending them apostolic authority. Some of the reasons given are: 1. Reference to bishops which title came into usage after Paul's decease; 2. I Timothy 4:12, 'Let no man despise thy youth . . .' We are told that Timothy was not a 'youth' at the time this letter was claimed to have been written, thus a slip-up by real writer; 3. Paul never gave himself to writing about 'organization,' thus this manual of procedure and organization is out of character for Paul and so not his writing. What answers can be offered to refute these viewpoints of so-called 'higher critics'?"

Answer: This is in answer to your questions relative to Paul and the authenticity of the epistles of Paul to Timothy, which epistles have been called in question by some critics.

In the beginning, permit me to say that the efforts of the so-called "higher critics" have utterly failed. Modern research, based in part on the discoveries of Doctors B. P. Grenfell and Arthur S. Hunt, have completely demolished the claims of these critics of the scriptures. In addition we have the research made by Flinders Petrie, Agnes Smith Lewis, Adolph Deissmann and a score of others who are competent to speak.

One of the archeologists who is considered among the greatest in that field, Dr. Edouard Naville, in speaking of "higher criticism," has said:

A book of scripture is taken, a minute philological analysis is made of it, with often a great amount of scholarship, but this analysis necessarily leads to the discovery of apparent inconsistencies, of disconnections, of repetitions, which have been interpreted as showing the hands of different writers. The whole process has been one of disintegration of the books, resulting in the creation of a great number of authors, for the existence of whom no historical proofs whatever can be adduced.

Again he said:

Truth will best be reached by the concurrence and the mutual help both of literary and archeological evidence. Considering only what is within the limits of this book—the New Testament—the recent discoveries compel us, as we said, to replace the authors of its different parts in the time when they are said to have lived, and among their readers or the hearers to whom they spoke. This seems to the present writer the best answer to the radical criticism and the most telling way of showing how insufficient and often misleading are its results, which are generally brought forward as being above discussion.

If we put side by side the gospels, the epistles of Paul, and the writings which have been discovered of the first century, we shall find in those "as it were a new autographic commentary," the explanation of many expressions showing that "New Testament writings were not theological treatises, but were mostly composed in the non-technical and rather careless language of the street and home." This comparative study has led Dr. Milligan to declare that "in view of all the new light coming upon the question from recent discovery, it is safe to conclude that with the probable exception of II Peter, all our New Testament writings may now be placed within the first century," though the collection called the New Testament may be of much later date.

This goes a long way to disprove many of the critical theories, attributing parts of books like the gospel of John to a later epoch, and cutting it up between various authors, some of them quite unknown and merely literary creations. (Cobern, Camden M., The New Archeological Discoveries, Introduction, pp. xxii-xxiii.)

TITLE OF 'BISHOP' KNOWN IN PAUL'S TIME

Your critic raised objection to the title bishop which he says "did not come into usage until after Paul's decease." He is evidently unaware of the fact, as set forth by Dr. Camden M. Cobern, that the title bishop was in use in Paul's time. Not only that, but scores of other words which the "critics" said belonged to a later period, were current in Paul's day. In the numerous manuscripts discovered by Grenfell and Hunt, thousands of letters and documents dated from the century preceding the time of Christ and during the first century containing words which the "critics" said were not in use in that day, have been found showing that they were in current use in the vernacular tongue, before and during Paul's ministry. I give this quotation from this noted scholar and archeologist:

It was Deissmann who taught the revolutionary truth that the gospels were a "people's book written in the dialect of the middle classes in the vernacular of the home and the shop; written in a style which no literary man of that day would have permitted himself to use, but which did appeal to the masses. An examination of the papyri written contemporaneously with the New Testament proved, according to Deissmann, that the New Testament books, with perhaps the exception of two or three, were written to working men in the tongue of the working man, the Bible authors freely using the colloquialisms and even the solecisms of the market-place. This was a theory which at first seemed too good to be true. It meant that Wycliffe only did for England what Matthew and Mark did for the Roman world. Christianity from its beginning spoke the tongue of the peasant. Its crooked grammar and mixed orthography and peculiar syntax, upon which have been built so many theological castles in the air, are all found paralleled exactly in the letters and other familiar documents of the first century. The common Greek was spoken everywhere throughout the entire Roman empire, and even our early church titles, such as "bishop," "presbyter," "deacon," etc., were well-known names used in the grade unions and other corporations, religious and civil, of that era. (My italics.) This contention, which seemed at first utterly unbelievable, has now inside of twenty years gained the adhesion of almost every great living Greek scholar and has caused the rewriting of the New Testament lexicon and grammar. (Ibid., p. 31.)

"Let no man despise thy youth . . ." Paul knew what he was talking about. Timothy was a young man, and Paul so addressed him.

BRANCHES REQUIRED ORGANIZATION

How foolish to say Paul was out of order in speaking of organization! Did they not have an organization in his day? Did he not organize branches of the Church throughout Asia Minor and in Greece and other places? If a branch, or church, is not an organization, then pray, what is it?

Here are a few more quotations from Dr. Cobern's wonderful book:

From the study of the grammar of the Koine it is perfectly clear that many of the supposed blunders and solecisms of the New Testament writers and their supposed errors in transcription of the text are merely grammatical forms common among the middle classes of the first century. This is one of the greatest discoveries that have been made. The two genders found with the same word in Rev. 14:19, are also found with the same word in the papyri. (Ibid., pp. 110-111.)

The accuracy and age of the New Testament documents are thus confirmed by the new discoveries in a striking way; for although the great New Testament uncials of the fourth and later centuries were changed slightly in vocabulary and grammatical idiom to conform to the custom in those centuries, yet these retain the ancient and peculiar forms of the first and early second century to such an extent that their origin is now undoubted. It does not need a "redactor" any longer to explain the different spellings and changes in orthography, and in every direction these modern studies have increased the authority of the great uncial MSS. of the New Testament. (Ibid., pp. 111-112.)

One of the outstanding evidences that Paul wrote the epistles to Timothy is the fact that his prophetic utterances in I Timothy 4:1-3 and II Timothy 3:1-7, have been literally fulfilled.

Paul could not have written more accurately had he written these prophetic sayings in the present century.

There are several books that treat of the labors and historical background of Paul. Perhaps they are not accurate in all things. I name Emile Baumann's Saint Paul, and Cannon F. W. Farrar's The Life and Works of St. Paul, by E. P. Dutton & Company.
