Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 3 ( 1960)

39

Moses and the Tables from Sinai

Question: "There has been a discussion among members of the ward concerning Moses and his receiving the Ten Commandments. One side of the discussion says that when Moses came down from the mount the first time with the tables and found the people had made them a golden calf to worship, Moses threw down the tables and broke them. These tables contained the gospel, and the people were not ready to accept the gospel, so Moses returned to the mount and received from the Lord the carnal commandments— 'Thou shalt not.'

"The other side of the discussion claims that both sets of the tables, the ones he broke and the ones he brought back the second time, were the same, the Ten Commandments on both sets.

"Please advise, giving references from both ancient and modern scriptures."

Answer: When Israel came out of Egypt it was the intention of the Lord to make of Israel a royal priesthood. That is to say, that he was to give them the Melchizedek Priesthood and the principles of exaltation. When Moses went up into the mount and was gone forty days, Israel sinned a very serious sin and turned back to the worship of the Egyptians and had Aaron make for them a golden calf. When Moses came down from the mountain, in his anger, he threw down the tables and broke them. Then at the command of the Lord he went back into the mountain, and the Lord gave him other tables on which he wrote with his finger.

The Lord did not write the same things on the second tables that were on the first, but confined Israel to the Aaronic Priesthood and denied the Melchizedek Priesthood to the tribes of Israel except in special cases with certain prophets like Isaiah, Jeremiah and others. These prophets had the Melchizedek Priesthood by special appointment. The Lord gave to Israel the carnal law and said that they should not enter into his rest while they were in the wilderness.

TEN COMMANDMENTS IN EXISTENCE BEFORE MOSES' DAY

The Ten Commandments were in existence long before Moses' time, and the Lord only renewed them in the days of Moses, just as he has done in our day.

Now we do not find in the Bible the full history of these things. We do learn that the Lord withdrew from Israel the right to the Melchizedek Priesthood and confined them largely to the Aaronic Priesthood. The full reason for this is not clearly stated. This is due to the fact that the Bible has lost much in translations and copying by the scribes. In the Doctrine and Covenants the Lord has restored some of this history as in D. & C. 84:19-27. I refer you to the revision given by the Prophet Joseph Smith which tells more about this action.

And the Lord said unto Moses, Hew thee two other tables of stone, like unto the first, and I will write upon them also, the words of the law, according as they were written at the first on the tables which thou brakest; but it shall not be according to the first, for I will take away the priesthood out of their midst; therefore my holy order, and the ordinances thereof, shall not go before them; for my presence shall not go up in their midst lest I destroy them. (D. & C. 84:19-27.)

THE WORD OF THE LORD

To this we may add the word of the Lord in the Doctrine and Covenants:

And this greater priesthood administereth the Gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God.

Therefore, in the ordinances thereof, the power of godliness is manifest.

And without the ordinances thereof, and the authority of the priesthood, the power of godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh.

For without this no man can see the face of God, even the father, and live.

Now this Moses plainly taught to the children of Israel in the wilderness, and sought diligently to sanctify his people that they might behold the face of God;

But they hardened their hearts and could not endure his presence; therefore, the Lord in his wrath, for his anger was kindled against them, swore that they should not enter into his rest while in the wilderness, which rest is the fulness of his glory.

Therefore, he took Moses out of their midst, and the Holy Priesthood also;

And the lesser priesthood continued, which priesthood holdeth the key of the ministering of angels and the preparatory gospel;

Which gospel is the gospel of repentance and of baptism, and the remission of sins, and the law of carnal commandments, which the Lord in his wrath caused to continue with the house of Aaron among the children of Israel until John, whom God raised up, being filled with the Holy Ghost from his mother's womb. (Exodus 34:1-2 (Inspired Version).)
