Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 3 ( 1960)

40

Plural Marriage in Early Days

Question: "When it is discovered that I am a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, someone always has something unpleasant to say about 'having more than one wife.' I would appreciate very much an explanation as to why the Church taught and practiced plural marriage in the early days of the Church."

Answer: In regard to your question, I think you are entitled to an explanation and will give you a brief statement which I hope will explain this matter satisfactorily.

First, it should be understood that the practice of plural marriage in the Church was discontinued upwards of half a century ago by command of the Lord in a revelation to President Wilford Woodruff, then the President of the Church. The reason for this I will explain later.

The Lord revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith the doctrine of the eternity of the marriage covenant. That is to say, when a man and a woman are married by divine authority in a temple their marriage is to continue throughout all eternity. Children born to such parents will belong to their parents forever, and the family will be an eternal organization and will not come to an end at the death of the members.

The so-called Christian world, because of apostasy, has lost this glorious doctrine and believes that marriage is only for this mortal life, and therefore in all Protestant and Catholic churches the marriage covenant is performed for time only. The priests who officiate do not have authority to marry for eternity and generally do not believe in that doctrine. Therefore, according to their teaching and practice, the marriage union ceases to exist forever when one of the covenanting parties dies, and the children are left without parents in the eternity. To the minds of those who understand the fulness of the gospel, this teaching and practice is a false and fearful doctrine.

MARRIAGE NEVER MEANT TO END AT MORTAL DEATH

Marriage was never intended by the Lord to end at mortal death. Commenting on this President Joseph F. Smith once said:

. . . While man was yet immortal before sin had entered the world, our Heavenly Father himself performed the first marriage. He united our first parents in the bonds of holy matrimony, and commanded them to be fruitful and multiply . . . (President Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine, p. 274.)

The Apostle Paul, when writing to the Corinthian Saints, said:

Nevertheless neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord. (I Corinthians 11:11.)

This understanding is necessary to comprehend the answer to your question regarding plural marriage. When the Lord revealed celestial marriage to Joseph Smith, which is marriage for all eternity, he also explained to the Prophet why Abraham, Jacob, and other ancient prophets had plural wives, and the Lord did not condemn these prophets because they did have plural wives, but to the contrary, he greatly blessed and prospered them. Abraham had two or three wives, and he is spoken of in the Bible as the "Friend of God." (James 2:23.) Jacob, grandson of Abraham, had four wives, and by these four wives he had twelve sons, from whom come the twelve tribes of Israel. The Israelites became the chosen people of the Lord with whom he made special covenant and to whom he gave the Holy Priesthood. The Lord said through Moses:

The Lord's portion is his people: Jacob is the lot of his inheritance. (Deuteronomy 32:9.)

Likewise, the Lord blessed and honored these men who are spoken of as holy prophets.

THE LORD HONORED MOSES

The Lord blessed and honored Moses. He was called to lead the children of Israel out of Egypt, and the Lord spoke to him "face to face, as a man speaketh to his friend." (Exodus 33:11.) Moreover, the Lord gave to Moses the law by which Israel was to be governed, and not only accepted him as his servant, but accepted also his plural family and made provision in the law sanctioning plural marriage. This same Moses was highly praised and commended by our Savior when he was in his ministry on the earth.

In the Book of Revelation you will discover that the Lord revealed to John the Apostle, on the Isle of Patmos, that the holy city, New Jerusalem, was to be established when the Lord should come to reign in the millennium. No unclean thing was to enter this city, and it is written:

Blessed are they that do his commandments that they may have right to the tree of life, and may enter through the gates into the city.

For without are dogs and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers, and idolaters, and whosoever loveth and maketh a lie. (Revelation 22:14-15.)

On the gates of this holy city, on its four sides are to be emblazoned the names of the twelve sons of Jacob, the heads of the tribes of Israel.

ANCIENT PROPHETS ACCEPTED FOR THEIR RIGHTEOUSNESS

In the revelation on celestial marriage, that is marriage for eternity, the Lord informed Joseph Smith that these men who had plural families in ancient times did not sin. Moreover, he taught Joseph Smith the doctrine of plural marriage and commanded him to practice it, and this practice was in the Church for many years.

In 1890, because of the enactment of laws forbidding this practice and because of the opposition on the part of all other people in the United States and throughout the so-called Christian world, the Lord instructed President Wilford Woodruff to call upon the members of the Church to discontinue the practice of plural marriage. From that time forth the Church has accepted this as a commandment, and plural marriage within the Church has ceased.

JUSTIFIED IN OBEYING THE LAWS OF THE LAND

When the government passed laws against plural marriage the Church, by revelation from the Lord, ceased the practice. In doing so they were justified, for in a revelation given to Joseph Smith when the Saints were prevented in building the temple in Independence, Missouri, the Lord said:

Verily, verily, I say unto you, that when I give a commandment to any of the sons of men to do a work unto my name, and those sons of men go with all their might and with all they have to perform that work, and cease not their diligence, and their enemies come upon them and hinder them from performing that work, behold, it behooveth me to require that work no more at the hands of those sons of men, but to accept of their offerings. (D. & C. 124:49.)

It is also written in another revelation:

Let no man break the laws of the land, for he that keepeth the laws of God hath no need to break the laws of the land.

Wherefore, be subject to the powers that be, until he reigns whose right it is to reign, and subdues all enemies under his feet. (D. & C. 58:21-22.)

According to the teachings and practice in the Church when a man and woman are married in the temple, and the wife dies, the man is at liberty to marry another wife for time and all eternity. It is also permissible for a man who has been divorced for good cause to marry again and have another wife sealed to him in the temple.
