Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 3 ( 1960)

41

Are the Sons of Levi Our Temple Workers?

Question: "Someone has said that the sons of Levi are our temple workers today. Is this true? The following are the scriptures which were used as evidences for this point of view: Joel 2:28; Malachi 3:1-2, 4:1-6; D. & C. 84:31, Section 13, 124:39, 128:17, 16-24, and Ezekiel 43:18."

Answer: When in ancient Israel, the sons of Levi looked after the temple and performed ceremonies in the temple, it was when the Israelites were under the Aaronic Priesthood and the Melchizedek Priesthood had been taken away from them.

The following account appears in the Doctrine and Covenants:

And the Lord confirmed a priesthood also upon Aaron and his seed, throughout all their generations, which priesthood also continueth and abideth forever with the priesthood which is after the holiest order of God.

And this greater priesthood administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God.

Therefore, in the ordinances thereof, the power of Godliness is manifest.

And without the ordinances thereof, and the authority of the priesthood, the power of godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh;

For without this no man can see the face of God, even the Father, and live.

Now this Moses plainly taught to the children of Israel in the wilderness, and sought diligently to sanctify his people that they might behold the face of God;

But they hardened their hearts and could not endure his presence; therefore, the Lord in his wrath, for his anger was kindled against them, swore that they should not enter into his rest while in the wilderness, which rest is the fulness of glory.

Therefore, he took Moses out of their midst, and the Holy Priesthood also;

And the lesser priesthood continued, which priesthood holdeth the key of the ministering of angels and the preparatory gospel;

Which gospel is the gospel of repentance and of baptism, and the remission of sins, and the law of carnal commandments, which the Lord in his wrath caused to continue with the house of Aaron among the children of Israel until John, whom God raised up, being filled with the Holy Ghost from his mother's womb. (D. & C. 84:18-27.)

In this dispensation, the temple work is under the direction of the Melchizedek Priesthood and while the sons of Levi will have to offer an offering in righteousness, that is separate and apart from the ordinances in the temple as we have them.
