Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 3 ( 1960)

Question: "Why do you condemn the very church that made it possible for you to have the Holy Bible?"

Answer: It is true that certain manuscripts of the Bible have fallen into the hands of the Catholic Church, but there were other manuscripts which did not. There have been many translations of the scriptures which were not made by the Catholic Church. The Bible was published contrary to their wishes. I call your attention to the fact which is substantiated by authentic history, that the Catholic Church a few hundred years ago condemned any individual who was not associated with the ministry who read the Bible, and they were punished and even put to death for having excerpts from the Bible in their possession. Moreover, when the Catholic Church held sway—before the Reformation—such Bibles as were in existence were chained to the pulpits.

ATTEMPTS MADE TO DESTROY COPIES OF THE BIBLE

Wycliffe's Bible appeared in 1380 and was followed by translations of a later date, both in English and other tongues. There was an attempt made to destroy these copies which were prepared without authority of the Catholic Church. When the invention of printing came in the fifteenth century, the cause of religious freedom received a powerful impetus, and Bibles were distributed all over Europe, contrary to the wishes of the Catholic Church.

An English chronicler, Henry Kneighton, a Catholic, many years before the "Reformation" declared that the general reading of the Bible should be prohibited "lest the jewel of the Church, hitherto the exclusive property of the clergy and divines, should be made common to the laity." Archbishop Arundel, of the Catholic Church, issued an enactment that " . . . no part of the scriptures in English should be read, either in public or in private, or be thereafter translated under pain of the greater excommunication."

The translation by Erastmus was forbidden to be used in Cambridge, and the vicar of Croyden said from his pulpit: "We must root out printing, or printing will root us out."

In England in the days of Henry V3 the reading of the Bible by the common people, or those who were not of the privileged class (that is the clergy) was prohibited by Parliament. That was, of course, when Henry of England was known as the "defender of the (Catholic) faith." All reading of the scriptures, all discussion within one's own doors concerning faith, the sacraments, the papal authority, or other religious matters were forbidden "under penalty of death."

John Lathrop Motley, in his History of the Rise of the Dutch Republic, says:

The edicts were no dead letter. The fires were kept constantly supplied with human fuel by monks who knew the act of burning reformers better than of arguing with them. The scaffold was the most conclusive of syllogisms, and used upon all occasions.

Charles V introduced and organized a papal institution, side by side with these horrible "placards" of his invention, which constituted a masked inquisition even more cruel than that in Spain.... The execution of the system was never permitted to languish. The number of Netherlanders who were burned, strangled, beheaded, or buried alive, in obedience to his edicts and for the offense of reading the scriptures, or looking askance at a graven image, or of ridiculing the actual presence of the body and blood of Christ in a wafer, have been placed as high as one hundred thousand by distinguished authorities, and have never been put at a lower mark than fifty thousand. (J. L. Motley, The Rise of the Dutch Republic, Burt's ed., Vol. 1, p. 68. See Doctrines of Salvation, Vol. 3, p. 186.)

These are unpleasant things, and I would not have called attention to them had you not made it necessary by your remarks in relation to the Catholic responsibility for our having the Bible.

AN ANCIENT PROPHET SPOKE ABOUT THE BIBLE

An ancient prophet had this to say about the Bible and the attitude which is so frequently expressed that we are indebted to the Catholic Church for the Bible:

And because my words shall hiss forth—many of the Gentiles shall say: A Bible! A Bible! We have got a Bible, and there cannot be any more Bible!

But thus saith the Lord God: O fools, they shall have a Bible; and it shall proceed forth from the Jews, mine ancient covenant people. And what thank they the Jews for the Bible which they receive from them? Yea, what do the Gentiles mean? Do they remember the travels and the labors, and the pains of the Jews, and their diligence unto me, in bringing forth salvation unto the Gentiles?

O ye Gentiles, have ye remembered the Jews, mine ancient covenant people? Nay; but ye have cursed them, and have hated them and have not sought to recover them. But behold, I will turn all these things upon your own heads; for I the Lord have not forgotten my people. (II Nephi 29:3-5.)

It is not to the Catholic Church that we are indebted for the Bible, but to the "ancient people" of the Lord, the prophets of Israel.
