Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 3 ( 1960)

44

Catholic Faith and Biblical Doctrines

Question: "How can you claim that the Catholic Church is not the church established by the Savior when it is the only church which can substantiate a beginning from which it has never been separated? Every doctrine of Catholic faith has its source in the Bible, and it is the only church which has the trademarks of the church established by Jesus Christ."

Answer: Let us consider some evidences why we claim that the Catholic Church is not the church established by our Savior.

We will consider the question of continued revelation. There has not appeared in the Catholic world, nor in the Protestant world, one single divine revelation. John the Apostle, and successor to Peter, as he outlived Peter, was the only person recognized by the Lord since the death of Peter. No pope, since there has been a pope, has ever obtained a divine revelation from the heavens. In fact, Cardinal Gibbons declared that it was not the prerogative of the pope to receive revelations, but he was merely the interpreter of the scriptures, which have been given. To the contrary, the popes have closed the volume of scripture tightly and maintain that there can be no further scripture. Peter and Paul taught that the gift of prophecy—which would be scripture—is essential to the Church.

ORDINANCES AND COVENANTS WERE CHANGED

The Catholic Church changed the ordinances and covenants as they were given to the apostles of Jesus Christ and mixed them with pagan philosophy and practice.

a. Baptism which was for the remission of sins for all who were able to repent, was changed and made a solemn mockery. Baptism was for those who were capable of sinning. It was performed by immersion of the entire body in water. It was changed by the Catholic Church to sprinkling or pouring water on the head, which is definitely not a burial. (Romans 6:1-6; Colossians 2:12.)

In Rome, there is a place where a pool once existed. There the converts went to be baptized by immersion which was the practice in the days of Christ, Peter and Paul, and in the first century the practice in Rome. Later it was changed to sprinkling or wetting the head with water. Thus the sacred ordinance was changed. Where is the revelation that was given changing this holy sacred ordinance? There is none!

b. Baptism, instead of being an ordinance for the remission of sins for those who were capable of understanding, was corrupted to apply to newly born infants, who could not sin and had not sinned! This is contrary to the words of our Savior who taught:

Suffer the little children and forbid them not to come to me: for the kingdom of heaven is for such. (Matthew 19:14 (Catholic Bible).)

LITTLE CHILDREN ARE INNOCENT AT BIRTH

Little children are innocent when they are born into this world, and there is no taint of any kind upon them. Yet the Catholic Church has condemned all little children to dire punishment who were neglected and were not "baptized" when they were born and died without this sprinkling. I am a witness to this terrible doctrine where Catholic priests have refused to give "Christian burial" because a child was so unfortunate as to never have had this sprinkling before it died. This is a doctrine which assuredly the Lord will never forgive, and those who teach it will be damned.

This doctrine, I admit, has been modified. In the Catholic Church in the earlier centuries, little children so dying were assigned to the torments of hell, but now this punishment is modified, but not by any revelation! I quote from the Catholic Encyclopedia:

The absolute necessity of this sacrament [baptism] is often insisted on by the Fathers of the church, especially when they speak of infant baptism. Thus St. Irenaeus (II, xxii): "Christ came to save all who are reborn through Him to God, infants, children and youths." St. Augustine (3 De Anima) says: "If you wish to be a Catholic, do not believe, nor say, nor teach, that infants who die before baptism can obtain the remission of original sin." A still stronger passage from the same doctor (Ep. xxvii, Ad. Hieron.) reads, "Whosoever says that even infants are vivified in Christ, when they depart this life without the participation of His Sacrament (baptism), both oppose the Apostolic preachings and condemn the whole church which hastens to baptize infants, because it unhesitatingly believes that otherwise they cannot possibly be vivified in Christ." (The Catholic Encyclopedia, Vol. 2, Art. "Baptism," p. 265. See also Answers to Gospel Questions, Vol 1, p. 58.)

Later Catholic scholars have modified this terrible doctrine as follows:

Catholic theologians are unanimous, consequently, in declaring that infants dying without baptism, are excluded from the beatific vision; but as to the exact state of these souls in the next world they are not agreed. In speaking of the souls who have failed to attain salvation, theologians distinguish the pain of loss (paena Domni), or privation of the beatific vision and the pain of sense (paena Sensus). While it is certain that unbaptized infants must endure the pain of loss, it is not at all certain that they are subject to the pain of sense. St. Augustine (De. Peca. at Mer. Ixvi) held that they would not be exempt from the pain of sense, but at the same time he thought it would be of the mildest form. On the other hand, St. Gregory Nazianzen ( Or. in S. pap.) expressed the belief that such infants would suffer only the pain of loss.

Since the twelfth century, the opinion of the majority of theologians has been that unbaptized infants are immune from all pain of sense.

St. Augustine (Serm. xi. De. Verb Apost.) says of infant baptism, "This the church always had, always held; this she received from the faith of our ancestors; this she perseveringly guards even to the end." St. Cyprian (Ep. ad. Fidum) writes "From baptism and from grace—must not be kept the infant who, because recently born has committed no sin, except inasmuch as it was born carnally from Adam, it has contracted the contagion of the ancient death in its first nativity; and it comes to receive the remission of sins more easily on this very account that not its own, but another's sins are forgiven it." (Ibid., p. 270.)

NO WORD OF MERCY OR JUSTICE IN CATHOLIC DOCTRINE

In all of this doctrine there is not one word of mercy or justice, but a condemnation of infants who were so unfortunate as not to have been sprinkled by someone before they died. This neglect which was not their own, for they were helpless, a just God is to condemn forever— according to Catholic belief and doctrine—to everlasting punishment! Can you think of anything more inhuman and unjust! Why in the world, did not these Catholic popes take this unsettled question to the Lord for solution? Simply because they are not susceptible to revelation. They can have no revelation on any doctrine, for all revelation with them ceased! How absurd this doctrine is! For any normal mind to even imagine that our Eternal Father would condemn innocent infants to punishment because in their helpless state someone did not sprinkle them with a little water is beyond comprehension! Surely any church, Catholic or Protestant, that teaches that kind of doctrine will stand condemned before the Lord!

Now let me quote another ancient prophet who had clear vision of this question:

For I know that God is not a partial God, neither a changeable being; but he is unchangeable from all eternity to all eternity.

Little children cannot repent; wherefore it is awful wickedness to deny the pure mercies of God unto them, for they are all alive in him because of his mercy.

And he that saith that little children need baptism denieth the mercies of Christ, and setteth at naught the atonement of him and the power of his redemption.

Wo unto such, for they are in danger of death, hell, and an endless torment, I speak it boldly; God hath commanded me. Listen unto them and give heed, or they stand against you at the judgment-seat of Christ.

For behold that all little children, are alive in Christ, and also all they that are without the law. For the power of redemption cometh on all them that have no law; therefore, he that is not condemned, or he that is under no condemnation, cannot repent; and unto such baptism availeth nothing. (Moroni 8:18-22.)

This brings us to the point of the atonement of Jesus Christ. I speak it definitely: No Catholic priest from the pope down, understands the atonement of Jesus Christ! If they did, then this abominable doctrine of original sin would be abolished. So the atonement and its relationship to the human family is the next point which proves the apostasy of the Catholic Church.

THE TWO-FOLD NATURE OF THE ATONEMENT

The atonement of Jesus Christ was of two-fold nature. First: By his death upon the cross he redeemed all mankind from death. Second: He redeems all mankind from sin on condition of faith in God, repentance from all sin, and baptism by immersion—a burial in water—for the remission of their sins.

Conditional redemption is also universal in its nature; it is offered to all, but is not received by all; it is a universal gift, though not universally accepted. Its benefits can be obtained only through faith, repentance, baptism, the laying on of hands and obedience to all other requirements of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

Unconditional redemption is a gift forced upon mankind which they cannot reject, though they were disposed. Not so with conditional redemption; it can be received or rejected according to the will of the creature.

Redemption from original sin is without faith or works; redemption from our own sins is given through faith and works. Both are the gifts of free grace; but while one is a gift forced upon us unconditionally, the other is a gift merely offered to us conditionally. The redemption of the one is compulsory; the redemption of the other is voluntary. Man cannot by any possible act prevent his redemption from the fall; but he can utterly refuse and prevent his redemption from the penalty of his own sins. (Orson Pratt, M.S. 12:69.)

BIBLE TEACHES UNIVERSAL RESURRECTION OF THE DEAD

The Bible—whether Catholic or Protestant translations—teaches the universal resurrection of the dead. No man can refuse to receive it! This is the free gift of Christ by the shedding of his blood on the cross. Salvation comes only to those who earnestly seek it and who keep the commandments that pertain to the kingdom of God!

One of the greatest evidences of the apostasy of the Catholic Church is their doctrine in relation to the salvation of little children, denying the mercies of Jesus Christ. No little child was ever condemned for being born. No child was ever born who is under any taint of "original" sin, or the sin of Adam. Every priest or teacher who proclaims the doctrine of the damnation of little infants who died unsprinkled is in the gall of bitterness. I repeat, they do not understand, and deny the atonement of Jesus Christ, who came to destroy death and did so on the cross. He also came to redeem men from their own sins. Little children have no sin, and there is no original taint upon them! If it were so, then the sacrifice of Jesus Christ on the cross failed. Then the shedding of his blood did not redeem us from death! He declared that it would. He promised little children a place in his Father's kingdom, and no Catholic priest or Protestant minister can prevent it!

CHURCH GOVERNMENT WAS CHANGED

Another reason for the apostasy is the fact that the calling of apostles was done away, and that cardinals and archbishops came into the apostate church, for the Lord never sent them. There is no revelation in any scripture giving to the church these officers, neither a pope. The duties and office of a bishop in the original church were far different from that of the apostle.

Another reason for the apostasy is that one sits, as Paul has placed it for lack of a better expression, "in the temple of God," claiming to be the Holy Father, thus in blasphemy taking the title which belongs only to God! Moreover, it is in direct opposition to the words of Jesus: "And call none father upon the earth: for one is your father, who is in heaven." (Matthew 23:9 (Catholic Bible). See Matthew 23:9-10, King James version.) This is a blasphemous expression. But it proves the point of the pope's real status. Moreover, nearly every priest is called "father," thus Catholics show their contempt for the words of Jesus and Paul.

The Catholic Church is out of harmony with the truth, and they prove that the words of Paul apply to them and their apostasy, in the fact that their priests do not marry. Who else in the world fulfills this prediction which is in strict opposition to the teachings of Paul who firmly declares that a bishop (or priest) should be a married man? Are you acquainted with the fact that for several centuries the priests did marry honorably and had families? It was Pope Hildebrand who forced celibacy upon the clergy, thus fulfilling Paul's prophecy concerning the apostasy. Where did he get the revelation? Popes do not believe in revelation.

When the edict of celibacy went forth, a mob arose under direction of the priests and waged a campaign against the married clergy, and they and their families were sorely abused. Thus there came into the Catholic Church a condition which, not many years ago, a large group of Catholic priests protested against and asked relief from what they called an "impossible condition." Thus the edict of Gregory VII of celibacy became the universal custom.

MARIOLATRY IS A FALSE DOCTRINE

Another evidence of the apostasy of the Catholic Church is the worship and elevation of Mary. No one of the apostles after the death of our Lord ever referred to Mary much less recommend her for adoration or Godhood. This came about by the mixing of Christianity with paganism long after the time of Emperor Constantine. Here is what one historian has to say about the introduction of this doctrine:

Nestor was deeply imbued with the doctrine of Aristotle, and attempted to coordinate them with what he considered the orthodox Christian tenets. Between him and Cyril, the Bishop or Patriarch of Alexandria, a quarrel accordingly arose. Cyril represented the paganizing, Nestor the philosophizing party of the Church. This was the Cyril who had murdered Hypatia. Cyril determined that the worship of the Virgin as the Mother of God should be recognized, Nestor was determined that it should not. In a sermon delivered in the metropolitan church at Constantinople, he vindicated the attributes of the Eternal, the Almighty God. "And can this God have a mother?" he exclaimed. In other sermons and writings, he set forth with more precision his ideas that the Virgin should be considered not as the Mother of God, but as the mother of the human portion of Christ, that portion being as essentially distinct from the divine as is a temple from its contained deity.

Initiated by the monks of Alexandria, the monks of Constantinople took up arms in behalf of "the Mother of God." The quarrel rose to such a pitch that the emperor was constrained to summon a council to meet at Ephesus. (John W. Draper, Conflict between Religion and Science, p. 71.)

So, says the author, John W. Draper, there came a restoration of the Egyptian worship of Isis restored as the Virgin Mary.

OTHER FALSE DOCTRINES WITHOUT BIBLICAL SANCTION

There are numerous other subjects that could be considered, but this is already too long. I might have referred to the Eucharist, and its perversion, and how the ridiculous and superstititous belief that the bread and wine become the actual body and blood of Jesus Christ is extremely unwarranted and absurd. I might have referred to the sacrilegious change in this sacred ordinance, by dividing the substance and the priest drinking the wine and the penitent member taking the wafer. I could have written a volume on indulgences. It is a fact historically attested that indulgences were and are even now a corruption and a fraud.

I could have condemned most heartily the prayers for the dead for money. I could have included the doctrine of Purgatory, for which there is no scriptural warrant, and could have condemned the paying for prayers to get people out of their distress or torment.

There are so many things connected with the Catholic religion that are concoctions without any warrant of revelation or scripture, there can be no other conclusion than that it is an apostate organization, fulfilling the predictions of Peter, Paul, and John as well as the old prophets.

Again I ask you to read carefully the 18th chapter of the Apocalypse which portrays the woman who now sits on many waters (people) who is eventually to be destroyed.

Another thing which places the stamp of fraud upon the Catholic Church, and brings down upon it the displeasure of the Lord, is the universal idolatry, bowing down to images and praying to them, seeking from them intercession; among which is the worship of the portion of an olive tree carved to represent Christ when a small child, and to which so many Catholics in this country write letters and before which Catholics bow down seeking blessings. All of this in the face of the word of the Lord that we should not make graven images or bow down to them.
