Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 3 ( 1960)

45

Sealing of the One Hundred Forty-four Thousand Elders of Israel

Question: "The Jehovah's Witnesses teach that the one hundred and forty-four thousand mentioned in the Book of Revelation are the only ones to receive resurrection. What is the correct interpretation?"

Answer: The one hundred and forty-four thousand mentioned in Revelation 7:4-8 represent special groups from the tribes of Israel, twelve thousand from each tribe, who will be caught up to meet Christ at his coming.

In Section 77 of the Doctrine and Covenants we read:

Q. What are we to understand by sealing the one hundred and forty-four thousand, out of all the tribes of Israel—twelve thousand out of every tribe?

A. We are to understand that those who are sealed are high priests, ordained unto the holy order of God, to administer the everlasting gospel; for they are they who are ordained out of every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, by the angels to whom is given power over the nations of the earth, to bring as many as will come to the church of the Firstborn. (D. & C. 77:11.)

Further, we read from Section 133:

Hearken and hear, O ye inhabitants of the earth. Listen, ye elders of my church together, and hear the voice of the Lord; for he calleth upon all men, and he commandeth all men everywhere to repent.

For behold, the Lord God hath sent forth the angel crying through the midst of heaven, saying: Prepare ye the way of the Lord, and make his paths straight, for the hour of his coming is nigh—

When the Lamb shall stand upon Mount Zion, and with him a hundred and forty-four thousand, having his Father's name written on their foreheads.

Wherefore, prepare ye for the coming of the Bridegroom; go ye out to meet him. (D. & C. 133:16-19.)

"GREAT MULTITUDES WHICH NO MAN CAN NUMBER"

Now if you will read all of Chapter 7 in Revelation you will learn that in addition to these one hundred and forty-four thousand there was a great multitude out of all nations which no man could number who likewise received salvation, and they, too, "stood before the throne of the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands."

Note particularly these verses:

After this I beheld, and lo, a great multitude, which no man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands;

And cried out with a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God which sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb. . . .

And one of the elders answered, saying unto me, What are these which are arrayed in white robes? and whence came they?

And I said unto him, Sir, thou knowest. And he said to me, These are they which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.

Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his temple: and he that sitteth on the throne shall dwell among them. (Revelation 7:9-10, 13-15.)

All mortals shall be resurrected, but only those who merit celestial glory shall stand before the throne of God.
