Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 3 ( 1960)

46

Is There a Conflict between Moses 2:3 and Abraham 4:3?

Question: "I am reading the Pearl of Great Price and it seem to me that the books of Moses and Abraham contradict each other.

"In Moses 2:3, it says God (singular) created the earth. In Abraham 4:3 it says the Gods (plural) created the earth. Will you please explain these verses for me?"

Answer: The verses in books of Moses and Abraham which you consider to be contradictory are as follows:

And I, God, said: Let there be light; and there was light. (Moses 2:3.)

And they (the Gods) said: Let there be light; and there was light. (Abraham 4:3)

A correct understanding will make clear what you think is a contradiction. If you read carefully you will discover that the account in the Book of Abraham is an account of a council meeting which was held in heaven before the world was created. I call attention to the first two verses in Abraham, Chapter 5, which are as follows:

And thus we will finish the heavens and the earth, and all the hosts of them.

And the Gods said among themselves: On the seventh time we will end our work, which we have counseled; and we will rest on the seventh time from all our work which we have counseled.

ABRAHAM'S ACCOUNT IS IN THE FUTURE TENSE

It is plainly understood this account is of a meeting which was held in heaven, and it is stated in the future tense. Therefore the plural noun is used. On the other hand the account given in Moses is the recording of what had been done when the work was finished. You know we read in the Book of Moses that a council was held in heaven, and the plan was presented there.

Permit me to ask this question. Unto whom was the Lord speaking in the following passage in the Bible:

And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness: and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth. (Genesis 1:26.) (Italics added)

The correct answer is found in the Book of Moses:

And I, God, said unto mine Only Begotten, which was with me from the beginning: Let us make man in our image, after our likeness; and it was so. And I, God, said: Let them have dominion over the fishes of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth. (Moses 2:26. For further discussion see Answers to Gospel Questions, Vol. 2, pp. 139-144.)
