Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 3 ( 1960)

47

Was the Original First Presidency Independent of the Quorum of Apostles?

Question: "Did the Savior have a First Presidency in the Church in the meridian of time that was independent of the Quorum of Apostles?"

Answer: While the Savior was with the apostles there was no need of his having a First Presidency, neither assistants nor counselors. The Twelve Apostles served with him as his special witnesses.

The record concerning the history of the Church in the first century is extremely meager. The New Testament confirms our knowledge that only a small part of the history and lives of the brethren of those times has come down to us.

It is possible that Peter, James, and John formed a First Presidency, in addition to the Quorum of the Apostles. As to this we do not definitely know. The fact remains, however, that they were chosen by the Lord to serve in such capacity before his departure from them. (Matthew 17:1-13; D.H.C., Vol. 3, p. 387; Doctrines of Salvation, Vol. 3, pp. 151-153.)

ANCIENT ORDER WAS PATRIARCHAL

Then we have this thought which is worthy of consideration. From the days of Adam down to the days of Moses, there were no apostles. The Church was under the patriarchal order, and those who directed and presided were patriarchs. It was not until the coming of Jesus Christ that he added the office of apostle to the priesthood. The work of the ministry may well be a progressive thing, and the Lord has added to the offices in succeeding generations.

It is very possible that Peter, James, and John served as a First Presidency while still maintaining their standing as members of the Twelve. All the information we have indicates that they functioned in this capacity while serving at the same time as three of the Council of the Twelve. We know, however, that apostles were added to the Church following the days of our Lord's ministry. Matthias was chosen to take the place of Judas. (Acts 1:15-16.) Paul evidently took the place of someone else. (I Timothy 2:7; II Timothy 1:11; Titus 1:1.) Barnabas, who is also called an apostle, could well have taken the place of another. (Acts 14:14.) Then we have "James, the Lord's brother," and Jude who were generally considered as holding the same divine authority. (Galatians 1:19; Epistle of Jude.) (Galatians 1:19; Epistle of Jude.)

THE ORDER OF THE CHURCH WAS TO FILL VACANCIES

From the words of Paul to the Ephesian Saints we learn that it was the intention in that day that vacancies in the Quorum of the Twelve were to be filled. Apostles were to continue in the true Church—

For the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ:

Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ: (Ephesians 4:12-13.)

It is a dangerous practice for people to criticize the Church now because we have a First Presidency and a Quorum of Twelve Apostles. I assure you that it was done by divine commandment of the Lord.

Through latter-day revelation the Lord declared:

Of necessity there are presidents, or presiding officers growing out of, or appointed of or from among those who are ordained to the several offices in these two priesthoods.

Of the Melchizedek Priesthood, three Presiding High Priests, chosen by the body, appointed and ordained to that office, and upheld by the confidence, faith, and prayer of the church, form a quorum of the Presidency of the Church.

The twelve traveling counselors are called to be the Twelve Apostles, or special witnesses of the name of Christ in all the world—thus differing from other officers in the church in the duties of their calling. (D. & C. 107:21-23.)
