Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 3 ( 1960)

48

Does the Devil Have Power to Tempt Departed Spirits?

Question: "Does the devil have power or influence to tempt the departed spirits in the world of spirits?"

Answer: Permit me to quote to you a few passages from the Doctrine and Covenants and the Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith.

And he who breaketh it shall lose his office and standing in the Church, and shall be delivered over to the buffetings of Satan until the day of redemption. (D. & C. 78:12.)

And the soul that sins against this covenant, and hardeneth his heart against it, shall be dealt with according to the laws of my church, and shall be delivered over to the buffetings of Satan until the day of redemption. (D. & C. 82:21.)

Inasmuch as ye are cut off for transgression, ye cannot escape the buffetings of Satan until the day of redemption. (D. & C. 104:9.)

. . . but they shall be destroyed in the flesh, and shall be delivered unto the buffetings of Satan unto the day of redemption, saith the Lord God. (D. & C. 132:26.)

The spirit of Elijah was manifest in the days of the apostles, in delivering certain ones to the buffetings of Satan, that they might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. They were sealed by the spirit of Elijah unto the damnation of hell until the day of the Lord, or revelation of Jesus Christ. (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 228.)

THE WICKED ARE SUBJECT TO SATAN

If they are turned over to the buffetings of Satan until the day of redemption, or when Christ shall be revealed, then, it seems to me, they must be subject to Satan, and he would have power to tempt them. However, let it be remembered that men will answer for their own sins committed in this mortal life. Perhaps the power of Satan to persuade them may be limited in that spirit world, but it is a reasonable thought to think that they have their agency, and that he will endeavor to entice them to follow him, for he must exert great power over them when they are subject to his jurisdiction.
