“Remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy.

Six days shalt thou labour, and do all they work:

But the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord thy God: in it thou shalt not do any work, …

For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the Lord blessed the sabbath day, and hallowed it.” (Ex. 20:8–11.)

Sunday is a day that is different from any other day of the week. Reverence in our thoughts and actions should be shown on this day.

It’s a clean day—

Our shoes are shined.

Our clothes are clean.

Our hair is combed.

It’s a happy day—

We spend it with our family.

We see our friends at church.

We smile.

It’s a reverent day—

We go to Primary and sacrament meeting.

We are reverent in our Heavenly Father’s house.

We learn about Jesus Christ and our Heavenly Father.

And even at home we do quiet, reverent things.

Because Sunday should be a day of worship and rest, we don’t do many of the things we do on other days. Make your own list of different things you might do on Sunday. Here are some suggested activities:

Visit a neighbor.

Read and act out a parable or other story from the scriptures.

Go for a walk.

Write and illustrate a letter to a missionary or someone you know.

Call or write your grandmother and grandfather to tell them how much you love them.

Read one or more chapters from the scriptures.

Write in your journal.

Count or write down all the beautiful things you can see or think of that our Heavenly Father has given to us.

Ask your mother, father, or grandparents to tell you about their lives when they were children.

Make a hand puppet of a biblical character.

Draw a picture of three of your blessings.

Do a secret good deed for someone.

Make a main decoration for the table.

Work on a book to keep pictures, or other papers you want to keep.

Memorize the words to a favorite hymn or poem.

Read a story from the Children’s pages of the Tambuli.

Ask you mother if you may invite a friend for lunch or supper.

Learn about your ancestors and fill out a genealogy sheet.

Read a book.

Decorate a small box, or suitable container with crayons, colored markers, yarn, paper, or lace. Then cut your Sunday activity list into separate pieces with an activity on each one and place the pieces in your Sunday Box.

Every Sunday choose an idea from your box and you will know just what to do to have a reverent and happy day.
