Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Preface

While engaged in studying the Standard Works of the Church, I have been deeply impressed with the thought—which I believe to be the fact also—that the Revelations contained in the Doctrine and Covenants are pre-eminently the Scriptures of the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times. Every phrase, sentence, and paragraph is so instructive and enlightening; so pregnant with wisdom and purpose, and throws such a flood of light upon the gospel, as to bear convincing witness of their Divine Source, and proclaim them to be the very Word of God.

Splendid and glorious as are the ancient and meridian Hebrew and Nephite Scriptures, their splendor and glory are infinitely enhanced by the light these modern Scriptures cast upon them. As a group of great lights are more brilliant and beautiful than the light of one of them alone, so the Scriptures of different periods, when brought together, illuminate each, making clearer the meaning of the other. Such has been the effect of joining the "Light of Truth" as contained in the Bible and the Book of Mormon—the "Sticks of Judah and of Ephraim." When the "Light of Truth" in the Revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants is added, the Word of God and the "Way of Life" are revealed in all their power and purity and straightforwardness.

Without the light of these Revelations, many of the truths of the Bible would still be obscure, or seen dimly, "as through a glass darkly"; its prophecies, miracles, and history would be as unintelligible, meaningless, and mythical to the Latter-day Saints as they are to the world. Without it, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints could not have been organized; the Kingdom of God could not have been established in these days. It would have been impossible to designate the offices and officers, and set in order the quorums of the Holy Priesthood, and indicate the proper duties and calling of each. Very little would be known about the gathering of Israel and the building up of Zion in the last days. The appointed times and places, when and where the ancient predictions concerning these matters were to be fulfilled, would be veiled in darkness. Temple building, its object and purpose, and the doctrine of baptisms for the salvation and redemption of the unnumbered dead would be shrouded in impenetrable mystery. The coming of the Son of Man, His Millennial reign on the earth, the resurrection of the dead; eternal judgments, executed in justice and mercy according to the works of men, with everlasting rewards and punishments, would remain "rocks of offense," and discord upon which mankind would continue to split and be rent asunder.

All these principles, and many others pertaining to the gospel of Jesus Christ and the fulness of times, are made as clear as the cloudless noonday in the Revelations given to Joseph the Prophet.

In view of this, and the fact that the Lord has commanded His people to, "Search these commandments, for they are true and faithful, and the prophecies and promises which are in them shall all be fulfilled," it has been felt that the Priesthood, and members of the Church, in all departments, and in every place, should diligently study the Doctrine and Covenants; that they should become more familiar with the Word of the Lord and His great latter-day work; that they should sense more fully that they are living in the "hour of His judgment," the signs of which are terribly apparent, the world over, to all who have eyes to see, and ears to hear, and hearts open to understanding; and that they might realize the eternal importance of setting themselves and their houses in order, and thereby be ready to meet the Lord whose coming is at the very doors.

To this end the historical and explanatory notes relating to the coming forth, context, and import of each of these Revelations have been prepared. They are humbly offered to the Saints, and to all men, in the hope that those who read, may do so with faith and prayerful hearts, and thereby come to a fuller knowledge of the truth, and find added charm and interest in, and increased love for, the Word of the Lord, as well as a higher conception of the inspiration and greatness of Joseph Smith, the Prophet, and a broader understanding of the magnitude of the "marvelous" and "wonderful" work inaugurated by him.

To Elder J. M. Sjodahl, our fellow-laborer and companion in the service, is chief credit due, for his faithful and untiring efforts in searching out the references from the sermons of the Presidents, Apostles, and leading Elders of the Church, as well as from historical and other sources available, and for his other valuable labors in connection with this work.

We pray our heavenly Father, in the name of Jesus Christ, His Son, to bless His word and seal it upon the hearts of His children by the sanctifying power and witness of the Holy Ghost, for to know the Truth and continue in it, is to be made free and have Eternal Life.

HYRUM M. SMITH.
