Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Introduction

The Latter-day Saints accept four volumes as the standard works of the Church. These are the Bible, the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price. By unanimous vote of a General Conference, these four have been declared to be the established rule or test, by which the belief, the teachings, and the conduct of men must be judged. In the words of Isaiah, "To the law and the testimony: if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them" (Isa. 8:20). This applies with equal force to all these volumes. They are in perfect harmony one with the other, as the four Gospels in the New Testament. The same eternal truths are taught in each volume, and what is the word of God in the Bible, must be the word of God in the Book of Mormon, when found there; or in the Doctrine and Covenants, or in the Pearl of Great Price.

The Doctrine and Covenants occupies a unique and highly important position among this sacred literature.

The Bible is a collection of books—a library—written during a period of many centuries, from Moses, 1500 B.C., to St. John, who, towards the close of the first century of our era, wrote his Gospel, probably the last of the New Testament writings. These books, sixty-six in all, deal with the history of the kingdom of God on earth, chiefly on the eastern hemisphere. They contain a brief record of the origin and development of the Hebrew nation; a biography of our Lord while on earth; the rise and earliest struggles of the Church, together with sacred songs, proverbs, dramatic compositions, and letters. Scattered all through is found a vast amount of predictions relating to the future destiny of the Hebrews, the Church of Christ, and the human race. Among these prophecies are some concerning the coming forth of the Book of Mormon and the Church in our day, preparatory to the establishment of the Millennial reign of our Lord. But by far the largest part of the Bible refers to the past history of the people of God; some of it, to events so remote, and to present-day readers so obscure, as to render the brief references to them unintelligible. There are no first manuscripts of any of the books of the Bible extant. The text has been reconstructed from more or less defective copies found in all pans of the Old World, and this text has been translated to the best ability of uninspired scholars, and therefore, neither the text, nor any translation made, is perfect.

The Book of Mormon is also a collection of books, originally written between the years 600 B.C. and 400 A.D. It deals with the history of the kingdom of God on the western hemisphere. For centuries, inspired men in that part of the world kept historical records, until the leading events of a thousand years were covered. From this voluminous material, Mormon, the historian, prophet, and general, made an abridgment, or synopsis, and added his own inspired book. There is also an ecclesiastical history, by the prophet Nephi, and a brief history of the inhabitants of the "North Country," by Moroni, the son of Mormon, who completed the abridgment of his father, and wrote the last book of the collection. There is, of course, no facsimile of the original text extant. The plates from which the Prophet Joseph made his translation, through the power of God, are now hidden to mortal eye, as are the tables of stone upon which the Decalogue was written. They may be unveiled again, in the due time of the Lord. The Book of Mormon, too, has some remarkable predictions concerning the day in which we live, but the greater part of it relates to the past. Nephi incorporates in his writings portions of the prophecies of Isaiah, and thus the Book of Mormon becomes a witness for the Bible against the onslaughts of a ruthless, negative criticism, just as the Bible is a witness for the Book of Mormon against the infidelity that rejects that volume, notwithstanding the overwhelming evidence on which its claims rest.

The Pearl of Great Price is "a selection from revelations, translations, and narrations of Joseph Smith." It contains some visions of Moses as revealed to the Prophet, a translation of records found in Egypt, some of the writings of Joseph Smith, and the Articles of Faith. The Pearl of Great Price, therefore, also contains much matter which refers to the past. In it we obtain a clearer view of the Creation, the fall, and redemption, and a fuller account of the history of Abraham and the effect of his mission to Egypt. It was necessary that these things should be more clearly revealed in this dispensation. For this is the time when the hearts of the children are to be turned to their fathers, as well as the hearts of the fathers to their children, and this implies that the children should know something about their fathers and ancestors, and their work in the past on which they have built in all ages, and are still building. Through the Book of Abraham, in the Pearl of Great Price, a great deal of light has been shed upon the history of Egypt, to which country European civilization is so highly indebted.

The Doctrine and Covenants is different from these three volumes. It is in every respect a modern book. It contains revelations given during a period extending from 1823 to 1847. It covers the rise and development of the Church, restored in our day. It enables us to follow the tender watchcare of God over the infant Church, during its days of numerical weakness and the incessant assaults of the adversary, in the form of persecution, temptations, and apostasy, and to watch the retreat of the people of God into the wilderness. It contains "doctrines," "covenants," and predictions, all of the utmost importance to every nation and every individual on earth. The writings of Moses and the Prophets concerned, in the first place, the Hebrew nation and its neighbors in an age that is past. The writings of the Apostles were intended, in the first place, for the churches and saints of their age. The Doctrine and Covenants has been given to us for our instruction and salvation. We are interested in it, and should study it diligently and intelligently. Moses directed that the Law, that is, the Book of Moses, be read before all Israel (Deut. 31:11), and that the king should read it every day of his life (Deut. 17:19). In the same spirit Isaiah exhorted the people to search the Book of the Lord (Isa. 34:16), which, probably, contained the prophecies then collected, and Paul instructed the churches concerning the reading of his inspired epistles (Col. 4:16). The same instructions may be applied now to the Doctrine and Covenants.

As the name implies, and as already stated, this volume of Scripture contains doctrine and covenants. "Doctrine" means "teaching," "instruction." It denotes more especially what is taught as truth, for us to believe, as distinct from precepts, by which rules, to be obeyed, are given. "Doctrine" refers to belief; precept to conduct.

In the Doctrine and Covenants our Lord teaches us what to believe concerning the Godhead, the Church, the Priesthood, the Millennium, the resurrection, the state of man after death in eternal glory, or the opposite, and many other subjects about which it is necessary to have true information.

The word "covenant" is a term by which God indicates the settled arrangement between Him and His people. In the great Council in heaven, before the creation of the earth, the Father covenanted with His Son, when He said, "Thou art my Son: this day have I begotten thee. Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession (Psalm 2:7, 8). It was in pursuance of this decree, that the Son came to redeem the world; wherefore Isaiah (9:6) calls Him "Counsellor," or, as it has been rendered, the "Angel [or Messenger] of the Great Council." This covenant concerning the salvation of the human race, entered into in eternity, was made known to Adam, Noah, Abraham, and others, and, finally, through the Prophet Joseph, to the people of God in our day. It is the "everlasting" covenant, because it is from eternity to eternity. The new and everlasting covenant is the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

In it are revealed the organization of the Church, the authority of the Priesthood, the laws and rules by which, if we obey them, we can obtain citizenship in the kingdom of God, and salvation, both temporal and eternal. The covenant made with Israel has been called the Covenant of Works, and that made with Abraham, the Covenant of Promise. The covenant of the gospel is the covenant of "Truth and Grace." It is the covenant of "Faith," as expressed in obedience to all the laws of God. It is the covenant of a Father with His children, the covenant of adoption and heirship. The nature of this covenant is revealed to us in this precious volume of the word of God. It shows us what obligations we take upon ourselves in baptism, and what blessings we secure; what covenants we renew by partaking of the Sacrament, and what promises accompany that ordinance. In one word, it teaches us how to worship God in Spirit and in truth, and reveals to us the way opened up, back to the presence of God.

Furthermore, the Doctrine and Covenants contains predictions in which every nation in the world is interested. Some of these, as for instance, that of the Civil War in the United States, and the more recent world conflicts of 1914 and 1939, have been fulfilled, and there are others regarding wars and distress among the nations awaiting fulfillment because the peoples of the earth will not repent and receive the Gospel. The predictions concerning the establishment of the kingdom of God, and the events through which this will be accomplished, in large measure await fulfillment. These predictions are a Voice of Warning to the nations. "Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth, for the Lord hath spoken."

Each age has had its own questions to discuss. The first age of our era, when the Greek mind was predominant, dealt with the question of the Deity, and, finally, formulated the doctrine of the Trinity, as now known in the so-called orthodox world. To the following age, under Roman influence, fell the task of studying man in his relation to God, and the doctrine of sin and grace, as taught by Augustine and later church fathers. The age of the Reformation took up the question of God's plan of salvation, and formulated the doctrine of justification by faith, as promulgated by Luther and others. But it is evident to all who know the Scriptures, that the world has not been led into the truth on any of these important questions. In the doctrine of the Deity the influence of pagan philosophy is more prominent than that of the Bible. The doctrine of predestination, as traced to Augustine, is, essentially, fatalism, such as was taught by the Stoics. The doctrine of justification by faith has, in some respects, become a cover for spiritual indolence, and even for licentiousness, so thick as to keep the justice of God out of view. It was, therefore, highly necessary that new light should be shed upon these questions, from the only Source of light and truth, through Revelation, and this God has graciously and mercifully done in the Revelations recorded in the volume called Doctrine and Covenants. And He has done more. As each previous age had its problem to solve, so our age also is face to face with questions peculiarly its own. These relate to the Church; its nature, attributes, prerogatives, and organization; and also to man's state after death; the Millennium, resurrection, and judgment. All these questions belong particularly to the time in which we are living, and the Lord has been pleased to give Revelations on all these subjects, for the purpose of keeping His people from falling into the errors of former ages, and that the truth may be preserved unadulterated and pure.

It may be remarked here, that the Book of Doctrine and Covenants resembles the Bible in this respect, that it does not present the truths revealed, in systematic order. It resembles Nature too, God's other great book. The Creator has not given us, in Nature, a systematized, classified exhibition of facts or objects. He has created the objects, but He leaves it to man to study and classify them for himself, for the purpose of learning the laws by which all things are governed, and thus become proficient in astronomy, chemistry, biology, etc. It is the same with the Scriptures. Truths are there revealed; facts are there recorded, in order that the student may be able to form a system of theology, just as the student of Nature is enabled, through study, to construct the various branches of natural science. God intends us to do this. He intends us to study the Scriptures, to memorize them, to classify the doctrines they teach, and to apply the knowledge thus obtained to our daily lives. As the facts of Nature are all related, so the Scripture truths revealed are all related and form a grand whole; but we must discover what the relationship is. "As He [God] wills that men should study His works and discover their wonderful organic relation and harmonious combination, so it is His will that we should study His Word, and learn that, like the stars, its truths are not isolated points, but systems, cycles, epicycles, in unending harmony and grandeur." (Hodge, Systematic Theology, Vol. I., p. 3).

Only by such study and application of the Word to our lives will it influence our character and fit us for exaltation hereafter. The mere reading does not avail. The standing before a mirror serves no useful purpose, unless we set ourselves in order, so that we become fit to associate with our fellowmen. It is so with reading the Word of God. If we read so as to govern our lives in accordance with the mind and will of God, our characters will be formed thereby, and we shall be fit to associate with those who are permitted to enter His presence.

The book of Doctrine and Covenants formerly contained a series of seven lectures on Faith, which deal with the existence and attributes of God, and the nature of that principle which we call faith. The lectures were delivered before a theological class of the School of Elders at Kirtland, in 1835, and incorporated in the Doctrine and Covenants, "in consequence of their embracing the important doctrine of salvation" (Preface of the First Edition). [^1]

This sacred volume consists of one hundred and thirty-six sections, and is called "Covenants and Commandments." The first section is "The Lord's Preface" to the volume, given by divine inspiration.

It is instructive to note the dates of the various sections. The introduction was given November 1, 1831, when, at a special conference held at Hiram, Portage Co., Ohio, it was decided to publish the first edition. The other one hundred and thirty-one sections were given as follows:

1 in the year 1823. 2 in the year 1835.

1 " " 1828. 3 " " 1836.

15 " " 1829. 1 " " 1837.

19 " " 1830. 8 " " 1838.

35 " " 1831. 3 " " 1839.

16 " " 1832. 3 " " 1841.

13 " " 1833. 2 " " 1842.

5 " " 1834. 4 " " 1843.

The greatest number of revelations was given, as will be seen from this table, during the years 1829-33, when the Church was being formed and strengthened for life's struggle. Then the Saints needed special instructions and special care.

It is also instructive to note the various places in which the Revelations were given. Four came to the Prophet at Manchester, Ontario Co., New York; fifteen at Harmony, Susquehanna Co., Pennsylvania; fourteen at Fayette, Seneca Co., New York; forty-three at Kirtland, Geauga Co., Ohio; one at Thompson, Geauga Co., Ohio; eight in Jackson Co., Missouri; two at McIlwaine's Bend, on the Missouri River; fifteen at Hiram, Portage Co., Ohio; one at Orange, Cuyahoga Co., Ohio; one at Amherst, Lorain Co., Ohio; one at Perrysburgh, New York; one at Fishing River, Missouri; six at Far West, Caldwell Co., Missouri; one near Wight's Ferry, Missouri; three in Liberty Jail, Clay Co., Missouri; seven at Nauvoo, Hancock Co., Illinois; one at Ramus, Illinois; and one at Winter Quarters. There are thirteen sections for which no place is given in the headlines.

The first revelation (Sec. 2) was given to the Prophet in his father's house, through an angel, on the 21st of September, 1823. It relates to the restoration of the Priesthood. Some of the Revelations given at Harmony and Fayette concerned the bringing forth of the Book of Mormon, and the establishment of the Church. A number of glorious Revelations were given at Kirtland, including the Word of Wisdom and Section 88, on the future destiny of man. At Hiram, Portage Co., Ohio, many Revelations were given on the correct interpretation of the Scriptures, including I. Cor. 7:14, and the Revelation by John. There the Prophet Joseph and Sidney Rigdon were favored with the grand vision recorded in Section 76, while they were pondering the meaning of John 5:29. Important Revelations concerning the future of the Church were given at Far West. The Revelation on the eternity of the marriage covenant was first written at Nauvoo. And thus we see a gradual unfoldment of truth, each revelation containing just what the people at each time needed for instruction, encouragement, or correction.

Some of the Revelations, as Sections 2 and 27, were given through heavenly messengers; others, as Sections 76 and 110, through "visions": "The veil was taken from our minds, and the eyes of our understanding were opened" (Sec. 110:1).

Others came through divine inspiration, or quickening of the faculties to keener perception of things spiritual, than enjoyed under ordinary circumstances. By what token the Prophet knew that the Revelations so given were from God, we may judge from what the Lord told Oliver Cowdery concerning translation, "You must study it out in your mind; then you must ask me if it be right, and if it is right, I will cause that your bosom shall burn within you; therefore you shall feel that it is right" (Doc. and Cov. 9:8). When the Spirit of the Lord burns within, there is no mistaking that sacred fire. The Prophet Joseph says that the visions at times rolled like an overflowing surge before his mind (History of the Church, Vol. V., p. 339); and that the "still small voice, * * * oftentimes it maketh my bones to quake while it maketh manifest" (Doc. and Cov. 85:6). When God speaks, there is no room for doubt.

Many Revelations were given in the presence of witnesses. Section 29, for instance, contains a Revelation inspired in the presence of six elders. Parley P. Pratt, who was present when the revelation in Section 51 was received, relates how the Prophet the Revelations to be committed to writing. He says, "Each sentence was uttered slowly and very distinctly, and with a pause between each, sufficiently long for it to be recorded by an ordinary writer in long hand. This was the manner in which all his written Revelations were dictated and written. There was never any hesitation, reviewing, or reading back, in order to keep the run of the subject; neither did any of these communications undergo revisions, interlinings, or corrections. As he dictated them, so they stood, so far as I have witnessed; and I was present to witness the dictation of several communications of several pages each" (Parley P. Pratt, Autobiography, pp. 65-66). This statement Elder Brigham H. Roberts (History of the Church, Vol. I., p. 173) supplements by the information that some of the early Revelations published in the Book of Commandments in 1833, were revised by the Prophet himself; errors made by scribes and publishers were corrected, and some additional clauses, which also had been given by revelation, were added. The addition of Verses 65 and 67, in Section 20, is an example.

The Prophet Joseph never entertained any doubt concerning the divine inspiration of the Revelations he received for the guidance of the Church. To some of his associates their authority was not always equally clear. Oliver Cowdery, shortly after the establishment of the Church in 1830, informed the Prophet that he had discovered an error in Section 20, Verse 37. He demanded that it be corrected. He had succeeded in influencing the Whitmers in favor of this view, and the Prophet seemed to face a schism which might become fatal to the Church. Had the Prophet Joseph been conscious of a human origin of the work in which he was engaged, wisdom would have suggested that he yield to his co-laborers; but he knew that the Revelations were not his, to change and alter at will. Consequently, he asked Oliver Cowdery by what authority he commanded him "to alter or erase, to add to, or diminish from, a Revelation or commandment from Almighty God" (History of the Church, Vol. I., p. 105). Later, Cowdery and the Whitmers freely acknowledged that they had been in error.

Shortly after the Revelation contained in Section 26 had been received, in July, 1830, the Prophet Joseph began to arrange and copy the Revelations so far given, and in this work John Whitmer assisted him. At a special conference held at Hiram, Portage Co., Ohio, November 1st, 1831, it was decided that ten thousand copies should be printed, and that the title should be, Book of Commandments. It was also decided to send Oliver Cowdery to Independence, Mo., to supervise the printing there. The manuscript was to be ready for the press by the 15th of November, that year. It was at this time that Section 1 was given (November 1st), and Section 133 (November 3rd). At a conference held at Hiram, on November 12th, 1831, the Saints by vote expressed their appreciation of the Revelations given. Oliver Cowdery and John Whitmer were set apart to publish the book, and the manuscript and the means entrusted to them to carry to Zion were dedicated to the Lord by prayer. At the same time Joseph Smith, Jr., Martin Harris, Oliver Cowdery, John Whitmer, Sidney Rigdon, and William W. Phelps were, by revelation (Doc. and Cov. 70), appointed a committee—"stewards"—to look after the business of the publication and distribution of the book; if they should receive more than needful for their necessities, the surplus was to be consecrated for the benefit of the inhabitants of Zion. On the 26th of April, 1832, a general Council of the Church was held at Independence, Mo., which was in session for several days. On the 1st of May, that year, it was decided that, instead of printing ten thousand copies of the Book of Commandments, the first edition should be limited to three thousand copies. William W. Phelps, Oliver Cowdery, and John Whitmer were appointed to "review and prepare such Revelations for the press as shall be deemed proper for publication, and print them as soon as possible, at Independence, Mo., the announcement to be made that they are published by W. W. Phelps and Co." For the Saints believe all that God "does now reveal," as well as all that He "has revealed," and that the publication of Revelations now given through the inspired servants of the Lord is as necessary as the placing of former-day revelations on record.

After the Revelation in Section 1, called "The Lord's Preface," had been received at Hiram, Portage Co., Ohio, on the 1st of November, 1831, a number of the brethren who were present at the conference arose and testified to the truth of the Book of Commandments. But notwithstanding this fact, some of the brethren criticised the language in which they were recorded, as imperfect. The Prophet Joseph did not take any notice of these critics; if the Lord should select some other instrument through whom to speak to the Church, it would be agreeable to him. But the Lord had no such purpose. He gave the critics a test, in these words, "Now seek ye out of the Book of Commandments, even the least that is among them, and appoint him that is the most wise among you; or, if there be any among you, that shall make one like unto it, then ye are justified in saying that ye do not know that they are true. But if ye cannot make one like unto it, ye are under condemnation if ye do not bear record that they are true" (Doc. and Cov. 67:6-8). That was the test.

William E. M'Lellin accepted the challenge and did his best to bring forth a literary production that should compare favorably with the Revelations given through the Prophet. He was regarded as a learned man at that time, and when he utterly failed, the testimony of the elders was strengthened, and they renewed their allegiance to the Lord and their loyalty to the Prophet. Accordingly, the following declaration was drawn up:

"The testimony of the witnesses to the book of the Lord's Commandments, which He gave to His Church through Joseph Smith, Jr., who was appointed by the voice of the Church for this purpose; we therefore feel willing to bear testimony to all the world of mankind, to every creature upon the face of all the earth and upon the islands of the sea, that the Lord has borne record to our souls, through the Holy Ghost, shed forth upon us, that these commandments were given by inspiration of God, and are profitable for all men, and are verily true. We give this testimony unto the world, the Lord being our helper; and it is through the grace of God, the Father, and His Son, Jesus Christ, that we are permitted to have this privilege of bearing this testimony unto the world, that the children of men may be profited thereby."

Among the elders present at the special conference by which this question was decided were: Joseph Smith, Jr., Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, John Whitmer, Peter Whitmer, Jr., Sidney Rigdon, William E. M'Lellin, Orson Hyde, Luke Johnson, and Lyman E. Johnson (History of the Church, Vol. I., p. 226). In July 1833, a mob destroyed the press before the Book of Commandments was completed and only a portion of the forms were preserved. For this reason the testimony of these brethren was not published with the small collection of revelations later published as the Book of Commandments.

On the 24th of September, 1834, a general assembly of Saints appointed a committee, consisting of Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery, and F. G. Williams to collect and arrange the Revelations so far given. This work was completed, and on August 17th, 1835, it was presented to a general assembly at Kirtland, under the name of The Doctrine and Covenants. It was accepted by unanimous vote, as a "law and a rule of faith and practice to the Church," on motion of Oliver Cowdery, on behalf of the committee. Many testimonies were borne to the truth of the Revelations. W. W. Phelps read the written testimony of the Twelve, which was almost identical with that given previously with reference to the Book of Commandments. The Twelve at that time were: Thomas B. Marsh, David W. Patten, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde, William E. M'Lellin, Parley P. Pratt, Luke S. Johnson, William Smith, Orson Pratt, John F. Boynton, and Lyman E. Johnson.

After the labors of the committee had been accepted, W. W. Phelps read an article on "Marriage," and Oliver Cowdery read one on "Government and Laws in General." [^2]

On the 5th of May, 1879, Elder Orson Pratt, who was then on a mission in England, received a letter from President John Taylor, informing him that the Twelve had decided that he should obtain electro-plates for a new edition of the Doctrine and Covenants. He divided the text into verses, and added the references. He was assisted by Elders John Nicholson, Hugh Findlay, John Rider, and Moroni Snow.

The Christian world should not consider it strange that the Lord, our God, again reveals His will to His children. Ancient prophets, speaking of the last days, declare that the Spirit of God will be poured out upon all flesh, and the result will be visions, dreams, and prophecies (Isaiah 44:3; Ezek. 11:19; 36:27; Joel 2:28; Zech. 12:10; Acts 2:16-20). The pouring out of the Spirit upon all flesh is followed by a general Pentecostal manifestation.

Joseph Smith was a great man, raised up for the work he did. He came at the time when the world was prepared for it. At no other time previously could the Church have been established. He came in the country where the foundations could be laid, because the ground had been prepared by liberal laws and religious influences. In no other country could the foundations of the Church have been laid at that time. He came through a lineage selected for his earthly mission, equipped with the very characteristics, gifts, and graces of a messenger from God and a martyr. God formed him for his mission. Therefore, he was great in his day and generation; towering over his fellowmen, and yet full of love towards all, willing to serve on all occasions, though mighty in words and deeds.

The subjoined description of the personality of the Prophet Joseph is by Parley P. Pratt:

"President Joseph Smith was in person tall and well built, strong and active, of a light complexion, light hair, blue eyes, very little beard, and of an expression peculiar to himself, on which the eye naturally rested with interest, and was never weary of beholding. His countenance was ever mild, affable, beaming with intelligence and benevolence; mingled with a look of interest and an unconscious smile, a cheerfulness, and entirely free from all restraint or affectation of gravity; and there was something connected with the serene and penetrating glance of his eye, as if he would penetrate the deepest abyss of the human heart, gaze into eternity, penetrate the heavens, and comprehend all worlds.

"He possessed a noble boldness and independence of character; his manner was easy and familiar; his rebuke terrible as the lion; his benevolence unbounded as the ocean; his intelligence universal, and his language abounding in original eloquence, peculiar to himself—not polished—not studied—not smoothed and softened by education and refined by art; but flowing forth in its own native simplicity, and profusely abounding in variety of subject and manner. He interested and edified, while at the same time, amused and entertained his audience; and none listened to him that were ever weary with his discourse. I have even known him to retain a congregation of willing and anxious listeners for many hours together in the midst of cold or sunshine, rain or wind, while they were laughing at one moment, and weeping the next. Even his most bitter enemies were overcome, generally, if he could once get their ears.

"I have known him, when chained and surrounded with armed murderers and assassins who were heaping upon him every possible insult and abuse, rise up in the majesty of a son of God and rebuke them, in the name of Jesus Christ, till they quailed before him, dropped their weapons, and, on their knees, begged his pardon, and ceased their abuse.

"In short, in him the character of a Daniel and a Cyrus were wonderfully blended. The gifts, wisdom and devotion of a Daniel were united with the boldness, courage, temperance, perseverance and generosity of a Cyrus. And had he been spared a martyr's fate until mature manhood and age he was certainly imbued with powers and ability to have revolutionized the world in many respects, and to have transmitted to posterity a name associated with more brilliant and glorious facts than have yet fallen to the lot of mortal. As it is, his work will live to endless ages, and unnumbered millions yet unborn will mention his name with honor, as a noble instrument in the hands of God, who, during his short and youthful career, laid the foundation of that kingdom spoken of by Daniel, the Prophet, which should break in pieces all other kingdoms and stand forever."

Such was the Prophet through whom God gave to the world the Doctrine and Covenants.

———— Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. These Lectures were removed from the Doctrine and Covenants in the edition of 1921, not because they were called in question, for they are excellent lecturers of great value on the principle of faith, but because they were not revelations. When they were received and ordered printed in the Doctrine and Covenants it was with the understanding as expressed by Elder John Smith "that the lectures were judiciously arranged and compiled, and were profitable for doctrine." (D.H.C. 2:244.) The Prophet Joseph Smith revised and prepared these Lectures himself, and they are still "profitable for doctrine."
[^2] 2. These articles were prepared by Oliver Cowdery, and both were ordered printed, in the volume of The Doctrine and Covenants. Neither of these articles is a revelation and they were not presented as being such. It should be noted that the Prophet Joseph Smith was not in attendance at this General Assembly, nor was his second counselor, Frederick G. Williams. They were in Canada at the time and therefore had no opportunity to pass upon these articles before the action of the Assembly. (D.H.C. 2:243, 253.) The article on Government is found as Section 134. That on Marriage is not included in this volume since the Lord has revealed further light on this subject.
