Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

The Doctrine and Covenants

Section 1.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith, the Prophet, during a special conference of Elders of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, held at Hiram, Ohio, November 1, 1831. Many revelations had been received from the Lord prior to this time; and the compilation of these for publication in book form was one of the principal subjects passed upon at the conference. See History of the Church, vol. 1, page 222. This Section constitutes the Lord's Preface to the doctrines, covenants, and commandments given in this dispensation.—Proclamation of warning and commandment to the Church and to the inhabitants of the earth at large—The authority of the Priesthood in this dispensation attested—Second advent of the Lord Jesus Christ foretold—Authenticity of the Book of Mormon affirmed.

HEARKEN, O ye people of my church, saith the voice of him who dwells on high, and whose eyes are upon all men; yea, verily I say: Hearken ye people from afar; and ye that are upon the islands of the sea, listen together.

Covenants and Commandments] "You will find in the book of Doctrine and Covenants that these commandments [Exodus 20] have been renewed unto us. The Lord says in one place, All old covenants have I caused to be done away; and this is a new and everlasting covenant. It is even that which was in the beginning; it is that covenant which was made in the days of Jesus. It is that same covenant which the Almighty revealed to Father Adam in the Garden of Eden; but it has been renewed in these last days, and hence it is a new and everlasting covenant. Those covenants that we have made with God were also made in the beginning of creation. They are now renewed to us; and revelations of this kind are just as binding upon you and me as the words and counsels that come from President Young and others. We are acting in the same capacity that the apostles and prophets of former dispensations have acted, and our word will have the same effect upon this generation that theirs had upon the generations in which they lived. We have the same God to worship; the same Jesus lives to save, and He has spoken and renewed this covenant to us and for us, and to remain with us forever and forever" (Heber C. Kimball, Journal of Discourses, Vol. VIII, pp. 330, 331).

The term "covenant" signifies the settled arrangement between God and man, whereby the eternal Father undertakes to save His children. This arrangement is also called His "oath," His "counsel," and His "promise" (Psalm 89:3, 4; Heb. 6:13-20). "Commandments" are the laws, or rules man must obey as a condition of obtaining salvation. Divine covenants are ratified with a sacrifice, to show us in a most impressive manner that the wages of sin is death, and that eternal life can be gained only through atonement. Jesus Christ is both the Sacrifice and the Mediator of the new and everlasting covenant (Heb. 9:16). Some fail to understand how God can enter into a covenant with man, since a "covenant" means mutual obligations and benefits, and in the relations between the Creator and the creature, they say, both the benefits and obligations are all on one side, the side of man; but that is hardly the entire truth. In so far as God, the eternal Father, can be said to yearn for the salvation and exaltation of His children, He is benefited by their keeping the covenant faithfully. Their salvation is His joy, and His Glory, in the same sense that the success of all children is the joy of their loving parents. Our Savior prayed, "Glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee" (John 17:1), and that prayer all God's children may properly repeat. The salvation of man adds to the glory of God. "For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Pearl of Great Price, Book of Moses 1:39).

4-5. But, notwithstanding all enmity, the servants of the Lord are commanded, and authorized, to lift up their Voice of Warning in all the world, and "none shall stay them."

8-10. The servants of the Lord have been given "power to seal." Ancient seals were used either to stamp the name of the owner, or some other mark of identification, on a document, or other object. Some seals were signet rings, worn on the hand; others were quite large affairs. In Ezek. 9:4-6, the man in linen garment was commanded to place a "mark"—the letter Tav, our T—on the foreheads of those who did not partake in the abominations practiced in Jerusalem. As Tav is the last letter in the Hebrew alphabet, it might properly be used as an abbreviation of the name of Him who is the First and the Last. In Rev. 7:4-8, an angel has the commission to seal the servants of God in their foreheads, and from Rev 14:1, it appears that the "mark" used at the time there referred to was the name of God, the Father of our Lord, in full. That sealing, or marking, was done, as the sprinkling of the blood upon the door-posts of the houses on the night of the exodus from Egypt, in order to save those who were so marked, from destruction. The power to seal conferred upon the servants of the Lord in this, the last dispensation, extends to the "unbelieving" and "rebellious." They have power to discern between truth and error, right and wrong, and to declare, authoritatively, that such and such doctrine is true, and the opposite false; that such and such conduct is in accordance with the mind and will of God, and that the contrary conduct is sinful. They have power to put the seal of disapprobation upon the children of men who persist in unbelief and rebellion, and those who are thus "sealed" and remain in that condition, will suffer the wrath of God. This sealing concerns the "unbelievers," those who refuse to accept the gospel message; and the "rebellious," i.e., those who turn against the servants of the Lord, especially those who do so after having enjoyed the privileges and blessings of membership in the Church.

11-12. The message of the Lord to the inhabitants of the Earth, through His authorized servants, is here stated, "Prepare ye for that which is to come, for the Lord is nigh." Hitherto the adversary has reigned supreme; now the day of the Lord is at hand.

15-16. The reason why the children of men came to be in such a condition, that nothing but bloodshed could save them, is here given. They have strayed from the ordinances of the Lord: changed them, and added to them, or abolished them. Baptism has been changed to infant sprinkling, and the Lord's supper, to a sacrificial rite. One church has added five sacraments to the two instituted by our Lord; another disregards both baptism and the supper. That is one reason. Furthermore, they have broken the everlasting covenant, by pursuing another plan of salvation than that agreed upon in the Council of heaven before the creation of the world. That plan was founded upon individual freedom and the honor and glory of God. Men have, very largely, adopted the plan of the adversary and established a reign of compulsion for the aggrandizement of man. They have made an "image," a likeness of God, that is but a likeness of the world. A God without body, parts, or passions, is the god of the world, "whose substance is that of an idol"; there is nothing more substantial to that conception of God than there is to the pagan conception, that finds expression in an idol. Speaking of a God without body, parts, or passions, Parley P. Pratt observes: "It is painful to the human mind to be compelled to admit, that such wonderful inconsistencies of language, or ideas, have ever found place in any human creed. Yet, so it is. It is but another way of saying, that there is a God who does not exist, a God who is composed of nonentity, who is the negative of all existence, who occupies no space, who exists in no time, who is composed of no substance, known, or unknown, and who has no powers or properties in common with any thing or being known to exist, or which can possibly be conceived of, as existing either in the heavens or on the earth" (Key to Theology, p. 27).

17-19. The Lord knew that calamities would overtake the world, in the form of wars, famine, pestilence, earthquakes, floods, etc., because of the apostate condition of Christendom; for that reason He commissioned Joseph Smith and others to sound a voice of warning and find a place of refuge for those who would accept their message. They were weak in the estimation of the world. So was Paul (I. Cor. 2:3).

25-29. But through their testimony faith was to be increased in the earth (v. 21), the everlasting covenant established (v. 22), and the fulness of the gospel proclaimed (v. 23). Errors were to be revealed (v. 25), sins reproved (v. 27), and the humble to be made strong and receive knowledge. It is to be noted that God, who gave the Prophet Joseph power to translate the Book of Mormon, and lay the foundations of the Church, also gave him the Revelations in this volume (v. 24, 30). They are from the same Source, and of equal importance.

30-33. Through his instrumentality the Church was brought forth "out of obscurity." John, the Revelator, saw the Church fleeing into the wilderness (Rev. 12:6), where it was to remain 1260 "days." This period expired in 1830, and then the Church came forth, and was revealed in its pristine glory, power, and purity. The Lord was "well pleased" with the Church, its doctrines, precepts, and organization, and also with the members generally; however, there were some with whom He was not pleased, for He does not condone sin in Church members because of their membership (v. 31), any more than in anybody else. They, too, must repent, if they want forgiveness (v. 32), and if they do not repent, the light will be taken from them. The Spirit will be withdrawn (v. 33).

"The Church should be cleansed from bad men, and the Lord will take His own way to cleanse the Church" (Orson Spencer, History of the Church, Vol. VI, p. 273). "Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit, God Almighty (not Joseph Smith) shall hew it down and cast it into the fire" (Joseph Smith, Ibid. p. 274).

34-36. The Lord reiterates His warning to all the inhabitants of the earth. The day is coming, when peace shall be taken from the Earth. "The hour is not yet (when this revelation was given,) but it is nigh at hand." The beginning of the fulfillment of this day when peace was taken from the earth appears to be at the commencement of the Civil War. This is implied in the first verse of the revelation on War. Surely it is plain to see after the great conflicts in which the entire world has been involved in war and bloodshed, distress and wickedness, that peace is not found today on the earth. Never before in the history of the world, as far as we have knowledge, has there been the turmoil, contention, strife among nations and unrest and uncertainty that is found today in this troubled world. Wickedness and disregard for every sacred principle predominate in the world in the lives of men. We can say as the Lord said to Noah, "all flesh had corrupted its way upon the earth." All these wars are really a struggle of the adversary of all righteousness against our Lord, for dominion, but the outcome will be that the Lord shall reign and the world be judged.

37-39. The concluding verses are a commandment to study this book, for it contains the truth. Every word will be fulfilled. Can we receive a testimony of the truth? Yes, for the Spirit beareth record of the truth. And so does history.

General Notes

Hiram, Portage Co., Ohio, where this Revelation was given, together with fourteen others, is a small village situated about 30 miles from Kirtland. In 1831, "Father" Johnson, who lived there, invited the Prophet Joseph to come and stay with him, which invitation was accepted. During his residence there, the Prophet was engaged in Bible study and translation, Sidney Rigdon assisting him as scribe. He held several conferences there, and preached on the Sabbath days, and many were baptized. This aroused persecution. It was there, on the 25th of March, 1832, that a mob planned to assassinate him; but this God did not permit them to do. The Prophet and Sidney Rigdon were maltreated during the night by fiends in human form. Sidney Rigdon almost lost his life on this occasion. When the Prophet, in the morning, went to see him, he found his colaborer delirious. During the mobbing a twin child of John Murdock, which Mrs. Emma Smith had adopted, took a severe cold, that, a few days later, ended fatally. Both of the children were at the time sick with measles. The mob was composed of members of various denominations. It was under such circumstances that some of these glorious Revelations were received. Paul was given a "thorn in the flesh," a "messenger," or angel, "from Satan, to buffet him, lest he should be exalted through the abundance of revelations" (II. Cor. 12:7), and it may well be that troubles are necessary to keep the servants of the Lord humble when they are highly favored with revelations.
