Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

First Period, 1823-1830, Sections 2-37.

Section 2.

WORDS SPOKEN BY MORONI, the Angel, to Joseph Smith the Prophet, while in his father's house at Manchester, New York, on the evening of September 21, 1823. See History of the Church, vol. 1, page 12. Moroni was the last of a long line of historians who had made the record that is now before the world as the Book of Mormon. Compare Malachi 4:5, 6. See also Sections 27:9 and 110:13-16.

BEHOLD, I will reveal unto you the Priesthood, by the hand of Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord.

This Revelation is part of the message which Moroni delivered to the Prophet on the 21st day of September, 1823. In the evening of that day, after he had retired, Joseph engaged in prayer, asking for forgiveness for his past sins and imperfections, and for some manifestation of divine favor. While he thus prayed, the room gradually became light until it was lighter than at noon, and in the light appeared a personage, standing by the bedside. His robe was exceedingly white and his person glorious beyond description. At first the youthful Prophet was afraid, but presently all fear left him. The heavenly visitor called him by name and introduced himself as a messenger sent from the presence of God, whose name was Moroni. He then delivered his message. God had a work for him (Joseph) to do. If he would do it, he should be spoken of among all nations "for good and evil." The nature of the work was then explained. An ancient record had been deposited in a certain place, containing an account of the former inhabitants of the American continents, including the fulness of the gospel as it was preached to them. These records were to be recovered and translated.

Continuing his revelations, Moroni quoted passages from the book of Malachi, the last of the Old Testament prophets; for the work about to begin was but the fulfilment of ancient prophecies. "The revelation of God," as students of theology know, "is always continuous. Each fresh step is developed out of, and is in harmony with, those which went before."

Among the paragraphs quoted by Moroni was this: "For behold, the day cometh that shall burn as an oven, and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly shall burn as stubble; for they that come shall burn them, saith the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch" (Mal. 4:1) . Then he quoted the 5th and 6th verses of the same chapter, as found in this Section. He quoted other passages of the scriptures, with explanations, and gave certain instructions regarding the records referred to, and then he withdrew, but appeared again and again the same night.

Moroni informed the Prophet that great judgments were about to come upon the earth, in the form of famine, sword and pestilence, in the present generation, but not until the Priesthood had been revealed, and the sealing power by the hand of Elijah was restored so that husbands and wives could be sealed to each other and children sealed to their parents. That which makes the day to come so great and terrible, is not confined to the distress of peoples and nations, because of famine and war, but more particularly will it be great and dreadful to all of those who find themselves outside of the great family of our Father in heaven because they have not obtained these everlasting sealing ordinances, so essential to the exaltation.

"That great prophet, apostle, and martyr, Joseph Smith, was the Elias, the Restorer, the presiding messenger, holding the keys of the Dispensation of the fulness of times; yes, that extraordinary man * * * was the chosen vessel * * * to be a messenger in the spirit and power of Elijah, to prepare the way of the Lord! For, behold, he will suddenly come to his temple" (Key to Theology, p. 79).

Joseph Smith, after receiving the keys of restoration from John the Baptist, Peter, James and John, Elias, Moses and Elijah, and all other prophets who held keys of dispensations, also became a restorer, an Elias called to prepare the way before the coming of the Lord. In this point Elder Parley P. Pratt has said:

"The United States of America was the favored nation raised up, with institutions adapted to the protection and free-development of the necessary truths, and their practical results. And that great Prophet, and Martyr, Joseph Smith, was the Elias, the Restorer, the presiding Messenger, holding the keys of the 'Dispensation of the Fulness of Times.' " "Yes, that extraordinary man, * * * was the chosen vessel honored of God, and ordained by angels, to ordain other Apostles and Elders, to restore the Church and Kingdom of God, the gifts of the Holy Spirit, and to be a messenger in the spirit and power of Elijah, to prepare the way of the Lord! For behold, he will suddenly come to his temple!"

The prophecy of Malachi has a double fulfillment. It was fulfilled in the coming of John, wherein he declared: "Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me: and the Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his temple, even the messenger of the covenant, whom ye delight in: behold, he shall come, saith the Lord of hosts." The prevailing opinion is that this passage has reference to John, and that too, with reference to his first coming to prepare the way for the ministry of Jesus Christ. A careful reading, however, will reveal that this coming of the messenger to prepare the way was to have its fulfillment in the last days, not the days of our Lord's ministry. It is very apparent that in the former day the offering of Judah and Jerusalem was not pleasant, nor did the sons of Levi in that day offer an offering that was pleasant, but all of this to the contrary. The Lord did not at that time come as a swift messenger against the sorcerers, and against the adulterers, etc. But when he comes again all of this will be fulfilled. Joseph Smith was called to be an Elias in this dispensation to prepare the way before him.

In the Old Testament the name of the great prophet to whom Malachi refers is Elijah. This is the Hebrew form of the word. In the New Testament the Greek form, Elias, is used. Both mean the same and refer to the same person, and the same office. In later writings the two forms of the names occur indiscriminately. But we know from the Doctrine and Covenants (Sec. 110) that there are two personages, and two offices, one called Elias, and the other Elijah. No further information is given concerning the life, or history, of Elias, but he appeared in the Kirtland temple to Joseph and Oliver Cowdery and "committed the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham, saying, that in us and our seed, all generations after us should be blessed" (Doc. and Cov. 110:12). The Prophet Joseph draws a sharp distinction between the spirit and office of the two, and retains for the one the Old Testament form of the name, and for the other the New. He says:—

"I saw an angel, and he laid his hands upon my head, and ordained me to a priest after the order of Aaron * * * But I was informed that this office did not extend to the laying on of hands for the giving of the Holy Ghost * * * but that my ordination was a preparatory work, or a going before, which was the spirit of Elias."

* * *

"The spirit of Elias is to prepare the way for a greater revelation of God, which is the Priesthood of Elias, or the Priesthood that Aaron was ordained into. And when God sends a man into the world to prepare for a greater work, holding the keys of the power of Elias, it was called the doctrine of Elias, even from the early ages of the world."

* * *

"The spirit, power, and calling of Elijah is, that ye have power to hold the key of the revelation, ordinances, oracles, powers, and endowments of the fulness of the Melchizedek Priesthood and of the kingdom of God on the earth; and to receive, obtain, and perform all the ordinances belonging to the kingdom of God, even unto the turning of the hearts of the fathers unto the children, and the hearts of the children unto their fathers, even those who are in heaven" (History of the Church, Vol. VI, pp. 250-1).

It has already been stated that "the day of the Lord" is a day of judgment upon nations. In the prophecies of Zephaniah (1:14-18) that day is described as a day of battle and assault upon "fenced cities," and also a day of "trouble and distress," "wasteness and desolation," "darkness and gloominess," and "trumpet and alarm." It is the dies irae of the poet—the day of wrath.

"The day of the Lord is the day of His self-revelation to judge evil and bring His work of redemption among men to completion. On the one side His revelation of Himself fills men with terror and anguish; on the other side it is the cause of universal gladness, for the oppressions under which the world groaned come to an end and the reign of God begins: 'The Lord is king; let the earth rejoice; let the multitude of isles be glad * * * for he cometh to rule the earth, he shall rule the earth with righteousness, and the people with equity' (Psalms 97:1; 98-9). * * * The judgment of the day of the Lord is a judgment on the known world, on Israel and the historical nations lying within its horizon, and the nation that executes the judgment is some fierce and wild people emerging from the dark places of the earth lying beyond the confines of the known world" (Cambridge Bible, Notes under Zephaniah, pp. 117-8).

Note, that Elijah, according to the Scriptures, was to restore the Priesthood before the coming of that day.

"What is this power that is conferred upon us in the holy Priesthood? What particular power do you give when you send a man to some other land to transact business in your name? You give him a power of attorney, authorizing him to transact in your name the business that you wish to be performed; and in that letter of appointment would be conveyed all your power, your authority, and ability to transact that business, even as effectually as if you yourself were present to perform it with your own hand" (Orson Hyde, Journal of Discourses, Vol. VIII., p. 20).

"It is in the order of heavenly things that God should always send a new dispensation into the world when men have apostatized from the truth and lost the Priesthood; but when men come out and build upon other men's foundations, they do it on their own responsibility, without authority from God" (Joseph Smith, History of the Church, Vol. Vl., p. 474).

If it were not so, the whole earth would be utterly wasted at his coming.] This implies that if the keys of the sealing power were not restored so that the families might be sealed and thus their unity made eternally sure, the entire work of the Lord would fail and be utterly wasted at the coming of the Lord. The crowning blessing in the kingdom of God is the preservation of the family, and this earth is to be the eternal abode of the righteous.
