Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 3.

REVELATION given to Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Harmony, Pennsylvania, July, 1828, relating to the loss of certain manuscripts of the first part of the Book of Mormon, which Joseph had reluctantly allowed to pass from his custody to that of Martin Harris, who had served for a brief period as scribe in the translation of the Book of Mormon. This revelation was given through the Urim and Thummim. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 21. Compare Section 10.

THE works, and the designs, and the purposes of God cannot be frustrated, neither can they come to naught.

The Prophet Joseph had found, in Martin Harris, a valuable friend. whose friendship, however, was not altogether free from danger. Harris was a prosperous farmer. He gave freely of his means to help the Prophet in his poverty. He took a facsimile of some of the characters engraved on the Book of Mormon plates to scientists in New York, Professor Charles Anthon and Dr. Samuel L. Mitchell, and returned satisfied in his own mind, from the interviews, that the writings were genuine. He went to the Prophet's temporary home in Harmony, Pennsylvania. and acted as a scribe for him, manifesting great interest in the work. But, when he had written 116 pages, he began to importune the Prophet for permission to carry the manuscript home and show it to his friends. He urged the Prophet to inquire of the Lord, through Urim and Thummim. The Prophet, yielding to the pertinacity of his friend, laid the matter before the Lord. The answer received was in the negative. But Martin Harris would not take "No" for an answer. In all probability he was anxious to convince his friends of the truth of the cause in which he had become interested, and, no doubt, he hoped to be able to do so by submitting the manuscript for their inspection. At all events, he prevailed upon the Prophet to ask the Lord again. The renly was another refusal. But Martin Harris still persisted. Finally, the Lord permitted him to take the manuscript and show it to his wife, his father, mother, and brother, and to his wife's sister, but to nobody else. To this he agreed. But alas! he did not keep the agreement, and the precious writings were lost and never recovered. For a short time the Urim and Thummim was taken from the Prophet. When he again was entrusted with the guardianship of this sacred instrument, he went before the Lord, in humility, and received this Revelation.

This suggests a word or two about the providence of God. He preserves and governs all His creatures, and directs their actions, so that the ultimate results will serve the ends He has in view. The universe and all that it contains is sustained by His power; it would go back into chaos, if He should withdraw that power. He overrules the affairs of nations. "He changeth the times and the seasons; he removeth kings and setteth up kings' (Daniel 2:21). In the same way He governs individuals. There is an old adage which says, "Man proposes, but God disposes." The Lord turns the acts of men and nations to his purposes although they may design to overthrow His work and establish their own. While it may appear, at times, that the work of the Lord is defeated, it is only for a short period of time. "The Lord killeth and maketh alive; he bringeth down to the grave and bringeth up. The Lord maketh poor and maketh rich, he bringeth low and lifteth up" (I. Sam. 2:6, 7). He is the LORD, the absolute Ruler, (Isaiah 45:5), but He governs without interfering with the free agency of man. He overrules all for good. Notwithstanding the wicked conduct of men, thirst for plunder, war, and bloodshed, the world has been so shaped and formed that the gospel can be preached in it and the Church send out its light from the mountain tops. The very persecution of the Saints in the early days, resulted in the firmer establishment of the Church, and its triumphant rise and advance. Thus God governs supreme, and this glorious doctrine, the consolation of His people in all ages, is here re-affirmed. It may be contrary to the teachings of philosophers of worldly schools, but it is the gospel, and, therefore, the truth.

How strict were your commandments] The angel Moroni had instructed the Prophet not to show the Book of Mormon plates to anyone, except those to whom he should be commanded to exhibit them; if he did, he would be destroyed. That equally strict instructions had been given regarding the translated copy is probable. The angel met Joseph on at least four different occasions after the visit in 1823. On each of these, minute instructions were imparted regarding the publication of the Book of Mormon.

After the organization of the Church the Prophet Joseph could ascertain the mind and will of the Lord without any outward aid. The office of the Spirit is to lead into all truth.

My people] God's scattered children who were to be gathered from all the nations of the earth.

Jacobites] One of the tribes of the Nephites. the descendants of Jacob, the son of Lehi.

Josephites] Another tribe of the Nephites, the descendants of Joseph, a son of Lehi.

Zoramites] A family of the Nephites, the descendants of Zoram, the servant of Laban.

Lamanites] These were the descendants of Laman, the eldest son of Lehi. They separated themselves from their brethren, the Nephites. waged war upon them, and, finally, destroyed them.

Lemuelites] The descendants of Lemuel. They formed a tribe of the Lamanites.

Ishmaelites] Descendants of that Ishmael who, with his family, accompanied Lehi on the journey to the American Continents.

In course of time, all these mixed, so that the names became a religious rather than a racial distinction:

"Now the people which were not Lamanites, were Nephites; nevertheless, they were called Nephites, Jacobites, Josephites, Zoramites, Lamanites, Lemuelites, and Ishmaelites (Book of Mormon, Jacob 1:13).
