Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 4.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to his father, Joseph Smith, Sen., at Harmony, Pennsylvania, February, 1829.—Qualifications for the labors of the ministry are set forth.

NOW behold, a marvelous work is about to come forth among the children of men.

Joseph Smith, Sr., the father of the Prophet, was among the first to accept the calling of his remarkable son as from God. When, after repeated visits of the angel Moroni, during the night of September 21st, 1823, and the following forenoon, Joseph was physically exhausted and sorely in need of a friend and confidant, he unburdened his soul, by a full statement of what had transpired, to his father. Joseph Smith, Sr., this God's nobleman, did not scoff; he was not even impatient. He listened reverently to the wonderful story told by his boy, and then, his mind enlightened by a flash of intelligence from the divine Spirit of truth, he declared that the message was from God, and counseled Joseph to do as the angel had commanded him.

Now Joseph Smith, Sr., came to Harmony, Pa., where his son, Joseph, had taken refuge on account of persecution by the mob in the State of New York. He came, undoubtedly, to learn more of the work, to the divinity of which he had already borne testimony. Then the Prophet received this Revelation for his beloved father.

Joseph Smith, Sr., was baptized on the day the Church was organized. Later, he was ordained a Patriarch, and a President of the High Priesthood, in which offices he was singularly blessed.

The following is part of a patriarchal blessing which he pronounced upon his son Hyrum, in Kirtland, on December 18, 1833. It shows a high degree of spirituality, as well as clear thought and easy command of language.

"I now ask my heavenly Father in the name of Jesus Christ, to bless thee with the same blessing with which Jacob blessed his son Joseph, for thou art his true descendant, and thy posterity shall be numbered with the house of Ephraim, and with them thou shalt stand up to crown the tribes of Israel, when they come shouting to Zion. * * * The Lord will multiply His choice blessings upon thee and thy seed after thee, and thou with them shalt have an inheritance in Zion, and they shall possess it from generation to generation, and thy name shall never be blotted out from among the just, for the righteous shall rise up, and also thy children after thee, and say thy memory is just, that thou wert a just man and perfect in thy day."

In this Revelation God (1) declares that a "marvelous work" was about to come forth; (2) exhorts His servants to be sincere; and (3) indicates some of the qualities necessary for success in His service.

5-7. There are certain things the servants of the Lord must have, as their equipment, if they desire success. They must have faith, hope, charity, love, and an eye single to the glory of God; further, virtue. knowledge, temperance, patience, brotherly kindness, godliness, humility, and diligence. "Faith" and "charity" are enumerated twice in this list of a missionary's equipment, for he needs these in abundance. And then he must be prayerful; "Ask and ye shall receive, knock and it shall be opened unto you."

Hope] That which makes one a true optimist. "Tribulation worketh patience; and patience, experience; and experience, hope; and hope maketh not ashamed" (Rom. 5:3-5).

Charity] "The pure love of Christ" (Moroni 7:47).

Love]. Love "suffereth long and is kind; it boasts not, and does not behave itself unseemly," for it is always considerate; "it seeketh not its own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil. It beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things.

Where love of God and fellow men is, there are also the other qualities necessary to successful missionary labor.

General Notes

Joseph was instructed by the angel to impart to his father that which he had learned of the purposes of God. "He obeyed at once, and standing there in the harvest field, related to his father all that had passed. The inspiration of heaven rested upon the elder Joseph as he heard the lad's words; and when the account was finished, he said, 'My son, these things are of God; take heed that you proceed in all holiness to do His will'" (George Q. Cannon, Life of Joseph Smith, p. 15).
