Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 5.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Harmony, Pennsylvania, March, 1829.—Three witnesses to the Book of Mormon are promised, of whom Martin Harris is to be one if he shall prove himself worthy—Baptism is foreshadowed, but as no one had at this time been ordained to administer the ordinance, patient waiting is enjoined—Note that ordination followed, a few weeks later; see Section 13.

BEHOLD, I say unto you, that as my servant Martin Harris has desired a witness at my hand, that you, my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., have got the plates of which you have testified and borne record that you have received of me;

Martin Harris had already received a remarkable proof of the truth of the claims made by the Prophet Joseph regarding the Book of Mormon, when he carried a facsimile of the engravings to New York scientists. Professor Anthon had told him, as he himself states, that the "hieroglyphics were true characters." He had also, through the Prophet received revelations (Sec. 3:12). But he was not yet satisfied. He seems to have asked for further evidence that the Prophet Joseph actually had the plates from which the lost manuscript had been translated. To some, faith in God is as natural as it is for little children to trust their parents; others seem to be struggling with doubts continually. This Revelation was given in answer to the desire of Martin Harris for further evidence. In it the Lord declares (1) that the plates were hidden from public view for a wise purpose, which would be made known at some future time; (2) that the testimony of the three witnesses would be added to the Prophet's testimony; (3) that condemnation would be the consequence of rejection of this testimony; and (4) that it was necessary to keep the commandments of the Lord and to be humble, in order to receive and retain a testimony of the truth.

5-10. But if the prophet would use it and be faithful, he should receive other gifts, and "this generation shall have my word through you."

11-14. Three of my servants] Here is a gracious promise. The Lord would call and ordain three witnesses to the Book of Mormon, and thus the responsibility would be divided and unbelief be without excuse.

Clear as the moon * * * banners] This is a quotation from the Song of Songs (6;4, 10), where Shulamite is said to be fair as the moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners"; that is, indescribably beautiful, but at the same time inaccessible to flatterers, unconquerable, as an army under banners. Here and elsewhere in the Doctrine and Covenants (105:31-109:73) this expression is applied to the Church. When the Prophet was revising by inspiration the books of the Bible the Lord revealed to him that the Song of Solomon is not an inspired book, therefore the Prophet did not include it in his revision. This beautiful expression, it is reasonable to suppose, is not original with this uninspired book and, we may well suppose, was a current expression in ancient times. The fact remains no matter what view we take of it that an expression of this kind full of beauty and poetry could be found even in an uninspired book. Even should this be the case it is no reason why the Lord could not use it in a revelation given to the Church in our own day.

Brightness of my coming]. This expression is used by Paul (II. Thess. 2:8), and means literally "the presence," or "arrival" of Christ. It denotes the advent of our Lord in glory, when He will come to judge the nations and establish His kingdom.

The same is true of other signs.

Slain] An indication, at this early day, that the Prophet would die, a martyr.

This is a remarkable Revelation. It furnishes an irrefutable proof that the Prophet Joseph actually had the plates. He promised that Martin Harris, on certain conditions, which he could easily comply with, should obtain a view of them. Such a promise, if the records had not been in existence, would have been impossible to redeem. It would have been mere buffoonery. The fraud would have been detected at once. The promise was repeated a few months later (Sec. 17) to two more witnesses. Joseph had the plates and the Urim and Thummim, and this Revelation proves the truth of that assertion.

32-35. Here the warning is repeated and a promise added. Unless Martin Harris would humble himself, he would fall into transgression. There is strength in humility; weakness in pride. Unless Joseph followed the directions regarding postponement of his work of translation, he would be destroyed. That is the warning. If he would keep the commandments given, he would be "lifted up" at the last day. That is the promise.

Lifted up] This term in the New Testament sometimes refers to the Crucifixion. Christ was "lifted up" on the Cross. Here it means to be exalted and receive honor and glory.

General Notes

"We never inquire at the hand of God for special revelation only in case of there being no previous revelation to suit the case; and that in a council of High Priests."

* * *

"It is a great thing to inquire at the hands of God, or to come into His presence; and we feel fearful to approach Him on subjects that are of little or no consequence, * * * especially about things the knowledge of which men ought to obtain in all sincerity, before God, for themselves" (Joseph Smith, History of the Church, Vol. I., p. 339).
