Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 6.

REVELATION given to Joseph Smith the Prophet, and Oliver Cowdery, at Harmony, Pennsylvania, April, 1829. Oliver Cowdery began his labors as scribe, in the translation of the Book of Mormon, April 7, 1829. He had already received a divine manifestation attesting the truth of Joseph's testimony respecting the plates on which was engraved the Book of Mormon record. Joseph inquired of the Lord through the Urim and Thummim and received this response. See History of the Church, vol. I, pp. 32-35.—Oliver's willingness to serve is commended; and both to him and to Joseph blessings of great import are promised.

A GREAT and marvelous work is about to come forth unto the children of men.

On the 5th of April, 1829, Oliver Cowdery came to Harmony, Pa. He had been teaching school in the neighborhood of Manchester, N. Y., and for some time boarded in the home of the Smith family, While there he had heard the wonderful story of the Book of Mormon, and he was impressed to go to Harmony and visit the Prophet, to see for himself and learn more about the Book. Oliver Cowdery was an intimate friend of the Whitmers, and on his way to Harmony he called at their house, and at that time he promised David Whitmer, who also heard many conflicting rumors about the finding of the plates, to inform him of the result of his investigation. The first converts to "Mormonism" did not accept it without prayerful investigation. Oliver Cowdery, after his arrival in Harmony, soon became convinced that Joseph was called of God, and wrote to that effect to David Whitmer. The Lord now prompted His servant, Joseph, to resume the work of translation which had been interrupted by the vacillation of Martin Harris. Oliver Cowdery acted as amanuensis. According to his own statement at Council Bluffs on October 21st, 1848, Oliver Cowdery wrote the entire Book (save a few pages) as the words fell from the lips of the Prophet, "as be translated it by the gift and power of God, by the means of the Urim and Thummim, or, as it is called by that Book, 'holy interpreters.' " So that the testimony of Oliver Cowdery was as firm in 1848, two years before his death, as it was in 1829, when he first accepted the gospel, although he had been outside the Church for eleven years. When Joseph and Oliver had been engaged on the Book of Mormon a few days, this Revelation was received.

About the time the Church of Jesus Christ was founded in the United States, Mr. Edward Irving, a gifted minister in London, constructed his church. He, too, appointed apostles, prophets, evangelists, "angels" or bishops, elders, and deacons. He, too, claimed that the spiritual gifts had been restored. He, too, preached the second coming of our Lord. The Irvingites gained adherents in Great Britain, the United States, and the European continent, and there was every prospect that they would bring forth a great and marvelous work. But where is that church today? Irving called it the Catholic Apostolic Church. Even the name is unknown to most Christians, while that of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and, to a still greater extent, that of the Prophet Joseph, have become famous throughout the world. Mr. Irving was a clergyman, learned, eloquent and earnest. Joseph Smith was an unlettered, unknown youth. but his work stood the test, because it was God's work. It has become great, indeed.

"And now, my beloved brethren, I perceive that ye ponder still in your hearts; and it grieveth me that I must speak concerning this thing. For if ye would hearken unto the Spirit which teacheth a man to pray ye would know that ye must pray; for the evil spirit teacheth not a man to pray, but teacheth him that he must not pray. But behold, I say unto you that ye must pray always, and not faint; that ye must not perform anything unto the Lord save in the first place ye shall pray unto the Father in the name of Christ, that he will consecrate thy performance unto thee, that thy performance may be for the welfare of thy soul." (2 Nephi 32:8-9.)

Keep my commandments] He who cries repentance must himself keep the commandments, in order to enjoy the blessings of that labor.

"Salvation is for man to be saved from all his enemies: for, until a man can triumph over death, he is not saved. A knowledge of the Priesthood [and obedience] alone will do this" (Joseph Smith, History of the Church, Vol. V., p. 403).

14-17. Verily, verily, I say unto thee, * * * True] Nathanael believed that Jesus was the Messiah, when He told him that He had seen him under the fig tree. (John 1:48-50.) Oliver Cowdery had a similar experience. Before he came to Harmony, Pa., to see the Prophet, he had prayed earnestly to the Lord, in the seclusion of his own room, for light, and the Lord had manifested Himself to him by filling his heart with that peace which passeth understanding. No other human being knew of this. And yet, in this Revelation the Lord reminded him of that prayer and the answer. This was a testimony to Oliver Cowdery, similar to that which Nathanael received.

"When any of you receive a rebuke, or a correction, acknowledge it at once, and say to the one who administers it, 'Thank you, brother; God bless you! And may the Almighty give me power to do right'" (Heber C. Kimball, Journal of Discourses, Vol. IX., p. 41).

29-31. Faithful missionaries are blessed whether the world receives, or rejects, their testimony. There is great happiness in the performance of duty.

32-36. Instructions and encouragement in every line.
