Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 7.

REVELATION given to Joseph Smith the Prophet and Oliver Cowdery, at Harmony, Pennsylvania, April, 1829 when they inquired through the Urim and Thummim as to whether John, the beloved disciple, tarried in the flesh or had died. The revelation is the translated version of the record made on parchment by John and hidden up by himself. See History of the Church, vol. 1, pp. 35, 36.

AND the Lord said unto me: John, my beloved, what desirest thou? For if you shall ask what you will, it shall be granted unto you.

In the Gospel account as given by John (21:21-23.) he modestly refers to the question by Peter concerning John and the Savior's answer in the following words:

"Peter seeing him (John) saith to Jesus, Lord, and what shall this man do?

"Jesus saith unto him, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? Follow thou me.

"Then went this saying abroad among the brethren, that that disciple should not die: yet Jesus said not unto him, He shall not die; but, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?"

We learn from this that there was a general understanding among the apostles that John should not die until the second coming of our Lord. This revelation confirms that view.

The prophet Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, one day, discussed this passage of the Scriptures, and expressed different views on the meaning of it. In order to come to unity of faith on that question, the Prophet inquired of the Lord and received this Revelation.

The question might be asked, whether the Prophet had actually seen the parchment written and hidden by John, or a copy of it; if so, where and when did he obtain it, and what became of it?

The history of the Prophet does not furnish information on these subjects. But it is not necessary to suppose that the Prophet had St. John's parchment, or a copy of it, before him, when he received this Revelation. It was the contents of the document that were revealed. It was just as easy for the Spirit of the Lord to communicate the contents of that record to the Prophet, without the actual presence of it, as it would have been to enable him to understand the language in which John wrote it, whether Greek or Aramaean, which languages neither Joseph nor Oliver could have read, except by special divine interposition, even if they had had the manuscript before them. The miracle would have been practically the same.

Our Lord saw, from the mountain top, "all the kingdoms of the world in a moment of time" (Luke 4:5). They were, of course, not actually present on the mountain. He saw them in a vision. The Prophet Joseph heard the words which were spoken to Moses on a high mountain; that is to say, those words were repeated to him by revelation (Pearl of Great Price, Book of Moses 1:1-42). He was given, by revelation, part of the contents of the Book of Enoch (Doc. and Cov. 107:57). President Brigham Young saw the Salt Lake Temple, in a vision, one day in July, 1847, over five years before the ground whereupon it stands was broken for the foundation, on the 14th of February, 1853. He relates:

"I scarcely ever say much about revelations, or visions, but suffice to say, five years ago last July I was here, and saw in the spirit the Temple, not ten feet from where we have laid the chief corner stone. I have not inquired what kind of a Temple we should build. Why? Because it was represented before me. I have never looked upon that ground but the vision of it was there" (From an address by Brigham Young, April 6th, 1853. Journal of Discourses, Vol. I., p. 133).

There is, therefore, no difficulty in accepting the proposition that God could make the contents of John's parchment known to His Servants, whether the document was accessible to them or not. That John committed our Lord's last promise to him and Peter to writing is probable. It must have made a deep and lasting impression on him. That the incident is recorded in the Gospel in an abbreviated form, is certain.

John had "power over death." Tradition says that on one occasion he came unharmed from a cauldron of boiling oil; and that on another occasion he was a captive among a band of robbers, whose chieftain became converted through his preaching.

He "prophesied before nations, kindred, tongues and people" through the Book of Revelation, in which the history of the world, as committed to the records of heaven before the foundations of the world were laid, is outlined. He prophesied more particularly about the general apostasy (Rev. 9:20, 21; 13:1-18); and the restoration of the Gospel (10:1-11; 14:1-13).

The following is suggestive:

"Men are made a little lower than the angels for the suffering of death, but when men are clothed with the holy Priesthood and sent forth to minister the word of life, the comparison between them and the angels is somewhat different. And of his angels he saith, Who maketh his angels spirits, and his ministers a flame of fire." While in the act of ministering the gospel, the servants of God may be considered angels. * * * The servants of God are angels in one sense, sent forth to gather the house of Israel from the four corners of the earth; and the Elders of this Church in their labors have fulfilled, partly, the sayings of the Savior, when they have found two working in the field, one has received the gospel and been gathered, and the other left; two lying in a bed, the one has been taken and the other left" (Heber C. Kimball, Journal of Discourses, Vol. X, p. 103. Compare Doc. and Cov. 129:1).

Peter, James, and John hold the "power and keys" of the ministry. John wrote his Gospel about the year 97 A.D.—almost at the end of the first century of our era. After that he passes out of view, as far as history knows, until he, in company with Peter and James, appears on the banks of the Susquehanna River and confers the Melchizedek Priesthood upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, not many days after the 15th of May, 1829.

John was the last surviving member of the first Apostles chosen of the Lamb, and, as the last tone of the bell always sounds longer than the preceding ones, so the sweet influence of his sacred compositions—the Gospel and the Epistles—seem to have been more lasting and to have had a deeper effect upon the religious thought and life of men, than that of any other writer, inspired, or profane. The very name of John has become more popular than any other name, except those of the Deity, judging from the almost innumerable forms in which it occurs throughout the Christian world.

For an account of the three Nephites who obtained the promise that they should not ''taste of death," see III. Nephi 28:1-33.
