Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 97.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet at Kirtland, Ohio, August 2, 1833. Ten days before this time the corner stones of the Lord's House in Kirtland were laid, after the order of the Holy Priesthood. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 400. This revelation deals particularly with the affairs of the Saints in Zion, Jackson County, Missouri.—Many of the labors of the Saints in Zion are commended—Commendation of the school in Zion—The Lord's will that a house should be built unto him in the land of Zion—Great blessings promised to Zion if her people shall obey this commandment—Zion defined as the pure in heart—Zion to escape the indignation of the Lord if the people are faithful, otherwise many calamities to fall upon them.

VERILY I say unto you my friends, I speak unto you with my voice, even the voice of my Spirit, that I may show unto you my will concerning your brethren in the land of Zion, many of whom are truly humble and are seeking diligently to learn wisdom and to find truth.

A brief statement of the condition of the Church at this time may be of some help to the younger students of these Revelations.

In Kirtland, the work on the Temple had commenced. On the 5th of June, 1833, George A. Smith hauled the first load of stone for that sacred building, and Hyrum Smith and Reynolds Cahoon began digging the trench for the walls, which they, later, finished. On the 6th it was decided, by a conference of High Priests, that the Building Committee should obtain stone, brick, lumber, etc., and begin building immediately. On the 23rd of July, the cornerstones were laid. The work was now being prosecuted with vigor, until the building was completed. It was dedicated on March 27th, 1836.

On the 25th of June, 1833, the First Presidency sent letters of instruction to William W. Phelps, Edward Partridge, and the brethren in Zion, and enclosed plans for the future city of Zion and its temples. The first city plat was to be one mile square, divided into blocks containing ten acres each, except the middle range of blocks, which were to contain fifteen acres each. All the blocks, except those containing schools and public buildings, were to be divided into half-acre lots, four by twenty rods each. The dwelling-houses were to stand twenty-four feet from the street. The plat would accommodate from eighteen to twenty thousand inhabitants, and they would need twenty-five buildings for schools and public worship. These buildings would be temples, and none would be less than eighty-seven feet by sixty-one. There were to be no barns or stables in the city, but these were to be situated on lands laid off for that purpose, on the north and south sides of the settlement. The farms would be situated east and west of the city, but the tiller of the soil, as well as the mechanic, merchant, and others, would live in the city. "When this square is thus laid off and supplied, lay off another in the same way," the Prophet wrote, "and so fill up the world in these last days" (Documentary History, Vol. 1:357).

What an admirable view of the future cities of the world! For this plan will certainly be adopted when civilization shall have advanced far enough to appreciate it. In such a city the farmer will enjoy every advantage of city life; and yet there will be no slums, and none of the disadvantages of the large cities, in which corrupt politicians, criminals, and dishonest business methods flourish.

Kirtland was growing, notwithstanding the opposition stirred up by apostates. Sidney Rigdon wrote, July 2nd:—"Doors are opening continually for proclaiming the gospel. The spirit of bitterness among the people is fast subsiding, and a spirit of inquiry is taking its place."

The Saints in Missouri, on the 6th of April, 1833, celebrated the third anniversary of the organization of the Church, by a conference at the Ferry, on Big Blue River, a stream a few miles west of Independence. At this time the gospel had been preached in nearly all the States of the Union, and many flourishing branches had been organized. The Saints were contemplating the future of Zion with joy.

In the month of July, however, a mob in Jackson County, led by a Rev. Pixley, began to move against the Saints. This clergyman had published false stories about them, in order to create a hostile sentiment. He carried from house to house a tract, entitled, "Beware of False Prophets," calculated to excite violence against the Church. This was followed by the publication of a manifesto calling for a mass meeting at Independence on the 20th of July, 1833, in which to decide on a course to pursue against the Saints. That the politicians of Jackson County eagerly embraced the opportunity of utilizing the adverse sentiment created by religious bigots, is evident from the signatures affixed to the manifesto. The most prominent names are those of political office-holders, such as jailers, justices of the peace, judges, a postmaster, a constable, a colonel, a judge of the court, an Indian agent, and others. In this manifesto the Saints were falsely accused of having invited negroes and mulattoes to become "Mormons" and settle in Missouri; also to have declared that they would, sooner or later, "have possession of our lands for an inheritance." The first of these charges was without any foundation whatever; the second, seemingly, had a foundation of truth, but it was only half a truth and therefore served the same purpose as a falsehood. The Saints had been promised land in Missouri for an inheritance, but only by purchase; nobody was to be injured.

On the 20th of July, the mass meeting convened. Inflamed by falsehood strewn broadcast by religious fanatics and political office-seekers, the meeting demanded the discontinuance of the printing office, the closing of the store, and the cessation of all mechanical labor. When the brethren refused to comply with this law-defying dictum, the mob broke down the printing establishment, seized Edward Partridge and Charles Allen, daubed them with tar from head to foot and covered them with feathers, on the public square. Others were frightened from their homes by threats and yells. On the 23rd, the very same day on which the corner stones of the Kirtland Temple were laid, the brethren in Missouri, in order to prevent bloodshed, signed an agreement with the mob leaders to leave the country before the 1st of April, 1834. The brethren immediately sent Oliver Cowdery to Kirtland to report to the First Presidency. He arrived there early in September, 1833.

The Revelation in Sec. 97 was received before the arrival in Kirtland of Oliver Cowdery, and, consequently, before the Prophet knew any particulars of the storm of persecution that raged in the land of Zion.

The Lord (1) states the subject of his Revelation (1-2); (2) expresses his approval of the School of the Prophets in Zion, and of Parley P. Pratt, its superintendent (3-9); (3) instructs the Prophet that a Temple must be built in Zion (10-17); (4) promises that Zion shall prosper, if the Saints there will obey His commandments (18-21); (5) threatens the wicked with vengeance (22-24); while (6) Zion shall escape, if the Saints observe to do according to the Word of God (25-28).

1-2. The Lord, as has been noted, showed to the Prophet Joseph His will concerning the Saints in Zion, before he had received word of the rising of the mob and the agreement the Saints had signed, to leave Jackson County, but when Oliver Cowdery arrived, the Saints in Kirtland were not taken by surprise entirely, their minds having been prepared, by revelation, for the sad tidings of which he was the bearer. Many of the Saints, the Prophet was told (v. 1), were truly humble and willing to learn, and they would find mercy; others were not humble, and they would be brought into judgment (v. 2).

3-9. That the Lord begins His Revelation concerning the Saints in Zion with a word of commendation of the school and its superintendent, Parley P. Pratt, is not accidental. The school was a very important institution of the Church. Parley P. Pratt had given his services to the school under very trying circumstances. The students met in the open air, and he walked six miles, sometimes barefoot, in order to attend. God accepted and acknowledged his labor and sacrifices, in this manner.

10-17. In these paragraphs the Lord informs the Saints that a Temple was to be built in Zion, according to the pattern given by revelation (v. 10). It was to be built speedily (v. 11.). It was to be a "place of thanksgiving for all Saints," and a "place of instruction" for those who were called to the ministry (v. 13). No unclean thing was to enter it, and on that condition, "my glory," the Lord says, "shall rest upon it" (v. 15) as upon the Tabernacle in the wilderness (Ex. 40:34), and the Presence of God would be there (v. 16).

God was, if we may say so reverently, anxious that His people should rear a Temple in which they could be endowed with power from on high before the conflict with the adversary. The history of Temples teaches us that the people of God have been strong, or weak, in proportion to the faithfulness with which they have attended to their sanctuaries. The history of the Temple of Jerusalem is, as Dr. Joseph Angus, in his Bible Handbook, notes, "an index to the history of the Jews. When it fell, they were scattered; as it rose from its ruins, they gathered round it again; and history dates the captivity, with equal accuracy, from the destruction of the Temple, or from the first capture of Jerusalem." Speaking of the Temples in this dispensation, someone has declared that the completion of the Nauvoo Temple was the salvation of the Church from annihilation, although the Saints were forced to flee into the desert. Since the completion of the Salt Lake Temple, the adversary has had less power to injure the Church than he had before. If we remember that the Temples are the palaces of God, where His Presence is manifested, we can understand why, when the adversary was marshalling his forces against the Church, our Lord urged the Saints to build the Temple speedily. We can also understand why the evil one planned to have them scattered before they could rear that sacred edifice.

18-21. The promise is definite: "If Zion do these things, she shall prosper" (v. 18).

Parley P. Pratt, in his Autobiography, writes:

"This Revelation was not complied with by the leaders of the Church in Missouri as a whole, notwithstanding many were humble and faithful; therefore, the threatened judgment was poured out to the uttermost, as the history of the five following years shows."

22-4. Students of the prophetic writings of the Bible are aware of the fact that the prophets, while predicting the calamities that were to overtake Israel, also foretold the fate that would befall their enemies. The people of God would be redeemed in due time, while the enemies would be utterly destroyed.

25-8. This is a promise that the Saints would escape the scourge, if they would do what God commanded them. He had prepared a refuge for His people, in the mountains, and, in the language of Isaiah, He urged the Church, "Enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy doors about thee, hide thyself, as it were for a little moment, until the indignation be overpass" (Isaiah 26:20). Or, in the language of the Apocalypse, the Church, under the protection of the wings of a great eagle, fled into the wilderness, "into her place," where she "is nourished for a time, and times, and half a time, from the face of the serpent" (Rev. 12:14). The Latter-day Saints, from this experience in the Eastern States, learned the necessity of obedience to the Word of the Lord. They followed their divinely-appointed leaders into the Valleys of the Mountains, and, as a consequence, they have had blessings showered upon them, as a people and as individuals. They did escape the scourge of the Civil War.

General Notes

"We are infinitely more blessed by the persecution and injustice we have suffered, than we could have been, if we had remained in our habitations from which we have been driven—than if we had been suffered to occupy our farms, gardens, stores, mills, machinery, and everything we had in our former possessions. Had we not been persecuted, we would now be in the midst of the wars and bloodshed that are desolating the Nation" (Brigham Young, Jour. of Dis., Vol. X., p. 38).

It has been customary among a certain class of critics of the Latter-day Saints to say that the Church itself was largely responsible for the persecutions through which it passed in the early years of its existence. The saints, they claim, were undesirable citizens, who even deemed it their privilege to appropriate for their own use the property of their peaceful neighbors. For that reason, it is alleged, they were driven from Jackson County, Missouri, in 1833, and from Nauvoo, Illinois, in 1846. This is not true. Even non-"Mormons" admit that the Saints in Missouri and Illinois were innocent of wrong-doing.*

—————

*An article illustrating this, is quoted in a publication called "The Journal of History." It is by one Alexander Majors, a son of Benjamin Majors, who was a member of the committee that represented the lawless crowd by which the Saints were driven from Independence. In his book called, "Seventy Years on the Frontier," he says, in part, as quoted:

"They [the Saints] established their headquarters at Independence, where some of their leading elders were located. There they set up a printing office, the first that was established within one hundred and fifty miles of Independence, and commenced printing their Church literature, which was very distasteful to the members and leaders of other religion denominations, the community being composed of

—————
