Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 98.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Kirtland, Ohio, August 6, 1833.—Patience in persecution enjoined—Good to come out of affliction—The constitutional law of the land to be supported by the Saints—Good men to be supported for secular office—The Saints to proclaim peace—Offenders in the Church at Kirtland reproved—The Saints to forgive their enemies—When resistance is justified—The Saints to be blessed if they will forgive their enemies.

VERILY, I say unto you my friends, fear not, let your hearts be comforted; yea, rejoice evermore, and in everything give thanks;

—————

Methodists, Baptists of two different orders, Presbyterians of two different orders, and Catholics, and a denomination calling themselves Christians.

"In that day and age it was regarded as blasphemous or sacrilegious for anyone to claim that he had met angels and received from them new revelations, and the religious portion of the community especially, was very much incensed and aroused at the audacity of any person claiming such interviews from the invisible world

* * * Finally the citizens, and particularly the religious portion of them, made up their mince that it was wrong to allow them to be printing their literature and preaching, as it might have a bad effect upon the rising generation; and on July 4, 1883, there was quite a gathering of citizens, and a mob was formed to tear down their printing office."

"It has been claimed by people who were highly colored in their prejudice against the Mormons, that they were bad citizens; that they stole whatever they could get their hands on, and were not law-abiding. This is not true with reference to their citizenship in Jackson County, where they got their first kick, and as severe a one as they ever received, if not the most severe. There was not an officer among them, all the offices in the county being in the hands of their enemies, and if one had stolen a chicken, he could and would have been brought to grief for so doing, but it is my opinion that there is nothing in the county records to show that a Mormon was ever charged with any misdemeanor in the way of violation of the laws for the protection of property."

—————

God is continuing to reveal His will concerning His people. As Section Ninety-seven was addressed more especially to the Saints in Missouri, so this Section is given to those in Kirtland and the East, but both contain instructions applicable to the Saints anywhere and at all times.

In this Revelation our Lord (1) gives the Saints a glorious promise (1-3); (2) instructs them to be law-abiding citizens (4-10); (3) commands them to forsake evil and cleave to that which is good (11-17); (4) offers consolation and warning (18-22); (5) gives instructions concerning how to treat enemies (23-48).

1-3. This Revelation begins with a glorious promise. "Fear not!" "Let your hearts be comforted!" "Rejoice" and "give thanks," notwithstanding the trials that were coming; wait patiently on the Lord, for your prayers are heard (v. 2), and the promise is that all things "shall work together for your good, and to my name's glory" (v. 3).

4-10. In this section, our Lord reveals the important truth that it is the duty of the Saints to be loyal, law-abiding citizens. Two obligations are imposed upon them. They must (a) keep the Constitutional laws of the land, and (b) use their influence for the election of good officials. This Revelation should be studied closely.

Sometimes, however, a difference of opinion may arise as to whether a certain line of conduct is in accordance with the divine law, or not. There are as many views, almost, on that question, as there are religious denominations. How can a legislative assembly, then, be certain that it does not trespass by law-making contrary to the divine laws? By not enacting any laws on religious subjects, but leaving such matters to the conscience of each individual, and by protecting everyone in the exercise of what he conceives to be his religious duty. There can be only one exception to this rule. If anyone should claim the right, in the name of religion, to injure his fellowmen, or unlawfully deprive any of them of life, property, honor, or liberty to pursue lawful happiness, it would be the duty of the State to interfere.

"Powers not delegated to the States, or reserved from the States, are Constitutional. The Constitution acknowledges that the people have all power not reserved to itself * * * The Constitution is not a law to us, but it makes provision for us whereby we can make laws. Where it provides that no one shall be hindered from worshiping God according to his own conscience, is a law. No legislature can enact a law to prohibit it. The Constitution provides to regulate bodies of men and not individuals" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. V., pp. 289-90).

This embodies a general principle, by which laws can be tested as to their constitutionality.

11-17. It is the will of God concerning the Saints that they shall forsake all evil and cleave unto all good (v. 11). All evil includes everything that is contrary to the will of God and detrimental to the advancement of His children in holiness before Him. The Saints must forsake not only the sins and crimes common in the world, but a great many evils which are not recognized by the world as evils. Evil companionship, evil amusements, evil aspirations for worldly power and honor, evil conversation, evil thoughts, and evil sentiments are all included. All good includes all that is in harmony with the will of God, no matter whence it comes. Saints cannot be clannish or partisan. They must be cosmopolitans, for there is some good everywhere for them to recognize and to cleave to.

Obedience to this commandment opens the door to the revelations of God—line upon line, precept upon precept (v. 12). It enables the Saints to endure trials and persecution (v. 13); to renounce war and proclaim peace, and to devote themselves to their special mission of uniting the hearts of fathers and children (v. 16), Jews and Gentiles (v. 17).

"Call to mind a Daniel, the three Hebrew children, Jeremiah, Paul, Stephen, and many others, too numerous to mention, who were stoned, sawn asunder, tempted, slain with the sword, and wandered about in sheep skins and goat skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented, of whom the world was not worthy. They wandered in deserts and in mountains, and hid in dens and caves of the earth; yet they all obtained a good report through faith; and amidst all their afflictions they rejoiced that they were counted worthy to receive persecution for Christ's sake" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. I., p. 450).

Frank Crane, in an article in The Christian Work of September 2nd, 1916, strikingly depicted war as the work of the adversary of man, by stating what he (Crane) would do, "if he were the devil." The following paragraphs from that article are quoted:

"Here is murder, not the cheap and shameful knifing or shooting by the drunken thug in some dark alley, but murder beautiful, magnificent, where a thousand men are dismembered by one salvo, or lie quivering and shrieking on the ground after a charge; where trenches swarm with human creatures going mad with noise and terror, sitting with gangrened wounds in muddy water, suffocated with the stink of their dead companions, fly-blown and maggot-eaten by their side, or falling asleep from exhaustion while rats eat their living cheeks and lips."

* * * *

"Add to murder the cruelty of vain and petty officers driving their men into sure destruction, and horrors of the civilians hunted from their homes, shot down at their own thresholds or burned alive in the fire of their own goods, and the old women brained for sheer deviltry, and the nameless crimes committed upon the young women, and their children stamped out by military heel like scampering mice; and over all the blur or unchecked hate, the sound of blasphemy, the ribald songs of the raging warmen, the futile prayers smashed by mailed fists upon the palsied mouths that utter them, the whole hoarse rattle and roar swinging up in a majestic orchestration and hallelujah chorus worthy of hell's gala day."

* * * *

"I would glorify all this diabolism of destruction with the utmost enthusiasm, bands playing, men singing, priests and preachers telling how they were serving Jesus, statesmen vaunting the bravery and manliness of murderers, women adoring them and praying for them, and little children standing by admiring their gay uniforms."

Can there be any doubt that the Lord is in earnest, when He says, "Renounce war and proclaim peace?"

Turn the hearts of the children, etc.] This is the great mission of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. War is one of the evils they must forsake; peace is one of the blessings they must cleave to. For they are to link together the hearts of the ancestors and their descendants. They are to turn the hearts of the Jews to their Prophets, and this is essentially a work of peace. It is temple work, and men of blood cannot build, or administer in, temples.

18-22. Let not your hearts be troubled] This is consolation. It is quoted from the last discourse of our Lord, before His crucifixion. On that occasion He said to His faithful disciples, "Let not your heart be troubled" (John 14:1). Now in view of the approaching trials of the Saints, He repeats that comforting exhortation.

Where my Father and I am * * * also] This is a promise of celestial glory, for that is the glory in the Father dwells. Comp. Sec. 76:62.

20-1. The reason for the divine displeasure is here stated. They do not forsake their sins, their wicked ways, the pride of their hearts, their covetousness, etc. They do not observe the Word of Wisdom; and, as a consequence, they will be chastised. This should be a warning to the Saints everywhere, at all times. It is, perhaps, easy to forsake grosser sins which are disapproved by law and social requirements; to forsake puce and covetousness, and similar sins may be more difficult. Many do not even know that they are sins.

(a) The Law of Retaliation.

23-32. The Lord here states what may, perhaps, be called the lex talionis of the gospel. "An eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth," was the highest ideal of justice to which the majority of the Children of Israel could rise under the Mosaic law. Our Lord enunciated a higher ideal, "But I say unto you, that ye resist not evil; but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also. And if any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also" (Matt. 5:39-40). This principle is set forth in further detail in the paragraphs before us. If men will smite you, or your families, and ye will bear it patiently, and not seek revenge, ye shall be rewarded (v. 23). If the offense is repeated, and ye bear it patiently, your reward shall be a hundred fold (v. 25). If it is repeated again, and ye bear it patiently the reward shall be multiplied four times (v. 26), and the Lord will judge the offender (v. 27). If he still persists, he must be solemnly warned, and if he does not heed the warning, the victim is justified in "rewarding him according to his works" (v. 31); but if the wronged party will spare the offender, the reward for his righteousness will surely come (v. 30).

As the world is constituted at present, it is impossible to live in it without being wronged some time. What to do, when wronged, is one of the great problems of a Christian life. The world says, "Get even!" The Master says, "Forgive!" "Absurd!" the world exclaims; "what are laws and courts and jails for?" Christ bids us remember that our worst enemy is, after all, one of God's children whom Christ came to save, and that we ought to treat him as we would an erring brother. Very often Christian love in return for a wrong proves the salvation of the wrongdoer. It always has a wonderful effect upon those who practice it. It makes them strong, beautiful and God-like, whereas hatred and revenge stamp, upon the heart in which they dwell, the image of the devil.

(b) The Law of War.

33-8. Israel was a war-cradled nation, but the divine law placed many restrictions on their military life. All men from twenty years of age, capable of carrying arms, were liable to military service (Numbers 1:3), but all the priests and Levites, who were engaged in the Temple service, were exempt (Numbers 1:47); so was also a man who had built a house and had not yet dedicated it; one who had planted a vineyard and had not yet eaten of its fruit, and one who was engaged to be married and had not yet taken his betrothed home (Deuteronomy 20:5-7). A newly-married man was exempt for one year (Deut. 24:5), and, finally, every one who was afraid, or "faint-hearted," was barred from the service, lest "his brethren's heart faint as well as his heart" (Deut. 20:8). By these sweeping restrictions, the Temple service, industrial and agricultural pursuits, and domestic happiness were exalted above militarism, at a time when the military cast wielded the predominating influence in many countries.

Israel was enjoined from going to war with any city or nation, until a peace-offer had been refused (Deut. 20:10; compare Deut. 2:26-9). When war became inevitable, the Israelites were expressly commanded not to cut down the fruit trees in the territory of the enemy (Deut. 20:19). Unnecessary vandalism was prohibited.

Compare the instructions given to the Nephites, Alma 48:10-25.

(c) The Law of Forgiveness.

39-48. In paragraphs 23-32 the Saints are taught to bear persecution patiently, and not to seek revenge; here they are instructed to go still farther, and forgive an enemy as often as he repents of his evil-doing, and a stated number of times, even if he does not repent (v. 43). If, however, he continues to trespass and does not repent, the case is to be brought before the Lord, in the hope that the sinner may be brought to repentance; when that object is gained, he is to be forgiven (vv. 44, 45); if there is no repentance, the matter is to be left entirely in the hands of the Lord.

It is one of the proofs of the divine origin of the Revelation in this volume that they inculcate forgiveness at a time when the flames of persecution were about to break out over the Saints. Those who reject the gospel as proclaimed by the Prophet Joseph, also reject the divine principle of forgiveness which is an essential part of it—the principle which Jesus exemplified on the cross, when He prayed, "Father, forgive them."

The gospel teaches us that if we have a grudge against any man, in our hearts, we should drive it out. It teaches us to do good to all, even to enemies, and thereby it makes us as happy as only a heart full of sunshine can be.

General Notes

"With regard to elections, some say all the Latter-day Saints vote together, and vote as I say. But I never tell any man how to vote, or whom to vote for. But I will show you how we have been situated, by bringing a comparison. Should there be a Methodist society here and two candidates running for office [and] one says, 'if you will vote for me and put me in governor, I will exterminate the Methodists, take away their charters, etc.'; the other candidate says, 'If I am governor, I will give all an equal privilege'; which would the Methodists vote for? Of course they would vote en masse for the candidate that would give them their rights. Thus it has been with us" (Joseph Smith, Hist. of the Church, Vol. V., p. 490).

The Prophet Joseph did not aspire to military honor or power. Concerning the position he held in the Nauvoo Legion, he says that when the Saints came to Illinois, the State demanded that they should bear arms and do military duty. But they had been robbed of all their worldly possessions and could not comply with the demand. The Prophet, therefore, advised them to organize themselves into independent companies and ask the State for arms, and he added that, though he was exempt from military service, because of lameness in one leg, he would join them. On that condition, the Saints formed the Legion. The Prophet was recognized as the Lieutenant-general, and the law was complied with. The Prophet says:

"All the power that I desire, or have sought to obtain, has been the enjoyment of the Constitutional privilege for which my fathers shed their blood, of living in peace in the society of my wife and children, and enjoying the society of my friends and their religious liberty which is the right of every American citizen, of worshiping according to the dictates of his conscience and the Revelations of God" (Ib.).

The Prophet Joseph was one of the staunchest supporters of the Constitution of the United States that ever lived, but he did not entertain a high regard for the party politics of his day. In a letter to the editor of the Wasp, he wrote:

"I have of late had repeated solicitations to have something to do in relation to the political farce about dividing the county; but as my feelings revolt at the idea of having anything to do with politics, I have declined, in all instances, having anything to do on the subject. I think it would be well for politicians to regulate their own affairs. I wish to be let alone, that I may attend strictly to the spiritual welfare of the Church" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. V., p. 259).

This letter is dated January 23rd, 1843. On the 6th of August, the same year, he said:

"In relation to National matters, I want it to go abroad unto the whole world that every man should stand on his own merits. The Lord has not given me a Revelation concerning politics. I have not asked Him for one. I am a third party and stand independent and alone. I desire to see all parties protected in their rights" (Ibid., p. 526).

"It is said that Brother Joseph, in his lifetime, declared that the Elders of this Church should step forth at a particular time when the Constitution should be in danger, and rescue it, or save it. This may be so; but I do not recollect that he said exactly so. I believe he said something like this—that the time would come when the Constitution and the Country would be in danger of an overthrow; and, said he, if the Constitution be saved at all, it will be by the Elders of this Church. I believe this is about the language, as nearly as I can recollect it" (Orson Hyde, Jour. of Dis., Vol. VI., p. 152).
