Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 100.

REVELATION given to Joseph Smith the Prophet, and Sidney Rigdon, at Perrysburg, New York, October 12, 1833. The two had been long absent from their families and felt some concern over them.—Comforting assurances as to their families—Many of the Lord's people in that region—Sidney Rigdon to be a spokesman unto the Prophet and to be mighty in expounding the Scriptures—Assurances concerning affairs in Zion.

VERILY, thus saith the Lord unto you, my friends Sidney and Joseph, your families are well; they are in mine hands, and I will do with them as seemeth me good; for in me there is all power.

It is a very striking fact that the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ever since its organization, has proceeded on its onward course, no matter what the outward circumstances have been. There has been no turning back, no hesitation, no vacillation. As a mighty ship with its precious cargo, it has steered straight for the goal. The wind may have been adverse at times; the waves may have been breaking over it from stem to stern; it may have been assailed by hostile craft from above and from below, and from all sides. There may have been disaffection and even mutiny among the crew, but the command has always sounded clear and high above the storm and the din of conflict, "Forward, full speed!"

These reflections are suggested by the fact that while the enemies in Missouri were gathering their lawless forces for an assault upon the Church there, the Lord inspired the Prophet Joseph to go on a mission and proclaim the gospel message. He was not to mind the enemies. His calling was to testify to the world. And he went on this mission as far as Canada, as full of faith and hope as if there had been no stormclouds in the sky. What a testimony to his divine commission!

On the 5th of October, 1833, Joseph, in company with Sidney Rigdon and Freeman Nickerson, started on a journey east. Nickerson was a veteran of the war of 1812. He received the gospel at Dayton, New York, in April, 1833, and the same year went on a mission to Kirtland. Joseph and Sidney made this trip in his conveyance. On the 12th of October, the travelers arrived in Perrysburg, where Freeman Nickerson lived, and the same day this Revelation was received, in which the Lord (1) comforts His servants regarding their families (1-2); (2) encourages them to continue their missionary labors (3-8); (3) instructs them concerning their special gifts (9-12); and (4) comforts them concerning Zion (13-17).

1-2. The Lord is mindful of His servants. Knowing that they would be unable to put their best efforts into missionary work if they were full of anxiety for their families, He gave them the assurance that their loved ones at home were well, and that He would take care of them during the temporary separation (v. 1). Having received this promise, they were prepared to continue their labors (v. 2).

"In going forth to do our duty in warning mankind, we should not have our minds troubled and perplexed on account of our families being destitute * * * if a man has no cause of trouble, he can engage, heart and soul, in the work of the ministry and think of nothing else but the work in which he is engaged. 'But,' says one, 'I cannot forget my wife and child that are at home.' You are not required to forget them. I could always remember my wife and child but did I sorrow over them and fear that they were starving to death? No. * * * when absent on missions, we kneel down and pray, 'God bless the distant ones at home,' and then go on about our business" (Amasa M. Lyman, Jour. of Dis., Vol. X., p. 181).

3-8. The Lord assures His servants that He has much people in Perrysburg and vicinity (v. 3), but they must comply with certain conditions, if they would achieve success in their labor among them. They must speak as guided by the Spirit (v. 5) for they would be given what to say (v. 6); and they must speak "in solemnity of heart" and humility (v. 7). If they would accept these conditions, the Holy Spirit would be poured out upon the people and testify of the truth (v. 8).

Speak the thoughts that I shall put into your hearts]

Missionary work is God's work. Missionaries but His messengers. His ambassadors. They must deliver His message to the world. That does not mean that they need no preparation. An ambassador from one nation to another needs a great deal of training to fill that position efficiently and worthily. The ambassadors of our Lord need more preparation than any representative of a mere worldly kingdom. It is a missionary's duty to "get an understanding of the gospel, and teach it, as the Spirit directs"; but to get an understanding of the gospel, he must both study it and practice it. That is his preparation. When he is thus prepared, the Spirit will direct his utterance.

9-12. The Lord recognizes the fact that each of His servants has his own gifts. Sidney Rigdon was qualified to be the "spokesman" of Joseph (v. 9), while Joseph was specially qualified to bear testimony, as a witness (v. 10). Sidney Rigdon had the gift of expounding the Scriptures, and by that means to bring to light the truth. Joseph had the gift of receiving revelations of the truth, by direct communication from God. These gifts were to be utilized in God's service.

"He ceased to speak. He stood erect in terrible majesty. Chained, or without a weapon; calm, unruffled and dignified as an angel, he looked upon the quailing guards, whose weapons were lowered or dropped to the ground; whose knees smote together, and who, shrinking into a corner, or crouching at his feet, begged his pardon, and remained quiet till a change of guards."

13-17. Joseph's thoughts were continually on Zion, and at this time he must have felt very anxious about the Saints. The Lord, therefore, gives him the assurance that Zion will be redeemed (v. 13), and that all things shall work together for good to them that walk uprightly; and to the sanctification of the Church (v. 15). The Church will come out of the fire of persecution, purified, for God will raise up unto Himself a pure people (v. 16). How long a time it will take to raise up a people willing to serve God in righteousness, He does not say. But it will be done. Israel was in Egypt 400 years, and the Babylonian captivity lasted 70 years. But the purposes of God were accomplished.

General Notes

Shortly after the arrival in Jackson County, of the two messengers from Kirtland, W. W. Phelps and Orson Hyde were despatched with a petition from the Saints in Missouri to the Governor of that State, Daniel Dunklin, in which the outrages committed were set forth and redress was asked for. The Governor, in a letter dated October 19th, 1833, advised the Saints to bring suits against the violators of the law, and, in compliance with this suggestion, lawyers were engaged. But the mob was not looking for legal proceedings. They had already broken the law, and their only chance of escape from the consequences was to trample the fragments into the dust. And so, on the 31st of October, 1833, about fifty men, armed with guns, went to a Branch of the Church west of the Big Blue, and unroofed and partly demolished the dwellings of the Saints, and unmercifully beat several of the men, amid the shrieks and screams of women and children. The day following, a little settlement about 12 to 14 miles west of Independence was attacked. The same night a party stoned the houses of the Saints in Independence and broke windows and doors. The store belonging to Gilbert and Whitney was broken open and the goods scattered in the streets. Appeals for protection were ignored by justices of the peace. One judge at Lexicon is said to have advised the Saints to fight and kill the mob whenever the latter came upon them.

On the 5th of November, Independence was crowded with individuals from different parts of the county, all eager for violence. Word reached the Saints in the settlements that several of their brethren were imprisoned, and the lives of all were in danger. A company of about a hundred brethren led by Lyman Wight, was then formed and marched toward Independence. Colonel Pitcher had command of the "militia." He demanded that the Saints leave the county; that those who had arms deliver them to him, and that certain men be tried for murder. The brethren surrendered what few guns they had, and those "wanted" gave themselves up for "trial." The latter were not held. There was no case against them, but the arms were kept, and the mob could now break into houses and molest the people without fear of resistance. On the 5th and 6th of November, women and children fled in every direction before the merciless mob. On the 7th, the shores of the Missouri were lined with exiles. Hundreds of people were seen in every direction. Husbands were searching for their wives, and wives for their husbands; parents for children, and children for parents. Some of the Saints found a refuge in Clay County. Those who fled to Van Buren and Lafayette Counties were soon expelled by mobs. The condition of the scattered Saints was lamentable. "No regular order," writes W. W. Phelps, "can be enforced, nor any usual discipline kept up; among the world, yea, the most wicked part of it, some commit one sin and some another (I speak of the rebellious, for there are Saints that are as immovable as the everlasting hills), and what can be done? We are in Clay, Ray, Lafayette, Jackson, Van Buren, and other Counties, and cannot hear from one another oftener than from you. I know it was right that we should be driven out of the land of Zion, that the rebellious might be sent away. But, brethren, if the Lord will, I should like to know what the honest in heart shall do. Our clothes are worn out; we want the necessaries of life" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. I., p. 457).

As soon as the Prophet received definite information of the expulsion from Jackson County, Missouri, he sent a comforting affectionate letter to the scattered Saints. It was dated December 10th, 1833. In it he said, in part:

"Now there are two things of which I am ignorant; and the Lord will not show them unto me, perhaps for a wise purpose in Himself—I mean in some respects—and they are these: Why God has suffered so great a calamity to come upon Zion, and what the great moving cause of this great affliction is; and, again, by what means He will return her back to her inheritance, with songs of everlasting joy upon her head. These two things, brethren, are in part kept back that they are not plainly shown unto me; but there are some things that are plainly manifest which have incurred the displeasure of the Almighty" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. I., p. 454).

About the time of the expulsion of the Saints from Jackson County, Missouri, particularly on the 13th of November, 1833, there was a great meteoric display. The Prophet writes:

About 4 o'clock a. m., I was awakened by Brother Davis knocking at my door, and calling on me to arise and behold the signs in the heavens. I arose, and, to my great joy, beheld the stars fall from heaven like a shower of hailstones; a literal fulfilment of the word of God, as recorded in the Scriptures and a sure sign that the coming of Christ is close at hand" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. 1., p. 439).
