Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 101.

REVELATION given to Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Kirtland, Ohio, December 16, 1833. At this time the Saints who had gathered in Missouri were suffering great persecution. Mobs had driven them from their homes in Jackson County, and some of the Saints had tried to establish themselves in Van Buren County, but persecution followed them. The main body of the Church was at that time in Clay County, Missouri. Threats of death against individuals of the Church were many. The people had lost household furniture, clothing, livestock and other personal property, and many of their crops had been destroyed. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 456.—Affliction permitted to befall the Saints because of their transgression—The Lord's indignation to be poured out upon all nations—The pure in heart among those who had been expelled from Zion to return—Other stakes of Zion to be established—Blessed state incident to the millennial era of peace—Parable of the nobleman and the olive-trees—gathering of the Saints to be continued—Those who have been oppressed by their enemies to importune for redress—creation of the Constitution of the United States directed by the Lord—Parable of the woman and the unjust judge.

VERILY I say unto you, concerning your brethren who have been afflicted, and persecuted, and cast out from the land of their inheritance—

In his letter to the scattered Saints in Missouri, dated December 10th, 1833, the Prophet stated that the spirit withheld from him definite knowledge of the reason why the calamity had fallen upon Zion. Here is another striking evidence of his sincerity. If he had been in the habit of writing revelations without divine inspiration, he could have done so at this time. But it is perfectly evident that he did not speak in the name of the Lord except when prompted to do so by the Spirit. On the 16th of December, however, this Revelation was received concerning the Saints in Zion, and the Lord (1) states why they had been afflicted (1-3); (2) explains the twofold object of the experience they had passed through (4-8); (3) gives promises concerning the Saints (9-21); (4) commands them to gather (22-5); (5) speaks of the final victory (26-36); (6) reminds them that they are "the Salt of the Earth" (37-42); (7) and that Zion will be redeemed (43-62); (8) sends special instructions to the Churches (63-75); (9) and to the scattered Saints (76-80); (10) applies the parable of the unjust judge (81-95); and (11) closes with instructions and promises (96-101).

1-3. The Spirit of revelation here says that the tribulations through which the Saints in Missouri had passed, had come upon them because of transgression (v. 2). Sin brings suffering, always, inevitably. As surely as fire burns, so surely sin ends in misery. It is a law as well established as the law of gravitation. However, the Lord had not rejected His people. "Yet," He says, "I will own them" (v. 3).

4-8. Our Heavenly Father had two objects in view, in permitting the enemy to afflict the Saints: To chastise them for their sins, and to try them, as He tried Abraham (v. 4). The sins referred to are enumerated. There were jarrings, and contentions, envyings, strife, lustful and covetous desires; the people were slow to hearken to the voice of God, when they had peace, though in the days of trouble they prayed fervently. These were their sins. It behooves us to search ourselves to see whether we are better in these respects than they were.

"Some may ask why we did not tarry at the Center Stake [^1] of Zion when the Lord planted our feet there. We had eyes, but we did not see; we had ears, but we did not hear; we had hearts that were devoid of what the Lord required of His people, consequently, we could not abide what the Lord revealed to us. We had to go from there to gain an experience. Can you understand this? I think there are some here who can. If we could have received the words of life and lived according to them, when we first gathered to the Center Stake of Zion, [^2] we never would have been removed from that place" (Brigham Young, Jour. of Dis., Vol. XI., p. 102).

(a) God Is Merciful.

"We were driven out of Missouri—we were driven from one place to another in Missouri before we were driven out altogether. Then we were driven from Illinois to this Territory. But what of that? I know some men who thought the work was at an end. I remember a remark made by Sidney Rigdon—I suppose he did not live his religion; I do not think he did—his knees began to shake in Missouri; and on one occasion he said, 'Brethren, every one of you take your own way, for the work seems as though it had come to an end.' Brigham Young encouraged the people, and Joseph Smith told them to be firm and maintain their integrity, for God would be with His people and deliver them. I never saw a time that the Saints enjoyed themselves better than when they, apparently, were wading through their deepest troubles; I never saw them more full of the Holy Ghost" (Jour. of Dis., Vol. XI., pp. 25-6).

(b) Enemies Will Be Punished.

10-11. It is no consolation, no pleasure, to the children of God to know that their persecutors are bringing upon themselves the wrath of the Almighty; they cannot glory in the sufferings of anyone; but it is strengthening to their faith to contemplate the unerring justice of God, and to know that "Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap" (Gal. 6:7); for this assures them of perfect justice in the distribution of eternal rewards. Here on Earth men's fortunes do not always show perfect justice, but all will be made right, finally. "I have seen the wicked in great power and spreading himself like a green bay tree; yet he passed away, and, lo, he was not: yea, I sought him, but he could not be found. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: for the end of that man is peace" (Psalm 37:35-7).

(c) Israel to Be Gathered.

12-15. The people were now scattered, but they would be gathered again.

(d) Zion Not to Be Removed.

16-21. The Revelations of God are exceedingly clear and definite in stating that the location of Zion had not been moved, although the people were scattered (v. 17). Heber C. Kimball expresses his faith in this Revelation, as follows:

"I am pretty sure of one thing—we shall go to Jackson County, Missouri; that is, those who do right and honor their calling, doing what they have been told to do. You will be blessed, and you will see the day when Presidents Young, Kimball, and Wells, and the Twelve Apostles will be in Jackson County, Missouri, laying out your inheritances. * * * We shall be there in the flesh,* and all our enemies cannot prevent it. Brother Wells, you may write that. You will be there, and Willard will be there, and also Jedediah, and Joseph and Hyrum Smith, and David and Parley; and the day will be when I will see those men in the general assembly of the Church of the Firstborn, in the great council of God n Jerusalem, too" (Jour. of Dis., Vol. IX., p. 27).

"We are going to try to save ourselves, and when we come to understanding we will then be counted worthy to possess Zion, even the Center Stake of Zion. It is true this is Zion,—North and South America are Zion, and the land where the Lord commenced His work, and where He commenced, He will finish. This is the land of Zion; but we are not yet prepared to go and establish the Center Stake of Zion. The Lord tried that in the first place * * * now it is for you and me to prepare to return back * * * and by and by to build up the Center Stake of Zion" (Brigham Young, Jour. of Dis., Vol. XI., p. 324).

—————

* As resurrected beings; some of the brethren mentioned had already passed away.

—————

22-5. The Lord commands His Saints to gather and to establish themselves in "holy places" (v. 22); that is, in Stakes and Wards of Zion, and prepare themselves for the appearance of the Son of Man (v. 23).

"He comes! The earth shakes, and the tall mountains tremble; the mighty deep rolls back to the north as in fear, and the rent skies glow like molten brass. He comes! The dead Saints burst forth from their tombs, and 'those who are alive and remain are caught up' with them to meet Him. The ungodly rush to hide themselves from His presence, and call upon the quivering rocks to cover them. He comes! with all the hosts of the righteous glorified. The breath of His lips strikes death to the wicked. His glory is a consuming fire. The proud and rebellious are as stubble; they are burned and 'left neither root nor branch.' He sweeps the Earth as with 'the besom of destruction.' He deluges the Earth with the fiery floods of His wrath, and the filthiness and abominations of the world are consumed. Satan and his dark hosts are taken and bound—the prince of the power of the air has lost his dominion, for He whose right it is to reign has come, and 'the kingdoms of this world have become the kingdom of our Lord and His Christ' " (Charles W. Penrose, Millennial Star, Vol. XXI., pp. 581-4).

26-36. In the paragraphs immediately preceding, the coming of the Lord is referred to as the great and important event for which the Saints are to be prepared. This coming marks the beginning of the Millennium. In this section we are told of certain wonderful features that will characterize that period. (a) The enmity between man and beasts shall cease (v. 26), as well as enmity between men; (b) prayers will be heard (v. 27); (c) Satan shall have no power to tempt man (v. 28); there shall be no sorrow because there is no death (vv. 29-31); the light of revelation will shine in its fulness (vv. 32-4); and the martyrs will partake of this glory (vv. 35-6).

"Not what we wish, but what we need, Thy bounteous grace supply; The good, unasked, in mercy grant; The ill, though asked, deny."

"I have no doubt that many of my brethren and sisters have sensibly felt, in various places and at various times, evil influences around them. Brother Joseph Smith gave an explanation of this. There are places in the Mississippi Valley where the influence, or the presence, of invisible spirits is very perceptibly felt. He said that numbers had been slain there in war, and that there were evil influences or spirits which affect the spirits of those who have tabernacles on the Earth. I myself have felt those influences in other places besides the Continent of America; I have felt them on the old battle grounds of the Sandwich Islands * * * We call it the spirit of the evil one; but he has numerous agencies at work, even as the Lord has numerous agencies to assist Him" (Jour. of Dis., Vol. XI., p. 30).

"By-and-by Zion will be built up; Temples are going to be reared, and the Holy Priesthood is going to take effect and rule, and every law of Christ will be obeyed, and He will govern and reign King of nations as He now does King of Saints. Pretty soon you will see Temples reared up, and the sons of Jacob will enter into the Temples of the Lord. What will they do there? They will do a great many things. When you see Zion redeemed and built up—when you see the people performing the ordinances of salvation for themselves and for others (and they will hereafter), you will see simply this (but I have not time this morning to tell you only a little part of it): About the time that the Temples of the Lord will be built and Zion is established—pretty nigh this time you will see (those who are faithful enough), the first you know, there will be strangers in your midst, walking with you, talking with you; they will enter into your houses and eat and drink with you, go to meeting with you, and begin to open your minds, as the Savior did the two disciples who walked out in the country in the days of old. About the time the Temples are ready, the strangers will be along and will converse with you, and will inquire of you, probably, if you understand the resurrection of the dead. * * * They will expound the Scriptures to you, and open your minds, and teach you of the resurrection of the just and the unjust, or the doctrine of salvation; they will use the keys of the holy Priesthood, and unlock the door of knowledge, to let you look into the palace of truth. You will exclaim, That is all plain: why did I not understand it before? And you will begin to feel your hearts burn within you as they walk and talk with you "(Brigham Young, Jour. of Dis., Vol. VI., pp. 294-5).

37-42. The Saints are "the salt of the Earth." Salt is essential to organized life, and a preservative against corruption. But if it loses its savor, it becomes useless. It cannot be made savory again. It can only be cast out and trodden under foot. As the salt of the Earth, the Saints have certain obligations. They must pay more attention to the soul, or the spirit, than to the body (v. 37); they must communicate with God in prayer (v. 38); and they must be humble (v. 42). The Children of Zion had failed, partly, in these respects.

During the Mosaic dispensation, a great deal of salt was used with the sacrifices, and large quantities were stored near the Temple. Rock salt, in time, lost its savor and was then scattered on the pavement.

43-62. This section contains a parable concerning the redemption of Zion. The Saints understood it, as soon as it was explained to them, but to the world it was as unintelligible as was the Parable of the Sower to the Jews. Our Lord, in the discourse found in Matthew 21:33-46, employs, practically, the same parable. The Prophet Isaiah has a somewhat similar parable (5:1-7).

Our Lord, in this part of the Revelation, compares Zion to a choice piece of land, owned by a nobleman who has commanded his servants to plant twelve olive trees upon it (v. 44); to set watchmen round about them, and to build a tower from which the grove could be watched (v. 45). The servants planted the trees, built a hedge, appointed watchmen and began to build the tower. But while they were laying the foundations, they decided that there was no need of a tower (v. 48).

The settlements of the Saints were the olive trees; the officers of the Church were the watchmen, and the Temple, the site of which was dedicated August 3, 1831, would have been the tower from which the movements of the enemy could have been observed by inspiration. But, as nothing more was done to complete that tower, the enemy came by night and broke down the hedge, and the servants of the nobleman fled, leaving the enemy in possession (v. 51).

The nobleman rebuked his servants for their disobedience, but at the same time he commanded one of his men to gather them together again, and to take "the strength of mine house" and proceed to the land where the olive grove had been planted, and rescue it from those who held possession of it illegally (vv. 55-6). Here, then, is a Revelation containing the divine instructions that were carried out, afterwards, by those who formed the historic Zion's Camp.

63-75. The Saints in the various Branches of the Church are here instructed to continue to gather (v. 64). But they must remember that gathering is not the final sorting out of the wheat from the tares. That will be done later (vv. 65, 66). At present all kinds will be found among the gathered Saints. Their gathering, however, should not be in haste, "but let all things be prepared before you" (v. 68): let land be purchased in Jackson County and adjacent counties, and then leave the matter in the hands of God (v. 71). Further, let agents be appointed to purchase the land (v. 73). There was no excuse for delay in acquiring all the land that was for sale, for the Saints had accumulated enough property to redeem Zion, and they could have done it by united efforts (v. 75).

76-80. The scattered Saints are commanded to "importune for redress" (v. 76), as guaranteed by the Constitution and Constitutional laws (v. 77). The Lord suffered, that is, permitted, the establishment of Constitutional government in the United States for the protection of everybody in the enjoyment of religious liberty (v. 78). In the United States no man should be in bondage to another in matters over which conscience is the sole judge (v. 79), although most men like to force others to think and to act as they do. The Lord raised up wise men and inspired them to frame the Constitution for the very purpose of setting men at liberty, and the land was, furthermore, redeemed, to be a refuge for all oppressed, and the home of the free (v. 80).

It is strange that many men should have such a strong desire to force others to adopt their views and practices. It is strange to contemplate that prisons, torture, and death have been employed in the service of compulsory religion. No doubt, most of those who have resorted to such means have done so believing that they were trying to benefit their fellow-men by compelling them to believe and to do right. They did not call themselves persecutors. Nor do their modern successors regard themselves as persecutors, if they slander the members of unpopular churches, boycott them socially, and otherwise, and do everything in their power to prevent people from becoming interested in them. But, no matter how they regard themselves, they are persecutors, and as such they are in the service of Satan, who is the originator of the compulsory plan of salvation, and who has tried to enforce it among men from the beginning. God's kingdom is founded on perfect liberty.

81-95. In the minds of the Saints there would, naturally, be a doubt as to the effect of further petitions for redress. The Lord therefore reminds them of the parable of the woman and the unjust judge (Luke 18:1-8). This judge boasted of his atheism: He feared neither God nor man; yet, because the widow troubled him, by continually coming, he decided to "avenge her"; that is, to settle her case by according justice to her. For she was asking for justice, not for revenge. The Children of Zion are commanded to follow the example of this widow and "importune at the feet of the judge" (v. 86); and to carry the case from the judge to the Governor (v. 87), and from the Governor to the President, if need be (v. 88). And then, if they were not accorded justice, the Lord Himself would deal with the Nation (v. 89). When the leaders of the Nation refuse to do what is right, the Nation will suffer. This is perfectly just in a country where the people are responsible for their rulers.

The Saints did importune the rulers for redress. After having knocked at the doors of judges, they addressed several communications to Governor Dunklin of Missouri. In a letter dated February 4th, 1834, this official acknowledged the duty of the authorities to reinstate the Saints in their homes and to inquire into the proceedings of Col. Pitcher in depriving them of their arms. He also admitted that the entire State was interested in the faithful execution of the laws; "for that which is the case of the Mormons to-day, may be the case of the Catholics to-morrow, and after them, any other sect that may become obnoxious to a majority of the people of any section of the State." He proposed to provide protection for the people while suing in the courts and returning to their homes, but he did not guarantee protection in the continued possession of the homes, and the Saints, therefore, wisely declined to return and invite the mob to commit new outrages. Petitions were sent, and, finally, the Prophet Joseph appealed in person to the President of the United States, hut this only elicited the famous answer, "Your cause is just, but I can do nothing for you."

96-101. Sidney Gilbert is instructed not to sell the Lord's storehouse, and the Saints are directed not to give up their claims. The Lord promises them that they shall come into possession of them in the Millennium, if not before. All things will finally be adjusted. Wrongs will be righted and all injustice removed. Then, and not till then, will there be lasting peace on Earth.

General Notes

When the gospel of Jesus Christ was first proclaimed in this dispensation by the Prophet Joseph and his associates, the world did not realize the immense importance of the movement. Joseph told the story of his prayer and the miraculous answer, the appearance of Moroni, the angel, and coming forth of the Book of Mormon, the restoration of the Priesthood and the organization of the Church. Then, the Witnesses related what they had seen and heard, and committed their testimony to writing. But very few of those who heard this wonderful story understood that a new era was about to dawn upon the world. They were, generally, inclined to regard it as a fairy tale or a deliberate scheme to deceive.

But before the Church was three years old, the world began to realize that a new moral force had been brought into operation. The gospel proved that the religious world was in error in its conception of the Godhead, in its views of the origin, nature, and final destiny of man, in its understanding of the plan of salvation, and its mode of worship. The gospel raised a higher ethical standard than that which was known in the world. It proposed to make men equal in temporal things, and to abolish destitution and poverty; it proposed to make men and women physically strong, by teaching them how to live; it proposed to establish peace in the home, in the fields of industry, and in international relations. It touched the ramparts of Satan at every point of prominence, and it proposed to undermine them, in spite of religious, business, and other interests arrayed against it.

Hence the onslaught on the Saints in Missouri, which God permitted for certain purposes. But that was only an incident. The "little stone" was rolling on. It is still moving in its onward course, and growing, and it is now evident that, in time, it will fill "the whole earth."

——— Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Why the Saints Were Afflicted. The brethren frequently speak of the "center stake in Zion." What they mean is Zion itself. The term "stake" is taped from the writings of Isaiah (Ch. 33:20 and 54:2). See Essentials in Church History, pp. 143-147, and Saturday Night Thoughts—Whitney, page 183.
[^2] I, the Lord, have suffered the affliction to come upon them, wherewith they have been afflicted, In consequence of their transgressions; The Twofold Object of Affliction. He has been called the first martyr of the Church in this dispensation.
