Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Fifth Period, 1834, Sections 102-6

Section 102.

MINUTES of the organization of the first High Council of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, at Kirtland, Ohio, February 17, 1834.

THIS day a general council of twenty-four high priests assembled at the house of Joseph Smith, Jun., by revelation, and proceeded to organize the high council of the church of Christ, which was to consist of twelve high priests, and one or three presidents as the case might require.

After prayer the conference adjourned.

OLIVER COWDERY,

ORSON HYDE,

Clerks.

General Notes

The Prophet carefully guarded, against error, the report of the meeting in which this Council was organized. On February 18, he reviewed and corrected the minutes, and on the following day he assembled the Council to pass on the revised copy. The members then first engaged in prayer, asking God for the Spirit by which spiritual things are discerned. Then the minutes were read three times and, finally, adopted. It now forms what may be called the CONSTITUTION OF THE HIGH COUNCIL OF THE CHURCH OF CHRIST.

A few days before the organization of this High Council, the Prophet addressed a council of High Priests and Elders on the subject of the proper order in such gatherings. "In ancient days," he said, "councils were conducted with such strict propriety, that no one was allowed to whisper, be weary, leave the room, or get uneasy in the least, until the voice of the Lord, by revelation, or the voice of the Council, by the Spirit, was obtained, which has not been observed in this Church to the present time" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. II., p. 25).

"I remember very well the organization of the High Council at Kirtland as a permanent institution. There had been several councils of twelve High Priests called for special cases, but they organized it permanently on the 17th of February, 1834. On the 19th, the first case that was brought up was that of Elder Curtis Hodge, Sen., who, while speaking in meeting, had gone into a spasm, shouting and screaming in such a manner as caused one of the Elders to rebuke him. Brother Hodge was brought before the Council for so doing. A great deal of instruction was imparted to the people, who were assembled in a room, sixteen feet by eighteen. The decision was that the charges in the declaration had been fairly sustained by good witnesses; that Elder Hodge ought to have confessed when rebuked by Elder Ezra Thayre; also that, if he had the Spirit of the Lord at the meeting where he shouted, he must have abused it and grieved it away, and all the Council agreed with the decision" (George A. Smith, Jour. of Dis., Vol. XL., p. 7).

A very important Council meeting was held on the 20th of February, 1834. The attention of the Council had been called to the fact that, at a meeting at Springfield, Pa., held by Elders Orson Pratt and Lyman E. Johnson, some of the members of the Church had refused to partake of the Sacrament, because the Elder administering it did not keep the Word of Wisdom. Elder Lyman E. Johnson argued that they were justified in refusing, while Elder Orson Pratt held that Church members ought to receive the emblems from any Elder who retains his office, or license. Six councilors were appointed to speak on the question. When they had finished, the President gave the decision:

"No official member in this Church is worthy to hold an office, after having the Word of Wisdom properly taught him and he, the official member, neglecting to comply with or obey it."

This decision was confirmed by the vote of the Council (History of the Church, Vol. II., p. 34-5).
