Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 103.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Kirtland, Ohio, February 24, 1834. For explanation of unusual names see heading to Section 78.—Cause of the persecutions permitted against the Saints in Jackson County, Missouri—The Saints to prevail if they follow the counsel of the Lord—Otherwise the powers of the world to prevail against them—The angel of the Lord and the Lord's presence to go before the people—Moneys to be collected and sent up to Zion for the purchase of lands—Individual instructions to certain Elders.

VERILY I say unto you, my friends, behold, I will give unto you a revelation and commandment, that you may know how to act in the discharge of your duties concerning the salvation and redemption of your brethren, who have been scattered on the land of Zion;

On the Redemption of Zion.

In a previous Revelation (Section 101:55-60), it was made known to the Prophet that he would be required, at some future time, to lead "the strength of mine house" to the land of Zion, in order to "redeem" it. The Revelation in this Section was received four months and twelve days afterwards, directing him to begin to gather up the strength of the Church for a relief expedition. Elders Lyman Wight and Parley P. Pratt had just arrived in Kirtland, from Missouri, with a message from the Saints. A meeting of the High Council was called. The messengers from Zion told the Council that the scattered Saints had obtained food and clothing in exchange for labor, and that they were quite comfortable for the time being; but they were grief-stricken because they had been driven from their homes in Zion, and they earnestly desired to know, if possible, how and by what means Zion was to be redeemed. This Revelation, given before the meeting of the Council was held, is an answer to that very question. When the messengers had stated the case, the Prophet had the answer ready. He had prepared to announce that he was going to Zion and that he would call for volunteers to accompany him. The Council endorsed this, and between thirty and forty men volunteered to go, whereupon the Prophet Joseph was elected Commander-in-Chief of the expedition.

In this Revelation, our Lord (1) makes known the reason why the Saints had been driven from Jackson County (1-4); (2) promises them power over the enemy, if they would obey (5-10), and (3) an opportunity to return (11-14); (4) speaks of the redemption of Zion "by power" (15-20), (5) of the mission of the Prophet Joseph (21-8), and (6) of others (29-30); (7) names the number of men needed for the expedition (31-4); and (8) gives sundry instructions (35-40).

1-4. Our Lord reiterates the assurance given on several occasions that the exile was not an evidence that God had rejected His people. It was chastisement (v. 4) for the purpose of correction. It was necessary that the Saints should know this when they were about to furnish men and means for a relief expedition. Chastisement is not never-ending. In this case it was to be only for a "little season." If the Saints would submit and obey the Lord, their chastisement would be over.

It is to be noted that the Saints in Ohio and elsewhere were put to the test by this commandment to form a relief expedition. If they obeyed, Zion would be redeemed; if not, it would remain in bondage, and the churches in other places would also be set upon by enemies and scattered. The Prophet was well aware of this, for on the 21st of April, 1834, in a conference of Elders at Morton, Ohio, he prophesied:

"If Zion is not delivered, the time is near when all of this Church wherever they may be found, will be persecuted and destroyed in like manner" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. II., p. 53).

Little did the Saints realize the purport of this prediction.

5-10. The promise is here given that the Saints shall begin to prevail against the enemies "from this very hour" (v. 6), provided they hearken to the counsel of the Lord. On that condition they are, furthermore, promised that they shall prevail until "the Earth is given unto the Saints, to possess it forever and ever" (v. 7). On the other hand, if they did not keep the commandments of God, they would not prevail, but, as salt without savor, be cast out (v. 10. See also Sec. 101:39-41).

This is not difficult to comprehend. If Noah had not kept the commandment of God and built the Ark, he would not have escaped the flood. If Lot had not obeyed and left Sodom, he would have perished. If Israel had refused to obey Moses, they would not have been delivered from the bondage in Egypt. In any family, if the children refuse to follow the counsel dictated by the wisdom and love of the parents, they will not escape trouble.

11-14. Not only were the Saints to begin to prevail, but they were to be re-instated in their inheritances (v. 11). They were to be established, never more to be "thrown down" (v. 13), except they should pollute the place, by sin (v. 14).

This promise is yet to be fulfilled. The Saints have not yet been in a condition to receive this blessing, but the promise will be kept.

15-20. When the redemption of Zion comes, it will be by "power." The power of God will be manifested, as unmistakably as it was in the exodus of Israel. God will raise up a man who shall lead the Saints, as Moses led His people (vv. 17-18), and God's Presence will be with them, and angels shall go before them (v. 20).

"When God shows forth His power among the Latter-day Saints, it will be because there is unity in regard to doctrine, and in regard to everything that God has placed in their hands; and not only unity, but sanctification on their part, that there shall not be a spot or wrinkle, as it were, but everything shall be as fair as the sun that shines in the heavens" (Orson Pratt,Jour. of Dis., Vol. XV., p. 361).

"Whether that man is now in existence, or whether it is someone yet to be born; or whether it is our present leader [Brigham Young] who has led us forth into these valleys of the mountains; whether God will grant unto us the great blessing to have his life spared to lead forth His people like a Moses, we perhaps may not all know * * * Would to God that his life may be prolonged like Moses, in days of old, who, when he was eighty years old, was sent forth to redeem the people of Israel from bondage. God is not under the necessity of choosing a young man. He can make a man eighty years of age full of vigor, strength and health * * * But whether it be he or some other person, God will surely fulfil His promise * * * Many of us, no doubt, thought, when that Revelation was given, that Joseph would be the man * * * I do not know but that he will yet * * * We are living in the dispensation of the fulness of times, the dispensation of the resurrection, and there may be some who will wake from their tombs for certain purposes and to bring to pass certain transactions on the Earth, decreed by the great Jehovah; and if the Lord see proper to bring forth that man just before the winding-up scene to lead forth the army of Israel, He will do so" (Ibid., p. 362-3).

Led out of bondage] The conditions in the world, notwithstanding our boasted liberty, have produced "bondage." Those who have accumulated wealth command influence and power, and govern the affairs of kingdoms and republics to suit themselves, regardless of the needs of the poor. Class distinction is sharply drawn, and while there is oppression on one side, there is servitude on the other. Militarism is one fruit of existing conditions, and that is slavery in the most aggravated form. Another result is conflict between classes.

"Is this right or wrong? It is wrong, materially wrong, and we have continued in this wrong * * * When shall it come to an end? When will we learn to keep the commandments of God and become one, not only in doctrine but in the bands of earthly things? Such a time must come, and if we do not comply with it, we shall fall behind" (Orson Pratt, Jour. of Dis., Vol. XV., p. 357).

21-8. The Lord here directs His servant Joseph Smith to call upon the young and middle-aged men of the Church to assemble in the land of Zion (v. 22); and upon "wise men" to go there with money enough to purchase all the land that might be for sale (v. 23). If the enemy then came upon them, the Lord would interfere in behalf of His people (v. 25).

To "curse" means to "imprecate," to "call down evil" upon somebody or something; but it also means to foretell evils that will befall those who persist in wickedness, as for instance, when Noah cursed Canaan, by predicting that his descendants would live in servitude, while those of Shem and Japheth would flourish and prosper. In that sense of the word it may be said that our Lord cursed Jerusalem, when He predicted its destruction, though He shed tears over the doomed City. The Saints are not authorized to return evil for evil, but they are commanded to cast off the dust of their feet, as a testimony against enemies, and then leave them in the hands of the Lord (See Sec. 24:15). In this connection it may be stated that Baurak Ale (vv. 21, 22) are Hebrew words, meaning, "The Lord blesses." The Prophet Joseph was sent to the world to be a blessing, not a curse.

29-30. Special instructions are here given to Sidney Rigdon, Parley P. Pratt, and Lyman Wight, regarding the gathering of the strength of the Church for the redemption of Zion. Sidney Rigdon is directed to visit the Branches in the Eastern States, and Parley P. Pratt and Lyman Wight, who had just arrived from Missouri, were not to return, until a company, preferably five hundred strong, had been formed for a relief expedition to Jackson County.

31-4. Five hundred men were needed for the expedition. Five hundred were to be asked for; but, as men do not always comply with the requirements of the Almighty, three hundred, or even one hundred, were to be accepted (v. 33), but the expedition should not be attempted with a smaller number (v. 34).

35-40. The Saints are instructed to pray that the Prophet Joseph may be permitted to go to Zion and organize the kingdom of God upon the consecrated land, and establish the Saints in accordance with laws given, or still to be given (v. 35). Parley P. Pratt is appointed the companion of Joseph on his journey in behalf of the redemption of Zion (v. 37); Lyman Wight is made the traveling companion of Sidney Rigdon (v. 38); Hyrum Smith and Frederick G. Williams and Orson Hyde and Orson Pratt, are to travel together (vv. 39, 40).

General Notes

Five hundred men were called for. On the 5th of May, 1834, one hundred left Kirtland for Missouri. On the way, the company was reinforced and, finally, consisted of 205 members. The organization is known as Zion's Camp. The members were mostly Elders, Priests, Teachers, and Deacons. They crossed the Mississippi early in June, and in the latter part of that month pitched their tents between two forks of the Fishing River, Mo., between Richmond, in Ray Co., and Liberty, Clay Co., There, some of the exiles from Jackson County met them and told them of further outrages perpetrated against the Saints. The appearance at Fishing River of Zion's Camp caused considerable excitement in Missouri, and armed bands went out to meet them. On one occasion they were miraculously saved from a murderous attack, by a terrible storm which prevented the mob from crossing the River. Afterwards Colonel Sconce, of Ray Co., and Sheriff Gillium, of Clay Co., visited the Camp and satisfied themselves that the "Mormon" leaders had no other intention than to try to effect an amicable settlement of the existing difficulties.

On the 27th of May, 1834, Joseph made this note in his journal:

"Notwithstanding our enemies were continually breathing threats of violence, we did not fear neither did we hesitate to prosecute our journey, for God was with us, and His angels went before us, and the faith of our little band was unwavering. We know that angels were our companions, for we saw them."

Zion's Camp was organized on military lines, and the brethren were well armed for defense, but the mission was one of peace and good will. They carried clothing and provisions for the destitute Saints, and their object was to make peace, if possible, between the two classes of citizens. In some respects the mission appeared to be a failure, but in others it was a grand success. During the journey of a thousand miles, with trials and hardships innumerable, the sterling character of some of the men who afterwards became leaders of the Church was made manifest, and the Saints knew they could trust them. During this historic expedition, too, Brigham Young, the great Moses of the latter-day Israel, received his first lessons, under the eyes of the Prophet, in that leadership which became his special mission, after the martyrdom at Carthage, and the exodus from Illinois, and which made him famous in the annals of history. See Whitney's Life of Heber C. Kimball, pp. 77-9.
