Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 104.

REVELATION given to Enoch [ Joseph Smith the Prophet] April 23, 1834, concerning the United Order, or the order of the Church for the benefit of the poor. The occasion was that of a council meeting of the First Presidency and other High Priests, in which the pressing temporal needs of the people had been given consideration. For explanation of unusual names see heading to Section 78.—Some who had broken their covenants in the United Order had come under condemnation—The Lord will not be mocked—Care of the poor an imperative duty of the Saints—The United Order in Kirtland was segregated from that in Zion, Missouri—This separation partly because of transgression on the part of members, and partly because of the scattered condition of the Saints in Missouri—A treasury for the order provided for—On conditions of faith and humility, the Lord promises to deliver his people this once out of financial bondage.

VERILY I say unto you, my friends, I give unto you counsel, and a commandment, concerning all the properties which belong to the order which I commanded to be organized and established, to be a united order, and an everlasting order for the benefit of my church, and for the salvation of men until I come—

Before the brethren of Zion's Camp were ready to begin the journey to Missouri, the Prophet received this Revelation concerning the property belonging to the United Order. This Order had been established by Revelation (See Sec. 82), and its temporal affairs were to be placed on a solid foundation, before the journey to Zion. The brethren were going to face the lion in his den. They did not know whether they would return. Heber C. Kimball says of the departure, on the 5th of May, "Truly, this was a solemn morning to me. I took leave of my wife and children and friends, not knowing whether I would see them again in the flesh, as myself and brethren were threatened, both in that country and Missouri, by enemies, that they would destroy us and exterminate us from the land.

In this Revelation the Lord (1) characterizes the United Order as an everlasting Order (1-3); (2) threatens transgressors of its rules with severe punishment (4-10); (3) directs His servants to organize (11-18); (4) specifies stewardships (19-46); (5) commands them to dissolve partnership with the United Order in Zion (47-53); (6) explains what stewardship means (54-59); (7) directs them to establish two treasuries (60-77); and (8) to pay their debts (78-86).

"Says one, 'What, God revoke a commandment!' Yes, that is what He did in ancient times, and He is the same God yet. He did it for our good; for if that law had been in full force, this people would not have been in these mountains this day. Our selfishness and covetousness are so great that, as a people, we never would have complied with it. A few amongst us might have done so, but as a people we should have been overcome and ruined; but owing to that law being revoked, many of us will now, perhaps, be saved" (Orson Pratt, Jour. of Dis., Vol. XVI., p. 5).

4-10. Some of those who were called to become members of the United Order entered into covenants, as required, but soon broke their pledges because of covetousness (v. 4). Over these the wrath of God hovered as a thunder cloud; they might be destroyed by the enemy at any time (v. 5). Transgressors were to be cut off from the Order, for the protection of the innocent (v. 7), and when they were cut off, the adversary had power over them (v. 10).

"The worship of money, the love of earthly goods, the desire to possess property, to control wealth, has been planted in the breast, soul, and heart of almost every man in the world, from generation to generation. It has been the great, ruling deity, the object worshiped by the whole Christian world. * * * No man seems to desire an office * * * for the public good, but the first thing to be considered is, 'What will it pay?' * * * The god of this world has dominion over the souls of men" (Jour. of Dis., Vol. IX., p. 197).

Very few are saved from this sin. Those who broke their covenants because of covetousness had been saved, perhaps, from profanity, or from drunkenness, or from other sins of a similar nature, but covetousness still held them in chains. If we desire an illustration of the power of the adversary over some men—even some who are Church members—we need only consider their dealings with their fellowmen when a dollar is at stake. When the gospel becomes the "power of God unto salvation" to such an extent that man is saved from selfishness, of which covetousness is a manifestation, there will be no difficulty in living under the rules of the United Order; nor under the celestial law of consecration.

11-18. In this section the servants of the Lord are directed to effect an organization and appoint stewardships. The underlying principle is stated: The Lord, as the Creator of the heavens and the Earth, is the real owner of all that is therein (v. 14); He is perfectly willing that His children should use earthly things for their benefit (v. 15), and this is God's way of providing for them (v. 16). The United Order, then, is a divine institution.

19-46. Specific directions are here given for stewardships. Sidney Rigdon is given charge of the tannery (v. 20). He had, at one time, been engaged in the very useful business of a tanner and was competent in this stewardship. Martin Harris, who was a successful farmer, is given charge of a piece of land (v. 24). He was also to manage a publication business, under the direction of the Prophet (v. 26). Oliver Cowdery and Frederick G. Williams are given charge of the printing office (v. 30). John Johnson is to be a real estate agent (v. 36). Newel K. Whitney is assigned to the mercantile establishment (v. 39). Joseph Smith is given charge of the Temple lot (v. 43). He is also to take care of his father (v. 45), for the Lord recognizes the duty of children to provide for their parents, as well as the duty of parents to care for their children.

47-53. According to a Revelation given April 26th, 1832 (Sec. 82:11, 12), the temporal affairs of the western and eastern divisions of the Church were to be under one management. In this Section instructions are given for the formation of two separate organizations, one to be called The United Order of the Stake of Zion, the City of Shinehah (Kirtland); the other, The United Order of the City of Zion (v. 48). Each was to be independent of the other (vv. 49, 50). The brethren in Kirtland were not to suffer on account of the losses inflicted by the mob on the Saints in Zion. As an independent organization, they would be in a position to render financial aid to the exiles. As a part of the organization in Zion, the financial disaster engendered by mob rule would have affected them also, and they might have been unable to come to the aid of their brethren.

54-5. The Lord assigned certain properties to each of His servants (vv. 19-46), but He retained the ownership (v. 56). They were to manage the property for Him, and they were accountable to Him. Their office, power, and authority were those of stewards.

"But is this all? No. We have here another book, the Doctrine and Covenants, which contains Revelations from God, through the Prophet Joseph Smith, who lived contemporary with ourselves. They are Christ's words, declaring that He was the same that came to the Jews, that was lifted up on the cross, was laid in the tomb, burst the bands of death, and came forth out of the grave. * * * Here, then, is another testimony of this divine truth; hence we have three witnesses" (Jour. of Dis., Vol. XIX., p. 262).

60-77. Directions are here given for the establishment of two separate treasuries. One was to be called The Sacred Treasury of the Lord The proceeds from the publication of the Scriptures were to be kept in this treasury, and they were to be used for sacred purposes, as directed by the Order. The other was to hold all the funds accumulated by the business transactions of the various stewardships (v. 69). This, too, was to be common property, to be used as directed by the Order (v. 71). Each member was entitled to draw upon it, according to his needs, as long as he was in full fellowship (v. 75); but, in case of transgression of the rules of the Order, the transgressor would be subject to the decision of the organization (v. 76).

78-86. The servants of the Lord are here commanded to pay the debts incurred. If they had organized, as directed when the commandment was first given in 1832, and if they had been wise and faithful stewards, they would not have incurred indebtedness, but since they had contracted debts, their obligations must be met. Note, that the Lord expected them to pray for deliverance from debt, and then to work for it. God often answers prayers through natural agencies (vv. 80-2).

General Notes

The commandment to wipe out all indebtedness was obeyed. President Brigham Young says:

"Joseph was doing business in Kirtland, and it seemed as if all creation was upon him, to hamper him in every way, and they drove him from his business, and it left him so that some of his debts had to be settled afterwards; and I am thankful to say that they were settled up; still further, we have sent east to New York, to Ohio, and to every place where I had any idea that Joseph had ever done business, and inquired if there was any man left to whom Joseph Smith, Jr., the Prophet, owed a dollar, or a sixpence. If there was, we would pay it (Jour. of Dis., Vol. XVIII., p. 242).

"We desire to get closer to the mark, to have closer communion with God, to be prepared for the day that is approaching, when we will have to go and build up the Center Stake of Zion, where the Order of Enoch, as is recorded in the book of Doctrine and Covenants, will be established (Ibid., Vol. XII., p. 221).

"I say to the Latter-day Saints that the only reason why we do not take up the subject and enter into the organization of Enoch, or a City of Enoch, is simply this that we have not yet been able to find every item of law bearing upon this matter, so as to organize in a way that apostates cannot trouble us" (Ibid., Vol. XVI., p. 122).
