Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 105.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, on Fishing River, Missouri, June 22, 1834. Mob violence against the Saints in Missouri had increased; and organized bodies from several counties had declared their intent to destroy the people. The Prophet had come from Kirtland, at the head of a party known as Zion's Camp, bringing clothing and provisions. While this party was encamped on Fishing River the Prophet received this revelation. See History of the Church, vol. 2, chaps. 5 to 8 inclusive. For explanation of unusual names see heading to Section 78.—But for their transgressions the people might have been redeemed from their enemies—Unwillingness to impart to the poor condemned—The redemption of Zion deferred—The people to appeal to the officers of the law for redress—Lands in Jackson and adjoining counties to be purchased—Endowment to be given in the House of the Lord in process of erection at Kirtland—The day of calling followed by the day of choosing—The Saints to lift an ensign of peace.

VERILY I say unto you who have assembled yourselves together that you may learn my will concerning the redemption of mine afflicted people—

Zion's Camp arrived at Fishing River on the 19th of June, 1834. On the 22nd, Sheriff Gillium, of Clay County, visited the Camp in order to find out the intention of the brethren. The Prophet addressed him and his companions and then issued a signed statement in which the following occurs, "We are willing for twelve disinterested men, six to be chosen by each party, and these men shall say what the possessions of those men are worth who cannot live with us in the County: and they shall have their money in one year; and none of the 'Mormons' shall enter that County to reside, until the money is paid. The damages that we have sustained in consequence of being driven away, shall also be left to the twelve men; or, they may all live in the County if they choose, and we will never molest them if they let us alone and permit us to enjoy our rights. We want to live in peace with all men; and equal rights is all we ask." The opponents refused to listen to this fair proposition.

The very day on which Sheriff Gillium visited the Camp, the Prophet received this Revelation, in which the Lord (1) reveals why Zion could not be redeemed at that time (1-10); (2) promises Endowments (11-15); (3) rebukes the disobedient and promises rewards to the faithful (16-19); (4) gives instructions for the discharge of the Camp (20-22), and (5) counsel on many subjects (23-32); (6) reiterates His gracious promises of Endowments (33-37); and (7) defines the mission of the Church in the world as one of peace (38-41).

1-10. The reasons why Zion had not been redeemed, and why it could not be redeemed at this time, are stated here.

Do not impart * * * to the poor and afficted] Perhaps the selfishness manifested by Sylvester Smith during the journey of Zion's Camp was quite general. It appears that one evening Parley P. Pratt asked him for some bread, and that he refused to give it, although he was well supplied (Hist. of the Church, Vol. II., p. 153).

"In case the excitement continues to be allayed, and peace prevails use every effort to prevail on the Churches to gather to those regions and locate themselves, to be in readiness to move into Jackson County in two years from the 11th of September next, which is the appointed time for the redemption of Zion. If—verily I say unto you—if the Church with one united effort perform their duties; if they do this, the work shall be complete" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. II., p. 145).

Elder Orson Pratt has this to say:

"When the Saints were driven out from Jackson County, almost all in the Church expected that they would speedily be restored; and a person was considered almost an apostate that would say, they would not come back in five years, or ten at the furthest: but the prevailing opinion seemed to be that it would take place immediately. When Zion's Camp came up, and found the Saints all scattered abroad, what did we hear? Why all in Camp were on tiptoe to have Zion redeemed immediately; perhaps some would stretch their faith and put it off for five years; but those were considered weak in the faith" (Journal of Discourses, Vol. III., p. 17).

The history of the Church shows us that the "little season" extended over more than two years, or five, or even ten. Still, since the Spirit of revelation has characterized it as "little," we may hope that the redemption of Zion will not be postponed for a great while.

11-15. In the 10th paragraph we are taught that the redemption of Zion was postponed until the Saints should have attained more knowledge and more experience. Here we learn that it was necessary that the Elders should be "endowed with power from on high" (v. 11); the Lord had "prepared a great Endowment and blessing" for the faithful (v. 12). They were to have a Pentecostal outpouring of the Spirit, and then they would be in a position to teach the people "the things which I require at their hands" (v. 10). The Elders were not to fight "the battles of Zion" (v. 14); the Lord would do that in His own way (v. 15).

Not many years hence] The time of the enemies of the people of God is short. They flourish only as the flower which stands to-day but tomorrow falls before the scythe of the reaper.

16-19. The Prophet Joseph had been commanded to gather the young and the middle-aged for the redemption of Zion (v. 16), but they did not respond in sufficient numbers (v. 17); some, however, had been faithful, and they were to receive the blessing and Endowment promised in vv. 11-12.

The Prophet, evidently, did not regard the command to gather "the strength of my house" as annulled when Zion's Camp was dismissed; for in the letter to the High Council in Zion, dated the 16th of August, be wrote, "If we do not exert ourselves to the utmost in gathering up the strength of the Lord's house that this thing may be accomplished, behold there remaineth a scourge for the Church, even that they shall be driven from city to city, and but few shall remain to receive an inheritance" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. II., p. 145).

20-2. The long journey being almost ended, permission was given to disband. Those of the Camp who could remain in Missouri might do so; the others would return home as soon as convenient.

On the 3rd of July, 1834, Lyman Wight was authorized to give to every man in the Camp, who had been faithful, a formal discharge.

23-32. The Saints are here instructed on many subjects. They must be faithful, prayerful, and humble, and also discreet. They were not to publish broadcast the Revelations concerning the redemption of Zion, until the proper time came (v. 23). The Saints have ho secret doctrines, no secret practices, but as there is a time for everything, so there is a proper time for the promulgation of revealed truth. Even the disciples of our Lord were charged not to testify, prematurely, to the fact that He was the Messiah (Luke 9:21. See also Matt. 9:30, Mark 5:43).

Another rule to observe is stated in verse 24. The Saints were not to threaten their neighbors with the judgments of the Almighty; nor were they to boast of faith, or mighty works. This follows from their duty of being humble. Humility neither threatens nor boasts.

Further, the Saints were to continue to supplicate the people for justice under the law (v. 25). If they would do this, they might find favor, and increase in numbers (v. 26) and in influence (v. 27), and thus be able to obey the commandment concerning the purchase of land (v. 28). No concerted effort to return to the land purchased should be made, until the army of the Lord had become "very great" (v. 31) and also "sanctified before me."

33-7. The promise of Endowment is reiterated. They were to be received in the Kirtland Temple, when that building should be completed. They were to be given only to those who were considered worthy (v. 35). And if the Elders, after their Endowments, would follow counsel, they would be given power to redeem Zion, after many days.

38-41. Our Lord is the Prince of Peace (is. 9:5). When He came in the flesh, angels heralded His advent, in the song,

"PEACE ON EARTH!"

The mission of His Church, therefore, is one of peace. "The Lord will bless His people with peace" (Ps. 29:11); and they are instructed to pray for the "peace of Jerusalem" (Ps. 122:6). Some churches of the world have proved their apostasy from the Prince of Peace by committing themselves to the policy of blood. The Church of Christ stands for peace among nations, as well as among individuals. It believes that nations should be bound by the standards of morality recognized by individuals.

"Now, therefore, as citizens of the United States and leading Elders in the Church of the Latter-day Saints, residing in the State of Missouri, in behalf of the Church, we the undersigned do make this solemn appeal to the people and constitutional authorities of this nation, and to the ends of the Earth, for peace; that we may have the privilege of enjoying our religious rights and immunities, and worship God according to the dictates of our own consciences, as guaranteed to every citizen by the Constitution of the National and States governments; that * * * we may be enabled to regain and enjoy our rights and property, agreeable to law, in this boasted land of liberty" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. II., p. 128).

General Notes

The object aimed at by the formation of Zion's Camp and its remarkable journey, was the peaceful reinstatement of the exiled Saints in their homes. This object would have been gained, if the Saints had complied with the requests made. The Revelation called for 500 men (See Sec. 103:23, 30) with sufficient means to purchase the land in Jackson County that was for sale. An addition of 500 young, energetic men, and their families, to the number of settlers that had been driven away, especially if they had means enough to make comfortable homes, would have strengthened the Church considerably. Governor Dunklin acknowledged the rights of the Saints to live unmolested in their homes, and he vacillated between the call of duty to protect the victims, and the clamor of the mob. An increase of the number of the Saints might have turned the Governor to the path of duty. He might, if necessary, have called out the militia to maintain order, if the Saints in Jackson County had been as strong as, or stronger than, their persecutors. At all events, there would have been no political incentive for siding with the mob. But the Saints did not respond as liberally as they might have done. In 1846, when the Federal Government asked the exiled "Mormons" to furnish 500 young men to march to California, the response was instantly given. In 1834, when 500 men were asked for, to go to Zion, only about 200 could be found for that purpose.

Zion might have been redeemed even with this number, if they had been united. But a spirit of rebellion developed, and when the Camp came to Missouri, the Lord deemed it necessary to punish the brethren, whereupon the cholera broke out among them. "Our ears," the Prophet says, "were saluted with cries, and moaning, and lamentations on every hand; even those on guard fell to the earth with their guns in their hands; so sudden and powerful was the attack of this terrible disease." About sixty-eight suffered more or less, and thirteen died. A cholera-stricken camp could, of course, exercise but little political influence upon the situation.

The promises of Endowments given in the Revelation were fulfilled in 1836, when the Kirtland Temple was dedicated. Heber C. Kimball tells the wonderful story thus:

"We had been commanded to prepare ourselves for a solemn assembly. At length the time arrived for this assembly to meet; previous to which the Prophet Joseph exhorted the Elders to solemnize their minds, by casting away every evil from them, in thought, word, or deed, and to let their hearts become sanctified, because they need not expect a blessing from God without being duly prepared for it, for the Holy Ghost would not dwell in unholy temples. This meeting took place soon after the House of the Lord had been dedicated * * * When the Prophet Joseph had finished the Endowments of the First Presidency, the Twelve, and the Presiding Bishops, the First Presidency proceeded to lay hands on each one of them, to seal and confirm the anointing; and at the close of each blessing the whole of the Quorums responded to it with a loud shout of Hosanna! Hosanna! etc. While these things were being attended to, the beloved disciple, John, was seen in our midst by the Prophet Joseph, Oliver Cowdery, and others. After this, all the Quorums rose in order, together with the three presidencies; and the Twelve then presented themselves separately and individually before the First Presidency, with hands uplifted towards heaven, and asked of God whatever they felt to desire; and after each individual petition, the whole of the Quorums answered aloud, 'Amen; Hosanna! Hosanna! Hosanna! to God and the Lamb, forever and ever, amen, and amen' " (Whitney's Life of Heber C. Kimball, p. 103-4).

The Prophet organized the High Council of Zion, July 3rd, 1834. On the 9th of the same month, he started for Kirtland, where he arrived early in August.

——— Note
