Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 106.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Kirtland, Ohio, November 25, 1834.—Warren A. Cowdery is named as a local presiding officer—Great blessings promised him on condition of his obedience—Nearness and suddenness of the Lord's future advent.

IT is my will that my servant Warren A. Cowdery should be appointed and ordained a presiding high priest over my church, in the land of Freedom and the regions round about;

On his journey among the churches to gather up the strength of the Lord's House, the Prophet came to the City of Freedom, N. Y., where he was entertained by Warren A. Cowdery. He held several meetings there. One of the converts was Heman Hyde, and shortly after his baptism, March 11, 1834, his parents and thirty or forty others were baptized and organized into a Branch, from which nucleus the light spread and souls were gathered into the fold in all the regions round. In this Revelation, Warren A. Cowdery is called to the office of presiding High Priest over the Branch in Freedom and vicinity (v. 1). His duties are stated (vv. 2, 3). He was to preach the everlasting gospel, and warn the people. He was to devote his whole time to the ministry, and depend upon the Lord for his reward, "for the laborer is worthy of his hire." He was to remember that "the coming of the Lord draweth nigh" (v. 4) and warn the world, lest the day should overtake them "as a thief." Gracious promises are given (vv. 7, 8).

Several events of great importance in the history of the Church transpired in the year 1834, in addition to the journey of Zion's Camp from Kirtland to Clay County, Mo. On the 17th of February the first High Council of the Church was organized at Kirtland, with the Prophet Joseph and his counselors as the presiding officers. On the 3rd of July, a High Council was organized in Clay County, Mo., with David Whitmer, Wm. W. Phelps, and John Whitmer as the presidency. On the same date, David Whitmer was sustained as President of the Church in Zion, in the absence of the Prophet, who was sustained as the First President of the Church. In a conference held on May 3rd at Kirtland, on motion by Sidney Rigdon, seconded by Newel K. Whitney, it was decided that the Church be known as THE CHURCH OF THE LATTER-DAY SAINTS. On June 23 rd. the following were chosen to receive their Endowments: Edward Partridge, William W. Phelps, Isaac Morley, John Corrill, John Whitmer, David Whitmer, Algernon Sidney Gilbert, Peter Whitmer, Jr., Simeon Carter, Newel Knight, Parley P. Pratt, Christian Whitmer, Solomon Hancock, Thomas B. Marsh, and Lyman Wight. On November 29th, the Prophet Joseph and Oliver Cowdery entered into a solemn covenant with the Lord, for themselves and their descendants, that, if He would prosper them and enable them to pay their debts, they would give to Him a tenth part of all that He would give them; also that they would be faithful in the use of that which might be entrusted to their care. On December 5th, Oliver Cowdery was ordained Assistant President, in accordance with the Revelation (Sec. 20:3) that designates him the Second Elder of the Church.
