Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Sixth Period, 1835-9, Sections 107-23

Section 107.

REVELATION on Priesthood, given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Kirtland, Ohio, dated March 28, 1835. On the date named the Twelve met in council, confessing their individual weaknesses and shortcomings, expressing repentance, and seeking the further guidance of the Lord. They were about to separate on missions to districts assigned. See History of the Church, vol. 2, p. 209.—Distinction between the Aaronic and the Melchizedek Priesthoods—The right of presidency belongs to the Melchizedek Priesthood—High authority of the Presidency of the High Priesthood—The Bishopric as the presidency of the Aaronic Priesthood—Duties of the several quorums and of the presiding officers thereof—The Twelve constitute the Traveling Presiding High Council—The Twelve to ordain evangelical ministers, or Patriarchs—Descent of the patriarchal order from Adam to Noah—Bishops to be chosen from the High Priesthood unless literal descendants of Aaron are made known—The order of Church tribunals—No one in the Church exempt from accountability.

THERE are, in the church, two priesthoods, namely, the Melchizedek and Aaronic, including the Levitical Priesthood.

On the Two Priesthoods. Apostles Chosen.

On the 14th of February, 1835, a meeting was held at Kirtland, to which all the members of Zion's Camp had been invited. On this occasion the Prophet Joseph stated that "it was the will of God that those who went to Zion, with a determination to lay down their lives, if necessary, should be ordained to the ministry, and go forth to prune the vineyard for the last time, or the coming of the Lord, which was nigh—even fifty-six years should wind up the scene" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. II., p. 182). The assembly, by vote, expressed unanimous agreement, whereupon the Prophet submitted a proposition for the selection of Twelve Apostles, which was accepted by all present. After an interval of an hour, the meeting convened again, and the Three Witnesses, viz., Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris, in accordance with a previous Revelation (See Sec. 18:37), selected Twelve, to be special witnesses, with them, to the truth of the gospel. Those chosen were, Lyman E. Johnson, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde, David W. Patten, Luke S. Johnson, William E. McLellin, John F. Boynton, Orson Pratt, William Smith, Thomas B. Marsh, and Parley P. Pratt.

Brigham Young relates the following:

"After we returned from Missouri, my brother Joseph Young, and myself had been singing after preaching in a meeting; and when the meeting was dismissed, Brother Joseph Smith said, 'Come, go down to my house with me.' We went and sang to him a long time, and talked with him. He then opened the subject of the Twelve and Seventies for the first time I ever thought of it. He said, 'Brethren, I am going to call out Twelve Apostles. I think we will get together, by and by, and select a Quorum of Seventy from those who have been up to Zion, out of the Camp boys.' In 1835, the last of January or in February, or about that time, we held our meetings from day to day, and Brother Joseph called out Twelve Apostles at that time. He had a Revelation when we were singing to him" (Jour. of Dis., Vol. IX., p. 89).

On the 28th of February, the Church, in council assembled, commenced the selection of men to be Seventies. The Seven Presidents of the First Quorum were, Hazen Aldrich, Joseph Young, Levi W. Hancock, Leonard Rich, Zebedee Coltrin, Lyman Sherman, and Sylvester Smith.

On March 28th, 1835, the Twelve held a council meeting. They were about to separate and go to their various fields of labor. They were humble and contrite, confessing their shortcomings and forgiving each other, and they desired a Revelation for their comfort. "Our worthiness," they said, "has not inspired us to make this request, but our unworthiness." In answer to this humble petition the Revelation in the first fifty-eight paragraphs of this Section was given.

This is a Revelation on the Priesthood. It may be divided as follows: (1) Two Priesthoods (1-7); Authority of the Melchizedek Priesthood (8-12); (3) Authority of the Aaronic Priesthood (13-20); (4) Presiding Officers, (a) First Presidency (21-2); (b) Twelve Apostles (23-4), (c) Seventies (25-6); (d) Valid Decisions (27-32); Duties of the Twelve (33), and (f) of the Seventies (34-5); (5) Standing High Councils (36-7); (6) Seventies to Preach (38); (7) Patriarchs (39); (8) Lineage of the Priesthood (40-52); (9) Adam's Blessing (53-7); (10) Addenda on the duties of the various officers in the Priesthood (58-100).

Opinions differ concerning the character of the Priesthood in the Church of Christ. Romanists affirm that the ministers are priests, in the Old Testament meaning of the word; that they are mediators between God and the people; that they are offering a propitiatory sacrifice in the consecrated emblems, and that, in the absolution, they intercede for sinners, rendering the Sacrifice effectual in its application to individuals. The Roman clergy claim to be priests because the people must draw near to God through them, as Israel through Aaron; because they alone can present the real body and blood of the Son of God as a sacrifice, and because they have the power to bind and to loose, or to forgive sins, on Earth.

Protestants deny this claim. They hold that there are no priests in the Church of Christ. Jesus Christ, they argue, is our only Priest. He alone has access to God. All other men must approach the Father through Him. His death is the only sacrifice that takes away sin, and it is only through Him that the favor of God is conveyed to His people. Clergymen are only His ministers; not priests. In the Old Testament there were priests, but their office was abolished when Christ came. No priestly function, they say, is ever attributed to Christian ministers, in the Word of God. This is the Protestant view.

Romanists err in making the Priesthood a caste, a privileged class, a "hierarchy," with autocratic power over the faith and practice of their fellowmen. Our Lord warned His disciples against the temptation to assume the position of Rabbis and masters; "for one is your Master even Christ; and ye are all brethren" (Matt. 23:8, 10). Romanists have ignored this principle and erected an ecclesiastical empire patterned after imperial Rome. The Protestants err in regarding the Priesthood as abolished in the Church. It is true enough that Christ is the Priest of the New Covenant. He is a Priest "for ever after the order of Melchizedek" (Heb. 7:17). He is "the Apostle and High Priest of our profession" (Heb. 3:1). But, as there was a Priesthood in each of the old dispensations, with power and authority to officiate in His stead, until He came and accomplished the work for the salvation of man, which was typified in the ordinances of those dispensations, so He commissioned His servants and gave them power and authority to officiate in His stead in the ordinances of the gospel, after His ascension. Those who hold this power and authority, hold the Priesthood; for Priesthood means divine authority to act for the Lord, be it as a preacher of the gospel or as one administering divine ordinances, etc. He commissioned the Twelve to continue His work after Him, for He said, "As thou hast sent me into the world, even so have I also sent them into the world" (John 17:18). He delegated to them His power and authority; that is, He clothed them with the authority of the Holy Priesthood. "Fear not," He said, "little flock; for it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom" (Luke 12:32). And again, "I appoint [^1] unto you a kingdom, as my Father hath appointed unto me" (Luke 22:29). But in the Church there is no priest caste, no "hierarchy." Nearly all the male members in the Church hold the Priesthood. Peter had this fact in view, when he wrote to the Church, "Ye also, as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house, an Holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices" (I. Peter 2:5). As many as are living stones in God's Temple—the Church—belong to the Priesthood. "Ye are a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people" (1. Pet. 2:9). The Priesthood embraces the entire people, wherefore the Redeemed sing praise to Him who "hath made us kings and priests unto God and His Father" (Rev. 1:6).

"Although there are two Priesthoods, yet the Melchizedek Priesthood comprehends the Aaronic, or Levitical Priesthood, and is the grand head, and holds the highest authority which pertains to the Priesthood, and the keys of the kingdom of God in all ages of the world to the latest posterity on the Earth, and is the channel through which all knowledge, doctrine, the plan of salvation, and every important matter is revealed from heaven" (Joseph Smith, Hist. of the Church, Vol. IV., p. 207).

"What is this power that is conferred upon us in the holy Priesthood? What particular power do you give when you send a man to some other land to transact business in your name? You give him a power of attorney, authorizing him to transact in your name the business that you wish to be performed; and in that letter of appointment would be conveyed all your power, your authority, and ability to transact that business, even as effectually as if you yourself were present to perform it" (Orson Hyde, Jour. of Dis., Vol. VIII., p. 20).

8-12. There are two divisions in the Melchizedek Priesthood, viz., Elders and High Priests. The Presidency of the High Priesthood have authority to officiate in all the offices of the Church (v. 9). The High Priests, under the direction of the Presidency, have authority to officiate n their own calling, which is to administer in spiritual things, and also in the office of an Elder, Priest, Teacher, Deacon, or member (v. 10). An Elder has authority to officiate instead of a High Priest, when he is absent (v. 11). And the authority of both Elders and High Priests is to administer in spiritual things (v. 12). As the Melchizedek Priesthood holds the right of Presidency (v. 8), Elders and High Priests may officiate in all the offices of the Church, when there is no higher officer present.

"If anybody wants to know what the Priesthood of the Son of God is, it is the law by which the worlds are, were, and will continue forever and ever. It is that system which brings worlds into existence and peoples them—gives them their revolutions—their days, weeks, months, years, their seasons and times, and by which they are rolled up as a scroll, as it were, and go into a higher state of existence" (Brigham Young, Jour. of Dis., Vol. XV., p. 127).

"There is a matter that has of late become a subject of a good deal of conversation * * * namely, that of the High Priesthood, or the place and calling of a High Priest. In the Revelation on this subject I find these words, 'And again, I give unto Don C. Smith, to be a President over the Quorum of High Priests, which ordination is instituted for the purpose of qualifying those who shall be appointed standing Presidents or servants over the different Stakes scattered abroad.' What are they organized for? It is instituted for the purpose of qualifying those who shall be appointed standing Presidents over the different Stakes * * * a sort of normal school, if you please, to prepare men to preside, to be fathers of the people" (John Taylor, Jour. of Dis., Vol. XIX., p. 242).

13-20. The Aaronic Priesthood is also called the Lesser—not because it is inferior in sacredness, but because its scope, being concerned, principally, about "outward ordinances" (v. 14), is restricted to a smaller circle than the Melchizedek Priesthood. Its authority is to "hold the keys of the administering of angels, and to administer in outward ordinances, the letter of the gospel—the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins" (v. 20).

"In all their affliction He was afflicted, and the Angel of His Presence saved them; in His love and in His pity He redeemed them: and He bore them, and carried them all the days of old. The angels that have gone forth at sundry times to execute the decrees of God fully substantiate this fact. Abraham, Hagar, Jacob, Balaam, Joshua, Gideon, together with the enemies of the Lord are witnesses who knew the power and offices of angels on Earth. * * * The action of the angels or messengers of God, upon our minds, so that the heart can conceive things past, present, and to come, and revelations from the eternal world, is, among a majority of mankind, a great mystery" (Millennial Star, Vol. V., p. 180-1).

(a) The First Presidency.

21-2. Three High Priests, chosen and upheld by the Church, "form a quorum of the Presidency of the Church." This Council is at the head of all the affairs of the Church. Its President only is authorized to receive revelations for the Church. He is the Prophet, Seer and Revelator, and, together with his two Counselors, he leads and directs the Church, as Moses did the Children of Israel.

(b) The Twelve Apostles.

23-24. The Twelve bear the title of Apostles, or Messengers, because they are special witnesses of the name of Christ in all the world. They are also called Traveling Councilors. They constitute a traveling Presiding High Council, and from their decisions, when exercising judiciary functions abroad, there is no appeal. Their calling is to direct the affairs of the Church abroad under the instructions from the First Presidency, and to take the leadership of the Church when the First Presidency becomes disorganized, through death or otherwise. They form a Quorum, or Council, equal in authority to the First Presidency. (v. 24).

(c) Seventies.

The Seventies are Elders called to preach the gospel to all the world under the direction of the Apostles. They are the missionaries of the Church and have no local authority of presiding. "The difference between this quorum and the quorum of the elders is that one is to travel continually, and the other is to preside over the churches from time to time; the one has the responsibility of presiding from time to time, and the other has no responsibility of presiding, saith the Lord our God." (Sec. 124:140.) There can never be two or three quorums of equal authority at the same time; therefore in the revelation where it reads that the Twelve Apostles form a quorum equal in authority with the First Presidency, and that the Seventies form a quorum equal in authority with the Twelve, it should be understood that this condition of equality could prevail only when the ranking quorum is no longer in existence, through death or otherwise. When the First Presidency becomes disorganized on the death of the President, then the Apostles become the presiding quorum, or council, of the Church with all the power to organize again the First Presidency, when they fall back again as the second ranking quorum of the Church. So with the Seventies, they would become equal only on the condition that the first two quorums ceased to exist. In regard to the Seventies, this provision, of course, concerns the first quorum of the Seventies.

On the 6th of April, 1837, a solemn assembly was held in Kirtland. It had been ascertained that most of the Presidents of the Seventies were High Priests and that the common practice was to confer the High Priesthood upon Elders when they were ordained and set apart for the Quorum of Seventy. "This was declared to be wrong, and not according to the order of heaven. New Presidents of Seventies were accordingly ordained to fill the places of such of them as were High Priests, and the ex-officio Presidents, and such of the Seventies as had been legally ordained to be High Priests, were directed to unite with the High Priests' Quorum" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. II., p. 476).

"If the first Seventy are all employed, and there is a call for more laborers, it will be the duty of the seven Presidents of the first Seventy to call and ordain other Seventy and send them forth to labor in the vineyard, until, if needs be, they set apart seven times seventy, and even until there are one hundred and forty-four thousand thus set apart for the ministry * * * The Twelve and the Seventy have particularly to depend upon their ministry for their support, and that of their families; and they have a right, by virtue of their offices, to call upon the churches to assist them" (Joseph Smith, Ibid., p. 221).

28 A majority may form a quorum when circumstances render it impossible to be otherwise—

(d) Unity in Decisions.

27-32. There is an essential difference between the rules governing the deliberations of these Church Councils and those that are followed in the deliberative assemblies of the world. In Church Councils every decision must be unanimous (v. 27). In the world, "the majority rules," and the minority is set aside. It is possible to obtain unanimity in the Church Councils, because there is no one there who has any selfish interests to "fight for." In those assemblies everything is done, when the Spirit of the Lord prevails, "in all righteousness, in holiness, and lowliness of heart, meekness and longsuffering, and in faith, and virtue, and knowledge, temperance, patience, godliness, brotherly kindness, and charity" (v. 30). When each member endeavors to conform his views on every question that comes up for consideration, to these requirements, and eliminates all personal preferences, unity can be maintained. In these Councils each member freely states his views, but when the opinion of the majority is ascertained, this is always found to be based on truth, and the minority gladly falls in line. For it is of such Councils that it can be said absolute truth, vox populi, vox Dei.

(e) Duties of the Twelve.

(f) Duties of the Seventies.

34-5. See notes under vv. 25-6.

36-7. At the time this Revelation was given, there were two standing High Councils in the Church: One in Kirtland, organized February 17th, 1834, and one in Clay County, Mo., organized July 3rd, the same year.

"In Kirtland, Ohio, a great many things were revealed through the Prophet. There were then a First Presidency that presided over the High Council in Kirtland; and that High Council and another, which was in Missouri, were the only High Councils in existence. As I have said, the High Council in Kirtland was presided over by Joseph Smith and his Counselors; and hence there were some things associated with this that were quite peculiar in themselves. It is stated that when they were at a loss to find out anything in their Council, the Presidency were to inquire of the Lord and get Revelations on those subjects that were difficult for them to comprehend. * * * All High Councilors, and all Presidents of Stakes, and Bishops, and, in fact, all men holding the Priesthood * * * if they seek unto God with that faith which He requires of us, He will give them wisdom under all circumstances and on all occasions, and the Holy Spirit will never fail to indicate the path they should pursue" (John Taylor, Jour. of Dis., Vol. XIX., p. 241).

This indicates the importance attached to the organization of the High Council in Zion. The standing High Councils in the various Stakes are presided over by the Stake presidency, and their jurisdiction is confined to the Stakes in which they are located.

"An Evangelist is a Patriarch, even the oldest man of the blood of Joseph, or of the seed of Abraham. Wherever the Church of Christ is established in the Earth, there should be a Patriarch for the benefit of the posterity of the Saints, as it was with Jacob in giving his Patriarchal blessings unto his sons."

"December 18, 1833, a number of elders assembled in the printing office in Kirtland and dedicated the printing press, with all that pertained thereunto, unto the service of the Lord. * * * While they were assembled in the printing office on this occasion the Prophet gave the first patriarchal blessings in this dispensation. It was his privilege to do this, for he held the keys of all the authority in the Church, and was spoken of as the first patriarch in the Church because of this fact, in the minutes which were kept at that time. Those who received blessings under his hands on this occasion were: Oliver Cowdery, the father and mother of the Prophet, and three of his brothers, Hyrum, Samuel and William Smith. Oliver Cowdery, who held the keys of Priesthood with the Prophet, also gave a number of patriarchal blessings. Joseph Smith, Sen., was ordained to the Patriarchal Priesthood, to hold the keys of blessings on the heads of all the members of the Church, the Lord revealing that it was his right to hold this authority. He was also set apart as an assistant counselor to the Prophet Joseph Smith." (Essentials in Church History, pp. 168-169.)

"It is the function of their Priesthood to pronounce blessings upon the heads of the people, and more especially to bless those who are fatherless. To them is given the power by the inspiration of the Lord to designate the lineage of the Saints, and in their blessings point out the possibilities to which they can attain through their faithfulness" (B. H. Roberts).

41-52. How this Priesthood descended from Adam to Noah is here recorded. Adam ordained Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch and Methuselah. Seth ordained Lamech, and Methuselah ordained Noah. All these Patriarchs, except Noah, were born before Adam died; so that from him they might have received a full and authentic account of the creation, the fall, and the promise of redemption, as well as the ordination to the Priesthood.

53-7. This is a remarkable account of the last public appearance in a family re-union of our first Ancestor. Seven generations were represented by heads of families, holding the holy High Priesthood, and there were, besides, a numerous attendance. The meeting was held in the Valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman (v. 53). There the Lord appeared (v. 54) and administered comfort to Adam, who prophesied of the future of the race (v. 56).

Archangel] This denotes an office. As one of the arch-angels, or chief messengers, of God, Adam has a special work to perform in connection with the divine plan of salvation. In Daniel 10:13-21 he is represented as having special charge of the Hebrew nation, and in Dan. 12:1 it is said that he will "stand up" for that nation, for its deliverance, at the time of the end. In Jude 9 he is said to have disputed with Satan about the body of Moses, and in Rev. 12 he is represented as being at war with the adversary.

Here ends the Revelation given on the 28th of March, 1835. What follows was received at sundry times.

65-6. The President of the Church is the Presiding High Priest over the High Priesthood, and only through him do the ordinances and blessings come to the Church.

77-84. The Latter-day Saints have been taught not to indulge in lawsuits, if not compelled to. The Church has a perfect judiciary, and the members need not suffer the expenses and inconvenience of so-called legal proceedings. The Teachers are peacemakers. They visit the Saints in their homes, as their friends, and they can generally remove, in their incipiency, all causes of trouble between members. But if they do not succeed, the matter may be taken to the Bishop's Court, where the evidence is heard and a decision may be taken to the High Council of the Stake, and the decision there given is final, unless the First Presidency, after a review of the evidence, orders a re-hearing. The Bishop's Court may, if deemed necessary, excommunicate a member who holds only the Aaronic Priesthood, and disfellowship one who holds the Melchizedek Priesthood. The High Council can excommunicate any member.

"When we take a High Priest and set him apart to officiate in the office of a Priest, or as a Bishop, while he is acting in this calling, do we expect him to officiate as a High Priest? When Bishop Miller finds that the Seventies in his Ward are teaching doctrine that he does not believe in, he has nothing to do with the matter while acting in the capacity of a Bishop. He would say, 'I stand here as your Bishop, and I have nothing to do with the doctrines you teach. I cannot control the higher Priesthood, while in my present calling. I cannot officiate here as an Apostle, as a revelator, as one who has authority to say, Thus saith the Lord, to the people concerning spiritual things' * * * In the capacity of a Bishop, has any person a right to direct the spiritual affairs of the kingdom of God? No. In that capacity his right is restricted to affairs of a temporal and moral nature. He has a right to deal with the transgressor. I do not care what office a transgressor bears in the Church and kingdom of God. * * * What! One of the Seventies? Yes. One of the High Priests? Yes. One of the Twelve Apostles? Yes, anybody that happens to come into this neighborhood and transgress the moral law. On the other hand, can the Seventies try a Bishop? No. Can the High Priests try him? No, unless they call twelve High Priests in the capacity of a High Council; and then you must have the Presidency of the Melchizedek Priesthood to preside over the Council" (Brigham Young, Jour. of Dis., Vol. IX, p. 91).

85-9. Twelve Deacons constitute a Quorum (v. 85); twenty-four form a Quorum of Teachers (v. 86), and forty-eight, of Priests (v. 87). There are ninety-six Elders in an Elders' Quorum (v. 89). There is no given number for a High Priests' Quorum. All the High Priests in a Stake generally belong to the same Quorum, but Brigham Young tells us that, "Three High Priests form a Quorum; five form a Quorum, seven form a Quorum; twelve form a Quorum" (Jour. of Dis., Vol. IX., p. 91).

91-2. The President of the Church is the Moses of the Church of Christ—leader, lawgiver, revelator, judge, and Prophet.

General Notes

It should be noted that the organization of the Church was gradual. The Aaronic Priesthood was first conferred upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, on the 15th of May, 1829. A short time afterwards they received the Melchizedek Priesthood. In June, 1831, other High Priests were ordained. The same year Edward Partridge was called to be the first Bishop in the Church (see Sec. 41). On the 18th of March, 1833, the First Presidency was organized in Kirtland. The Councils of Apostles and of Seventies were organized in 1835. And thus the organization grew and developed, until it reached the indescribable beauty and world-conquering strength which it has attained.

"When the Church is organized, in all its various departments with the President at the head, the Twelve in their place, the High Priests, Seventies, and Elders in theirs, together with the Bishops and lesser Priesthood * * * then the whole becomes as the body of a man, sound and complete in all its members, and everything moves harmoniously and pleasantly along" (John Taylor, Jour. of Dis., Vol. XIX., p. 54).

"A High Priest is a member of the same Melchizedek Priesthood with the Presidency, but not the same power and authority in the Church. The Seventies are also members of the same priesthood (i.e. Melchizedek Priesthood), are a sort of traveling council or Priesthood, and may preside over a church, or churches, until a High Priest can be had. The Seventies are to be taken from the Quorum of Elders, and are not to be High Priests" (Joseph Smith, Hist. of the Church, Vol. II., p. 477).

——— Note

---
Notas:
[^1] Your sins are forgiven you] From this verse and the two following paragraphs it is evident that Lyman Sherman had passed through one of those mental struggles in which faith is tried to the utmost. It had been a question with him whether to go forward, or to turn back. It is evident, also, that he had conquered doubt and had determined to continue in the faith. At this stage of the trial, it occurred to him that he had sinned by resisting the voice of the Lord, and that perhaps he had lost his standing among the brethren. Tortured by this thought, he heard the voice of the Spirit whispering in his soul and prompting him to visit the Prophet and ask for the Word of God through His servant. The very first assurance was, "Your sins are forgiven you." What comfort! The Prophet knew nothing of the mental struggle through which his visitor had passed, or the condition in which it had left him. And yet he uttered the very word needed to restore peace to the troubled heart. And this word was spoken by one who had the authority of the Priesthood. It was no empty phrase.
