Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 109.

PRAYER offered at the dedication of the Temple at Kirtland Ohio, March 27, 1836. According to the Prophet's written statement, this prayer was given to him by revelation. See History of the Church, vol. 2, p. 410.

THANKS be to thy name, O Lord God of Israel, who keepest covenant and showest mercy unto thy servants who walk uprightly before thee, with all their hearts—

General Notes

The dedication of the Temple in Kirtland, on the 27th of March, 1836, was an ever memorable event in the history of the Church. That structure was reared in compliance with Revelations received (See Sec. 88:119; 95:8-9), at a time when the Saints were few and poor, and when to raise the money required (between sixty and seventy thousand dollars) meant a great deal of self-sacrifice on their part. "While the brethren labored in their departments," says Tullidge, "the sisters were actively engaged in boarding and clothing workmen not otherwise provided for—all living as abstemiously as possible, so that every cent might be appropriated to the grand object." And thus they toiled on from the 23rd of July, 1833, when the corner stones were laid, until it was completed for dedication.

In the Revelation given on the 1st of June, 1833, the Lord indicated the special object for which this house was to be built: "I gave unto you a commandment, that you should build an house, in the which house I design to endow those whom 1 have chosen, with power from on high" (Sec. 95:8). It was to be a place in which the Church would receive a Pentecostal baptism in the fire of the Holy Spirit. A special house, consecrated and dedicated, was needed for that purpose. Hence the commandment of God to the Saints concerning this house.

Now the day of dedication had come. The people assembled early, full of joy and gratitude, and they were not disappointed in their expectations. The manifestations of the divine presence were such as to leave no room in the minds of the true Saints for doubt concerning the nature of the work in which they were engaged. Heber C. Kimball relates that during the ceremonies of the dedication, an angel appeared and sat near Joseph Smith, Sr., and Frederick G. Williams, so that they had a fair view of his person. He was tall, had black eyes and white hair; wore a garment extending to near his ankles, and had sandals on his feet. "He was sent," President Kimball says, "as a messenger to accept of the dedication" (Whitney's Life of Heber C. Kimball, p. 103). A few days afterwards. a solemn assembly was held in accordance with a commandment received (See Sec. 108:4), and blessings were given. "While these things were being attended to," Heber C. Kimball says, "the beloved disciple John was seen in our midst by the Prophet Joseph, Oliver Cowdery, and others" (Ibid., p. 104). On the 6th of April, a meeting was held which was prolonged into the night. On this occasion the spirit of prophecy was poured out upon the Saints, and many in the congregation saw tongues of fire upon some of those present, while to others angels appeared. "This," President Kimball says, "continued several days and was attended by a marvelous spirit of prophecy. Every man's mouth was full of prophesying, and for a number of days and weeks our time was spent in visiting from house to house, administering bread and wine, and pronouncing blessings upon each other to that degree, that from the external appearances one would have supposed that the last days had truly come, in which the Spirit of the Lord was poured out upon all flesh," (Ibid., p. 105; see also Hist. of the Church, Vol. II., p. 427). Nor were the Saints the only ones who were aware of supernatural manifestations at this time. Elder George A. Smith rose to prophesy, when a noise was heard like the sound of a rushing wind. All the congregation arose, and many began to speak in tongues and prophesy. And then people of the neighborhood came running together (hearing an unusual sound within and seeing a bright light like a pillar of fire resting upon the Temple), and were astonished at what was taking place. This continued until the meeting closed, at 11 p.m. (History of the Church, Vol. II., p. 428).

The dedicatory prayer opens with an expression of gratitude to God for His faithfulness and mercy (v. 1). Then the Prophet humbly asks Him to accept the house which had been built in obedience to His command (v. 4). It was not a magnificent building, compared with the Temple of Solomon, for instance, but, the Prophet says, "Thou knowest that we have done this work through great tribulation" (v. 5). Then he asks the Lord to bless His people in the solemn assembly that is to be called (vv. 10-13), and to grant that those who shall worship in the Temple may be instructed and learn wisdom (vv. 14-20). He asks for blessings upon the servants of the Lord (v. 22), and on the Saints generally (vv. 24-8), and that the enemies may be confounded (vv. 29-31). He prays for all nations (v. 54), for kings, princes, etc., (vv. 55-8); for the Church (v. 59); for the children of Jacob; the children of Judah (v. 64); for Israel (v. 67); and then he prays for himself and his house (vv. 68-70); for the officers of the Church (v. 71), and for the Church (vv. 72-6). This remarkable prayer can be studied, profitably, in connection with the dedicatory prayer of King Solomon. See I. Kings 8:23-53, and II. Chron. 6: 14-42.

Elder George A. Smith says of the Kirtland Temple:

"We considered it a very large building. Some 960 could be seated, and there would be room for a few to stand; the congregation was swelled to a little over a thousand persons at the time of the dedication. It was a trial of faith. The Elders from every part of the country had come together. * * * The congregation was so large that we could not all get in; and when the house was full, then, of course the doors were closed and no more admitted. This caused Elder Frazier Eaton, who had paid $700 towards building the house, to apostatize, because he did not get there early enough to the meeting. When the dedication prayer was read by Joseph, it was read from a printed copy. This was a great trial of faith to many, 'How can it be that the Prophet should read a prayer?" (Jour. of Dis., Vol. XI., p. 9).

"The erection of the Temple at Kirtland seemed to increase the hostile opposition to which the Church had been subjected since its organization; and persecution soon became so violent that all of the Saints who could dispose of their property and leave did so and joined their fellow religionists in Missouri. Within two years following the dedication, a general exodus of the Saints had taken place, and the Temple soon fell into the hands of the persecutors" (Dr. James E. Talmage, The House of the Lord, p. 123).

Nor is this to be wondered at. The rearing of a Temple of God in the world is the construction of a citadel by the followers of Prince Immanuel in the territory claimed by Diabolus. Hence his rage when the people of God build Temples. But the Temple in Kirtland served its divine purpose, as did that in Nauvoo, though both were abandoned. In it the Saints received that power from on high which enabled the Church to withstand, successfully, the attacks of all enemies. Owing to that baptism by the Holy Spirit received in the Temples, the Church, notwithstanding persecution, exile, and apostasy, has grown in spiritual power and become able to make itself felt in the world as a regenerating force. But for the Temples and the communion with God established through the Temple service, the Church might have been overwhelmed in the persecutions of Missouri and Illinois, just as the Primitive Church might have perished in the early persecutions but for the power it received on the day of Pentecost. Comp. Acts. 1:8.
