Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 110.

VISIONS manifested to Joseph Smith the Prophet, and Oliver Cowdery, in the Temple at Kirtland, Ohio, April 3 1836. The occasion was that of a Sabbath day meeting. The Prophet prefaces his record of the manifestations with these words: In the afternoon, 1 assisted the other presidents in distributing the Lord's Supper to the Church, receiving it from the Twelve, whose privilege it was to officiate at the sacred desk this day. After having performed this service to my brethren, I retired to the pulpit, the veils being dropped, and bowed myself, with Oliver Cowdery, in solemn and silent prayer. After rising from prayer, the following vision was opened to both of us.—Personal manifestations of the Lord Jesus Christ—His acceptance of the Temple—Visitation by Moses and his commitment of the keys of the gathering—Visitation by Elias and his conferment of authority—Visitation by Elijah in direct fulfilment of Malachi's prediction.

THE veil was taken from our minds, and the eyes of our understanding were opened.

There were two stands, one on the west end and one on the east ends each consisting of four pulpits, one rising above the other, like terraces. The pulpits on the west end were reserved for presiding officers of the Melchizedek Priesthood, and those on the east end for the Aaronic Priesthood. Each of these pulpits could be separated from the others by means of veils of painted canvas, which could be let down or rolled up at pleasure.

On Sunday, April 3rd, 1836, in the afternoon, after the Sacrament, the Prophet Joseph and Oliver Cowdery retired to the pulpit in order to engage in silent prayer. The veils were dropped. When they rose from their devotion, the visions recorded in this Section were given to both. (1) Our Lord appears (1-3); (2) His message is delivered to them (4-10); (3) Moses appears (11); (4) Elias appears (12); (5) Elijah appears (13-16).

1-3. Glorious manifestations had indeed been given during the dedication services of this sanctuary. This vision surpasses any of those previously granted, for our Lord Himself indeed came to His Temple, "suddenly," as predicted (Mal. 3:1).

Rushing of great waters] There is wonderful harmony in the apparently unending tune of a waterfall. Some one with an analytical ear claims to have found that the sound produced by a cataract is composed by the chord C, E, G. and a deep F. The Song of the Redeemed sounded to the Revelator "as the voice of many waters," accompanied by the voice of thunder and the music of harps. It was at once majestic, awe-inspiring, and sweet.

You are clean] He whose sins are forgiven is clean.

Therefore * * * rejoice] The wonderful manifestations they had witnessed were not comparable to the fact that their sins were forgiven. Jesus said to the Seventy: "In this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you; but rather rejoice, because your names are written in heaven" (Luke 10:20).

7-10. I have accepted this house] This verse and the following three paragraphs contain a direct answer to the dedicatory prayer. But the condition is,—"If my people will keep my commandments, and do not pollute this holy house" (v. 8). When His people suffer His Sanctuary to be polluted, He is not greatly concerned if the hordes of Nebuchadnezzar carry away the consecrated vessels for Belshazzar to use in drunken orgies; or if the Roman soldiers level its walls with the ground and run the plow over it, so as to make sure that not one stone is left undisturbed.

"By it [the Book of Mormon] we learn that our Western Indians are descendants of that Joseph who was sold into Egypt, and that the land of America is a promised land unto them, and unto it all the tribes of Israel will come, with as many of the Gentiles as shall comply with the requisitions of the new covenant. But the tribes of Judah will return to old Jerusalem. The City of Zion, spoken of by David in the 102nd Psalm, will be built upon the land of America, 'and the ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to Zion, with songs of everlasting joy upon their heads' (Is. 35:10), and then they will be delivered from the overflowing scourge that shall pass through the land. But Judah shall obtain deliverance at Jerusalem. See Joel 2:32, Isa. 26:20-1; Jer. 31:12; Ez. 34:11-13" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. I., p. 315).

"The spirit of Elias is first, Elijah second, and Messiah last. Elias is a forerunner to prepare the way, and the spirit and power of Elijah is to come after, holding the keys of power, building the Temple to the capstone, placing the seals of the Melchizedek Priesthood upon the house of Israel, and making all things ready; then Messiah comes to His Temple, which is last of all. Messiah is above the spirit and power of Elijah, for He made the world, and was that spiritual Rock unto Moses in the wilderness. Elijah was to come and prepare the way and build up the kingdom before the coming of the great day of the Lord, although the spirit of Elias might begin it" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. VI., p. 254).

Elias was the representative of the Patriarchal dispensation; Moses, of the Mosaic, and Elijah of the dispensation preparatory to the coming of the Lord. Each delegated part of his authority and mission to the Prophet Joseph.
