Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 111.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Salem, Massachusetts, August 6, 1836. The Prophet with one of his Counselors and two other Elders had journeyed from Kirtland, Ohio, to Salem, Massachusetts; and, at their destination had entered upon the work of teaching the people from house to house, and preaching publicly as opportunity presented. See History of the Church, vol. 2, p. 463.—Directions for further labor—The Lord's assurances as to Zion.

I, THE Lord your God, am not displeased with your coming this journey, notwithstanding your follies.

On the 25th of July, 1836, the Prophet Joseph, in company with Sidney Rigdon, Hyrum Smith, and Oliver Cowdery, left Kirtland for a mission to the East. They passed through Albany, New York, Providence, Boston, and arrived, early in August, in Salem, Mass., where they hired a hall in which they held meetings for about a month, and visited sections of the surrounding country. While there, this Revelation was received.

Inquire diligently concerning the more ancient inhabitants and founders of this city] History is, perhaps, the most useful knowledge a missionary can have, next to a thorough understanding of the principles of the gospel, but "ancient inhabitants" refers more particularly to the ancestors of the Prophet. The Revelation was given at Salem, the county seat of Essex County, Massachusetts. It was in that county that Robert Smith, the first of the Smith family in America, settled. It was the residence of many more of the pioneer immigrants to America, whose descendants joined the Church. At Salem, the county seat, the records for all the towns in the county were kept, and the Smiths' record, among others, were there. The matter of genealogy evidently entered into the inquiry concerning the "ancient inhabitants," for a purpose which was manifest later, of the salvation of the dead.

General Notes

The Prophet Joseph notes the persecution in the early days of Baptists and Quakers in Boston; the insane prosecutions of witches at Salem, and the destruction, in more recent days, by a mob, of a Catholic convent near Charleston, and adds:

"Well did the Savior say concerning such, 'By their fruits you shall know them.' And if the wicked mob who destroyed Charleston Convent, and the cool, calculating religious lookers on, who inspired their hearts with deeds of infamy, do not arise, and redress the wrong, and restore the injury four-fold they, in turn, will receive of the measure they have meted out, till the just indignation of a righteous God is satisfied. When will man cease to war with man, and wrest from him his sacred rights of worshiping his God according as his conscience dictates? Holy Father, hasten the day!" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. II., p. 465).

Most of the famous Reformers of the world have clamored for religious liberty for themselves and their own followers; the Prophet Joseph demanded liberty of conscience for all men and all religions.
