Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 112.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to Thomas B. Marsh, at Kirtland, Ohio, July 23, 1837. The word of the Lord unto Thomas B. Marsh, concerning the Twelve Apostles of the Lamb. The Prophet records that this revelation was received on the day on which the Gospel was first preached in England. Thomas B. Marsh was at this time president of the quorum of the Twelve Apostles.—The Twelve to send the gospel abroad among all nations—They are to act under the direction of the First Presidency—Others may be authorized by the Twelve for ministry among the nations—The keys of power in the Priesthood committed to the First Presidency and the Twelve—The present designated as the dispensation of the fulness of times.

VERILY thus saith the Lord unto you my servant Thomas: I have heard thy prayers; and thine alms have come up as a memorial before me, in behalf of those, thy brethren, who were chosen to bear testimony of my name and to send it abroad among all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people, and ordained through the instrumentality of my servants.

At the end of the year 1836 and the beginning of 1837, a spirit of disaffection made itself manifest among the Saints in Kirtland. The United States was passing through a financial crisis, brought about by over-speculation, and other causes, and the Saints who had been drawn into the maelstrom suffered with the rest of the victims. "As the Saints," says Eliza R. Snow, "drank in the love and spirit of the world, the Spirit of the Lord withdrew from their hearts, and they were filled with pride and hatred towards those who maintained their integrity." George A. Smith, speaking of these times, says, "A man that would stand up in the streets and say he was Joseph's friend, could not get a greater compliment than being called a 'lick-skillet.' Joseph had few friends; but among the leading Elders of the Church in Kirtland, the High Council, one of the members of the First Presidency, some of the seven Presidents of the Seventies, and a great many others were so darkened that they went astray in every direction * * * They boasted of the talent at their command, and what they would do. Their plan was to take the doctrines of the Church, such as repentance, baptism for the remission of sins, throw aside the Book of Mormon, the Prophet and Priesthood, and go and unite the whole Christian world under these doctrines" (Jour. of Dis., Vol. XI., p. 11). They even went so far as to claim that the Temple was theirs. The Prophet says:

"In this state of things, and but a few weeks before the Twelve were expecting to meet in full Quorum * * * God revealed to me that something new must be done for the salvation of His Church. And on, or about, the 1st of June, 1837, Heber C. Kimball, one of the Twelve, was set apart by the spirit of prophecy and revelation, prayer and laying on of hands of the First Presidency, to preside over a Mission to England, to be the first foreign mission of the Church of Christ in the last days" (Hist. of the Church, Vol.II., p. 489).

Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde, Willard Richards, and Joseph Fielding left for this mission on the 13th of June, 1837, accompanied, as far as Fairport, on Lake Erie, by Brigham Young and others. In New York City, they were joined by John Goodson, Isaac Russel, and John Snyder. The party arrived in Liverpool, England, on the 20th of July, 1837, and proceeded to Preston, where Heber C. Kimball, on the 23rd, preached the first sermon in a chapel belonging to the congregation of the Rev. James Fielding, a brother of Joseph Fielding.

The Revelation in this Section was given through Joseph, the Prophet. to Thomas B. Marsh concerning the Twelve Apostles, on the very same day on which the first gospel sermons were preached at Preston, England.

In this Revelation the Lord (1) addresses Thomas B. Marsh on his own status (1-11); (2) gives him instructions concerning the Twelve (12-22); (3) concerning their duties to the world (23-32); and (4) closes with an admonition and promises (33-4).

Thou shalt send forth my word] It is the office and calling of an Apostle to preach the gospel, administer the ordinances of the Church, heal the sick, and perform mighty works, plant and set churches in order, and ordain to the Priesthood and offices in the Church (Comp. Matt. 10:1, 28:19; Acts 14:23; I. Cor. 3:6.

12-13. Our Lord instructs the President of the Council to continue to pray for the members, and also to admonish them "sharply." Admonition without prayer is barren of results. He promised to feel after them. when they had passed through the tribulations awaiting them because they had yielded to temptations. And then, if they would not harden their hearts, they would be converted and healed.

Orson Hyde, who had imbibed of the spirit of speculation, freely acknowledged his faults and asked forgiveness. Parley P. Pratt, too, at one time was overcome by the evil spirit, of strife, but, he says, "l went to Brother Joseph Smith in tears, and with a broken heart and contrite spirit, confessed wherein I had erred. * * * He frankly forgave me, prayed for me, blessed me." Others did not repent. Luke S. Johnson, Lyman E. Johnson, and John F. Boynton were rejected and disfellowshiped by the Church on the 3rd of September, 1837, less than a month and a half after this Revelation was given.

16-20. The Prophet Joseph, Sidney Rigdon, and Hyrum Smith were the First Presidency, and on them rested the burden of all the Churches (v. 18). But the Twelve had the authority (keys) to regulate the affairs of the Church among all nations (v. 16). "Whosoever receiveth my word receiveth me, and whosoever receiveth me, receiveth those (the First Presidency) whom I have sent" (v. 20). Our Lord does not visit all men in person, but He sends His servants, His ambassadors. Those who reject these, would also reject Him, if He came in person to them.

23-7. In these paragraphs the Spirit indicates that a storm was about to burst over the Church. "Darkness"—the very opposite of the light of revelation—"covereth the earth" * * * "and all flesh has become corrupt," as in the days of Noah. For that reason, "a day of wrath, a day of burning, a day of desolation, of weeping, of mourning," is coming, "as a whirlwind," and "upon my house shall it begin." The day of wrath came, and the Church was first sifted. Those who professed to be Saints and were not, were separated from the Church, through persecution, and the Church itself was then brought to a place of safety, in the mountain chambers.

General Notes

In the fall of 1833, the Saints were expelled from Jackson County, Mo. Many of the exiles settled in Clay County. For three years they enjoyed peace there, but on the 29th of June, 1836, they were requested, by a mass meeting, held at Liberty, to move on to a place "where the manners the habits, and customs of the people would be more consonant with their own." No charge was preferred against them; only their religion was not "consonant" with the habits and customs of their neighbors. The Saints after a protest as citizens of the United States, agreed to leave, and within three months they were on their way to a wilderness almost unoccupied in the Shoal Creek region, where they settled and organized a county government of their own. They named their new location Caldwell County, and founded the city of Far West there, during the winter of 1836-87.

In Kirtland the spirit of apostasy continued rampant. Warren Parrish, John F. Boynton, Joseph Coe, and others, combined with some Missouri Elders and planned the destruction of the Church. Outsiders joined them. Brigham Young, who had exposed the villainy of some of them-in connection with the failure of the Kirtland Bank-became an object of their rage, and he left for Missouri on the 22nd of December, 1837. Three weeks later, the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon fled. They arrived in Far West, about the middle of March, 1838.

In Kirtland, on the 3rd of September, 1837, Frederick G. Williams had been rejected as one of the First Presidency, and Hyrum Smith sustained in his place. Lyman E. Johnson, Luke S. Johnson, and John F. Boynton, three Apostles; John Gould, one of the Presidents of Seventies, and several High Councilors were also rejected.

In Far West, at the April conference, Thomas B. Marsh, Brigham Young, and David W. Patten were sustained Presidents over the Church n Missouri, and under their administration Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, Luke S. and Lyman E. Johnson, John F. Boynton, and William E. McLellin were excommunicated.*
