Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 115.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Far West, Missouri, April 26, 1838, making known the will of God concerning the building up of that place, and of the Lord's House. This revelation is addressed to the presiding officers of the Church.—The official name, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, confirmed by the Lord—Far West to be a holy and consecrated place—Commandment to build a house of the Lord there—The First Presidency not to incur debts for the building of a house unto the Lord.

VERILY thus saith the Lord unto you, my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., and also my servant Sidney Rigdon, and also my servant Hyrum Smith, and your counselors who are and shall be appointed hereafter;

1-4. This Revelation is addressed to the First Presidency and their counselors; the Presiding Bishop in Zion and his counselors; the High Council in Zion, and all the Elders and members of the Church.

Bible scholars have said that since the name "Christ" is a title which means, "the Anointed One," sometimes interpreted "the Messiah," it ought to have the definite article, and we ought to say, "Jesus, the Christ, and not Jesus Christ, as given in the name of the Church. These learned men have overlooked the fact that the name of our Redeemer is "Jesus Christ," and this name refers to him individually as a being as well as to His title. We, therefore, disagree with them, and maintain that we should not use the definite article except in the case where we are referring to the Messiahship of our Redeemer. At other times when referring to His name, we should say "Jesus Christ." The greatest reason why we should do this is because our Lord calls Himself by that name repeatedly in the revelations to the Church.

"Wherefore, as I said unto you, it must needs be expedient that Christ—for in the last night the angel spake unto me that this should be his name—should come among the Jews." (2 Nephi 10:3.)

5-6. Standard for the nations] The truth revealed to the Saints is their "light," and it must be sent forth and become a "standard" for the nations. In the latter days, many people shall say, "Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord * * * and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths" (Is. 2:3.) The Saints should raise a standard for the nations, as regards moral, religious, and political conduct. They must lead the world, not ape its fashions. The gathering is to enable them to raise God's standard high.

7-16. The command is here given to build a Temple at Far West (v. 8). The date of beginning the work is appointed (v. 10); the important instruction is given that indebtedness should not be contracted by Temple construction (v. 13), and that sanctuaries must be built according to the plan revealed (vv. 14-16).

At this time there were about 150 houses at Far West, and among them were stores, hotels, and a fine school house. The City had sprung up, as by magic, in the midst of a rolling prairie. It might have been a large center of population today, into which would have been poured the wealth of continents, instead of a spot in a desert, but for the bigotry and strange madness of the neighbors.

The corner stones of the Temple were laid on the 4th of July, 1838. The excavation, one historian says, 120 by 80 feet in area, and 5 feet in depth was completed in half a day, more than 500 men being employed in the work. Little else was done, however, for the storm of persecution broke loose in all its fury, and the Saints at that place went into exile again.

17-19. It is quite probable that if the Saints had gathered in greater numbers and built up their Stakes and cities more rapidly, the enemies would have had less power to execute their designs. That they did not do their duty in this respect, may be inferred from Section 117:1-6.
