Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 9.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to Oliver Cowdery, at Harmony, Pennsylvania, April, 1829. Oliver is admonished to patience, and is urged to be content to write, for the time being, at the dictation of the translator, rather than to attempt to translate.—It is not sufficient for one merely to ask for a divine gilt, without prayerful thought and study—Oliver loses such small measure of the gift of translation as he had temporarily possessed.

BEHOLD, I say unto you, my son, that because you did not translate according to that which you desired of me, and did commence again to write for my servant, Joseph Smith, Jun., even so I would that ye should continue until you have finished this record, which I have entrusted unto him.

It seems that Oliver Cowdery, although he had been promised the gift to translate, neglected to seek diligently to obtain it, or that he neglected to cultivate it. For this he was gently rebuked. He did, however, continue to write, as the Prophet dictated. For this he was commended.

"I have seen men who belonged to this kingdom, and who really thought that if they were not associated with it, it could not progress. One man especially, whom I now think of, was peculiarly gifted in self-reliance and general ability. He said as much to the Prophet Joseph, a number of times; as much as to say that if he left this kingdom, it could not progress any further. I speak of Oliver Cowdery. He forsook it, and it still rolled on and still triumphed over every opposing foe, and bore off safely all those who clung to it" (Journal of Discourses, Vol. XI., p. 252).

God does not need any one in particular. We need Him. Oliver Cowdery seems to have lacked humility until, after his experience outside the Church, he returned to the fold. Then he was humble. To the special High Council that heard his case, in November, 1848, he said: "I am not a member of the Church, but I wish to become a member of it. I wish to come in at the door. I know the door. I have not come here to seek precedence. I come humbly and throw myself upon the decisions of this body, knowing as I do, that its decisions are right and should be obeyed" (Andrew Jenson, Historical Record, p. 201).

General Notes

"Other records" are referred to in the 2nd paragraph of this Section. On that subject President Brigham Young makes the following statement:

"When Joseph got the plates, the angel instructed him to carry them back to the hill Cumorah, which he did. Oliver says that when Joseph and Oliver went there, the hill opened, and they walked into a cave, in which there was a large and spacious room. He says he did not think. at the time, whether they had the light of the sun, or artificial light; but it was just as light as day. They laid the plates on a table; it was a large table that stood in the room. Under this table there was a pile of plates as much as two feet high, and there were altogether in this room more plates than, probably, many wagon loads; they were piled up in the corners and along the walls. The first time they went there, the sword of Laban hung upon the wall; but when they went again, it had been taken down and laid upon the table across the gold plates; it was unsheathed, and on it were written these words, 'This sword will never be sheathed again until the kingdoms of this world become the kingdom of our God and His Christ.' I take the liberty of referring to those things so that they will not be forgotten and lost. Carlos Smith was a young man of as much veracity as any young man we had, and he was a witness to these things. Samuel Smith saw some things, and Hyrum saw a good many things, but Joseph was the leader.

"Now, you may think I am unwise in publicly telling these things, thinking, perhaps, I should preserve them in my own breast; but such is not in my mind. I would like the people called Latter-day Saints to understand some little things with regard to the workings and dealings of the Lord with His people here upon the earth. I could relate to you a great many more, all of which are familiar to many of our brethren and sisters" (Journal of Discourses, Vol., XIX., p. 38).
