Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 117.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Far West, Missouri, July 8, 1838, concerning the immediate duties of certain Elders, William Marks, Newel K. Whitney, Oliver Granger.—imperative commands—What is property unto the Lord?

VERILY thus saith the Lord unto my servant William Marks, and also unto my servant Newel K. Whitney, let them settle up their business speedily and journey from the land of Kirtland, before I, the Lord, send again the snows upon the earth.

The Lord had commanded the Saints to gather and build up Far West speedily (See Sec. 115:17). A company of 515 souls, known as the Kirtland Camp, left Kirtland on the 6th of July, 1838, for Zion. On the 14th of September, it appears only 260 members were left, the others having been scattered "to the four winds." The camp arrived in Adam-ondi-Ahman on the 4th of October. Neither Marks, Whitney, nor Granger were members of this company. Joseph Smith at Far West had no means of knowing, at that time, who had, or who had not, left for Zion; but the Lord knew. Hence this Revelation in which He (I) calls William Marks and Newel K. Whitney to come to Zion and instructs the Saint concerning the property in Kirtland (1-6); (2) promises them blessings, if they will obey (7-11); and (3) gives instructions to Oliver Granger (12-16).

1-6. The Saints had private property in Kirtland, and there was property belonging to the Church. Many of them lingered there, reluctant to sacrifice their temporal interests. Our Lord regards this disposition as a sin (v. 4), and calls upon the people to repent and to let the property go for the liquidation of debt (v. 5). He would recompense them for any sacrifice they might make in His service.

12-16. Oliver Granger was a man of faith and business ability—two qualities which form a rare combination. He characterized the Kirtland Camp as the greatest undertaking since the organization of the Church, and he firmly believed that God would bless that endeavor (Hist. of the Church, Vol. III., p. 96). When the Prophet fled from Kirtland, he appointed Granger his business agent, and so well did he perform this duty that he was commended by business men. At a conference held at Quincy, May 4th to 6th, 1839, he was appointed to return to Kirtland and take charge of the Temple and Church there. This makes the concluding verses of the Revelation perfectly clear. His name is to be held in remembrance for his faithful services as a man of business, having sanctified his talent to the service of the Lord.
