Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 119.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Far West, Missouri, July 8, 1838, in answer to the supplication: O Lord, show unto thy servants how much thou requirest of the properties of thy people for a tithing.

VERILY, thus saith the Lord, I require all their surplus property to be put into the hands of the bishop of my church in Zion,

The law of tithing, as now understood, had not been given to the Church previous to this Revelation. The term "tithing" in the prayer quoted in the headlines, and in previous Revelations (64:23; 85:3; 97:11), is, therefore, synonymous with "free-will offering," or "contribution" to the Church funds. The question presented in the petition to the Almighty was not how much a tenth part of the property of the people amounted to, but how much of that property He required for sacred purposes. The answer was this Revelation on the Law of Tithing. The Lord required, first, "all the surplus property" (v. 1), for the building of temples, etc. (v. 2); this is the "beginning of tithing" (v. 3); then He required one-tenth of all the interest annually (v. 4). This law was to become obligatory upon all who gathered to Zion (vv. 5-7). See also page 492.

The Prophet Joseph and Oliver Cowdery, on the 29th of November, 1834, entered into covenant with the Lord, as follows:

"That if the Lord will prosper us in our business and open the way before us that we may obtain means to pay our debts, that we be not troubled nor brought into disrepute before the world, nor His people; after that, of all that He shall give unto us, we will give a tenth to be bestowed upon the poor in His Church, or as He shall command; and that we will be faithful over that which He has entrusted to our care, that we may obtain much; and that our children after us shall remember to observe this sacred and holy covenant, and that our children, and our children's children may know of the same, we have subscribed our names with our own hands" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. II., p. 175).

"We do not ask anybody to pay tithing unless they are disposed to do so; but if you pretend to pay tithing, pay it like honest men" (Brigham Young, Jour. of Dis., Vol. VIII., p. 202).

"The law of tithing is of very ancient origin. How early it was observed by the people of God is not clearly set forth in the Scriptures, but we have an account of its observance as early as the days of Abraham and Melchizedek. We have also, anterior to that, an account given us in the Scriptures of the bringing forward of offerings by Cain and Abel, one bringing the first fruits of the earth, and the other the first fruits of his flocks, as offering unto the Lord their God. From the days of Abraham down to the days of Jesus the law of tithing was observed by the people of God" (George Q. Cannon, Jour. of Dis., Vol. XV., p. 145).

From the original text of Heb. 11:4, it may be gathered that Cain did not bring an honest tithing before the Lord, while Abel did; for the author of that Epistle says, literally translated, "By faith Abel offered unto God a more abundant [pleiona] sacrifice than Cain." The Septuagint version renders Gen. 4:6, 7 as follows, "And the Lord God said to Cain, wherefore didst thou become vexed, and wherefore did thy countenance fall? If thou didst rightly offer, but didst not rightly divide, didst thou not sin?" (Henry Lansdell, D. D. The Sacred Tenth, Vol. I., p. 41).

Ancient Israel paid three-tenths. One was for the support of the Levites and the Temple service (Lev. 27:30-3; Numb. 18:21-4). The second was to be spent by the head of the family and those dependent on him on yearly journeys to the conferences, on which occasions he was supposed to offer sacrifices and to feast with his friends (Deut. 14:22-7). He was expected to spend one-tenth of his income, yearly, on religious rites and social entertainments, at the annual festivals-the Passover, the Feast of Tabernacles, and the Feast of Weeks—in addition to the sacred tenth, which was the Lord's. A third tenth was paid every third year, for the benefit of Levites, strangers, orphans (Deut. 14:28, 29).
