Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 120.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Far West, Missouri, July 18, 1838, making known the disposition of the properties tithed as named in the preceding revelation, Section 119.

VERILY, thus saith the Lord, the time is now come, that it shall be disposed of by a council, composed of the First Presidency of my Church, and of the bishop and his council, and by my high council; and by mine own voice unto them, saith the Lord. Even so. Amen.

This Revelation is dated July 18th, but from the History of the Church (Vol. III., p. 44) it appears that it was given on the 8th, the same day on which the Revelations contained in Sections 117, 118, and 119 were received. It is a promise that the Lord will guide His servants by His Spirit in the expenditure of the offerings of the Saints—a promise that, as the results prove, has been fulfilled.

General Notes

The Saints, expelled from Jackson County in the fall of 1833, and requested to leave Clay County in the summer of 1836, had found refuge in Caldwell County, and become quite prosperous. But the enemies were not inactive. On Aug. 6th, 1838, a State election was held. William P. Penniston, one of the candidates for the State legislature and generally known as an anti-"Mormon," naturally supposed that no Church member would vote for him. Acting on this assumption, he organized a mob for the purpose of preventing all the Saints from voting. This was, of course, illegal. Twelve "Mormons" went to Gallatin, to exercise their rights as citizens. They were set upon by Penniston's men. A conflict ensued. No lives were lost, but the election riot, for which Penniston's supporters were responsible, was followed by a general rising against the Saints.

Lilburn W. Boggs, one of the active leaders of the mob in 1833, was the governor of Missouri then. This emboldened the mob to plan an attack upon the little settlement of Diahman, which, however, was not carried out, owing to the firm stand taken by General Doniphan, who declared that the people had been deceived by designing, half-crazy men.

The mob, temporarily thwarted in their designs upon Diahman, turned against Dewitt, Carroll County. For nine days, that settlement was besieged and bombarded An appeal to the governor only elicited the unsympathetic reply that the combatants might "fight it out." The Saints rather than to engage in civil war, left Dewitt and fled to Far West. The mob then marched upon Diahman.

On the advice of General Doniphan, the Saints in Far West sent a force to the assistance of their brethren in Daviess County, where houses were being plundered and burned, and other outrages committed. Colonel Lyman Wight, having obtained authority, organized a command for the protection of the Saints. At first the marauders fled before this organized resistance, but their bitterness increased. On the 25th of October, 1838, a marauding band was met and, after a short engagement, dispersed, and this, the so-called "Crooked River Battle," was heralded abroad as a "Mormon atrocity," on the strength of which Governor Boggs, on October 27th, 1838, issued an order for the extermination of the "Mormons."

Among the first results of this truly Herodian edict for the slaughter of innocents, was the Haun's Mill massacre, in which nearly a score of inoffensive "Mormon" settlers were mercilessly killed. Then the Governor's force marched against Far West. Colonel George M. Hinckle, commanding the defenders of that City, treacherously entered into a secret agreement with the commander of the assailants, General Lucas, to deliver up the leaders of the Church, and to disarm the "Mormons." Under pretense of having arranged a conference between the Church leaders and the militia generals, Hinckle induced Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon Parley P. Pratt, Lyman Wight, and George W. Robinson to meet General Lucas, whereupon they were surrounded and, as "prisoners of war," condemned to be shot. This order, however, was not executed, because Generals Doniphan and Graham denounced it as a crime, and threatened to withdraw, if it were carried out.

The militia now advanced upon the defenseless city and compelled the Saints to sign away their property, "to defray the expenses of the war." The town was given up to pillage. Women were abused publicly and nameless horrors were committed. The Prophet and his companions were taken, first to Independence, then to Richmond, and later, to Liberty, Clay County. While in jail at this place, he received the Revelations in Sections 121, 122, and 123.

The prisoners were treated outrageously. Several times their food was poisoned, but God preserved their lives. They passed the winter in prison, where they were held illegally. During this winter, from ten to twelve thousand Latter-day Saints, under the direction of Brigham Young, who. as President of the Twelve, had charge of the Church in the absence of the First Presidency, left Missouri for Illinois and thus placed themselves outside the reach of the Missourians. Most of the exiles found a kind welcome at Quincy, Ill., and there the Prophet Joseph and Hyrum joined the Saints during the latter part of April, or early in May, 1839, having been delivered, by the providence of God, from their enemies in Missouri.

President Joseph Fielding Smith was born at Far West, a few days after his saintly mother had been separated from her husband by the brutal captors and traitors. "The child, thus born amid these warlike scenes," was, as Elder Orson F. Whitney observes, "drinking in with his mother's milk a wholesome hatred of tyrants and mobs, and the courage to denounce them fearlessly" (Hist. of Utah, Vol. I., p. 160).

The repeated mobbings and drivings of the Latter-day Saints were a severe discipline, but they served a great purpose in God's plan. While the Saints were prosperous, many hypocrites joined the Church. They were the chaff. The blasts of adversity blew these to the four winds, and only the good wheat remained. The Church was purified by persecution.
