Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 121.

PRAYER AND PROPHECIES, written by Joseph Smith the Prophet, while a prisoner in the jail at Liberty, Missouri, dated March 20, 1839. The Prophet with several companions had been months in prison. Their petitions and appeals directed to the executive officers and the judiciary had failed to bring them relief. See History of the Church, vol. 3, p. 289.—Fervent appeals to the Lord in behalf of the suffering Saints—The curse of the Lord to fall upon those who contend against his will—Men though called may not be chosen—The rights of the Priesthood inseparably connected with the powers of heaven—Unrighteous exercise of the powers of the Priesthood leads to apostasy—Powers of the Priesthood to be exercised in justice and mercy.

O GOD, where art thou? And where is the pavilion that covereth thy hiding place?

In the History of the Church, (Vol. III., pp. 289-305) an epistle is found, addressed "to the Church of Latter-day Saints at Quincy, Ill., and Scattered Abroad, and to Bishop Partridge in Particular." It is signed by Joseph Smith, Jr., Hyrum Smith, Lyman Wight, Caleb Baldwin, and Alexander McRae, and dated, "Liberty Jail, Clay County, Missouri, March 25, 1839." The letter, it appears, was commenced on the 20th and finished on the 25th. Sections 121, 122, and 123 are extracts from this communication.

In the opening paragraph of the letter, the Prophet refers to the fearful crimes committed against the Saints. He hears the cries of orphans and widows; he sees the innocent blood that stains the soil of the State; he contemplates the inhumanity of the people, that "shocks all nature," and "beggars and defies all description," and then he pours out his soul in lamentation before his God, as Jeremiah of old wept upon the ruins of Jerusalem: "O God! Where art thou?" And he prays, "Remember thy suffering Saints."

7-25. God's answer to the Prophet's prayer begins with these verses. The Prophet is assured that his sufferings will last only a moment (v. 7), and then God will exalt him (v. 8). He is reminded that he has not been tried to the extent that Job suffered (v. 10); and that his friends are faithful, and the assurance is given that those who accuse him falsely shall be disappointed (v. 14). "For there is a time appointed for every man, according as his works shall be" (v. 25).

26-32. The Prophet, in the Epistle, reminds the Saints that, in the past, they have been vain and trifling both in public gatherings and private intercourse; he exhorts them to reform "both old and young, teachers and taught, both high and low, rich and poor, bound and free, male and female." "Let," he adds "honesty, and sobriety, and candor, and solemnity, and virtue, and pureness, and meekness, and simplicity crown our heads in every place; and, in fine, become as little children, without malice, guile, or hypocrisy. * * * If you do these things, and exercise fervent prayer and faith, * * * God shall give unto you knowledge," etc. God gives knowledge only to those whose minds are prepared to receive it.

30-1. Concerning the universe, too, the Holy Spirit will reveal the truth to the Saints. The world is God's and He desires His children to know something about its marvelous construction and operations.

The Prophet, in his letter, warns the Saints not to labor for their own aggrandizement, or the accumulation of wealth, while so many of their brethren are groaning under the burden of poverty. Unless they heeded this warning, they could not have the intercession of the Holy Spirit. In this connection he is led to say, "There are many called, but few are chosen," and then he considers the reasons why this is so.

41-6. Here the proper exercise of the power of the Priesthood is illustrated. The Priesthood should make those who hold it kind, full of knowledge, honest and virtuous. Where these qualities exist, the Holy Spirit will be. And only those that retain the Spirit are chosen, though many are called.
