Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 122.

THE WORD OF THE LORD to Joseph Smith the Prophet, while a prisoner in the jail at Liberty, Missouri, March, 1839. See History of the Church, vol. 3, p. 300.—Comforting assurances—Further persecutions of the Prophet and his possible martyrdom foreshadowed—The Son of Man had likewise suffered.

THE ends of the earth shall inquire after thy name, and fools shall have thee in derision, and hell shall rage against thee;

1-9. The Lord continues speaking words of comfort to His servant through the Spirit of Revelation. He assures him that his name shall be known all over the world; that fools shall scoff and hell rage, but that the pure, wise, and noble will embrace the truth (vv. 1-2), He assures him that traitors shall not be able to injure him except for a moment, but that his voice shall be like the roar of a lion among enemies (v. 4). He assures him that whatever happens to him shall be for his good (v. 8), and promises him divine assistance for ever and ever (vv. 5-7). And He reminds him that the Son of God suffered (v. 9). God never forsakes His servants in times of trouble.

It is also true that the wise, noble and virtuous embrace "Mormonism," when they understand it. It appeals to them and to none else.

"I found my wife and children in tears, who feared we had been shot by those who had sworn to take our lives, and that they would see me no more. When I entered my house, they clung to my garments, their eyes streaming with tears, while mingled emotions of joy and sorrow were manifested in their countenances. I requested to have a private interview with them for a few minutes, but this privilege was denied me by the guard. I was then obliged to take my departure * * * My partner wept, my children clung to me, until they were thrust from me by the swords of the guards" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. III., p. 193).

Parley P. Pratt, in his Autobiography, writes:

"I went to my house, being guarded by two or three soldiers. The cold rain was pouring down without, and on entering my little cottage, there lay my wife sick of fever, with which she had been for some time confined. At her breast was our son Nathan, an infant of three months, and by her side a little girl of five years. On the foot of the same bed lay a woman in travail, who had been driven from her house in the night, and had taken momentary shelter in my hut of ten feet square—my larger house having been torn down. I stepped to the bed; my wife burst into tears; I spoke a few words of comfort * * * I then embraced and kissed the little babes and departed."
