Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 123.

DUTY OF THE SAINTS in relation to their persecutors, as set forth by Joseph Smith the Prophet, while a prisoner in the jail at Liberty, Missouri, March, 1839. See History of the Church, vol. 3, p. 302.—All facts relating to the sufferings and abuses of the people by their persecutors to be recorded—The record of persecution to be published.

AND again, we would suggest for your consideration the propriety of all the saints gathering up a knowledge of all the facts, and sufferings and abuses put upon them by the people of this State;

This Revelation is a continuation of the two previous Sections. The Lord (1) instructs the Saints to gather up all available material for a history of the Missouri persecutions, including the value of the property destroyed, and all defamatory literature (1-6); (2) gives the reasons for such a work (7-17).

At a conference held near Quincy, III., May 4th-6th, 1839, Almon W. Babbitt, Erastus Snow, and Robert B. Thompson were appointed a committee to gather up the historical material required by this Revelation.

To angels] The angels who are sent to administer to the Saints have a right to know whether such accusations are true or false.

To ourselves, to our wives and children] Silence is sometimes more eloquent than words; but at this time it was necessary to place the accusers and persecutors in the limelight of public opinion, because wives and children had a right to know the full truth.

General Notes

"We read in that book [Book of Mormon], that not only a Church should arise, etc., but that the blood of the Saints who should embrace its faith, should cry from the ground to the God in heaven * * * How unlikely a thing to be fulfilled' Here, upon this land, is one of the most free governments given to man, bestowing upon all civil and religious liberty; * * * The people said such a thing could never come to pass; Joseph Smith was an impostor. But how long was it before this met with its fulfillment? History shows that three years after the rise of this Church, the Latter-day Saints, numbering some 1200 persons * * * were driven en masse from their possessions, their homes were torn down and destroyed, their animals were shot down * * * and many of the Saints were also shot dead by the persecutors. Was it because they had committed crimes that merited this treatment? No, their court records do not show a single instance of our people having broken the laws. Was it polygamy? No, for the principle of plural marriage was not known among us then" (Orson Pratt, Jour. of Dis., Vol. XVIII., pp. 223-4).
