Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Seventh Period, 1841-3, Sections 124-32

Section 124.

REVELATION given to Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Nauvoo, Illinois, January 19, 1841. Because of increasing persecutions and illegal procedures against them by public officers, the Saints had been compelled to leave Missouri. The exterminating order issued by Lilburn W. Boggs, Governor of Missouri, dated October 27, 1838, had left them no alternative. See History of the Church, vol. 3, p. 175. In 1841, when this revelation was given, the city of Nauvoo, occupying the site of the former village of Commerce, Illinois, had been built up by the Saints, and here the headquarters of the Church had been established.—Proclamation to the president of the United States, the governors of the States, and to the rulers of all nations—Blessed state of former members of the Church who had died—George Miller called to the bishopric—A house of entertainment for strangers to be erected—A Temple to be built at Nauvoo—No baptismal font upon the earth for the administration of baptisms for the dead—Reason for the command to Moses to build a tabernacle in the wilderness—Promise of revelations concerning sacred things thus far hidden—Men who prevent the Saints from carrying out the commandments of God to be held accountable—Delay in building a Temple in Jackson county, Missouri, tolerated—The house of entertainment to be known as Nauvoo House—Directions for its building and administration—William Law called to be a counselor in the First Presidency—Hyrum Smith called to be the Patriarch to the Church—His great powers and privileges—He receives the same office in the Priesthood once conferred upon Oliver Cowdery—General, stake and local officers of the Church named.

VERILY, thus saith the Lord unto you, my servant Joseph Smith, I am well pleased with your offering and acknowledgments, which you have made; for unto this end have I raised you up, that I might show forth my wisdom through the weak things of the earth.

Most of the Saints expelled from the State of Missouri during the winter 1838-9, found their way into Illinois and Iowa. A majority of them went to Quincy, Ill., about 200 miles from Far West, and there they were kindly and hospitably received. Governor Carlin of Illinois, legislators, and private citizens vied with each other in proffering assistance and sympathy.

Among the prominent citizens who, at this time, extended a helping hand to the Saints were Daniel H. Wells, a native of Trenton, New York, and Dr. Isaac Galland. Daniel H. Wells was the owner of a tract of land, which he divided into lots and which the exiles were offered, practically on their own terms. Dr. Galland, also, sold his land at a reasonable price and on the most favorable terms.

The Prophet arrived at Quincy on the 22nd of April, 1839, and two days after, a Council was convened and resolutions were passed directing some of the Saints to go to Zion, and some to settle on Dr. Galland's land, near Commerce, 111. This location soon became the central gathering place, and its name was changed to Nauvoo. In the year 1841, when this Revelation was given, this beautiful city had about 3,000 inhabitants. A charter had been granted by the Illinois Legislature, by which Nauvoo was given a liberal municipal government, with authority to form a militia and erect a university. A Temple was about to be built. The scattered Saints were gathering, and the settlements in Illinois were growing rapidly. The mission in Great Britain was highly successful. Such were the general conditions when this Revelation was given. The Church had a moment's rest. There was calm before the next storm.

In this Revelation the Lord (1) shows the Prophet that his prayers are answered (1-14), and (2) that He knows His servants (15-21); then (3) He commands the building of the Nauvoo House (22-4), and (4) the Temple (25-48); He then (5) gives the Saints a key by which they may know that their work is accepted (49-55), and (6) imparts further instructions concerning the Nauvoo House (56-83); then (7) comes the Word of the Lord to some of His servants (84-118), and (8) further instructions are given concerning the Nauvoo House (119-22); finally (9), the Officers of the Priesthood are named (123-45).

Make a solemn proclamation] This was the immediate duty of the Prophet. The Revelation was read to the Saints at the General Conference, Nauvoo, April 7th, 1841. What further action was taken, the minutes do not show. But several letters concerning Nauvoo and the gathering were addressed to the Saints, and the literature of the Church was, in due time, made available to high and low. The Voice of Warning and a Letter to Queen Victoria were published by Parley P. Pratt. Orson Hyde wrote An Address to the Hebrews and a pamphlet addressed more particularly to the German nation. The Book of Mormon has been presented to at least two Sovereigns; to Queen Victoria, in 1842, by Elder Lorenzo Snow, and to King Oscar II., of Sweden, on the 22nd of September, 1897, by Elder Janne M. Sjodahl. This may all be said to be in accordance with this command.

15-21. In this section the comforting lesson is taught, that the Lord takes cognizance of, and knows, His servants individually. Moses could not be personally acquainted with all the people under his care, but God is not subject to human limitations.

(a) Hyrum Smith.

(b) John C. Bennett.

Why, then, did his name appear, in this Revelation, as that of a trusted assistant of Joseph? John Taylor furnishes the answer to that question. He says, "Respecting John C. Bennett: I was well acquainted with him. At one time he was a good man, but fell into adultery, and was cut off from the Church for his iniquity" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. V., p. 81). At this time he was a good man. But he was overcome by the adversary and made the slave of his carnal desires. The Lord knew him and warned him. "His reward shall not fail if he receive counsel." "He shall be great * * * if he do this," etc. Bennett did not heed these warning "ifs" from Him who knew what was in his heart.

"Bennett lived to be despised by all who knew him. "For some years before his death he suffered from violent fits; he also partly lost the use of his limbs and of his tongue, and it was difficult for him to make himself understood. He dragged out a miserable existence, without a person scarcely to take the least interest in his fate, and died without a soul to mourn his departure" (Andrew Jenson, Hist. Rec., p. 496).

(c) Lyman Wight.

18-19. See Secs. 52:7; 103:30. David Patten, martyred on Oct. 25th, 1838. Edward Partridge, died in Nauvoo, May 27th, 1840. The Lord says these were "with Him;" not in a purgatory.

(d) George Miller.

20-1. George Miller, as long as the Prophet Joseph lived, seemed to be a faithful Latter-day Saint. He was chosen to fill the important place of Bishop, left vacant by the death of Edward Partridge. He accompanied the Prophet on his journeys, on several occasions. He and Newel K. Whitney were appointed Trustees-in-trust of the Church, after the death of the Prophet. And when the Saints left Nauvoo, he was among the first to cross the river. But from now on he changed. In the Camp of Israel, slowly wending its way westward, he became disaffected. He always wanted to be ahead of the main body, and be a law unto himself. At Winter Quarters he expressed the view that Texas was the place to go to, and not the Rocky Mountains, and when Brigham Young refused to listen to him, knowing that the Prophet had pointed to the Great Basin as the gathering place of the Saints, he left the Camp with a few followers, and joined Lyman Wight in Texas. Shortly afterwards he disagreed with this schismatic and joined Strang, unable to find peace and rest anywhere. Here is another career, beginning in integrity and love of the gospel and ending in failure, because of lack of humility.

22-4. The Spirit of Revelation directs the Saints to build a fine hotel for the entertainment of strangers. There is no greater inducement for travelers to visit a place than good hotel accommodations. This Revelation proves that the Lord wanted the tourists of the world to visit and become acquainted with the Saints. These were not to be surrounded by a wall of isolation. They had nothing to hide from the world.

The erection of the hotel here referred to, generally known as the Nauvoo House, was commenced in the spring of 1841, and in 1846, when the Saints left Nauvoo, the walls were up above the windows of the second story. It fronted two streets, 120 feet on each. The estimated cost was $100,000. It was planned to be the most magnificent hotel in the West, at the time. When the Saints left the City, the unfinished building became the property of the Prophet's widow, and was subsequently claimed by her second husband, Mr. L. C. Bidamon. In 1872 he put part of it under roof and fitted it up as an hotel, known as the Bidamon House.

25-48. In this section the Lord commands the Saints to build a Temple in Nauvoo. It was not unknown to Him that their stay in Illinois would be brief. They needed the blessings they were to receive in that sacred building, in order to pass the fiery furnace of the exodus and come out unscathed.

27-28. For the Most High to dwell therein] The Church is the kingdom of God on Earth. The Temple is the palace of the King.

29-30. A baptismal font there is not upon the earth] Baptism for the dead was performed by the Saints for some time following the resurrection of our Savior, but this practice soon became discarded as the apostasy set in and from that time until the time of the building the Nauvoo Temple, there was no baptismal font any place on the earth where baptisms for the dead could be performed. It now became necessary to prepare a font for this purpose, and the Lord gave the commandment that one be placed in the Nauvoo Temple. There was no font in the Kirtland Temple, because the work of salvation for the dead had not been revealed when that Temple was built. For a short time, while a place in the Nauvoo Temple was being prepared, the Lord granted the saints the privilege of being baptized for their dead in the Mississippi River, but explained that this could only be done when there was no House of the Lord where this ordinance could be performed, "for the ordinance belongeth to my house, and cannot be acceptable to me, only in the days of your poverty, wherein ye are not able to build a house unto me."

31-35. I grant unto you a sufficient time to build a house] This passage has been misinterpreted by some, especially by enemies of the Church who profess a belief in the mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith, but do not accept the doctrine of salvation for the dead. A careful reading of these verses will show that it was not the failure to build a house, but the failure to perform the ordinances for the dead in the house after it was prepared for those ordinances that would cause the rejection. In the months when the saints were without a Temple the Lord granted them the privilege of baptizing for their dead in the Mississippi River, but with the understanding that this was a special privilege which would end when they had been given sufficient time to prepare a place in the Temple where this ordinance could be performed. For baptism for the dead, as well as other ordinances for the dead, are to be performed in a house built to the name of the Lord and for that holy purpose. Therefore we find the members of the Church engaging in baptisms for the dead in the river from the time the privilege was granted until the time arrived when the font in the house of the Lord was prepared for that ordinance, and when that time arrived all baptisms for the dead in the river ceased by divine command. The Lord said (v. 32) "But behold, at the end of the appointment (i.e. the sufficient time) your baptisms for your dead shall not be acceptable unto me [in the river] and if ye do not these things at the end of the appointment ye shall be rejected as a church with your dead, saith the Lord your God.

"For verily I say unto you, that after you have had sufficient time to build a house to me, wherein the ordinance of baptizing for the dead belongeth, and for which the same was instituted from before the foundation of the world, your baptisms for your dead cannot be acceptable unto me." (i.e. acceptable in the river, or any other place outside the house of the Lord; v. 35.)

"And if ye do not these things at the end of the appointment, obviously does not mean 'if ye do not build a temple at the end of the appointment,' as our critics infer it does, but it refers to the ordinances that were to be performed in the temple, and the failure on the part of the Saints to perform these ordinances for their dead was the thing that would cause their rejection with their dead, and not the failure to build the temple, which was merely the edifice in which the saving principles were to be performed. This is in harmony with the teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, who said that if we neglect the salvation of our dead, we do it at the peril of our own salvation! Why? Because we without them cannot be made perfect. (Doc. and Cov. 128:15.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith—Salvation Universal, page 22.)

At the conference of the Church held Sunday, October 3, 1841, the Prophet announced: "There shall be no more baptisms for the dead, until the ordinance can be attended to in the Lord's House, and the Church shall not hold another general conference, until they can meet in said house. For Thus saith the Lord!" (D.H.C. 4:426.) Thus the "end of the appointment" had arrived, and no more baptisms outside of that house were acceptable to the Lord. The reason for this startling proclamation was the fact that the font in the house of the Lord was prepared for that sacred ordinance. On the eighth day of November 1841, this font in the basement of the Temple was dedicated for the ordinance of baptism for the dead. The Prophet wrote in his journal of this event: "Monday, (Nov.) 8.—At five o'clock p.m., I attended the dedication of the baptismal font in the Lord's House. President Brigham Young was spokesman." (D.H.C. 4:446.) On the 21st day of that month Elders Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball and John Taylor baptized about forty persons for the dead, and Elders Wilford Woodruff and George A. Smith confirmed them. Thus the great work of baptism for the dead commenced in the House of the Lord and continued until the Saints were driven from Nauvoo. After arriving in the valleys of the Rocky Mountains, a place was prepared in another House of the Lord, and this work for the salvation of the dead has continued on ever since.

It may be added that God did not reject the Church but saved it as by a miracle, from destruction. Says President George Q. Cannon:

"If any proof of this is needed, let us reflect upon the wonderful deliverance that God hath wrought out for us since we left Illinois. Up to that period, or up to the time that the Temple was partly finished, and the blessings of God bestowed within its walls, our enemies to a very great extent had triumphed over us. We had been driven from place to place; compelled to flee from one town, county, and State to another; but how great the change since then! We started out a poor, friendless people, with nothing but God's blessing upon us. His power overshadowing us and His guidance to lead us in the wilderness; and from the day that we crossed the Mississippi River until this day—the 8th of April, 1871—we have had continued success and triumphs * * * God has done for us as He did for His ancient covenant people, when he caused the waters of the Red Sea to separate, that they might pass through and escape the destruction their enemies threatened" (Jour. of Dis., Vol. XIV., p. 125).

There were no ordinances performed for the dead in Solomon's Temple, or at any time before the resurrection of our Lord. Before that day there was a great gulf fixed which separated the righteous from those who had not received the Gospel, which none could pass. (Luke 16:26.) Until our Savior opened the gates through the resurrection all ordinances were confined to the living. President Smith's vision of the redemption of the dead is in harmony with this doctrine. (Gospel Doctrine, pp. 596-601.) "Jesus was the first man that ever went to preach to the spirits in prison, holding the keys of the Gospel of salvation to them. Those keys were delivered to him in the day and hour that he went into the spirit world, and with them he opened the door of salvation to the spirits in prison." (President Brigham Young, Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 379.)

"Memorials" refers, possibly, to records of sacrifices that will be kept when the Levitical service shall have been restored, and "oracles" means the place in which the divine revelations are received. The name is applied to the sacred Scriptures, which contain the Word of God, and also to the part of the Temple called the Holy of Holies, where the presence of God was manifested (I. Kings 8:6; II. Chron. 4:20; Ps. 28:2).

Municipals] Stakes and Wards.

49-55. The comforting truth is here stated that the Lord accepts the will for the deed, when His children endeavor with all diligence to obey God but are prevented from doing so by the enemy. On that ground the offerings of the Saints in Jackson County were accepted, and the wrath of God would be poured out upon the enemies. That the Saints were diligent in the building of the Nauvoo Temple is amply attested by history.

"That structure cost more than one million dollars; the Saints were poor, and a great deal of the time the Temple was in course of erection they were harassed by their enemies. The Prophet Joseph was forced into exile to avoid his enemies who tried to drag him into Missouri, and therefore he could not devote his personal attention to the building of the Temple, as he otherwise could have done; and in this way the work was retarded in some degree by the enemies of the people. Moreover the building of that structure was not like building one to-day. The Saints could not order their timber from the lumberyard in a state of preparation for the Temple. There were no iron foundries from which they could obtain the required metal properly prepared; but, on the contrary, every detail had to be performed by the Saints. The timber had to be hewed in the far off forests of Wisconsin, carried to Nauvoo, and cut into boards and for the various uses of the Temple. The stone had to be cut and polished from the quarries, and the whole work had to be supplied out of the tithing of the people" (Joseph Fielding Smith, Origin of the "Reorganized" Church, p. 21).

56-83. In this section special instructions are given concerning the Nauvoo House. It was to be dedicated to the Lord. The Prophet Joseph, or one of his descendants after him from generation to generation (v. 56). was to live there. This does not imply that the Presidency of the Church should be transmitted as an inheritance from father to son. It refers only to the shares of stock in the Nauvoo House Association. The Prophet Joseph owned a portion of that stock that was transferable property, and it was perfectly proper that he and any of his descendants who owned the stock should have their residence in the House as part of the dividend on the money invested, when that condition was understood and agreed on from the beginning. A building committee is appointed (v. 62), and instructions are given for the adoption of a constitution for the corporation (v. 63-72). Other individuals, besides Joseph, are mentioned as worthy to become stockholders. They are Vinson Knight (v. 74), Hyrum Smith (v. 77), Isaac Galland (v. 78), William Marks (v. 80), Henry G. Sherwood (v. 81), and William Law (v. 82).

84-118. In these verses the Spirit of Revelation speaks to the individuals mentioned by name, giving counsel, instruction, encouragement, or warning and reproof, as each case may require.

(a) Almon Babbitt.

84-6. The Lord severely rebukes Almon Babbitt. From these verses it may be gathered that his chief ambition was to make money, and that he advised the Saints to leave Nauvoo, contrary to the counsel of the Church leaders. Perhaps he was interested in the sale of land elsewhere. At all events, when the Saints left Nauvoo, he was appointed one of the real estate agents in whose hands the abandoned property was left, to be disposed of on the best terms obtainable. How he discharged this duty, we may infer from the following statement of Heber C. Kimball: "My house was sold at $1,700, intended to be used to help to gather the Saints; but Almon W. Babbitt put it in his pocket, I suppose" (Jour. of Dis., Vol. VIII., p. 350).

(b) William Law.

87-90. William Law is here instructed to trust in the Lord and not fear for the safety of his family, although there was sickness among the people (v. 87). Fear is the great friend of disease-carrying microbes. It opens the door to them. If there is an epidemic abroad, it is certain to find the cowards. On the other hand, faith in God is an excellent foundation for both physical and moral health. William Law was, next, called to take a mission to Warsaw, Carthage, Burlington, and Madison (v. 88); to remember the poor and to publish the new Bible translation (v. 89). The Lord promises him certain blessings, if he will do these things—blessings extending to his posterity after him (v. 90); and commands the Prophet Joseph to appoint him counselor in the First Presidency, to take the place of Hyrum Smith (v. 91).

Wonderful opportunities were offered to Wm. Law, which he neglected to embrace. If he had done faithfully what God here gave him to do, he would have received the blessings promised, but when he failed to obey the Lord, even his appointment in the First Presidency could not save him from falling. When he lost the Spirit of God he became one of the most bitter enemies of the Church. Apostates and persecutors rallied around him, and he tried to form a church of his own of such material.

(c) Hyrum Smith.

91-6. In the preceding paragraph Hyrum Smith is pointed out as the legal successor of his father in the Patriarchal office; it is his "by right" of lineage, no less than by Patriarchal blessing. The following is the blessing pronounced upon Hyrum Smith by his father:

"My son Hyrum, I seal upon your head your patriarchal blessing, which I placed upon your head before, for that shall be verified. In addition to this, I now give you my dying blessing. You shall have a season of peace, so that you shall have a sufficient rest to accomplish the work which God has given you to do. You shall be as firm as the pillars of heaven unto the end of your days. I now seal upon your head the patriarchal power, and you shall bless the people. This is my dying blessing upon your head in the name of Jesus. Amen." (Origin of the Reorganized Church and Question of Succession, by Joseph Fielding Smith, p. 71.)

"We learn from the Doctrine and Covenants that there are two offices in the Church that descend from father to son. One is that of the Bishopric, for upon Aaron and his sons the Lord conferred this Priesthood (Section 68:16-18). The other is that of the Evangelist. This we learn in Section 107" (Ibid. p. 51).

In this section (v. 92-6) the Lord explains the power and authority of the Patriarch. "Whoever he blesses shall be blessed, and whoever he curses shall be cursed" (v. 93); "whatsoever he shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever he shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven."

In addition to the Patriarchal Priesthood which was conferred upon Hyrum Smith, he received another great and special blessing, for the Lord called him to be a "prophet, and a seer, and a revelator unto my church as well as my servant Joseph" (v. 94), and to him was transferred "the blessing and glory and honor and Priesthood and gifts of the Priesthood," that once were given to Oliver Cowdery, who stood as the "second Elder of the Church," holding the keys with the Prophet, before he (Oliver) transgressed. All these blessings were given to Hyrum Smith who, by this special calling, in addition to becoming the Patriarch of the Church, also became a President of the Church, holding the keys of the kingdom in conjunction with his brother Joseph. Moreover, he was given the promise that his name should be had in "honorable remembrance from generation to generation for ever and ever" (v. 96). How literally this has been fulfilled! (See remarks by Elder Joseph Fielding Smith, April Conference Report 1930.)

(d) A Last Warning to William Law.

97-102. The Spirit of Revelation again calls William Law to consider what he might gain by humility and lose by following his own inclination. Our Lord, who was full of compassion for Jerusalem, undoubtedly pitied this man, who was greatly exalted but fell so low. He was offered the choicest blessings of heaven; they would be his, if he would pray, be humble, and without guile. God knew his weaknesses. One of them was "guile," which means ''deceitful cunning," "duplicity." By prayer, these might have been overcome.

(e) Sidney Rigdon.

103-10. Sidney Rigdon, according to a generally prevailing impression, was more or less, under the influence of a spirit of apostasy. It is related that, in Liberty jail, he declared to his fellow-prisoners that the sufferings of the Lord were nothing compared with his, and while the faithful Saints were straining every nerve to complete the Nauvoo Temple, he had no word of encouragement to them. As a consequence of his disposition, he did not have good health. Like the Corinthians who partook unworthily of the Sacrament (I. Cor. 11:30), he was "weak and sickly." The Lord, therefore, points out to him the cause of his ailments and promises to heal him, if he will do his duty and stand by the Prophet as a true counselor.

Sidney Rigdon had a remarkable experience some months after this Revelation was received. His daughter Eliza took sick and was pronounced dead by the physician. Some time after her departure, she rose up in the bed and said she had returned to deliver a message from the Lord. She then called the family around her. To her sister Nancy she said, "It is in your heart to deny this work; and if you do, the Lord says it will be the damnation of your soul!" To her sister Sarah she said, "We have but once to die, and I would rather die now, than wait for another time." After having spoken for some time she fainted, but recovered again. The following evening she called her father and said to him that the Lord would make her well, if he would cease weeping for her. Sidney Rigdon related this manifestation of the power of God, in a public meeting on the 20th of August, 1842, and added a strong declaration of his allegiance to the Prophet Joseph and the Church. On the same occasion, Hyrum Smith cited Sidney Rigdon's mind back to this Revelation, in which the Lord promised that if he would move into the City and defend the truth he would be healed, and showed that Rigdon's improvement in health was a fulfilment of this Revelation (Hist. of the Church, Vol. V., pp. 121-3). But, notwithstanding all, Rigdon finally lost his way. It can be said, however, that, according to his son, John Rigdon, who joined the Church, he never was an enemy of the Church.

1 l 4. Let him therefore abase himself that he may be exalted. Even so. Amen.

(f) Amos Davies.

111-14. From this Revelation it is evident that Amos Davies, notwithstanding his prominence, had some weaknesses. He was slow to obey counsel, and he shunned work. He is, therefore, commanded to "labor with his own hands" and prove himself faithful in all things. It is to be feared that he heeded this commandment only in part, for on the 9th of March, 1842, he indulged in abusive language concerning the Prophet whereupon the court bound him over, to keep the peace (Hist. of the Church, Vol. IV., p. 549).

(g) Robert D. Foster.

115-18. Robert D. Foster was one of the men who fell from a high position of honor to the lowest depths of wickedness. The Prophet befriended him again and again, hoping that he would mend his ways. According to a statement made to Cyrus H. Wheelock, shortly before the tragedy at Carthage, he was one of a number of conspirators who were determined to take the life of the Prophet, even if the court declared him innocent.

"When my feelings are aroused to anger by the ill-doings of others, I hold them as I would hold a wild horse, and I gain the victory. Some think and say that it makes them feel better, when they are mad, as they call it, to give vent to their madness in abusive and unbecoming language. This, however, is a mistake. Instead of its making you feel better, it is making bad worse" (Jour. of Dis., Vol. XI., p. 255).

119-22. Further instructions concerning the Nauvoo House are given here.

(a) Stockholders.

119, 120. The Nauvoo House was to be an hotel, but only those who believed in the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants were permitted to hold stock in the association. Unity of faith may not seem essential to a business enterprise, but this house was to be erected for religious purposes; the weary traveler would there "contemplate the glories of Zion" (v. 60). It was essential that the owners of the house should all be of one faith; otherwise those who did not believe in the gospel might object to its principles being taught on their premises.

(b) Compensation.

121, 122. In these paragraphs compensation is provided for work done by all engaged in furthering the interests of the association. "A laborer is worthy of his hire."

123-145. The officers of the Church are here enumerated in the following order:

Heber C. Kimball, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, Orson Hyde, William Smith, John Taylor, John E. Page, Wilford Woodruff, Willard Richards, George A. Smith.

Samuel Bent, H. G. Sherwood, George W. Harris, Charles C. Rich, Thomas Grover, Newel Knight, David Dort, Dunbar Wilson, Aaron Johnson, David Fullmer, Alpheus Cutler, William Huntington

Joseph Young, Josiah Butterfield, Daniel Miles, Henry Harriman, Zera Pulsipher, Levi Hancock, James Foster (v. 138).

General Notes

President Brigham Young says:

"Brother Heber and I never went to school until we got into 'Mormonism'; that was the first of our schooling. We never had the opportunity of letters in our youth, but we had the privilege of picking up brush, chopping down trees, rolling logs, and working amongst the roots and getting our shins, feet, and toes bruised. * * * I learned to make bread, wash the dishes, milk the cows, and make butter. * * * Those are about all the advantages I gained in my youth" (Jour. of Dis., Vol. V., p. 97).

"Up to the time that 'Mormonism' came to me, I did earnestly pray, if there was a God (and I believed there was), 'Lord God, Thou who gavest the Scriptures; who didst speak to Abraham and reveal Thyself to Moses and the ancients, keep my feet that they may not be entangled in the snares of folly.' * * * I could not more honestly and earnestly have prepared myself to go into eternity than I did to come into this Church; and when I had ripened everything in my mind, I drank it in, and not till then" (Brigham Young, Jour. of Dis., Vol. VIII., p. 38).
