Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 126.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, in the house of Brigham Young, at Nauvoo, Illinois, July 9, 1841. At this time Brigham Young was president of the quorum of the Twelve Apostles.

DEAR and well-beloved brother, Brigham Young, verily thus saith the Lord unto you: My servant Brigham, it is no more required at your hand to leave your family as in times past, for your offering is acceptable to me.

The career of Brigham Young was that of a missionary. Shortly after his baptism, he went to Canada, in company with his brother, Joseph and as a result of their labors, several families joined the Church and went to Kirtland. Brigham Young labored at his trade and preached the gospel whenever an opportunity was found. He joined Zion's Camp when that organization was formed. He and his brother were the "sweet singers" of the Camp, always cheerful and true. Brigham Young was chosen to be one of the Twelve Apostles, and early in May, 1835, he went to the Eastern States, as did the other Apostles, for the purpose of preaching the gospel, gathering the Saints, and collecting means to purchase land in Missouri. In 1836, after having attended the solemn assembly at Kirtland and received a promised endowment, he went on another mission to the Eastern States, traveling through New York, Vermont, Massachusetts, and Rhode Island, returning to Kirtland in the fall, where he became one of the chief supports of the Prophet, during the time of financial crash and apostasy. In 1840, Brigham Young, accompanied by Heber C. Kimball, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, George A. Smith, and Reuben Hedlock, left New York for a mission to Great Britain, where he labored with indomitable zeal and great success. On the 20th of April, 1841, he set sail for New York on his return journey. While in the British mission field, he had been instrumental in performing a great work. He says "Through the mercy of God we have gained many friends, established churches in almost every noted town and city of Great Britain, baptized between seven and eight thousand souls, printed 5,000 Books of Mormon, 3,000 hymn books, 2,500 volumes of the Millennial Star, and fifty thousand tracts." It was shortly after the arrival of Brigham Young in Nauvoo, after his British mission, that this Revelation was received, in which the Lord expresses approval of his labors and commands him to leave his family no more, but to send His word abroad and provide for his family.

In order to grasp fully the significance of this Revelation, an incident from the first meeting, in 1832, between the Prophet Joseph and his successor should be recalled. They had spent the evening in conversation on the gospel, and when the time for parting had come, Brigham Young was invited to lead in prayer. While he was praying, the Spirit of the Lord came upon him, and he spoke in tongues—the first instance of the bestowal of that gift upon anyone in this dispensation. Afterwards, it is asserted, the Prophet said, "A time will come when Brother Brigham will preside over this Church" (Whitney's Hist. of Utah, Vol. I., p. 112).

It should, further, be remembered that, at a Conference held at Nauvoo, August 16th, 1841, the Prophet Joseph, with this Revelation in mind, stated that, ''The time has come when the Twelve should be called upon to stand in their place next to the First Presidency, and attend to the settling of emigrants and the business of the Church at the Stakes, and to assist to bear off the kingdom victoriously to the nations" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. IV., p. 403). By this Revelation, therefore, Brigham Young, the President of the Twelve (Sec. 124:127), was called to stand next to the First Presidency. Why? To take his place, whenever the Prophet should be called to another sphere of action. By this Revelation, the Spirit indicated that Brigham Young was to be the successor of Joseph Smith, as the Prophet had predicted in 1832.
