Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 10.

REVELATION given to Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Harmony, Pennsylvania, in the summer of 1828.—Herein the Lord informs Joseph of alterations made by wicked men in the 116 manuscript pages of the Book of Mormon, which had been lost from the possession of Martin Harris, to whom the sheets had been temporarily entrusted. Compare Section 3. See History of the Church, vol. 1, pp. 21, 23. The evil design was to await the expected re-translation of the matter covered by the stolen pages, and then to discredit the translator by showing the discrepancies created by the alterations. That this wicked purpose had been conceived by the evil one, and was known to the Lord even while Mormon, the ancient Nephite historian, was making his abridgment of the accumulated plates is shown in the Book of Mormon. See The Words of Mormon 3-7.

NOW, behold, I say unto you, that because you delivered up those writings which you had power given unto you to translate by the means of the Urim and Thummim, into the hands of a wicked man, you have lost them.

This Revelation should be read in connection with Sec. 3.

As soon as the 116 pages of manuscript had been lost through the carelessness of Martin Harris, the Urim and Thummim was taken from the Prophet. The sacred instrument was restored after a short time, and the Revelation in Section 3, especially rebuking Martin Harris, was received. Then both the plates and the Urim and Thummim were removed for a few days. It was necessary that the young Prophet should learn the lesson that he was entirely dependent on the Lord. When they were restored, he received the Revelation in Section 10, containing instructions to himself with regard to the lost portion of the manuscript (See History of the Church, Vol. I., p. 23, Footnote.).

The Prophet was sorely punished for his continuous importuning of the Lord, which was an important lesson which he never forgot. The Lord has given us instruction not to be overly insistent in having some of our prayers answered. He has said:

"Whatsoever ye ask the Father in my name it shall be given unto you, that is expedient for you;

"And if ye ask anything that is not expedient for you, it shall turn unto your condemnation." (Doc. and Cov. 88:64-65.)

A wicked man] Martin Harris is again referred to as a "wicked man." This is explained in the 6th and 7th verses, where the Lord says, "Even the man in whom you have trusted, has sought to destroy you. And for this cause I said that he is a wicked man." Martin Harris on the suggestion of wicked men, had adopted a course, which, but for divine interposition, would have led the Prophet to destruction. He associated with wicked men, probably without perceiving what the consequences might be.

The experience with the lost folios taught all concerned the necessity of keeping constant watch over the precious manuscript. And so, when the translation was completed Oliver Cowdery, complying with a command of God (See History of the Prophet Joseph by Mother Smith, p.142), made a transcript of the entire volume for the printer This copy was delivered at the printing office, a few folios at a time, and as soon as they were printed, they were taken care of by the Prophet. There were, therefore, two written copies of the Book of Mormon, and any alteration in the printed text would have been detected at once.

The first written copy was, in the year 1841, placed in a stone box in the southwest corner of the Nauvoo House, by the Prophet Joseph. Part of it was destroyed by dampness. What remained was eventually obtained and taken care of by President Joseph F. Smith. The copy used by the printer fell into the hands of David Whitmer, who kept it as a most sacred relic. But, notwithstanding all precautions, an effort was made, while the book was being printed, to foist a spurious version of it upon the world. Many attempts by wicked men were undertaken to get possession of the plates of the Book of Mormon and to destroy the translated work, but they all failed. The Prophet learned that the greatest vigilance had to be used for the preservation of the sacred record and the translation he had made.

Urim and Thummim] See notes on Sections 3:15; 17:1.

The word "satan" means "adversary." It is the same as "devil," which is generally rendered "accuser." Satan is also known as the "Evil One," "Angel of the Bottomless Pit," the "Prince of this World," the "Prince of the Power of the Air," the "God of this World," "Apollyon," "Abaddon," "Belial," "Beelzebub," etc. Originally he belonged to the heavenly hosts and was a chief among them. He was known as Lucifer, which means "light-bearer"; also as the "Son of the Morning," or "Morning Star."

Lucifer was from "the beginning." In the great Council in heaven he proposed to redeem mankind by compulsion, if God would give him His honor. That proposition was rejected by the Council, and another, made by the Beloved Son, was adopted. Satan, instead of yielding to the majority, in accordance with the rule of the kingdom of heaven, rebelled and, at the head of other rebellious spirits, endeavored to carry out his plan, in opposition to that which had been accepted. Then he was "cast down" and became Satan (Pearl of Great Price, Book of Moses, 4:1-4).

"When the devil and his host were sent from heaven because of disobedience, they came to this world. And wherever the children of men are, there also those evil spirits exist to tempt the children of men to do evil, and everything that leads to destruction and misery, and woe originates from that source, but everything that leads to exaltation, virtue, holiness, goodness, glory, immortality, and eternal life is from the hand of God. The Lord is the strongest power, and He will prevail at last" (Wilford Woodruff, Journal of Discourses, Vol. XI., p. 66).

This doctrine is here stamped as "Satanic."

32 And, behold, they will publish this, and Satan will harden the hearts of the people to stir them up to anger against you, that they will not believe my words.

But Nephi also made another record. In this he preserved an account of events connected with the departure of his father from Jerusalem and their landing in America. This history was continued for 400 years, down to the reign of King Benjamin. It was chiefly an ecclesiastical history.

The Prophet Mormon found these "smaller plates" of Nephi and attached them to his own abridgment of the "larger plates." And thus there was a double line of history of the Nephites for 400 years. The Prophet Mormon says he added the smaller plates to his abridgment "for a wise purpose" (Mormon 1:7), "for thus it whispereth me, according to the working of the Spirit of the Lord which is in me," and Nephi says he made those smaller plates in obedience to a commandment of God, given for some reason unknown to him (I. Nephi 9:5).

41-2. Therefore you shall translate * * * my words] The Prophet Joseph was directed not to translate the lost portion of the manuscript a second time, but to substitute for it the account of the smaller plates of Nephi.

The Prophet Joseph, from the very beginning of his prophetic calling, learned the truth so well expressed in Luther's great battle-hymn:

"Our old, malignant foe, Fain would us overthrow, With cunning and great might."

But he also learned that:

"Our God, He is a mighty tower, A bulwark that availeth; A present help in danger's hour, When trouble us assaileth."

48-50. This was their faith * * * eternal life] Why did the last prophets of the Nephites abridge the records of their forefathers and carefully deposit their literary work in the ground? The answer to these questions is found here. They hoped and prayed that the gospel that was preached among the ancient inhabitants of the American Continents might, by that means, reach the descendants of the Lamanites and those associated with them (Section 3:18), and also to other nations that might come to the Western World.

Not to destroy that which they have received] The Book of Mormon does not take the place of the Bible; it confirms that sacred record, at a time when so-called Higher Critics are doing all in their power to destroy the belief in the divine authority of the Scriptures. It is a "New Witness" for the authenticity of the Bible. It claims no other position in sacred literature. It is the "Stick of Ephraim" joined to the "Stick of Judah," according to the word of the Lord (Ezekiel 37:15-19).

The cosmopolitan character of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has often been noted. Here is a striking illustration. On the 1st of June, 1834, services were held in Zion's Camp, near Jacksonville. Many strangers attended. Heber C. Kimball, in his Journal, says that some of these were very much interested, but they could not make out what church the speakers represented. They said they thought that Joseph Young was a Methodist, Brigham Young a Close Communion Baptist, Orson Hyde a Campbellite, Lyman E. Johnson a Presbyterian, and Orson Pratt a "Restorationer" (Times and Seasons, Vol. Vl., p. 773).

Kingdom of the devil] There is also a "kingdom of the devil," and those who are engaged in building up this kingdom, have cause to fear the triumph of the Church.

Is [of] my Church] "Of" should be inserted, as in the 68th and 69th paragraphs.
