Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 127.

AN EPISTLE from Joseph Smith the Prophet to the Latter-day Saints at Nauvoo, Illinois, containing directions on baptism for the dead; dated at Nauvoo, September 1, 1842.—Because of intense persecution and consequent interference with his labors, the Prophet purposes to go into retirement for a short period—He rejoices in the eventual triumph of the cause of God—He gives the word of the Lord respecting the records to be made of baptisms for the dead.

FORASMUCH as the Lord has revealed unto me that my enemies, both in Missouri and this State, were again in the pursuit of me; and inasmuch as they pursue me without a cause, and have not the least shadow or coloring of justice or right on their side in the getting up of their prosecutions against me; and inasmuch as their pretensions are all founded in falsehood of the blackest dye, I have thought it expedient and wisdom in me to leave the place for a short season, for my own safety and the safety of this people. I would say to all those with whom I have business, that I have left my affairs with agents and clerks who will transact all business in a prompt and proper manner, and will see that all my debts are canceled in due time, by turning out property, or otherwise, as the case may require, or as the circumstances may admit of. When I learn that the storm is fully blown over, then I will return to you again.

JOSEPH SMITH.

This Section contains a letter by the Prophet Joseph to the Saints on the subject of baptism for the dead. In a meeting of the Relief Society, August the 31st, 1842, he made the remark, "a few very important things have been manifested to me in my absence respecting the doctrine of baptism for the dead, which I shall communicate to the Saints next Sabbath, if nothing should occur to prevent me." He did not wait, however, till the following Sabbath, but wrote this epistle on the Thursday preceding, and it was well he did, for on the Saturday he received word that the Missourians were again on the move, and the same day men well armed entered his house, and, without legal authority, searched for him. He was then at Newel K. Whitney's house, having escaped unobserved through a cornfield. In the evening the Prophet proceeded to the home of Edward Hunter, where he was safe for the time being.

The special thought which the Prophet desired to convey to the Saints at this time is expressed in paragraphs 6-9. Baptisms must be witnessed by a recorder, who can testify to the performance, as a witness, and the records must be preserved. On this subject the Prophet said in the Relief Society meeting referred to in the preceding paragraph:

"I have one remark to make respecting the baptism for the dead to suffice for the time being, until I have opportunity to discuss the subject at greater length—all persons baptized for the dead must have a recorder present, that he may be an eye-witness, to record and testify of the truth and validity of his record. It will be necessary in the Grand Council, that these things be testified to by competent witnesses. Therefore, let the recording and witnessing of baptisms for the dead be carefully attended to from this time forth. If there is any lack, it may be at the expense of our friends; they may not come forth" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. V., p. 141).

In an epistle written by the Prophet Joseph Smith to the "Traveling High Council and Elders of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Great Britain," dated October 19, 1840, the following in relation to baptism for the dead was revealed:

"I presume the doctrine of 'baptism for the dead' has ere this reached your ears, and may have raised some inquiries in your minds respecting the same. I cannot in this letter give you all the information you may desire on the subject; but aside from knowledge independent of the Bible, I would say that it was certainly practiced by the ancient churches; and St. Paul endeavors to prove the doctrine of the resurrection from the same, and says, 'Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? Why are they then baptized for the dead?'

"I first mentioned the doctrine in public when preaching the funeral sermon of Brother Seymour Brunson; and have since then given general instructions in the Church on the subject. The Saints have the privilege of being baptized for those of their relatives who are dead, whom they believe would have embraced the Gospel, if they had been privileged with hearing it, and who have received the Gospel in the spirit, through the instrumentality of those who have been commissioned to preach to them while in prison." (Documentary History, 4:231.)
