Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 128.

AN EPISTLE from Joseph Smith the Prophet to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, containing further directions on baptism for the dead; dated at Nauvoo, Illinois, September 6, 1842.—More detailed instructions concerning the general recorder, local recorders, and their duties—Witnesses required—The keeping of records shown to be in conformity with the ordinances of the Lord—Records kept on earth as well as those kept in heaven to be used in judgment—What is bound on earth by the power of the Holy Priesthood is bound in heaven, and what is loosed here is loosed there—The baptismal font a similitude of the grave—The mission of Elijah the Prophet—Baptism for the dead a welding link between the departed fathers and the living children—The Prophet's gladsome summary of heavenly visitations to him—The voice of gladness—Glad tidings for the dead—Glad tidings from Cumorah—The voice of the Three Witnesses to the Book of Mormon—The voice of Michael, of Peter, James and John—Records of the work done for the dead to be made acceptable to the Lord.

AS I stated to you in my letter before I left my place, that I would write to you from time to time and give you information in relation to many subjects, I now resume the subject of the baptism for the dead, as that subject seems to occupy my mind, and press itself upon my feelings the strongest, since I have been pursued by my enemies.

JOSEPH SMITH.

This Section contains another letter from the Prophet on the subject of baptism for the dead, written while he was in seclusion at the home of Edward Hunter—his temporary Wartburg. The Prophet makes the following note. "The important instructions contained in the foregoing letter made a deep and solemn impression on the minds of the Saints and they manifested their intentions to obey the instructions to the letter."

2-5. In the preceding Section, the Prophet instructed the Saints to keep a record of Temple ordinances performed. In this letter, further instructions are given on this subject, and the information is added that it is all in accordance with preparations made, before the foundation of the world, for the salvation of the dead.

6-11. The Prophet gives Scripture proofs for this. (1) John the Revelator saw the books opened and the dead judged out of the things which were written. (2) The power and authority of the Priesthood are such that, "whatsoever you loose on Earth shall be loosed in heaven," etc.; which means, "Whatsoever you record on Earth shall be recorded in heaven," etc.

12-15. From the subject of recording, the Prophet turns to the subject of baptism, and explains its significance. Baptism is a representation of burial and resurrection, as the Sacrament is a representation of His death.

As Paul says] Note that the Prophet credits this quotation from Hebrews to Paul. Among scholars, opinions concerning the authorship of that Epistle are divided. Some believe Apollos wrote it; others Luke, or Titus, or some other companion of Paul. Here the Spirit of Revelation ascribes the authorship to Paul. In favor of the Pauline origin it can be said that fathers of the Eastern and Alexandrian churches, in the third and second centuries, state that the "Ancients" had handed down the tradition that Paul wrote it. Clement of Alexandria, Origen, and Eusebius considered this testimony sufficient, and it must be admitted that it has a great deal more weight than a surmise in favor of Barnabas, or even Apollos, especially as there is no writing from the pen of either of them, with which the Epistle can be compared for critical purposes.

But may not baptism "for the dead" mean baptism "on the graves of the dead"? No, "for the dead" means "instead of," "for the benefit of" the dead. [^1]

But may not "baptism" for the dead mean "persecution to death," "martyrdom?" No, for persecution does not prove the resurrection, and that is the subject Paul is treating on. But if God had revealed the doctrine of vicarious baptism for the benefit of the dead, that would indeed be an unanswerable argument in favor of the resurrection.

20-21. In these paragraphs the Prophet reviews, enraptured, the wonderful story of the origin of the work in which the Saints were engaged. Scene after scene is unrolled before him, from the uncovering of the treasures of the Hill Cumorah to the last glorious Revelations on the salvation [^2] of the dead;—from the unveiling of the ancient records of the Nephites to the opening of the books from which mankind shall be judged.

" 'I saw the hosts of the dead, both small and great, and there were gathered together in one place an innumerable company of the spirits of the just * * * They were filled with joy and gladness, and were rejoicing together because the day of their deliverance was at hand * * * the Son of God appeared * * * and * * * preached to them the everlasting gospel, the doctrine of the resurrection, and the redemption of mankind from the fall and from individual sin, on condition of repentance.

"'I perceived that the Lord went not in person among the wicked and disobedient who had rejected the truth, to teach them; but behold from among the righteous He organized His forces and appointed messengers, clothed with power and authority, and commissioned them to go forth and carry the light of the gospel to them that were in darkness, even to all the spirits of men.

" 'I beheld that the faithful elders of this dispensation, when they depart from mortal life, continue their labors in the preaching of the gospel * * * among those who are in darkness and under the bondage of sin in the great world of the spirits of the dead.'

"The new light here thrown upon the subject proceeds from the declaration that when the Savior visited the inhabitants of the Spirit world, it was by proxy and not in person so far as the wicked were concerned. He ministered to the righteous directly, and to the unrighteous indirectly, sending His servants bearing the authority of the Priesthood and duly commissioned to speak and act in His name and stead. President Smith's Pronouncement is a modification of the view commonly taken, that the Savior's personal ministry was to both classes of spirits (Compare III. Nephi 15:21-24)." (Orson F. Whitney, Saturday Night Thoughts, pp. 292-293. See Gospel Doctrine, pp. 596-601.)

—————

Raphael] From the Revelations we know that Adam is Michael, and Noah, Gabriel; John the Baptist is called an angel (See Sec. 13). So is Moroni. Who Raphael was in the flesh is not revealed. In the Apocryphal book called Tobit (12-15) he is represented as saying, "I am Raphael, one of the seven holy angels, which present the prayers of the Saints, and which go in and out before the glory of the Holy One."

——— Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] The Greek preposition hyper with a genitive means "instead of," or "in behalf of," as in I. Thess. 5:10, where it is said that Christ died for us (hyper hemon); or "because of," as in I. Cor. 15:3. Those to whom Paul refers were baptized instead of the dead, not over their graves.
[^2] For instance, Jesus said: Handle me and see, for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have. From what is here stated concerning the nature of the different classes of beings in heaven, the rules given in paragraphs four to eight are easily comprehended.
