Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 129.

REVELATION given to Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Nauvoo, Illinois, February 9, 1843, making known the three grand keys by which good or bad angels or spirits may be distinguished.—Two kinds of beings besides mortals—Resurrected personages having bodies of flesh and bones—Disembodied spirits and spirits that have never been embodied—Means of detection.

THERE are two kinds of beings in heaven, namely: Angels, who are resurrected personages, having bodies of flesh and bones—

About the time this Revelation was received, a man came to the Prophet Joseph and told him he had seen an angel. He described his dress. The Prophet told him that he was mistaken, for in heaven there was no such dress as he had described. The man then became furious and commanded fire to come down from heaven and consume the Prophet and his house (Hist. of the Church, Vol. V., p. 267).

It should be noted that this Revelation came about a year before so-called spirit-rapping had been discovered, or invented, by the Fox family at Hydeville, N. Y., in March, 1844, giving birth to Spiritism with all its delusions. By this Revelation the Saints were forewarned and therefore saved from being deceived by false pretensions or by evil spirits.

Most Bible students have a very imperfect understanding of the nature of angels. They regard them as superior to man in intelligence, without material bodies, sexless, enjoying perpetual youth and immortality. Farther than that, the idea formed of angelic beings does not, as a rule, go. How clear and rational the information conveyed in this Revelation!

There has been considerable confusion arise because of the statement by the Prophet in this revelation that there are in heaven two kinds of beings, namely "angels who are resurrected personages, having bodies of flesh and bones * * * 2nd, spirits of just men made perfect—they who are not resurrected, but inherit the same glory." * * * When a messenger comes, saying he has a message from God, offer him your hand, and request him to shake hands with you. If he be an angel, he will do so, and you will feel his hand. If he be the spirit of a just man made perfect, he will come in his glory; for that is the only way he can appear." From this the thought has been conveyed to the minds of some that a personage cannot be an angel unless he is resurrected and has a body of flesh and bones. Any messenger sent from the presence of the Lord with a message is an angel. This term has even been applied to translated beings.

"In the broadest sense, any being who acts as a messenger for our Heavenly Father, is an angel, be he a God, a resurrected man, or the spirit of a just man; and the term is so used in all these senses in the ancient scriptures. In the stricter and more limited sense, an angel is, as the Prophet Joseph Smith states, a resurrected personage, having a body of flesh and bones; but it must be remembered that none of the angels who appeared to men before the death of the Savior could be of that class, for none of them was resurrected. He was the first-fruits of them that slept. He Himself appeared often to His servants before he took His mortal body; for instance, to the brother of Jared, to Abraham, to Moses, to the seventy Elders and to many others." (President George Q. Cannon in the Juvenile Instructor, Vol. 26; January 15, 1891.)
