Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 130.

IMPORTANT ITEMS OF INSTRUCTION given by Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Ramus, Illinois, April 2, 1843.—When the Savior appears he will be in his true form, that of a man—The abode of the angels—The earth in its sanctified and immortalized condition—Prophecy of great difficulties involving much bloodshed to begin in South Carolina—Time of the Lord's coming not definitely made known—Intelligence acquired in this life will abide with its possessor—The law decreed in heaven, that blessings are obtained only by obedience to the laws upon which they are predicated—The Father and the Son possess bodies of flesh and bones—The Holy Ghost a personage of spirit.

WHEN the Savior shall appear we shall see him as he is. We shall see that he is a man like ourselves.

On the 2nd of April, 1843, the Prophet Joseph attended a meeting at which Orson Hyde spoke and, alluding to the coming of the Savior, said, "When He shall appear, we shall be like Him, etc. He will appear on a white horse as a warrior, and may be we shall have some of the same spirit. Our God is a warrior. It is our privilege to have the Father and Son dwelling in our hearts."

At dinner time the Prophet called the attention of Orson Hyde to these statements and told him that he would offer some corrections. Orson Hyde replied that they would be thankfully received, whereupon the Prophet gave the explanations contained in these paragraphs, first privately and afterwards in the meeting.

God dwelt among the people of Israel; His abode was the Tabernacle, and afterwards, the Temple, and His presence was manifested in the glory which rested between the cherubim on the Mercy Seat. In a similar manner He dwells in the hearts of the sanctified, by His Holy Spirit. But when the Father, or the Son, appears, he does so as a personage with the very body in the image of which man was made.

When the Prophet, at the little dinner party, had given his views on these subjects, questions were asked and a conversation ensued. The first question was answered in these verses.

—————

*"Abraham's bosom" is by commentators considered to be an expression depicting the banquet of Paradise (Numb. 11:12; John 13:23).

—————

God's time, we read in the Pearl of Great Price (Book of Abraham 3:1-9), is measured by the revolutions of Kolob, the central orb of the system of worlds to which our solar system belongs, and a day to Him is one thousand of our years. This is in harmony with Psalm 90:4 and II. Pet. 3:8.

Prophet's time] The prophets count days and years as the people among whom they live and to whom they speak, or write. The people of Bible times and lands, it is thought, measured the years according to the phases of the moon and counted 354 days in a year, instead of 365, as now, and the prophets, of course, used the same time measure.

"We have no doubt of the correctness of the statement of the Prophet Joseph Smith that 'there are no angels that minister to this earth but those who do belong or have belonged to it;' but that does not necessarily imply that they did not belong to the earth before they took a mortal body. In our opinion they belonged to this earth from the time of its creation, when they covenanted to come and take bodies thereon, at the time that the morning stars sang together and all the sons of God shouted for joy. In just this same way was Jesus 'the Lamb slain from before the foundation of the world.'

"We are taught to believe that Adam was the first man who took a body on this earth. There was no death before the fall. Who, then, was the angel who taught him the law of sacrifice, or of faith and baptism, or who was the cherubim with the flaming sword who guarded the tree of life? We cannot admit that the scriptures are false, and that these beings were not angels; neither can we admit that the Savior was not the first-fruits of the resurrection. Therefore, we are forced to the conclusion that the word 'angel' is used in the scriptures for any heavenly being bearing God's message or fulfilling His commands; and, further, that all beings who were created with the design that they should inhabit this earth, belong to it, and to no other planet. Taking this view, all difficulty vanishes. On the other hand, if this is not the case, how can the sayings of Joseph and the scriptures-the Bible, the Book of Mormon and modern revelation—be harmonized, as these all declare that angels were frequent visitors to this earth from the time of the creation to the days of the coming of the Redeemer." (President George Q. Cannon, Juvenile Instructor, January 15, 1891.)

10-11. Furthermore, each inhabitant on the glorified Earth will be given a "white stone"-a Urim and Thummim, whereby all things pertaining to a higher order of kingdoms will be made known.

12-13. The subject of conversation now turns to the remarkable prophecy on war given on the 25th of December, 1832 (See Sec. 87). The statement is reiterated that the trouble would begin in South Carolina and that the paramount issue would be the slave question. Note that the series of wars, beginning with the Civil War of the United States, is said to be "previous to the coming of the Son of Man"; that is to say, shortly before His advent.

14-17. The mention of the coming of the Son of Man reminds the Prophet of an incident which he relates. He was once praying to know when the Lord would come, just as Christ's disciples on one occasion desired to know, "When shall these things be?" Our Savior did not enlighten the Twelve on the time for His coming (See Matthew 24:36) but He spoke of the signs by which they would know that the day was drawing near (Luke 21:31). Nor did God satisfy Joseph's curiosity concerning the time, but He gave him the remarkable answer recorded in the 15th verse: "If thou livest until thou art 85 years old, thou shalt see the face of the Son of Man." At the April Conference, 1843, the Prophet spoke of the preparations foretold in the Scriptures:

"Judah must return, Jerusalem must be rebuilt, and the Temple, and water come out from under the Temple and the waters of the Dead Sea be healed. It will take some time to rebuild the walls of the city and the temple, etc., and all this must be done before the Son of Man will make His appearance" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. V., p. 337).

18, 19. Intelligence * * * will rise with us. The Prophet teaches us that, "A man is saved no faster than he gets knowledge, for if he does not get knowledge, he will be brought into captivity by some evil power in the other world, as evil spirits will have more knowledge, and consequently more power, than many men who are on the Earth" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. IV., p. 588). It would be useless, as far as life after death is concerned, to study and gain knowledge, if death ended it all.

20-1. This is indisputable. If we want to live we must conform to the physical laws by obedience to which life is sustained. We must take nourishment, exercise, keep clean, etc. If we desire to become musicians, painters, orators, we must obey certain laws by which the respective talents are developed. In the same way, if we desire to obtain any spiritual blessings, we must obey the laws upon which they are predicated.

22-3. See Lectures on Faith, 5:1-3. If we believe the Scriptures that Jesus Christ ascended with a body of flesh and bones, and that He dwells with the Father, it is not difficult to accept the fact that the Father also has a material body, for the Son is His "express image" (Heb. 1:3).
