Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 131.

Instructions by Joseph Smith the Prophet, given at Ramus, Illinois, May 16 and 17, 1843. See History of the Church, vol. 5, p. 392, 393.—Degrees in the celestial glory—Significance of the new anti everlasting covenant of marriage—The more sure word of prophecy—Impossibility of a man being saved in ignorance—Spirit is matter.

IN the celestial glory there are three heavens or degrees;

Ramus, where this Revelation was received, was a settlement situated about 22 miles southeast of Nauvoo. The Prophet often visited this place and preached some powerful discourses there.

On the 16th of May, 1843, a little company, consisting of Joseph Smith, George Miller, William Clayton, Eliza and Lydia Partridge, and J. M. Smith, went to Ramus. The Prophet and William Clayton stayed at Benjamin F. Johnson's over night. Before retiring, the little party of friends engaged in conversation on spiritual topics. The Prophet told them that "except a man and his wife enter into an everlasting covenant and be married for eternity, while in this probation, by the power and authority of the holy Priesthood, they will cease to increase when they die; that is, they will not have any children after the resurrection." Then he spoke of the unpardonable sin, explaining that it consists in shedding innocent blood, or being accessory thereto. "All other sins," he said, "will be visited with judgment in the flesh, the spirit being delivered to the buffetings of Satan until the day of the Lord Jesus." Then he spoke of the three heavens in the celestial glory, as recorded in the first four verses of this Revelation. See also footnote, page 285.

On the 17th of May the Prophet preached a discourse on II. Pet. 1, and showed that knowledge is power. Among the truths announced at this time was that recorded in the 5th and 6th verses of this Revelation.

In the evening the Prophet went to hear a Methodist preach. After the sermon he offered some corrections. On Gen. 2:7 he observed that it ought to read, "God breathed into Adam his [that is, Adam's] spirit or breath of life;" but when the word reach applies to Eve, it should be translated "lives."

He added the truths recorded in the 7th and 8th verses of this Revelation.

General Notes

On his return home from Ramus, on the 18th of May, 1843, the Prophet took dinner with Judge Stephen A. Douglas, at Carthage, and gave him, at his request, a detailed account of the persecutions the Saints had suffered. He concluded his narrative with a prophecy which B. H. Roberts considers "one of the most remarkable prophecies either in ancient or modern times" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. V., p. 395). The Prophet concluded as follows:

"Judge, you will aspire to the presidency of the United States; and if ever you turn your hand against me or the Latter-day Saints, you will feel the weight of the hand of the Almighty upon you; and you will live to see and know that I have testified the truth to you; for the conversation of his day will stick to you through life."

Judge Douglas did aspire to the presidency so effectively that, on the 23rd of June, 1860, he was nominated by the Democratic party. Judging from appearances, his election was sure, for his party, in the preceding election, polled over half a million votes more than the opposing parties. But the Judge failed miserably. On the 12th of June, 1857, he turned his hand against the Latter-day Saints, in spite of the warning of the Prophet, when, in a speech delivered at Springfield, III., he accused the Latter-day Saints, then living in Utah, of all the crimes known to the penal code, well knowing that he did so falsely, to gain favor among the enemies of the Church. The result was as the Prophet had told him would be the case, he was defeated. Abraham Lincoln carried 18 States; Breckinridge, 11; Bell, 3; and Judge Douglas, only one! Less than a year after his nomination he died, disappointed, heartbroken, only 48 years of age (Hist. of the Church, Vol. V., pp. 393-8). The prophecy was fulfilled to the letter, and, incidentally, the Lord demonstrated to the world that He recognized the Church in the Valleys of the Mountains as His people; for it was because of his attitude towards the Saints there that he sealed his own doom.
