Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 132.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Nauvoo, Illinois, recorded July 12, 1843, relating to the new and everlasting covenant, including the eternity of the marriage covenant, as also plurality of wives.—The Prophet's inquiry of the Lord—He is told to prepare himself to receive the new and everlasting covenant—Conditions of this law—The power of the Holy Priesthood instituted by the Lord must be operative in ordinances to be in effect beyond the grave—Marriage by secular authority is of effect during mortality only—Though the form of marriage should make it appear to be for time and eternity, the ordinance is not valid beyond the grave unless solemnized by the authority of the Holy Priesthood as the Lord directs—Marriage duly authorized for time and eternity to be attended by surpassing blessings—Essentials for the attainment of the status of godhood—The meaning of eternal lives—Plurality of wives acceptable only when commanded by the Lord—The sin of adultery—Commandment to Emma Smith, wife of the Prophet.

VERILY, thus saith the Lord unto you my servant Joseph, that inasmuch as you have inquired of my hand to know and understand wherein I, the Lord, justified my servants Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, as also Moses, David and Solomon, my servants, as touching the principle and doctrine of their having many wives and concubines—

This Revelation is dated the 12th of July, 1843. William Clayton, who was Temple Recorder and private clerk of the Prophet Joseph at that time, relates the following:

"On the morning of the 12th of July, 1843, Joseph and Hyrum Smith came into the office of the upper story of the 'Brick-store,' on the bank of the Mississippi River. They were talking of the subject of plural marriage, [and] Hyrum said to Joseph, 'If you will write the Revelation on celestial marriage, I will take and read it to Emma, and I believe I can convince her of its truth, and you will hereafter have peace.' Joseph smiled and remarked, 'You do not know Emma as well as I do.' Hyrum repeated his opinion, and further remarked, 'The doctrine is so plain, I can convince any reasonable man or woman of its truth, purity, and heavenly origin,' or words to that effect. * * * Joseph and Hyrum then sat down, and Joseph commenced to dictate the Revelation on Celestial Marriage, and I wrote it, sentence by sentence, as he dictated. After the whole was written, Joseph asked me to read it through slowly and carefully, which I did, and he pronounced it correct"(Hist. Rec. pp. 225-6).

This was not the first mention of the subject among the Saints. Sarah Ann Kimball and many others knew of it in 1842, and Joseph B. Noble heard of it in the fall of 1840. Orson Pratt says that the Prophet Joseph, in the forepart of 1832, while he was living at the house of Father Johnson at Hiram, Ohio, told Church members that he had enquired of the Lord concerning this doctrine, and received the answer that it was true, but that the time to practice it had not come (Discourse by Orson Pratt, Salt Lake City, October 7th, 1869). Consequently, the Law of the Church remained as stated in Doctrine and Covenants 42:22, and as it is to-day, "Thou shalt love thy wife with all thy heart, and shall cleave unto her and none else."

The Revelation is divided into two parts. The first, comprising vv. 3-33, deals mainly with the principle of celestial marriage, or marriage for time and all eternity; the second, comprising the remaining verses, deals with plural marriage. The doctrine of celestial marriage remains in force; the practice of plural marriage was abandoned by the acceptancy by the Church, in Conference assembled October 6th, 1890, of the Manifesto of President Woodruff.

Section 132 contains (1) an introductory statement (1-2); (2) a reminder to the Prophet that knowledge demands obedience (3-6); (3) a definition of the celestial law (7-14), and (4) how the law applies to marriage covenants (15-20); (5) a demand for obedience (21-7); (6) the Law of the Priesthood (28-33); (7) the doctrine of plural marriage (34-40); (8) a declaration that plurality of wives is not adultery (41-9); (9) that it is a sacrifice (50-7); (10) that it is a law of the Priesthood (58-66).

1-2. From this introductory statement it is evident that the Prophet had made the question of marriage a subject of earnest prayer, as he did with matters concerning which he was perplexed and desired to know the truth. He did not understand how the Patriarchs, and David and Solomon could find favor with the Lord, while living in a manner contrary to certain modern moral standards, and he asked the Lord for light. Elder B. H. Roberts (Hist. of the Church, Vol. V., Intr., p. 29) suggests that it was in the year 1831, when the Prophet was studying the lives of the Patriarchs in the Old Testament, in the course of his Bible revision, that he was led to offer the prayer referred to in the first verse, and received the answer contained in this Section, though it was not then committed to writing.

3-6. The truth is here emphasized that when the Lord reveals a law, man must obey it. Knowledge entails this responsibility. God may, as Paul expresses it, "wink at" the time of ignorance (Acts 17:30), but when the ignorance is removed, obedience is expected.

If ye abide not that covenant * * * damned] That is to say, when the eternity of the marriage covenant has been revealed, those who reject that revelation and neglect to enter married life through the holy Priesthood, in which alone the authority to seal for eternity is vested, will be "damned." Their damnation will consist in not being permitted to enter into "my," that is, celestial glory.

This verse has sometimes been supposed to refer to plural marriage. But that is not the case. It refers to celestial marriage—marriage for eternity.

7-14. The celestial law is here explained. All covenants, agreements, promises, etc., not entered into for eternity are of no force after death. Only the covenants that are sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise, through one who holds divine authority, remain in force after death.

But one * * * at a time] Only one man at a time holds this authority. He may delegate others to act for him, but he remains responsible for the administration of the kingdom. For "mine house is a house of order" (v. 8).

15-20. From the preceding paragraphs (7-14) it follows that a marriage contract, entered into by worldly authority alone, ends at death. It is binding and perfectly legal and honorable as far as this life is concerned, but it is dissolved by the grim reaper's work. Nor is it sufficient for a man and a woman to make a private contract on the supposition that such an agreement will be binding for eternity (v. 18). The covenant must be sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise, through him who is divinely authorized to do so. Then it is valid for eternity. Then it is a celestial marriage (v. 19).

Note the incomprehensible and immeasurable glory and exaltation that are the attendants in eternity on celestial marriage, provided the contracting parties live worthy and pure lives.

"He [God] has revealed to us * * * that marriage is destined for eternity as well as time—that the marriage covenant between male and female must be entered into in this life, and the ordinance performed here by those whom God has appointed and ordained to hold the keys and authority to seal on earth that it may be sealed in heaven; for in heaven there is neither marrying nor giving in marriage; no such thing can be attended to there. Now, persons among the Latter-day Saints who do not enter this covenant of marriage, but prefer to lead a single life, can not enjoy all that fulness of exaltation which will be possessed by those who have this covenant sealed upon them. They might not have forfeited the right to have wives by which only they could have a posterity in the eternal worlds. Who will be the subjects in the kingdom which they will rule who are exalted in the celestial kingdom of our God? Will they reign over their neighbor's children? Oh, no! Over whom will they reign? Their own children, their own posterity will be the citizens of their kingdoms; in other words, the Patriarchal order will prevail there to the endless ages of eternity, and the children of each Patriarch will be his, while eternal ages roll on" (Orson Pratt, Jour. of Dis., Vol. XV., p. 319).

"Man is made an agent to himself before his God; he is organized for the express purpose that he may become like his Master. You recollect one of the Apostle's sayings, that when we see Him, we shall be like him; and again, 'We shall become gods, even the sons of God.' Do you read anywhere that we shall possess all things? Jesus is the elder brother, and all the brethren shall come in for a share with Him * * * We are created, we are born, for the express purpose of growing up from the low estate of manhood, to become gods, like unto our Father in heaven" (Jour. of Dis., Vol. III., p. 93).

This verse is not a quotation of John 17:3, where our Lord teaches His disciples that His mission was to give eternal life to those whom the Father had given Him, "in order that they may know" the true God and His Son. Earthly life is too short for that study. This is a new Revelation, in which we are taught that eternal increase, or "lives," is part of the glory of eternal life; but the language closely resembles that of John, as is frequently the case in these Revelations.

The illustration seems to be drawn from a mansion having a large portal at which many enter, and a narrow entrance known only to a few.

"If any man see his brother sin a sin which is not unto death, he shall ask, and he shall give him life for them that sin not unto death. There is a sin unto death; I do not say that be should pray for it." (I. John 5:16.)

In this passage we are taught that all manner of sin which is forgivable on repentance, or "not unto death," may be forgiven on repentance, but some sins may call for a most dreadful punishment even then—the destruction in the flesh and being turned over to the buffetings of Satan until the day of redemption. This punishment is most severe. The Lord has not at any time contradicted Himself and he has said: "And no unclean thing can enter into his kingdom; therefore nothing entereth into his rest save it be those who have washed their garments in my blood, because of their faith, and the repentance of all their sins, and their faithfulness unto the end. (III. Nephi 27:19.) The wilful sinners who remain in their sins, "shall return unto God, and behold his face, and remain in their sins." (II. Nephi 9:38. Compare Mormon 9:3-4.)

Blasphemies] A blasphemy is an indignity offered to God in words or acts, and in the Scriptures it means also "heresies." Hymenaeus and Alexander, whom Paul "delivered to Satan" (I. Tim. 1:20), were blasphemers," but their "blasphemy" seems to have consisted in teaching the false doctrine that the resurrection had already taken place (II. Tim. 2:17).

28-33. The celestial law, an explanation of which has been given in vv. 7-20, is here called, "The law of my Holy Priesthood." It was ordained by God before the world was (v. 28). In accordance with that law, Abraham received "all things" by revelation and commandment. Among the things received were promises concerning his seed—that his children should continue in this world and in the next, as innumerable as the stars (v. 30). This law is celestial, because by obedience to it, the works of God, the Father, continue, to His glory (v. 31).

34-40. In the preceding sections, this Revelation deals with celestial marriage—marriage for eternity. In this section and those following, plural marriage is the subject; and it is first shown that some of the greatest characters in the Old Testament had wives and concubines.

"It is not to be supposed that, in a time when polygamy was usual, the young sheyk remained celibate till forty. The marriage to one of the kin, Rebekah, was the political marriage for the clan, to set up a fresh chieftainess after Sarah was dead." (W. M. Flinders Petrie, Egypt and Israel, p. 24.)

Have entered into their exaltation. See verse 29.

41-9. The Prophet, in his prayer on this subject, had asked the Lord for information concerning the ground on which the Patriarchs were justified in their domestic relations, and the answer was the definition of adultery here given. Plural marriage, the Revelation says, in substance, is not adultery, but to violate the marriage covenant is to commit that sin, the penalty being destruction (vv. 41, 52); but God Himself will execute that judgment (v. 54).

58-66. The truth is here reiterated, that whatever is done in the name of God, according to His law and by His direction, cannot be sin. What human law regards as a crime may, or may not, from the Divine point of view, be a sin. Sometimes the Innocent dies on Calvary, because criminals have acted as judge and jury.

General Notes

As has been stated in the introductory notes, the doctrine of plural marriage was made known to the Prophet in 1831, or 1832, although the Revelation on the subject was not committed to writing until the year 1843. It should be noted that even then it was not given to the Church. This step was taken on the 29th of August, 1852, when the Revelation was read to a General Conference in the "Old Tabernacle," Salt Lake City, and accepted by the assembly as a revelation from God and part of the law of the Church. In voting for the Revelation, the Saints firmly believed that they were only exercising their legal right as American citizens. They believed that, as a majority, they had the indisputable constitutional right to regulate their domestic affairs, within the boundaries of their own territory, and that the Supreme Court of the United States would uphold this view, even if Congress should be of a different opinion. And they were strengthened in their position by the fact that not until ten years after the action taken by the Church in 1852 was any effort made by Congress to stamp plural marriage as illegal.

The first Congressional enactment against plural marriage, passed in 1862, remained a dead letter for twenty years. By that time. the anti-Mormons had evidence that the Supreme Court would uphold legislation of that kind, and laws more drastic than the first were passed by Congress. The Church leaders appealed to the Supreme Court, as was their prerogative. For years there was a legal conflict. At last, when the Supreme Court had declared the anti-polygamy laws constitutional and there was no prospect that there would be a reversal of this decision, the Church loyally and gracefully accepted it. President Wilford Woodruff issued his Manifesto against the practice of plural marriage, and this was accepted by a unanimous vote of the General Conference assembled in Salt Lake City, Oct. 6th, 1890. This was done by divine revelation to President Wilford Woodruff.

This is the full text of the Manifesto:

"Press dispatches having been sent for political purposes, from Salt Lake City, which have been widely published, to the effect that the Utah Commission, in their recent report to the Secretary of the Interior, allege, that plural marriages are still being solemnized and that forty or more such marriages have been contracted in Utah since last June or during the past year, also that in public discourses the leaders of the Church have taught, encouraged and urged the continuance of the practice of polygamy,

"I, therefore, as President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, do hereby, in the most solemn manner, declare that these charges are false. We are not teaching polygamy or plural marriage nor permitting any person to enter into its practice, and I deny that either forty or any other number of plural marriages have during that period been solemnized in our temples or in any other place in the Territory.

"One case has been reported, in which the parties allege that the marriage was performed in the Endowment House, in Salt Lake City, in the spring of 1889, but I have not been able to learn who performed the ceremony; whatever was done in this matter was without my knowledge. In consequence of this alleged occurrence the Endowment House was, by my instructions, taken down without delay.

"Inasmuch as laws have been enacted by Congress forbidding plural marriages, which laws have been pronounced constitutional by the court of last resort, I hereby declare my intention to submit to those laws, and to use my influence with the members of the Church over which I preside to have them do likewise.

"There is nothing in my teachings to the Church or in those of my associates, during the time specified, which can be reasonably construed to inculcate or encourage polygamy, and when any Elder of the Church has used language which appeared to convey any such teaching, he has been promptly reproved. And I now publicly declare that my advice to the Latter-day Saints is to refrain from contracting any marriage forbidden by the law of the land.

WILFORD WOODRUFF,

President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints."

After the Manifesto had been read to the Conference, President Lorenzo Snow offered the following:

"I move, that, recognizing Wilford Woodruff as the President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and the only man on the earth at the present time who holds the keys of the sealing ordinances, we consider him fully authorized by virtue of his position to issue the manifesto which has been read in our hearing and which is dated Sept. 24th, 1890, and that as a Church in General Conference assembled, we accept his declaration concerning plural marriages as authoritative and binding."

The vote to sustain the foregoing motion was unanimous.

By this action the Church voted to conform to the laws of the land as interpreted by the highest tribunal, and to leave the issue with God. Since that conference, and, in fact, for some time previous to the acceptance of the Manifesto, no plural marriage has been performed anywhere with the sanction of the Church, or the approbation of the First Presidency, or anyone representing them, as was fully proved during the so-called Smoot investigation in the United States Senate, which commenced January 16, 1904.

"I want to say to this congregation, and to the world, that never at any tune since my presidency in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints have 1 authorized any man to perform plural marriage, and never since my presidency of the Church has any plural marriage been performed with my sanction or knowledge, or with the consent of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; and therefore such unions as have been formed unlawfully, contrary to the order of the Church, are null and void in the sight of God, and are not marriages" (President Joseph F. Smith, at the General Conference of the Church, Oct. 4th, 1918).
