Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 133.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Hiram, Ohio, November 3, 1831. Prefacing this revelation the Prophet wrote: At this time there were many things which the Elders desired to know, relative to preaching the Gospel to the inhabitants of the earth, and concerning the gathering; and in order to walk by the true light, and be instructed from on high, on the 3rd of November, 1831,1 inquired of the Lord and received the following important revelation, which has since been added to the book of Doctrine and Covenants and called the Appendix.—A proclamation to the people of the Church to gather to Zion—This proclamation to be carried by the Elders to the peoples of the world—Zion and Jerusalem both to be established—The voice of the Lord to issue from each of these centers—The Lost Tribes to be remembered by the Lord and to be brought forth from the north countries—These to receive their blessings at the hand of Ephraim—Graves of the Saints to be opened at the coming of the Lord—The doom of those who reject the Lord's message.

HEARKEN, O ye people of my church, saith the Lord your God, and hear the word of the Lord concerning you—

This Revelation was given on the 3rd day of November 1831, just two days after the Revelation was received known as the Preface to the Book of Commandments. It came in response to questions by the Elders of the Church relative to the preaching of the gospel, the gathering of the Jews to Palestine, and the return of the lost tribes of Israel, and other questions of great importance pertaining to the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times.

As it was given while the Prophet Joseph Smith was compiling the Revelations for publication, after the special Conference of the Church which ordered that work done, it was agreed that it should appear in the forthcoming volume. It is one of the most important Revelations the Prophet received and has continued to appear in all editions of the Doctrine and Covenants from the beginning, notwithstanding many other Revelations were received since this was given.

The curse pronounced upon the Jews for their rejection and crucifixion of the Lord was that they should be scattered among all nations and should thus remain downtrodden until the "times of the Gentiles be fulfilled" (Luke 21:24; Sec. 45:30). The capture of the Holy Land from the Turks by the British forces under General Allenby in 1917-18, is bringing to pass greater freedom for the Jews in their own land. They are now preparing to return in considerable numbers, and the indication is that the remnant spoken of by the prophets will soon stand on their native land. This means that the times of the Gentiles are rapidly drawing to their close.

"The Gentile fulness now comes in. And Israel's blessings are at hand; Lo! Judah's remnant, cleansed from sin, Shall in their promised Canaan stand."

The Gentiles who obeyed the Gospel were commanded (v. 12) to gather in Zion, and those of the house of Judah were to flee to Jerusalem (v. 13). This is in harmony with the prediction of Isaiah and Micah. that out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. For from both these centers the Lord shall judge, Jerusalem shall be re-built and become a holy city, the capital for Judah, and Zion shall be the capital and city of our God, for Ephraim and his fellows. Both shall be seats of government in unison with each other, and the Lord shall dwell in both.

At a conference of the Church held in June 1831, the Prophet said that John the Revelator was then among the ten tribes of Israel who had been led away by Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, to prepare them for their return from their long dispersion. (Essentials in Church History, p. 126).
