Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 136.

THE WORD AND WILL OF THE LORD, given through President Brigham Young, at the Winter Quarters of the Camp of Israel, Omaha Nation, West Bank of Missouri River, near Council Bluffs, Iowa, January 14, 1847.—Plan of organization for migration to the West—Admonitions to righteousness—The Lord to be praised both in times of joy and of sorrow—Needful that Joseph Smith the Prophet should have sealed his testimony with his blood.

THE Word and Will of the Lord concerning the Camp of Israel in their journeyings to the West:

1-2. The word and will of the Lord] The Saints were driven from their homes in Nauvoo under the most trying circumstances and in poverty and destitution in large measure, for they had been robbed by their enemies. Therefore it was extremely needful for a revelation from the Lord for their guidance in their journeyings to the Rocky Mountains. The Lord did not fail them in this hour of distress and gave this revelation to President Brigham Young to guide them in their journeyings and admonishing them to keep His commandments. All the members of the Church were to be organized in companies and were required to keep the commandments faithfully that they might have the guidance of His Spirit with them in all their trying circumstances. These companies were to be on the order followed by Zion's Camp in their remarkable march from Kirtland to Missouri, with captains, over hundreds, fifties and tens and all under the direction of the council of Apostles.

4-11. And this shall be our covenant] How essential it was then in the days of tribulation for the saints to walk by covenant as they journeyed towards a new home. Moreover it was necessary that they provide themselves the best they could with teams, clothing and provisions, for the journey was a difficult one. Some members of necessity would be left behind until such time as they could be prepared. The officers of the companies were to decide who might go and who would better remain behind until a more suitable day. These who were to remain were to put in crops and wait until the coming harvest. Each company was to bear an equal proportion of the means for the benefit of all. Those who had substance were to share with those who were destitute, in the true spirit of charity and faith. There were among them the widows and fatherless and the wives and families of those who had gone into the "Mormon Battalion." If they would do this the Lord would pour out upon them his blessings. They should have flocks and herds and their fields would not fail them.

18-27. Zion shall be redeemed] The members of the Church had been disappointed, if not discouraged, because Zion had not been redeemed. No doubt it was trying to the faith of some to be on the way to the unknown region of the Rocky Mountains. All that they had heard of this territory was discouraging and the redemption of Zion seemed farther away than ever from fulfillment. Now they were to take courage, for the Lord had not forgotten Zion, and it should be redeemed in the due time of the Lord. It was well, therefore, for the members to obey counsel and not seek to build themselves at the expense of others; should this be done they would lose the reward. The Lord would lead them as he led the children of Israel, and he was just as mindful of the Saints today as he was then. Every man should respect the rights and property of the rest, and all should be wise stewards.

"For verily I say unto you, blessed is he that keepeth my commandments, whether in life or in death; and he that is faithful in tribulation, the reward of the same is greater in the kingdom of heaven. Ye cannot behold with your natural eyes, for the present time, the design of your God concerning those things which shall come hereafter, and the glory which shall follow after much tribulation." (Doc. & Cov. Sec. 58:2-3.)

34-42. For they killed the prophets] The Lord declares that the nation rejected the prophets and permitted the saints to be driven out, and by doing so there would come upon them calamity and sorrow The blood of Joseph and Hyrum Smith and the others who had been slain for the Gospel's sake cried to the Lord from the ground against them. The Prophet laid a foundation upon which all men could build, but they refused and the Lord took the Prophet to himself. While many marveled that the Lord would permit his enemies to slay his servant, yet it was needful that he seal his testimony with his blood "that he might be honored, and the wicked be condemned."
