Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 11.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to his brother, Hyrum Smith, at Harmony, Pennsylvania, May, 1829. This revelation was received through the Urim and Thummim in answer to Joseph's supplication and inquiry.—The coming forth of a great and marvelous work proclaimed—Hyrum restrained from preaching for the time being, he not being yet baptized and ordained—He is assured of the gift of God awaiting his preparation to receive—The organization of the Church foreshadowed—Hyrum admonished to learn the word of God before attempting to proclaim it—Warned against denying the spirit of revelation and prophecy.

A GREAT and marvelous work is about to come forth among the children of men.

Hyrum Smith, who was born on the 9th day of February, 1800, was the second son of Joseph Smith, Sr., and his wife, Lucy, and the oldest of the children living at this time. He was a Presbyterian, but when he heard of the finding of the Book of Mormon plates and learned that his brother, Joseph, was translating them, he went to Harmony, Pa., where the young Prophet lived temporarily, to investigate the matter. At his earnest request, Joseph prayed for a Revelation for him and received the one contained in this Section. Hyrum became convinced of the truth, and was baptized in June, 1829. Shortly afterwards he became one of the Eight Witnesses to the Book of Mormon.

Between Joseph and Hyrum there was a sacred bond of genuine friendship, unselfish and tender; a friendship of that pure quality of which there are but few instances on record. We may recall the beautiful story of David and Jonathan, or, that of Damon and Pythias; the friendship between Joseph and Hyrum was all that those names stand for, and, in addition, the sympathy engendered by natural affection, and made sacred by a common interest in the salvation of their fellow men. Hyrum watched tenderly over Joseph. He was a peacemaker. He was faithful to death, and shared the martyr wreath with his illustrious, younger brother.

The following sentiment was expressed by the Prophet Joseph on the 11th of August, 1842:

"Brother Hyrum, what a faithful heart you have got! Oh, may the Eternal Jehovah crown eternal blessings upon your head, as a reward for the care you have had for my soul! O how many are the sorrows we have shared together; and again we find ourselves shackled with the unrelenting hand of oppression. Hyrum, thy name shall be written in the Book of the Law of the Lord, [^1] for those who come after thee to look upon, that they may pattern after thy works" (History of the Church, Vol. V., pp. 107-8).

That the Lord was well pleased with this faithful witness, is clear from the following, "Verily I say unto you, blessed is my servant Hyrum Smith, for I, the Lord, love him because of the integrity of his heart, and because he loveth that which is right before me, saith the Lord" (Doc. and Cov. 124:15). Like Abraham, Hyrum Smith was a Patriarch, and as such he was a great man; but he was greater still as "the friend of God."

The Revelation in this Section was given to him in order that he might know the truth.

1-9. These verses are identical with Section 6:1-9. There are some remarkable repetitions in the Bible, too. See, for instance, Isaiah 2:2-4 and Micah 5:1-3.

''The Apostles heard, during three years and a half, many sermons [by our Lord], and a vast amount of conversation and private teaching. The office of the Spirit of Truth was to bring to their remembrance the things that Jesus had formerly taught them. So it is the office of the same Spirit in these days to bring to our remembrance the words of the ancient Prophets and Apostles, and the words of Jesus, inasmuch as we have faith and confidence in God" (Journal of Discourses, Vol. VI., p. 349).

My rock] My revelation.

"Jesus says, 'Upon this rock I will build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.' What rock? Revelation" (Joseph Smith, Hist. of Church, Vol. V., p.258).

18-22. Further instructions are given here. "Keep my commandments." Assist in the bringing forth of the Book of Mormon (v. 19). "First seek to obtain my Word" (v. 21). This involves prayerful study. The command is repeated (v. 22), "Study my word which hath gone forth" (the Bible), "and also study my word which shall come forth" (the Book of Mormon). The Lord does not employ ignorant preachers.

"It is impossible for a man to be saved in ignorance" (Doc. and Cov. 131:6). Much less can one be a savior in ignorance.

Nor the Spirit of prophecy] The Spirit of revelation is the Spirit of prophecy; it reveals things past, present, and future. To deny this Spirit is one form of atheism.

General Notes

Hyrum Smith was one of the Eight Witnesses to the Book of Mormon. He suffered a great deal of persecution because of his testimony. In December, 1839, he wrote a letter to the scattered Saints, in which he told them of the sufferings he had endured in the State of Missouri, and reaffirmed his testimony. He said, in part:

"I had been abused and thrust into a dungeon, and confined for months on account of my faith and the testimony of Jesus Christ. However, I thank God that I felt a determination to die, rather than deny the things which my eyes had seen, which my hands had handled, and which I had borne testimony to, wherever my lot had been cast; and I can assure my beloved brethren that I was enabled to bear as strong a testimony, when nothing but death presented itself, as ever I did in my life" (Times and Seasons, Vol. I., p. 23).

——— Note

---
Notas:
[^1] The Prophet kept a record which he called "The Book of the Law of the Lord," in which he recorded in love and gratitude the names of those who had proven themselves loyal to him and the Church. It also contained some important revelations.
