Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 12.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to Joseph Knight, Sen., at Harmony, Pennsylvania, May, 1829. Joseph Knight believed the declarations of Joseph Smith, concerning his possession of the Book of Mormon plates, and the work of translation then in progress, and had given material assistance to the translator and his scribe. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 47.—Great and marvelous character of the Lord's work—Personal participation in the bringing forth and establishment of the cause of Zion open to all who have earnest desires and who possess the requisite qualifications.

A GREAT and marvelous work is about to come forth among the children of men.

Joseph Knight, Sr., of Colesville, N. Y., having heard of the work in which the Prophet Joseph was engaged, was prompted to go to Harmony, Pa., with a load of provisions, to enable the Prophet and his associates to continue the translation. He brought supplies several times, a distance of thirty miles. The Lord thus taught His young servants to trust in Him. He gave them their first lesson in laboring without "purse and scrip." Knight was a Universalist, but he was liberal, hospitable, and kind, and was of great assistance in laying the foundations of the Church. During his visit with the Prophet in May, 1829, this Revelation was received

1-6. See notes on Sec. 6:1-6. The first six verses are identical with the first part of Section Eleven, which contains a Revelation to Hyrum Smith; also with the first part of the Revelation to Oliver Cowdery, Sec. 6. There are elementary truths which the Spirit of God deemed it necessary to impress upon the minds of all who had a desire to engage in the ministry: (1) The work about to come forth was "great and marvelous," even the marvelous work predicted by Isaiah (29:14); (2) He who gave these Revelations, Jesus Christ, is God, and His word must be obeyed; (3) the field was ripe, ready for the harvest; the time had come; (4) only those who were willing to work would be called; (5) by prayer great things would be accomplished; and, finally, it would be necessary, for success, to keep the commandments of God.

Humble] Humility is a Christian virtue. Heathen philosophers—Aristotle, for instance—regarded meekness as a defect, and not a virtue. The world generally holds that view. Humility is submission to the will of God. Christ was "meek and lowly," and He is the pattern. Humility is the opposite of self-assertion and pride.
