Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 13.

ORDINATION of Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery to the Aaronic Priesthood, at Harmony, Pennsylvania, May 15, 1829, under the hands of an Angel, who announced himself as John, the same that is called John the Baptist in the New Testament. The angelic visitant averred that he was acting under the direction of Peter, James, and John, the ancient Apostles, who held the keys of the higher Priesthood, which was called the Priesthood of Melchizedek. The promise was given to Joseph and Oliver that in due time the Priesthood of Melchizedek would be conferred upon them. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 39. Compare Section 27:7, 8, 12.

UPON you my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah I confer the Priesthood of Aaron, which holds the keys of the ministering of angels, and of the gospel of repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; and this shall never be taken again from the earth, until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness.

The Section contains the words which John the Baptist spoke when he conferred upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood. John held these keys in the dispensation of the Meridian of Time, and because of this authority he was sent in the dispensation of the Fulness of Times to confer these keys in the day of restoration of all things. This Priesthood we are informed holds the keys of the preparatory Gospel, which is the Gospel of faith, repentance and the remission of sins by baptism by immersion, but does not hold the authority of laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, they were informed by John that he was acting under the direction of Peter, James and John, who held the keys of the Priesthood of Melchizedek, and that this Priesthood would in due time be conferred upon them, and Joseph Smith should be called the first Elder of the Church and Oliver Cowdery the second. This Priesthood held the keys of the higher ordinances, including the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. (D.H.C. 1:39-40.)

This promise was fulfilled shortly afterwards, when Peter, James, and John appeared in the wilderness between Harmony, Pa., and Colesville, N. Y., on the banks of the Susquehanna River, declaring that they held the keys of the Kingdom and of the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times (Doc. and Cov. 128-20), and ordaining and confirming the Prophet and Oliver to "be apostles and especial witnesses of my name" (Doc. and Cov. 27:12). When this ordination took place is not known, but Elder B. H. Roberts, Hist. of the Church, Vol. I., pp. 40, 41) fixes the date, from the historical material available, at some day between the 15th of May and the latter part of June, 1829.

The Priesthood of Aaron] There are two Priesthoods, the Melchizedek and the Aaronic, but "the Melchizedek Priesthood comprehends the Aaronic, or Levitical, "Priesthood" (Joseph Smith). Moses held the Melchizedek Priesthood, "and sought diligently to sanctify his people * * * but they hardened their hearts * * * therefore, he took Moses out of their midst, and the holy Priesthood also; and the lesser Priesthood continued" (Doc. and Cov. 84:23-27). This Lesser, or Aaronic Priesthood holds the Keys; that is, it has and confers authority to receive the ministration of angels, to preach the gospel of repentance, to baptize for the remission of sins, and to administer "the law of carnal commandments." Those who held this Priesthood in the Old Dispensation, attended to the Tabernacle and the Temple service, including the sacrifices; they took care of everything belonging to the Sanctuary. The duties of that Priesthood are of a similar nature now.

The Priests of the Aaronic Priesthood in the Mosaic Dispensation kept the fire upon the altar burning continually (Lev. 1:13). They dressed the burnt offerings (II. Chron. 29:34) and killed the pascal lamb (Ezra 6:20); they received the blood of the sacrifices in basins (Ex. 24:6) and sprinkled it round the altar; they disposed of the meat offerings, as prescribed by law, and of other offerings; they performed the ceremonies of purification (Lev. 12:6, 7) and judged cases of leprosy, etc.

The presiding officer was called the High Priest. His duties were to offer a meat offering every morning and evening, to officiate on the Day of Atonement, to arrange the shew-bread every Sabbath, to adjudicate legal differences, and to ascertain the mind and will of the Lord. Under his direction the Priests took the Tabernacle to pieces, when the people were to move forward. and reconstructed it, when they camped. He also appointed the Levites to their various duties and blessed the people (Num. 6:23-27).

The garments worn by the Priests consisted of linen drawers (Ex. 28:42) and a coat of fine linen, or cotton (Ex. 39:27), which, according to Josephus, reached to the feet, sat close to the body, had sleeves and was girded to the chest by a girdle: it had an aperture for the head, and was tied with strings.

The dress of the High Priest was similar, but, in addition, he wore a robe, an ephod, a breastplate in which he carried the Urim and Thummim, and a mitre (Ex. 28:4; 29:9). There is difference of opinion as to whether the ephod was a waistcoat or an apron. [^1] The Urim and Thummim was carried in a pocket, called the "breastplate," either above or upon the ephod. This pocket was about nine inches square, and was adorned with twelve precious stones, on each of which was engraved the name of one of the twelve tribes of Israel.

Speaking of the Aaronic Priesthood, the Prophet says:

"The offering of sacrifice has ever been connected with and forms a part of, the duties of the Priesthood. It began with the Priesthood, and will be continued until after the coming of Christ, from generation to generation. We frequently have mention made of the offering of sacrifice by the servants of the Most High in ancient days, prior to the Law of Moses; which ordinances will be continued when the Priesthood is restored with all its authority, power, and blessings" (History of the Church, Vol. IV., p. 207).

Until the sons of Levi do offer again, etc.] This does not mean that the Aaronic Priesthood will be taken from Earth when the sons of Levi are re-instated in their calling, but that, as a result of the restoration of that Priesthood, the sons of Levi would again offer sacrifices, as of yore. Oliver Cowdery, in an article in the Times and Seasons, reproduced in the Pearl of Great Price, quotes John the Baptist thus:

"Upon you my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah, I confer the Priesthood and this authority, which shall remain upon Earth, that the sons of Levi may yet offer an offering unto the Lord in righteousness'" giving the true sense of the words of John in this Revelation.

——— Note

---
Notas:
[^1] Facsimile No. 3 in the Book of Abraham throws some light on the vestments of the bearers of the Priesthood in ancient times. Abraham is there depicted with a mitre, or crown, on his head, emblematic of the grand Presidency in heaven, or the Melchizedek Priesthood. Shulem wears an apron, and this may be emblematic of the Lesser Priesthood.
