Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 14.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to David Whitmer, at Fayette, New York, June, 1829. The Whitmer family had become greatly interested in the translating of the Book of Mormon. Joseph changed his residence to the Whitmer home, where he dwelt until the work of translation was carried to completion and the copyright on the forthcoming book secured. Each of the three sons, having received a testimony as to the genuineness of the work, became deeply concerned over the matter of his individual duty; and the Prophet inquired of the Lord respecting the matter. This revelation and the two next following (Sections 15 and 16) were given in answer, through the Urim and Thummim. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 48. David Whitmer later became one of the Three Witnesses to the Book of Mormon.—Conditions of attaining eternal life specified—The Lord's purpose of bringing the fulness of his Gospel from the Gentiles to the house of Israel—David Whitmer informed of his call to assist in the latter-day work—His reward, conditioned by his faithfulness, is promised.

A GREAT and marvelous work is about to come forth unto the children of men.

David Whitmer was the son of a prosperous farmer, Peter Whitmer, living in the western part of the state of New York. On a business trip to Palmyra he became acquainted with Oliver Cowdery and heard the story of the finding of the Book of Mormon plates by Joseph Smith. It was the subject of common conversation in the community. This was in the year 1828. David, who had been brought up a strict Presbyterian, at first paid little attention to the rumor. Cowdery said there must be some foundation for it, and that he intended to make an investigation. David returned home. Some months after this visit to Palmyra, Cowdery visited the Whitmers. He was then on his way to Harmony, Pa., to see the Prophet Joseph. David Whitmer asked him to let him know the results of his investigation. Some time later he received a letter from Cowdery, in which that latter stated that he was convinced that Joseph the Prophet, had the plates, as claimed. Several letters passed between them, and finally David Whitmer went to Harmony with a conveyance and brought Joseph Smith, his wife, and Oliver Cowdery to his home where they were hospitably received. The very next day after the arrival, the work on the Book of Mormon was resumed and continued for a month, from June the 1st to July the 1st, 1829. David Whitmer states that the translation was done in the presence of all of his father's family, Mrs. Smith, Oliver Cowdery, and Martin Harris, through the aid of the Urim and Thummim (Millennial Star, Vol. XLIII., p. 421). While this work was being done in the Whitmer home, David, John, and Peter Whitmer were anxious to know the will of God concerning them. and the Revelations contained in Sections 14, 15 and 16 were received.

1-5. These verses are identical with the first five verses of Sec. 6.

David Whitmer was baptized during the month of June 1829, and was privileged to become one of the Three Witnesses to the Book of Mormon. He was one of the original six members of the Church. He shared in the trials of the Saints, was appointed president of the High Council in Clay County, July 3, 1834, and took a leading part in the Church in Missouri. When the saints settled in Far West, he was sustained as their president there. But, notwithstanding all this, he was excommunicated on April 13th, 1838. Had he given heed to this Revelation, he might have remained faithful to the end. He did not return to the Church, but he remained faithful to the testimony to the Book of Mormon until the day of his death.

General Notes

Some imagine that the first associates of the Prophet were dupes, who took his words at par without evidence. This is far from true. They believed because the evidence was overwhelming. This is clear from the history of Samuel Smith, Hyrum Smith, Martin Harris, Oliver Cowdery, and David Whitmer. The latter relates the following:

"Soon after this [the arrival of a letter from Oliver Cowdery] Joseph sent for me to come to Harmony to get him and Oliver, to bring them to my father's house. I did not know what to do. I was pressed with my work. I had some twenty acres to plow, so I concluded I would finish plowing and then go. I got up one morning to go to work as usual, and on going to the field, found between 5 and 7 acres of my ground had been plowed during the night. I do not know who did it, but it was done just as I would have done it myself, and the plow was left standing in the furrow."

This incident was related to Orson Pratt and Joseph F. Smith by David Whitmer, on the 7th of September, 1878, forty years after he had left the Church. It was to him a miraculous evidence, the force of which he never denied.
