Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 15.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to John Whitmer, at Fayette, New York, June, 1829. See heading to Section 14. John Whitmer later became one of the Eight Witnesses to the Book of Mormon.—The message is intimately and impressively personal, in that the Lord tells of what was known only to John Whitmer and himself—The recipient blessed for his worthy desire—The thing of greatest worth to him.

HEARKEN, my servant John, and listen to the words of Jesus Christ, your Lord and your Redeemer.

John Whitmer, the third son of Peter Whitmer, Sr., was baptized by Oliver Cowdery shortly after the arrival of the Prophet at the Whitmer home. He assisted Joseph as secretary; accompanied him to Colesville, where a Branch was organized; was Church historian, went with Oliver Cowdery to Jackson County, in 1831, to direct the publication of the Book of Commandments, and he was one of the Eight Witnesses to the Book of Mormon. But he did not remain faithful. He was excommunicated by the High Council at Far West, 1838, the charge being that he, together with David Whitmer and W. W. Phelps, had failed to account properly for $2,000 of the funds of the Church. He did not return to the Church, but he always maintained that his testimony concerning the Book of Mormon was true.

My arm] God's power, which is over all the Earth; wherefore the gospel is to be made known everywhere, for the salvation of the children of men. See Isa. 53:1; John 12:38.

3-5. The Lord made Himself known to John Whitmer, as He had done to Oliver Cowdery (Doc. and Cov. 6:15), and to Nathanael (John 1:48).

General Notes

During the persecution in Missouri, Elders Heber C. Kimball and Theodore Turley came to Far West, to render any assistance they could. On the 5th of April, 1839, fifty men swore that they would neither eat nor drink until they had killed the Prophet. At the same time eight men presented a paper to Elder Turley, containing a Revelation predicting that the Apostles would take leave of the Saints on the Temple ground at Far West, on the 26th of April, 1839 (Doc. and Cov. 118:5). This, they said, could not be done; if any of the Twelve should attempt it, they would be killed; here, then, they said, was a false prophecy. Turley replied, "In the name of God, that Revelation will be fulfilled." Then he turned to John Whitmer and observed, "There are many things published that they say are true, and again turn around and say they are false." "Do you hint at me?" Whitmer asked. Turley said, "If the cap fits, you may wear it; all I know is that you have published to the world that an angel did present those plates to Joseph Smith." Then John Whitmer, in that company, made this statement, "I now say, I handled those plates; there were fine engravings on both sides, I handled them; they were shown to me by supernatural power." (Historical Record, p. 458).
