Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 17.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer and Martin Harris, at Fayette, New York, June, 1829, prior to their viewing the engraved plates that contained the Book of Mormon record. Joseph and his scribe, Oliver Cowdery, had learned from the translation of certain passages on the Book of Mormon plates that three special witnesses would be designated. See Ether 5:2-4; also 2 Nephi 11:3, and 27:12. Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer and Martin Harris were moved upon by an inspired desire to be the three special witnesses. The Prophet inquired of the Lord, and this revelation was given in answer, through the Urim and Thummim. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 52.—The three conditionally promised that they shall be permitted to view not only the plates but also other sacred relics of Book of Mormon record—Only by faith like unto that of the prophets of old can they be thus privileged—They to testify of what they shall see—Joseph Smith's solemn avowals to be supported—The Lord declares that as he lives the translation is true.

BEHOLD, I say unto you, that you must rely upon my word, which if you do with full purpose of heart, you shall have a view of the plates, and also of the breastplate, the sword of Laban, the Urim and Thummim, which were given to the brother of Jared upon the mount, when he talked with the Lord face to face, and the miraculous directors which were given to Lehi while in the wilderness, on the borders of the Red Sea.

Some time during the month of March, 1829, when Martin Harris expressed a desire to receive a divine confirmation of the testimony of the Prophet Joseph that he actually had the plates, the Lord promised His servant that three men should be called and ordained to become witnesses to the world (Sec. 5:11-15), after they had seen the plates and heard the heavenly voice declare the truth to them. As the translation of the Book of Mormon proceeded, they learned from the book itself (II. Nephi 11:3; Ether 5:2-4) that there were to be three witnesses to the Book, and then Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris desired the Prophet to ask the Lord that they might be chosen. In answer to the Prophet's prayer this Revelation was received.

The plates] The records were engraved on plates which had the appearance of gold. Each plate was nearly seven by eight inches in width and length, being not quite as thick as common tin. They had engravings on both sides and were bound together in a volume as the leaves of a book, and fastened at one edge with three rings running through the whole. The volume was about six inches in thickness, and part of it was sealed (Andrew Jenson, Historical Record, p. 363).

Urim and Thummim] See notes on Sec. 3:15; also Mosiah 8:13-19; 28:13-20; Ether 4:5. The place where God resides is a Urim and Thummim, and this Earth is to become one, in its sanctified state (Doc. and Cov. 130:8, 9). John describes the earth, in its sanctified state, as a "sea of glass." (Rev. 4:6; 15:2. D. & C. 130:7.)

Given to the brother of Jared] The instrument which Joseph had was that which was given to the brother of Jared (Ether 3:23) and deposited with the Jaredite Record, also known as the Book of Ether. It was entrusted to the care of Alma, the son of Alma, and finally hidden in the hill Cumorah. What became of the sacred instrument which the High Priest of Israel had is not known. From Ezra 2:63, and Nehemiah 7:65. it appears that it had been lost, but that its restoration was looked for. The meaning of the two words Urim and Thummim has been given as "lights" and "perfections"; or "manifestation" and "truth." Judges in Egypt presiding at trials, wore, suspended from their necks, an image of the Goddess of Truth, a custom in all probability handed down to them from the time of the Patriarchs, if these, as the High Priest of Israel, wore the Urim and Thummim when they entered the presence of God.

The breast plate] See notes, Section 13.

The sword of Laban] "The hilt thereof was of pure gold, and the workmanship exceeding fine, and * * * the blade * * * of the most precious steel" (I. Nephi 4:9). This sword played an important part in the history of the Nephites. It was wielded with great strength by Nephi and by King Benjamin, but steel cannot save a people from destruction. The Nephites fell, and the sword was buried with their records.

Miraculous directors] When the time had come for Lehi to leave the Valley of Lemuel, the voice of the Lord came to him during the night, commanding him to begin the perilous journey across the desert. It was no easy undertaking. Who was to act as guide? Undoubtedly, Lehi spent the night in prayer, asking for light and guidance. Early in the morning he stood in the tent door, anxiously surveying the surroundings, and then he beheld on the ground a brass ball. On examining this, he found that it had two spindles, one of which pointed the way (I. Nephi 16:10). When Lehi perceived the wonderful qualities of this instrument, he exclaimed, in ecstasy, Liahona! and that became its name (Alma 37:38). Liahona is a Hebrew word with, possibly, a Nephite termination, added later. L means "to"; Jah is an abbreviated form of the sacred name, "Jehovah," and on means "light." The meaning, then, is, ''To Jehovah is light"; that is, "God has light; light comes from God," for He had answered his prayers for light and guidance. Similarly, Hagar, after having seen the Angel of the Lord, said, Beer-lahai-roi; that is, ''The well of the Living One who seeth me" (Gen. 16:13).

The Prophet Joseph renders the word, "compass," as the nearest modern equivalent to it, just as one might properly apply the modern term "dreadnought" to an ancient viking ship; but it was not a compass, for it pointed out only the way the travelers were to follow, and it worked according to their faith; it was not dependent on the magnetic pole.

"Thus grave the lesson on thy soul— Faith, hope, and love—and thou shalt find Strength when life's surges rudest roll, Light when thou else wert blind."—Schiller.

"Within this awful volume lies The mystery of mysteries. Happiest he of human race To whom our God has given grace To read, to fear, to hope, to pray, To lift the latch, and force the way; And better had he ne'er been born Who reads to doubt, or reads to scorn."

These lines were written by Sir Walter Scott and copied by Lord Byron in his Bible. Are they not appropriate on the title page of that companion volume to the Bible, of which the Three Witnesses testify?

General Notes

One day a short time after this Revelation had been received, and after the customary morning devotions, the Prophet Joseph said to Martin Harris, "You must humble yourself before your God this day, that you may obtain a forgiveness of your sins. If you do, it is the will of God that you should look upon the plates in company with Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer" (History of the Prophet Joseph, by Mother Smith).

A place had been selected, not very far from Whitmer's house, and the Prophet and his three friends went there. They all prayed in rotation, but at first there was no answer. Then Martin Harris withdrew. They prayed again, and now, as they poured out their souls in fervent petitions, there was a light around them, and an angel appeared who held in his hands the plates and turned them over, one by one. To Whitmer the angel said, "David, blessed is the Lord, and he that keeps His commandments." And then a voice came from above, "These plates have been revealed by the power of God, and they have been translated by the power of God. The translation of them which you have seen is correct, and I command you to bear record of what you now see and hear."

Joseph now went to look for Martin Harris and found him engaged in prayer. He joined him, and presently Martin Harris cried out, full of joy, "'Tis enough; mine eyes have beheld," and jumping up, he shouted, "Hosanna." He had seen the same vision and heard the same voice.

It was between 3 and 4 p.m. when the men returned home. Mrs. Whitmer, Mr. Joseph Smith, Sr., and Mrs. Lucy Smith were sitting in the bedroom at the time. Joseph went straight to his mother and exclaimed, "Father, mother, you do not know how happy I am; the Lord has now caused the plates to be shown to three more besides myself. l hey have seen an angel, who has testified to them, and they will have to bear witness to the truth of what I have said, for now they know for themselves that I do not go about to deceive people, and I feel as if I were relieved of a burden which was almost too heavy for me to bear, and it rejoices my soul that I am not any longer to be entirely alone in the world."

Elder Edward Stephenson declares:

"I have often heard him [Oliver Cowdery] bear a faithful testimony to the restoration of the gospel by the visitation of an angel, in whose presence he stood in company with the Prophet Joseph Smith, and David Whitmer" (Millennial Star, Vol. XLVIII., p. 420).

David Whitmer, on the 7th of September, 1878, in a conversation with Elders Orson Pratt and Joseph F. Smith, said, in part:

"Joseph, Oliver, and myself were together when I saw them [the plates]. We not only saw the plates of the Book of Mormon, but also the brass plates, the plates of the Book of Ether * * * and many other plates * * * there appeared, as it were, a table with many records, or plates, upon it, besides the plates of the Book of Mormon, also the sword of Laban, the directors [i.e., the ball which Lehi had], and the interpreters. I saw them just as plainly as I see this bed (striking the bed beside him with his hand), and I heard the voice of the Lord, as distinctly as I ever heard anything in my life, declaring that the records of the plates of the Book of Mormon were translated by the gift and power of God" (Andrew Jenson, Historical Record, p. 208).

Martin Harris, while estranged from the Church, was on one occasion asked whether he actually believed that he had seen an angel. He replied:

"Gentlemen, what I have said is true, from the fact that my belief is swallowed up in knowledge; for I want to say to you that, as the Lord lives, I do know that I stood with the Prophet Joseph Smith in the presence of the angel, and it was in the brightness of day" (Historical Record, p. 217).
