Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 18.

REVELATION to Joseph Smith the Prophet, Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer, given at Fayette, New York, June, 1829: Making known the calling of Twelve Apostles in these last days, and also containing instructions relative to building up the Church of Christ according to the fulness of the Gospel. When the Aaronic Priesthood was conferred, the bestowal of the Melchizedek Priesthood was promised. See heading to Section 13. In response to fervent supplication for greater knowledge on the matter the Lord gave this revelation. See History of the Church, vol. 1, pp. 60-64.—Diligence enjoined—Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer called with the calling of Paul the Apostle of old—The value of souls emphasized—The great joy attending conversion of souls to the Gospel of Christ—The calling of twelve to assist in the ministry foreshadowed—The Twelve, here called disciples but later named Apostles, to be chosen from among those who desire to take upon them the name of Christ with full purpose of heart—Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer commissioned to search out the Twelve.

NOW, behold, because of the thing which you, my servant Oliver Cowdery, have desired to know of me, I give unto you these words:

After the glorious manifestations referred to in Section 17, Joseph and Oliver became anxious to receive the holy Melchizedek Priesthood, promised by John the Baptist when he conferred upon them the Aaronic Priesthood (Sec. 13), and they, together with David Whitmer, made this the subject of earnest prayer. One day, while thus engaged in a secluded chamber in Whitmer's house, the word of the Lord came to them, commanding Joseph and Oliver to ordain each other Elders, and then ordain others to the same office, as the Spirit should direct. But this ordination was not to take place until the Church should be organized and the members have an opportunity of sanctioning it by their vote, for Common Consent is one of the fundamental principles in the government of the Kingdom of God (Section 26:2; 28:13). When the time for the ordination came, they were further instructed to partake of the Sacrament and afterwards to ordain each other and those selected by the voice of the Spirit, and, finally, confer the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands upon those who had been baptized. All this was done on the 6th day of April, 1830, the day on which the Church was organized. Shortly after having received these instructions, Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery, and David Whitmer were given this Revelation concerning the calling of the Twelve Apostles and the building up of the Church.

The Spirit manifested to Oliver Cowdery that the Book of Mormon was true.

"I say to all, both Saint and sinner, that there is not an individual who has heard the sound of the gospel of salvation, the report of this work of the last days, of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, and of the mission of Joseph Smith, but the Spirit of the Lord in a greater or less degree accompanied the report with power, and with a testimony of its truth, no matter as to the character of the individual, nor yet whether he embraces or rejects the truth" (Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, Vol. I., p. 88).

His name is Joseph] Attention is called to the name, because the Scriptures predict the coming of a great deliverer in the latter days, so named. Nephi says that Joseph, the Patriarch, predicted the coming forth of the House of Israel on the American continents, of a "righteous branch" and a Seer, whose name, he said, "shall be called after me" (Joseph), and after the name of his father (II. Nephi 3:1-15). In Isaiah, too, there is an apocalyptic reference to the name, Joseph, in connection with the establishment of the Kingdom of God. That Prophet (Chapter 3) describes the judgment on his people and dissolution of the social order, as a consequence of greed, selfishness, and indulgence in luxury by the "upper classes." Then he predicts (Chapter 4) the restoration. when "the Branch of the Lord"—"the righteous Branch, of II. Nephi—shall be "beautiful and glorious." At the beginning of this time of restoration, Isaiah says, something unusual is to occur. "Seven women shall take hold of one man," and ask him for the privilege of bearing his name, ''to take away our reproach." This, we say, may well be considered as an allusion to the name and mission of the Prophet Joseph; for Joseph is said to mean, "God hath taken away my reproach" (Gen. 30:23).

l5. And if it so be that you should labor all your days in crying repentance unto this people, and bring, save it be one soul unto me, how great shall be your joy with him in the kingdom of my Father!

9-25. These verses contain special instructions to Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer concerning the building up of the Church. They were called with the same calling as Paul (v. 9). They were to remember that souls are so precious in the sight of God that our Redeemer suffered death in order to make it possible for all men to repent and come to Him; and not only did He die, but He rose, victorious over death, in order that He might bring all men unto Him, on condition of repentance (vv. 10-12). They were to remember that even if they should labor a life-time and bring only one soul to Christ, their joy would be great, and that they would have correspondingly greater joy, if they should win many souls (vv. 13-16). They had His gospel; if they would pray, they would also receive the Holy Ghost, and thus be fully equipped for the ministry, for the Holy Spirit manifests all things to the children of men; yet, unless they also had faith, hope, and charity, they could do nothing (vv. 17-19). But charity is the pure love of Christ, and it endureth forever; and whoso is found possessed of it at the last day, it shall be well with him. (Moroni 7:47.)

"And now abideth faith, hope and charity, these three; but the greatest of these is charity" (I. Cor. 13:13).

"Faith receives the promises of God as true. * * * Hope, as an anchor of the soul, keeps it steadfast amid all the storms and temptations of life; but the exercise of faith and hope is limited to the present imperfect state. The one shall be exchanged for sight, and the other shall be swallowed up in fruition. Love is superior to both, as the end is greater than the means; as that which is unchangeable is superior to that which is transitory" (Lothiar).

"Faith and hope are our own: love is diffused among others" (Calvin).

Church of the devil] The Devil has his church, his kingdom. "I beheld this great and abominable church: and I saw the devil, that he was the foundation of it" (I. Nephi 13:6). "There are two churches only; the one is the church of the Lamb of God, and the other is the church of the devil" (I. Nephi 14:10). The church of the adversary may be known by its fundamental principle of government. In the beginning he declared himself in favor of salvation by compulsion, and although he was cast out of heaven for refusing to submit to the divine Council, he has continued his agitation for that plan among the children of men ever since. His church consists of those who adopt his plan and seek to destroy the free agency of man by brute force. In the Church of the Lamb of God the "law of liberty," which is the law of "common consent," prevails. The church of the adversary may also be known by contention and strife, by false doctrines, and by all manner of iniquity. A minister of the Lord makes war upon the domain of the adversary by the sword of the Spirit; not by persecution.

Christ revealed Himself in the Old Testament as "I am,"—Hebrew, 'Ehyeh 'asher 'Ehyeh (Ex. 3:14), which implies that, while He is, or exists, and is therefore different from all non-existing deities of merely human imagination, He is not an abstract existence without form or substance, but He is a real Being, manifesting Himself in history ever anew; He is always with His people. active for their welfare.

In the New Testament He has revealed Himself as Jesus, the Savior, and Christ, the Anointed One (see v. 22). ''Thou shalt call His name JESUS: for he shall save his people from their sins" (Matt. 1:21). To take upon oneself His name is, therefore, more than to become a disciple; it is to engage in His service for the salvation of men. JESUS CHRIST is the name given of the Father, and there is no other through which man can be saved. It is the name in which men shall be called at the last day—the day of judgment (Mosiah 5:9)—and those who know not the Name can have no place in the Kingdom of God (vv. 23-25).

The modern tendency to insert the definite article and read, "Jesus, the Christ" is not consistent with this revelation.

26-29. The Lord, in these paragraphs, makes known His purpose to select, as of old, Twelve Apostles, to proclaim His gospel, both unto Gentile and Jew. These must "take upon them" the name of the Lord and be prepared to go to all parts of the world and preach to every creature. No man on Earth can sink so low that he is not entitled, through the mercy of God, to hear the gospel, for every human being is one of God's "creatures." The Twelve would also be authorized to baptize in the name of Jesus; i.e., in His stead, as His representatives, but the ordinance must be performed in accordance with the written word.

Some hold that the office and calling of the Twelve ended with the death of the Apostles first ordained by our Lord. Theologians tell us that, "The office of the Apostles as described in the New Testament, was, from its nature, incapable of being transmitted, and has not in fact been perpetuated." They say that, "There is no command given in the New Testament to keep up the succession of Apostles," and when it is pointed out that Matthias was selected to fill the vacancy caused by the apostasy of Judas, and that Paul was called to the Apostleship by our Lord Himself, while Barnabas, Silas, Timothy, Titus, and Apollos may, for all we know, have been members of the Apostles' Council, it is argued, in reply, that there is no record of the appointment of any of these to the Apostleship, except Matthias. The fact remains, however, that God gave to the Church both Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, the work of the ministry, and the edifying of the body of Christ, and that they were to continue, till we all come in the unity of the faith (Eph. 4:11-13). Apostles, according to the New Testament, are just as much needed as Pastors, Evangelists, and Teachers.

The calling of the Twelve neither began nor ended with the organization of which Peter, James, and John were prominent members. A Council of Twelve was appointed by Moses, in obedience to a divine command, shortly after the Exodus (Numb. 1:1-16). This Council consisted of one representative of each tribe of Israel, and they had, to a very large extent, the responsibility of leadership among the people. They are called "Princes [^1] of Israel," and when the Tabernacle was dedicated, they brought the offerings of the people before the Lord (Numb. 7:1-83; Joshua 3:12; 4:2-9).

There was then a permanent Council of Twelve in ancient Israel, although the Melchizedek Priesthood had been taken away. Our Lord appointed a Council of Twelve, to whom He committed the affairs of the Church on earth during His absence. He selected a Council of Twelve among the ancient people of the American continents (III. Nephi 12:1; 19:4), and He has again, in our day, appointed Twelve to be His special servants.

The duty of the Twelve is to carry the message of Christ to the world. They are His messengers. They have power over unclean spirits and diseases. They have the "keys of the kingdom of God"; that is, authority to act in the name of Christ. They are witnesses. They must know for themselves that their message is true, for they cannot testify to what they know only by hearsay.

31-36. These are special instructions to the Twelve that were to be called in this dispensation. They must walk uprightly and sin not; they must have integrity. They were to ordain Priests and Teachers, to preach by the power of the Holy Ghost, and to testify of the Lord that they have heard His voice and know His words.

This divine command was complied with on the 14th of February, 1835. at a special meeting held in Kirtland, when the Three Witnesses selected twelve men to form the first Council of Apostles.

43-46. Those who are favored with divine instructions must follow them; if they do not, they cannot be saved in the Kingdom of God.

——— Note

---
Notas:
[^1] Names and Characters of Our Lord. He was born May 18th, 1783.
