Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 19.

A COMMANDMENT OF GOD, and not of man, revealed through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to Martin Harris, at Manchester, New York, March, 1830, by him who is Eternal.—Christ affirms his omnipotence—Declares that punishment and suffering are inevitable consequences of unrepented sins—Explains the signification of endless torment and eternal damnation—Reaffirms the actuality of his own suffering in the flesh—Emphasizes the necessity of prayer—Gives specific commandment to Martin Harris.

I AM Alpha and Omega, Christ the Lord; yea, even I am he, the beginning and the end, the Redeemer of the world.

This Revelation is the first received in the year 1830, the year of the organization of the Church. In it our Lord (1) gives His names and character (v. 1); (2) reveals Himself as ruler of the world (2-3); (3) explains the nature of endless punishment (4-12); (4) commands Martin Harris (a) to repent (13-20), (b) to preach repentance (21-24), (c) to refrain from sin (25), (d) to give liberally for the purpose of enabling Joseph to print the Book of Mormon (26, 27), (e) to pray and to preach (28-31). Then the Lord warns Martin Harris that this would be the last word to him regarding the publication of the Book of Mormon (32) and tells him that he would be miserable, if he failed to obey, but happy, if he complied (33-38). The closing verses (39-41) contain searching questions.

Our Lord begins this Revelation by introducing Himself under five different names, each indicating His nature or work:

Alpha and Omega] The first and the last letter of the Greek alphabet, used as symbols of the beginning and the ending. Christ is so called, because He is the Author and the Preserver of all things (Heb. 1:2, 10).

Christ the Lord] "Christ" means "anointed." Prophets, Priests, and Kings were anointed, and our Lord unites all these offices in Him. He is the anointed Lord. The Greek word Christ is the same as the Hebrew Messiah (Mashiac), the title used in John 1:41, and 4:25.

I am He] This is equivalent to Jehovah (See notes on Sec. 18:21).

The Beginning and the End] He was in the beginning and will remain throughout all eternities. He is endless (v. 4).

The Redeemer of the World] Christ is our Redeemer. He delivers those who turn to Him from the bondage of sin and guilt. He has "bought" us (I. Cor. 6:20; 7:23; II. Pet. 2:1). And the world will in due time be delivered from the power of Satan, from sin and all its consequences, such as war, poverty, ignorance, sickness, and even death.

What a glorious constellation of divine names meets our wondering eyes in this Revelation, indicating that the Son of Righteousness is again about to rise effulgent on the world, through the establishment of the Church!

It is only a little while before the empires symbolized by beasts shall give way to the Kingdom of Immanuel. Then the pollutions of paganism and the sufferings due to error will be no more. Then the name of the Redeemer will he everywhere adored. Truth, freedom, love shall spread their mantle over every nation, and man will be permitted to fulfil his destiny unhampered by sin and suffering.

End of the World] This expression does not mean, as sometimes supposed, the destruction of the Earth, but the termination of a dispensation by some act of final judgment upon the inhabitants of the Earth. The flood was the "end" of the antediluvian world. The destruction of Jerusalem by Titus was the end of "the world" to which the first Christians were looking forward. The next "end of the world" will be the overthrow of the kingdoms of the world and the establishment of the Millennium.

"The end of the world is the destruction of the wicked; the harvest and the end of the world have an allusion directly to the human family in the last days, instead of the Earth, as many have imagined" (Joseph Smith, History of the Church, Vol. II., p. 271).

Judging every man] Every man shall be judged according to his works, but it will make a difference whether we stand before God as children in the presence of a father, as hired servants expecting wages, as criminals before a judge, or as enemies before the conqueror. The Lord tells us (Doc. and Cov. Sec. 76:111) that those who shall inherit telestial glory "shall be judged according to their works" and "receive according to their works." He also declares (John 5:24) that "He that heareth my word and believeth him that sent me, hath eternal life, and cometh not into judgment, but hath passed out of death into life (Revised Version). The believer does not come to judgment as a hired servant, nor as a criminal, or an enemy.

4-12. This is an explanation of the doctrine of eternal damnation. Why, it may be asked, was an exposition of this doctrine necessary at this time, even before the organization of the Church? Because it is necessary that God's children have a correct understanding of His character and power, lest they should be influenced by a fear of Satan instead of by love of God. The story is told of Luther that, when examining a candidate for the pulpit to ascertain his qualifications as a minister, he asked him first of all, "What do you know about the Devil?" That may sound absurd; but one who has false notions about the adversary is not likely to conquer him. Satan is a mighty potentate, but he is not as strong as some imagine. At the time this Revelation was given, preachers used to declare that unless sinners repented and believed, they would be cast into a lake of burning brimstone and there be tormented in all eternity. Then they tried to explain the duration of eternity. "I have heard men," says George A. Smith, "spend hours in endeavoring to explain how long this hell would last. It was frequently illustrated in this manner, 'Suppose a bird could carry a drop of water from this planet to another, and be gone a year on the journey, and continue this until every drop of water on the earth was carried away, and then should take a particle of sand and go to another planet and be gone a thousand years, and carry one particle of sand at a time until every particle of matter of which this globe is composed was carried away; then, this eternal punishment would have just commenced" (Journal of Discourses, Vol. XII., p. 333). How is it possible to believe in God, if He is powerless against such a condition, or to love Him, if He suffers the Devil to revenge himself upon His erring children? This Revelation sheds a flood of truth upon the future condition of sinners.

6-12. Endless torment] "Endless torment," "eternal damnation" are expressions which denote the punishment inflicted by the Endless One, the Eternal One. "Eternal punishment" is contrasted with such punishment as man can inflict on man in time here on earth.

13-38. These verses contain special instructions to Martin Harris. Notwithstanding the many manifestations he had received concerning the Book of Mormon, he was still tormented with doubts, to such an extent that it became sinful. Skepticism has its legitimate use, in so far as it prompts one to investigate, but to doubt in the face of overwhelming evidence is perversity.

"Those who go farthest on in the school of prayer and learn most of its hidden secrets often develop a sort of prescience which comes nearest to the prophetic spirit, the Holy Spirit showing them 'things to come.' They seem, like Savonarola, to know something of the purpose of God, to anticipate His plans, and to forecast the history of their own times. The great supplicators have been also the great seers" (Arthur T. Pierson).

39-41. The closing verses contain questions which must have revealed Martin Harris' thoughts to him in their true light.

General Note

Martin Harris was a prosperous farmer and had means enough for the furtherance of the great latter-day work, but when he became disassociated from the Church, he did not continue to prosper. In 1870, at the age of 87 years, [^1] the Spirit prompted him to go to Utah. Elder Edward Stevenson, consequently, raised the money necessary among the Saints in Utah, and some of the Saints at Des Moines, Iowa, gave him a new suit of clothes. But Martin Harris, in his days of poverty, was never troubled with doubts. While prosperous, he frequently merited chastisement. He died in full fellowship with the Church, a faithful witness to the last.

——— Note

---
Notas:
[^1] The Rise of the Church. The Church was organized on the 6th of April, 1830. This date was chosen in accordance with a divine command. In all probability the 6th of April is the anniversary of the birthday of our Lord. There is no authentic record of the date of the birth of Christ, but scholars (Griswell, among others) consider it probable that He was born on the tenth day of the Jewish month of Nisan, which in the year of the Nativity has been calculated to correspond to Saturday, April the 5th. But as He was born at night, and Saturday expired at sunset, the date would be more precisely, April the 6th, and that would be the beginning of Sunday, "our Lord's day." On this supposition the date was most appropriate. The commentator quoted thing it improbable, however, that the word "likeness" is used in Genesis to indicate an outward resemblance, though that is the idea it conveys. Is it improbable that it means what it says?
