Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 20.

REVELATION on Church Organization and Government, given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, April, 1830. Preceding his record of this revelation the Prophet wrote: We obtained of him [Jesus Christ] the following, by the spirit of prophecy and revelation; which not only gave us much information, but also pointed out to us the precise day upon which, according to his will and commandment, we should proceed to organize his Church once more here upon the earth.—The Lord again attests the genuineness of the Book of Mormon—He gives commandment respecting baptism—Defines the functions of the several offices in the Priesthood—Specifies the duties of members—Prescribes the mode of baptism, and of administering the sacrament of bread and wine—Directs the keeping of records of Church membership.

THE rise of the Church of Christ in these last days, being one thousand eight hundred and thirty years since the coming of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ in the flesh, it being regularly organized and established agreeable to the laws of our country, by the will and commandments of God, in the fourth month, and on the sixth day of the month which is called April—

The time was now drawing near for the organization of the Church, and the Spirit of Revelation indicated the date for that event. This Revelation (1) states that the Church should "rise" out of obscurity and darkness, (Sec. 1:30); in the year 1830 (1-4); (2) gives a brief review of events preceding the organization (5-12); (3) presents the solemn testimony of the two Elders (13-16); (4) sets forth some of the truths established by the Book of Mormon (17-28; and 29-36); (5) imparts instructions regarding (a) baptism (37); (b) duties of officers (38-67); (c) duties of members (68-71); (d) the manner of the administration of the Sacraments (72-79); (e) transgressors (80), and (f) conferences and records (81-84).

Agreeable to the laws] The Church was organized under the laws of the State of New York, which required that a society should have no fewer than six members, to be recognized under the law. It was organized in accordance with a divine command, for God requires His children to conform to all just laws. From the first the Church was taught loyalty.

Joseph and Oliver had, by this time, conferred upon them the Melchizedek Priesthood. They had authority to organize the Church, receive commandments, and take charge of the affairs of the Kingdom of God, according to the grace of our Lord the Savior.

5-12. A brief review of events preceding the establishment of the Church.

13-16. In the Book of Mormon the reader will find the solemn testimony of Three Witnesses, and also of Eight, to the authenticity of that Volume. Here is added the solemn testimony of the Prophet Joseph and Oliver Cowdery.

17-28. These are some of the important truths set forth in the Book of Mormon.

We know] Not "we believe," but we know that God exists; that He is infinite and eternal; unchangeable; the Creator of the heavens and the Earth and all things that are in them. The world is not the work of chance; nor is it self-existent; it is "created." The elements have been organized by an Infinite Intelligence. This the Saints know.

We know that God created man, male and female, after His own "image" in His own "likeness." Our first parents were in the image of God, in the same sense that Seth was in the image of Adam (Gen. 5:1-3). " 'Image' suggests reproduction in form and substance, physical or spiritual; 'likeness' gives the idea of resemblance and outward similarity" (The Cambridge Bible, Genesis, p. 20). [^1] Woman, as well as man, was made after the image, in the likeness, of God.

We know that man fell (v. 19), and that God gave His Son to atone for the sin of Adam and to open the way for all to life eternal, through faith and obedience. The disobedience of Adam brought upon him and his descendants, death—physical, moral, and legal. The atonement of Christ restored all that was lost through Adam. By justification men are freed from the legal condemnation; by sanctification their moral law is restored; and by glorification physical death, the last enemy, will be overcome.

"Is justice dishonored? No, it is satisfied, the debt is paid. Is righteousness departed from? No, this is a righteous act. All requirements are met. Is judgment violated? No, its demands are fulfilled. Is mercy triumphant? No, she simply claims her own. Justice, judgment, mercy, and truth, all harmonize as the attributes of Deity" (John Taylor, Mediation and Atonement, p. 171).

"A divine debt has been contracted by the children, and the Father demands recompense. He says to His children on this Earth, who are in sin and transgression, It is impossible for you to pay this debt; I have prepared a Sacrifice; I will send my Only Begotten Son to pay this debt. Was it necessary, then, that Jesus should die? Do we understand why He should sacrifice His life? The idea that the Son of God, who never committed sin, should sacrifice His life, is unquestionably preposterous to the minds of many in the Christian world. But the fact exists that the Father * * * provided this Sacrifice and sent His Son to die for us, and it is also a great fact that the Son came to do the will of the Father, and that He has paid the debt, in fulfilment of the Scripture which says, 'He was the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world. Is it so on any other earth? * * * (Brigham Young, Jour. Of Dis., Vol. XIV., p. 71; comp. Doc. and Cov. 88:51-61).

"The Scriptural facts are, (a) the Father says I; the Son says I; the Spirit says I. (b) The Father says Thou to the Son, and the Son says Thou to the Father; and in like manner the Father and the Son use the pronouns He and Him in reference to the Spirit. (c) The Father loves the Son; the Son loves the Father; the Spirit testifies of the Son. The Father, Son, and Spirit are severally subject and object. They act and are acted upon, or are the objects of action * * * The Son is of the Father, and the Spirit is of the Father and the Son. The Father sends the Son, and the Father and the Son send the Spirit. The Father operates through the Son, and the Father and Son operate through the Spirit" (Charles Hodge, D.D., Systematic Theology, Vol. 1., pp. 444-5).

This is a correct statement of the leading Scripture facts relating to the distinct personalities of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, although the author of it holds the orthodox, not Scriptural, view that the three Persons are one Being.

29-36. In these verses the subject is still further pursued and truths set forth in the Book of Mormon are enumerated.

How do we know that these things are true? Because the Lord God has spoken them (v. 36). Not always with a voice audible to the ear, but through the Spirit.

"The spirit of revelation is not so mysterious and incomprehensible as many imagine it to be. Men have imagined that it is something they cannot understand, and that men in possession of it must differ very remarkably from those who are destitute of it. But the Lord in His dealings with the children of men never produced monstrosities. His servants were not so remarkable in appearance as to strike everybody who saw them with surprise. * * * It is a glorious privilege we possess, of living so before the Lord our God, that we can have the testimony constantly within us, that we are operating and laboring in conformity with the requirements of Heaven" (George Q. Cannon, Journal of Discourses, Vol. XII, p. 42).

There are three requirements of an applicant for baptism: (1) He must be humble, so that he asks for it as a favor. He who comes with broken heart and contrite spirit is in the proper frame of mind for that ordinance; (2) He must show before the Church that he is repentant and willing to take upon him the name of Jesus Christ (Sec. 18:21). This confession is made before the Church when it is made in the presence of an Elder, or Elders, representing the Church; (3) he must manifest by his works that he has received the Spirit. An infant cannot comply with these conditions.

39-44. An Apostle's duties are enumerated here.

"The Twelve are not subject to any other than the First Presidency" (Joseph Smith, Hist. of Church, Vol. II., p. 374).

"A person who is ordained to the office of an Elder in this Kingdom has the same Priesthood that the High Priests, that the Twelve Apostles, that the Seventies, and that the First Presidency hold: but all are not called to be one of the Twelve Apostles, nor are all called to be one of the First Presidency, nor to be one of the First Presidents of all the Seventies, nor to be one of the Presidents of a Quorum of Seventy, nor to preside over the High Priests' Quorum; but every man in his order."* (Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, Vol. IX., p. 89).

46-52. The duties of a Priest are here enumerated. His office is the most advanced in the Aaronic Priesthood. In the Mosaic dispensation the Priests were ordained to instruct and pray for the people, and to offer sacrifices for them. In the Church the Priest's duty is to preach, exhort, baptize, administer the Sacrament, visit Church members, pray for them, and watch over them.

"From a retrospect of the requirements of the servants of God to preach the gospel, we find few qualified even to be Priests, and if a Priest understands his duty, his calling, and ministers and preaches by the Holy Ghost, his enjoyment is as great as if he were one of the Presidency, and his services are necessary in the body, as are also those of Teachers and Deacons" (Joseph Smith, History of the Church, Vol. 11., p. 478).

53-56. The duties of Teachers. The Teacher also holds the Aaronic Priesthood. His duty is to watch over the Church, and to warn the members against all kinds of evil.

57-59. The duty of Deacons is to assist the Teachers. A Deacon holds the power and authority first bestowed in the Aaronic Priesthood. One who performs those duties well, thereby qualifies himself for the more advanced positions.

"It was customary in Paul's days to ordain mature men to the office of Deacons, because the conditions of the Saints were such that only elderly people could be used to advantage. The Church was new, and adults were converted; perhaps only few, if any, were born and educated in the Church. But even in our day * * * There are many men holding the office of Deacon, and many men who hold the higher Priesthood who act in the office of Deacon. It is true the Priesthood is conferred on boys of twelve and thirteen who are found faithful and worthy. But that is no sign that such action is not acceptable to God. * * * The appointment of boys to the Deaconship is done under the direction of the constituted authority of the Lord, though the exact date of its beginning is perhaps not on record" (Improvement Era, Vol. XVIII., p. 452).

—————

* That is, an office in the Priesthood.

—————

61-62. Conferences are appointed by God. They are part of the divinely-instituted organization of the Church. A memorable conference of the New Testament church was that held in Jerusalem (Acts 15), when the Apostles, Elders, and brethren decided not to require that Gentile converts should be circumcised and obliged to keep the Mosaic law as a condition of membership in the Church. The first Conference of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was held June 9th, 1830. On that occasion the Spirit came upon those assembled with such power that some prophesied, and others saw the heavens opened. Newel Knight beheld our Lord seated on the right hand of God, and the future of the Church was unfolded to him (History of Church, Vol. 1, p. 85).

65-67. These verses were added some time after those preceding them. The organization of the Church was not completed at one time. Revelations were given gradually, as the Church required them.

The Lord teaches us in these paragraphs that no person can assume authority or take honor unto himself. All things are done by common consent and every man appointed, or ordained, to office must receive his calling by proper authority. Any other course would lead to confusion and disintegration of the Church. President Joseph F. Smith has said:

"The house of God is a house of order, and not a house of confusion"; and it could not be thus, if there were not those who had authority to preside, to direct, to counsel, to lead in the affairs of the Church. No house would be a house of order if it were not properly organized, as the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is organized. Take away the organization of the Church and its power would cease. Every part of its organization is necessary and essential to its perfect existence. Disregard, ignore, or omit any part, and you start imperfection in the Church; and if we should continue in that way we would find ourselves like those of old, being led by error, superstition, ignorance, and by the cunning and craftiness of men." (Gospel Doctrine, p. 185.)

"The duties and powers of a Bishop cease the moment he steps over the Aaronic Priesthood, which is to officiate in temporal things; when he passes this, he immediately begins to officiate by the authority and power of the Melchizedek Priesthood, though he may not know it. * * * It is chiefly because of the ignorance of the people that we often concentrate in one man these offices and callings, but when the people are sufficiently informed, and have advanced further in the knowledge of the truth, it will not be so, but every Branch will have its full quota of officers—a Patriarch, President, Bishop, High Council, and all officers that are necessary for the work of the ministry" (Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, Vol. X., p. 96).

68-71. By baptism we enter into a solemn covenant with God. We must, therefore, learn to know our duties as baptized members of the Church. Church members, above all others, should, in the language of the Prophet Joseph, "be kindly affectionate, one towards another; that the fathers should be kind to their children, husbands to their wives, masters to their slaves, or servants, children obedient to their parents, wives to their husbands, and slaves or servants to their masters" (History of the Church, Vol. II., p. 263).

Bread and wine] These are the Emblems. Bread is the proper emblem of the spiritual food we receive in the Sacrament. "Wine" is here used as a synonym for the Cup, the term found in Matt. 26:27; Mark 14:23; Luke 22:20;. I. Cor. 11:25. (Sec. 27:2). The essential part of the Sacrament is that those who partake of it receive broken bread and drink of the cup, in remembrance of the broken body and spilt blood of the Redeemer, for the broken bread and the cup are the emblems; both must be blessed, and both must be received by the communicants.

"When we partake of the bread, let us pray the Father that strength may be given to our bodies that they may not wither, but be strengthened to reach a good old age; when we partake of the wine, or water, which is emblematic of His blood, let us ask the Father that our blood may never be spilt, unless it is necessary for the advancement of His Kingdom and the glory of God" (Heber C. Kimball, Journal of Discourses, Vol. X., p. 102).

81-84. It is the duty of the "several churches," i.e., the several Stakes, Wards, or Branches, composing the Church to send representatives to the conferences, with complete records of the membership. Comp. Sec. 21:1; 47:3; 128:4-6.

General Notes

The Church was organized on the 6th of April, 1830, in the home of Peter Whitmer, Sr., at Fayette, N. Y. After prayer the Prophet asked those present if they were willing to accept him and Oliver Cowdery as teachers and to organize the Church. The vote was affirmative and unanimous. Then the Prophet ordained Oliver Cowdery an Elder, whereupon Oliver ordained him to the same office. They had received the Melchizedek Priesthood under the hands of Peter, James and John, out of which all the offices in the Church come. On this day of the organization, they complied with the instruction given them by John the Baptist, and ordained each other to the office of Elder by and with the consent of their brethren. After the ordination, they partook of the Sacrament, and then they confirmed all the members present. The Spirit of the Lord fell upon the little group of Saints. Some prophesied, all were filled with joy. The six original members of the Church were, Joseph Smith, Jr., Hyrum Smith, Samuel H. Smith, Oliver Cowdery, Peter Whitmer, Jr., and David Whitmer, and thus, as Elder Orson F. Whitney says, "arose, as a system, what the world terms Mormonism, universally regarded as the most remarkable religious movement of modern times; detested and denounced throughout Christendom as a dangerous and soul-destroying imposture, but revered and defended by its disciples as the wonderful work of the Almighty, the veritable 'marvelous work and wonder' foretold by Isaiah and other ancient seers."

A widely-prevalent conception of the Church of Christ is that it is invisible, because consisting of true believers only, who, it is argued, are found in all churches, often hidden among those who have the form but not the substance, and who, therefore, are known to our Lord and not to man. St. Augustine speaks of the "Twofold body" of Christ,—the true and the commingled, or the true and feigned body. This invisible church is also called the "mystical body" of Christ. "Whatsoever we read in Scripture," says Hooker, "concerning endless love and saving mercy which God sheweth to His church, the only proper subject thereof is this Church." But does not this view stamp the churches that are visible organizations as "feigned," excluding them from the influence of that saving mercy which is reserved for the so-called mystical body only?

President Brigham Young says: "When this Kingdom is organized in any age, the spirit of it dwells in the hearts of the faithful, while its visible department exists among the people, with laws, ordinances, helps, governments. officers, administrators, and every other appendage necessary for its complete operation to the attainment of the end in view" (Journal of Discourses, Vol. X., p. 18).

The Church is said to be the "body" of Christ (Eph. 1:23). As a "body" it may have its limitations, and even failings, for the human element in it has not reached perfection; but as long as it has the Holy Priesthood and is true to Him, keeping His commandments, observing His ordinances, and promulgating His gospel, it is His "body," the object of His love. He is the "head," although He is on the other side of the veil; for He rules and guides its affairs, and is as really present in the Church, as if He were among us in the flesh. The Tabernacle in the wilderness had two compartments, separated by a veil,—the Holy and the Most Holy. The Presence of God rested on the Mercy Seat in the Most Holy place, but from there it was manifested throughout the entire camp, and all Israel was guided by it. The Church, too, has two grand divisions, one on this side of the veil, and one on the other side. Christ is now, in a special sense, with the Church on the other side, but His presence here is none the less real, for there is only a veil between this side and the other.

The Hebrews, anciently, had their Assembly, which was a representative and ruling body. This institution survived in the ruling body of the Synagogue, which was called the "Church" (Matt. 18:17). The Greek republics also had their representative assemblies, known as "churches" (ecclesiae). They were visible bodies, and so is the Church of Christ. It is an assembly as tangible as any Congress or Parliament.

On "The Origin of Man" (v. 18) see an article in the Improvement Era, Vol. XIII., p. 75-81.

Salvation comes through the power of God; yet, only those who "endure to the end" will be saved (v. 25), and, generally speaking, those who feel too sure of their salvation are farthest from it. Soren Kjerkegaard has expressed this thought in the following quaint paradox: "If you fear, then fear not; but if you do not fear, then fear."

——— Note

---
Notas:
[^1] Seer] A Seer has the divine gift of "seeing," or having visions. Moses, Samuel, Isaiah, Ezekiel, and many others were seers, so called because they were privileged to have a nearer view of the divine glory and power than other mortals have. Joseph Smith also was a seer. (See Mosiah 8:13).
