Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 21.

REVELATION given to Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Fayette, New York, April 6, 1830. This revelation was given at the organization of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, on the date named, in the home of Peter Whitmer, Sen. Six men, who had previously been baptized, participated. By unanimous vote these expressed their desire and determination to organize, according to the commandment of God; see Section 20. They also voted to accept and sustain Joseph Smith, Jun., and Oliver Cowdery as the presiding officers of the Church. With the laying on of hands, Joseph then ordained Oliver an Elder of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; and Oliver similarly ordained Joseph. After administration of the sacrament, Joseph and Oliver laid hands upon the participants individually, for the bestowal of the Holy Ghost, and for the confirmation of each as a member of the Church. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 75.—Church records—The Lord manifests acceptance of the Church, and recognition of the presiding officers.

BEHOLD, there shall be a record kept among you; and in it thou shalt be called a seer, a translator, a prophet, an apostle of Jesus Christ, an elder of the church through the will of God the Father, and the grace of your Lord, Jesus Christ,

This Revelation was given while the meeting called for the organization of the Church was still in session. The Prophet Joseph received several Revelations in the presence of his brethren. A Revelation concerning the Apostleship, for instance, came while Brigham Young and Joseph Young were at his home. Brigham Young relates:

"After we returned from Missouri, my father, Joseph Young, and myself had been singing after preaching in a meeting; and when the meeting was dismissed, Brother Joseph Smith said, 'come, go down to my house with me.' We went, and sang to him a long time, and talked with him. He then opened the subject of the Twelve and Seventies for the first time I ever thought of it. He said, 'Brethren, I am going to call out Twelve Apostles. l think we will get together by and by and select Twelve Apostles, and a Quorum of Seventy from those who have been up to Zion, out of the camp boys.' * * * He had a Revelation when we were singing to him. Those who were acquainted with him knew when the Spirit of Revelation was upon him, for his countenance wore an expression peculiar to himself while under that influence. He preached by the Spirit of Revelation, and taught in Council by it, and those who were acquainted with him could discover it at once, for at such times there was a peculiar clearness and transparency in his face" (Journal of Discourses, Vol. IX., p. 89).

1-3. The Spirit here directs the Saints to keep an historical record, and defines the duties and responsibilities of the Prophet. The titles enumerated are not those of honor and emoluments but of duty, each indicating some line of service.

Translator] A translator renders the spoken, or written, word into another language. Here it means one who does so by the gift of divine inspiration.

Prophet] A prophet is one who speaks for another. Aaron was the prophet of Moses (Ex. 7:1), when, as his brother's spokesman, he appeared before Pharaoh. Paul (Titus 1:12) quotes Epimenides, a Cretan poet, as a prophet. A Prophet of God is one who speaks for the Almighty, by divine authority. He does not always foretell future events. Sometimes he reveals the past; sometimes he speaks of the present, and sometimes he predicts things to come. Some of the Old Testament Prophets were eminent statesmen, historians, and privy councilors of kings; others occupied less prominent positions, but all were the divinely inspired instructors of the people, whose special function it was to maintain the worship of Jehovah against adverse influences.

Originally the Hebrews called the Prophets, Seers (I. Sam. 9:9), and that designation is used by Lehi, when he blesses his sons and quotes to them the prophecies of his ancestor, Joseph (II. Nephi 3:5-22). Is this not a proof of the antiquity and authenticity of the prophecies quoted by Lehi?

Apostle] An Apostle is a messenger and special witness of Jesus Christ; one who has a divine message to all men.

Elder] Holding the Melchizedek Priesthood (Sec. 20:45).

Through the will of God] Joseph Smith was called, as was Paul, through the divine will, not human agency (Rom. 1:1).

4-6. It is the duty of the Church to obey God's commandments through the Prophet, because victory over the adversary can be obtained only by obedience. But God does not demand blind obedience. He gives reason for submission.

7-9. The Lord inspired Joseph to take up the cause of desolate Zion, as He inspired Moses to champion the cause of enslaved Israel. He wept when he contemplated the fallen condition of Christendom, as Jeremiah wept on the ruins of Jerusalem. God saw his tears; every tear was a prayer.

10-12. Because of his high and holy calling, Joseph was ordained by Oliver Cowdery, on behalf of the Church.

Oliver Cowdery was called to go on a mission to the Lamanites. He was accompanied by Parley P. Pratt, Peter Whitmer, Jr., and Ziba Peterson. On this mission he first preached to an Indian nation near Buffalo. Later, he and Parley P. Pratt labored among the Delaware Indians. And thus he became the first preacher to the Gentiles, and also to the "Jews," as the Revelation says; for the founders of the Church sometimes referred to the Lamanites as "Jews." Compare Section 57:4.
