Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 23.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Manchester, New York, April, 1830, to Oliver Cowdery, Hyrum Smith, Samuel H. Smith, Joseph Smith, Sen., and Joseph Knight, Sen. As the result of earnest desire on the part of the five persons named, the Prophet inquired of the Lord, and received this revelation in response.

BEHOLD, I speak unto you, Oliver, a few words. Behold, thou art blessed, and art under no condemnation. But beware of pride, lest thou shouldst enter into temptation.

The brethren here mentioned being anxious to learn the mind and the will of the Lord concerning them, this Revelation was given. It is perfectly clear that these intimate friends and close associates of the Prophet, were fully convinced that God spoke through him. If not, they would not have asked him to inquire of the Lord for them.

"There is another thing of great significance in this brief blessing to Hyrum Smith (Sec. 23:3) which is: 'Wherefore thy duty is unto the church forever, and this because of thy family. Amen.' It is doubtful if the Prophet Joseph fully understood the meaning of this expression when this revelation was given. In later years it was made clear. Evidently it has reference to the office of Patriarch and in this office, it was his duty and that of his family forever.'" ("Church History and Modern Revelation," series 1, p. 113.)

Samuel H. Smith had some wonderful experiences. After the engagement with a mob, known as the Crooked River battle, he went to Illinois in company with about twenty others, through a wild part of the country. They were pursued by fifty well-armed men, who had orders to bring them back, dead or alive. Soon only four miles of prairie lay between them and their pursuers. Then a snowstorm came, with such a fury that they were completely hidden from the enemy, and escaped. Later on, their provisions gave out, and they subsisted on lynne buds and slippery elm bark. One evening the company appointed Samuel H. Smith their president, and prayed to the Lord for a revelation. That night the Spirit of the Lord came upon him, and he said: "Thus saith the Lord; my servant Joseph is not injured, nor any of his brethren that are with him; but they will all be delivered out of the hands of their enemies; your families are all well, but anxious about you. Let your hearts be comforted, for I, the Lord, will provide food for you on the morrow." This Revelation proved true in every detail. The next day they came upon an Indian camp, where they received a supply of good bread (Historical Record, p. 618). On his deathbed Joseph Smith, Sr., gave his son Samuel this blessing:

"Samuel, you have been a faithful and obedient son. By your faithfulness you have brought many into the Church. The Lord has seen your diligence, and you are blessed, in that He has never chastised you, but has called you home to rest; and there is a crown laid up for you, which shall grow brighter and brighter unto the perfect day."

Samuel H. Smith died July 30th, 1844, shortly after his two brothers, Joseph and Hyrum, had passed beyond the veil, martyrs for the cause of truth and liberty.

Joseph Smith, Sr., the father of the Prophet, was born July 12th, 1771.

He was the first to receive the testimony of his illustrious son, after the Angel had visited the Prophet on the 22nd of September, 1823, and he was baptized the 6th of April, 1830. On December 18th, 1833, he was ordained a Patriarch, an office that was to continue from father to son. (See Section 107:40; 124:91). He died September 14th, 1840.

The Revelations to Joseph Smith, Sr., and Hyrum Smith contain an identical prediction to the effect that it was their calling to strengthen the Church forever. This could not refer to their personal ministry on Earth, but it has been fulfilled in the ministry of their descendants, and will, no doubt, come true, as the Revelations say, "forever."

Joseph Knight, Sr., was of great assistance to the Prophet during the early days of persecution. In this Revelation he is enjoined to pray vocally, before the world, and not only in secret; to join the Church, and to labor in the vineyard. He obeyed, and was baptized in June, 1830. See also Sec. 12.

——— Notes
