Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 24.

REVELATION given to Joseph Smith the Prophet and Oliver Cowdery, at Harmony, Pennsylvania, July, 1830. Though less than four months had elapsed since the Church was organized, persecution had become intense, and the leaders had to seek safety in partial seclusion. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 101.—The Lord combines encouragement with reproof—Gives individual commandments to Joseph and Oliver, respectively.

BEHOLD, thou wast called and chosen to write the Book of Mormon, and to my ministry; and I have lifted thee up out of thine afflictions, and have counseled thee, that thou hast been delivered from all thine enemies, and thou hast been delivered from the powers of Satan and from darkness!

As the Church membership increased, the adversary marshalled his forces, and the fires of persecution were kindled. At Colesville, where many were anxious to join the Church, a mob tried to prevent this by tearing up a dam which had been built over a stream, to get a convenient place for baptism. The dam was rebuilt and the ordinance performed. The mob then surrounded the house of Joseph Knight, where the Prophet bravely confronted them. At the house of Newel Knight, Joseph was arrested on the charge of "setting the country in an uproar" by preaching the Book of Mormon. The purpose, it has been supposed, was to waylay the Prophet on his way to court, but this plan was not carried out. Witnesses bad been summoned, who were expected to testify that the Prophet had received property from them, by fraud, but they testified to the contrary, and he was acquitted. Again he was arrested. The officer treated him very harshly, and the rabble rejoiced. But again he was acquitted. This infuriated the mob, and the bitterness increased, as they realized that their attempts at persecution by the aid of the courts were futile. See History of the Church, Vol. 1., pp. 86, 90.

It was shortly after this trying time that the Prophet received the Revelation called "Visions of Moses" (Pearl of Great Price, p. 1), and Sections 24, 25, and 26, Doc. and Cov.

I have lifted thee up] God had rescued the Prophet from the persecutors, as He had delivered him from the power of the adversary when be first sought God in prayer.

3-4. The Saints in Colesville, Fayette, and Manchester are here told to contribute to the support of the Prophet; not to pay him a salary, but to supply his wants. The law of tithing had not yet been given to the Church.

5-9. The Prophet Joseph's gifts were of a spiritual, not financial nature, but the Lord promised him that, if he would magnify his calling, he would always have what he needed. Financial ability is also a gift that can be used for the glory of God, but the Prophet was not a financier. He did not live for the accumulation of wealth. The Kingdom of God was his first and chief concern. It has been stated that the sum total of his worldly possessions, probably, never at any time exceeded two or three thousands dollars, though he always contributed liberally towards all public, worthy objects. At his death the administrator could allow the widow only $124 a year from the estate (Tullidge, Life of Joseph The Prophet, p. 744).

10-12. One evidence of the divine origin of the Church is found in the fact that each member was given the work for which he was best equipped. Oliver Cowdery was instructed to continue preaching the gospel, his special gift being eloquence, as is apparent from his graphic description of the ordination to the Priesthood, Pearl of Great Price pp. 98-99.

13-14. Miracles are not to be asked for as evidences of the truth of the gospel; the Spirit will testify of the truth of it. And yet, when required by those who humbly desire a blessing, to cast out demons, to heal the sick, or to counteract the effects of poison, a servant of the Lord must not refuse to administer. The Scriptures must be fulfilled.

15-19. These verses contain instructions to missionaries.

Casting off the dust] Our Lord instructed His Disciples to shake the dust off their feet, when departing from a house where they had not been received (Matt. 10:14) . Paul did so when leaving Antioch, in Pisidia (Acts 13:51). Those who rejected the gospel message were to be considered as pagans, with whom Jews held no social intercourse. Even the dust of their dwellings and their cities, was to be treated as defilement, necessitating a cleansing. But this is not an act to be performed on slight provocation. A disciple of the Lord must learn of Him patience and long-suffering.

Lawsuits are to be avoided, if possible.

"Does the Lord love your conduct when you drag each other before the ungodly? When you run after difficulties. contentions, broils, and strife? Do you think He has fellowship with your conduct in such things? No, you do not. Do you suppose that Jesus Christ has? No. Do you believe that angels and good men can fellowship your conduct? You do not?" (Brigham Young, Jour. of Dis., Vol. III., p. 239).

Brigham Young adds that there is not a righteous person who has difficulties that cannot be settled by arbitrators.

"For me to travel and preach without purse and scrip was never hard; I never saw the day, I never was in the place, nor went into a house when I was alone, or when I would take the lead and do the talking, but what I could get all I wanted. * * * I could make the acquaintance of the family. and sit and sing to them and chat with them, and they would be friendly" (Jour. of Dis.,Vol. IV., p. 34).

Revelations and miracles do not keep men from falling.

"I recollect, in the upper room of the Temple in Kirtland, Ohio. when we were assembled there, a very noted man, Sylvester Smith, bore testimony of what he had seen of the Prophet of God, of angels, etc. He said '* * * I have spoken by what you call the Holy Ghost; the eyes of my understanding have been touched, and I have seen convoy after convoy of angels; I have laid hands on the lame, and they have leaped like a hart; I have spoken with tongues and had the interpretation thereof: but, let me tell you, everything I have seen, and everything you have seen, is the height of idiotism.' This was Sylvester Smith, after he had apostatized" (Jedediah M. Grant, Jour. of Dis., Vol. Vl., p. 254).
