Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 25.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Harmony, Pennsylvania, July 1830.—The word of the Lord directed to Emma Smith, the Prophet's wife—Her duties defined, and glorious possibilities of achievement set forth—The Lord's admonitions are applied to all.

HEARKEN unto the voice of the Lord your God, while I speak unto you, Emma Smith, my daughter; for verily I say unto you, all those who receive my gospel are sons and daughters in my kingdom.

Emma Smith, the wife of the Prophet, was not always free from doubts regarding the wonderful story of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon. From the fourth verse it is evident that she had murmured because she had not been privileged to see the plates. As the wife of the Prophet she seemed to feel that she was entitled to be admitted into the secret councils of her husband and his brethren.

5-12. Some of the duties of Emma Smith are here enumerated. And, first of all, she was to be a comfort to her husband. Her public duties were to come next.

13-16. These exhortations are not given to Emma Smith only. "This is my voice to all."

General Notes

Emma Smith did not accompany the Saints in their exodus from Nauvoo. At that time, the Nauvoo House, which the Saints, obeying a divine command (Doc. and Cov. 124:22-24, 60-64), had begun to build, became her property, the Prophet Joseph having been a large stock holder. She also retained some other property, including the "old homestead" and a small farm. The Nauvoo House subsequently passed into the hands of her second husband, Mr. Bidamon, who was not a member of the Church. He put part of the building under roof and fitted it up for a hotel.

In the year 1860 Elder Joseph F. Smith visited Nauvoo. He relates:

"In the large dining room, which I had last entered in my childhood to witness the slain bodies of the two martyrs, some sixteen years before, we found Aunt Emma sitting, tailor like, on the large side-table. I knew her instantly. She was sewing. Frederick remarked. 'Mother, do you know these young men?' She instantly raised her eyes, lifted her glasses on to her forehead, and, looking at me, said 'Why, as I live, it is Joseph! Why, Joseph, I would have known you in—; you look so much like your father.' These were her exact words. They fell with bewildering surprise upon my ears, and I shall never forget them" (Hist. Rec. p. 190).
