Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 26.

REVELATION given to Joseph Smith the Prophet, Oliver Cowdery, and John Whitmer, at Harmony, Pennsylvania, July, 1830.—Instructions as to immediate duty—Reaffirmation of the principle of common consent in Church affairs.

BEHOLD, I say unto you that you shall let your time be devoted to the studying of the scriptures, and to preaching, and to confirming the church at Colesville, and to performing your labors on the land, such as is required, until after you shall go to the west to hold the next conference; and then it shall be made known what you shall do.

In the Church of Christ where the government is that of the Kingdom of Heaven, neither autocracy nor democracy obtains, but government by Common Consent. That is to say, the initiative in all that pertains to the government of the Church rests with the Head of the Church, even our Lord Jesus Christ, and He exercises this sovereign function through his authorized servants, upon whom He has bestowed the Holy Priesthood: but it is the privilege of the people to accept, or reject, His laws and ordinances, for God has given every individual free agency. Obedience must be voluntary. The government of the Church has been called a Theo-democracy. It is the form of government that will be general during the Millennium.

General Notes

The Prophet Joseph was a loyal patriot. He firmly held that the United States Constitution was an inspired document, but he never was an enthusiastic party politician. On January 23rd, 1843, he wrote to a newspaper editor:

"I have of late had repeated solicitations to have something to do in relation to the political farce about dividing the County; but as my feelings revolt at the idea of having anything to do with politics, I have declined, in every instance, having anything to do on the subject. I think it would be well for politicians to regulate their own affairs. I wish to be let alone, that I may attend strictly to the spiritual welfare of the Church" (History of the Church, Vol. V., p. 259).

On Dec. 20th, 1841, he wrote to the Times and Seasons:

"In the next canvass, we shall be influenced by no party consideration, and no Carthagenian coalescence or collusion with our people will be suffered to affect, or operate against General Bennett, or any other of our tried friends, already semi-officially in the field; so the partisans in this country, who expect to divide the friends of humanity and equal rights will find themselves mistaken—we care not a fig for Whig or Democrat; they are both alike to us, but we shall go for our friends, our tried friends, and the cause or human liberty, which is the cause of God" (History of the Church, Vol. IV., p. 480).

Prayer and faith. These are the two mighty forces in the government of the Church.

"Boast not your lightning wires to bear the news, Such tardy means the Saint would never choose; Too slow your fluid, and too short the wires For heavenly converse, such as love inspires. If man would fain commune with worlds above, Angels transport the news on wings of love." —Parley P. Pratt.

The government of the Kingdom of God embodies the best features of human governments, and avoid the defects. In that Kingdom the inspired representatives of the Lord teach the people correct principles; that ends their responsibility in the matter. Every individual must then accept, for himself, the responsibility for the course he pursues, be it one of obedience or disobedience. Even the Decalogue was submitted to the people under the law of Common Consent (Ex. 19:1-8). President Brigham Young says:

"Who called Joseph Smith to be a Prophet? Did the people or God? God, and not the people, called him. Had the people gathered together and appointed one of their number to be a prophet, he would have been accountable to the people; but inasmuch as he was called by God, and not the people, he is accountable to God only and the angel who committed the gospel to him, and not to any man on Earth. The Twelve are accountable to the Prophet, and not to the Church, for the course they pursue" (History of the Church, Vol. V., p. 521).

This is in accord with the doctrine of Common Consent. The Prophet s responsible to God, and the Twelve are accountable to the Prophet for the manner in which they perform the duties of their offices, but as members or officers of the Church, they are also subject to the laws and rules of the Church, as much so as any member or officer. Compare Doctrine and Covenants, Sec. 107:81-84.
