Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 28.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to Oliver Cowdery, at Fayette, New York, September, 1830. Hiram Page, a member of the Church, had a certain stone, and professed to be receiving revelations by its aid concerning the upbuilding of Zion and the order of the Church. Several members had been deceived by these claims, and even Oliver Cowdery was wrongly influenced thereby. Just prior to an appointed conference, the Prophet inquired earnestly of the Lord concerning the matter and this revelation followed. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 109.—Joseph's position of presidency defined—Oliver warned against undue assumption—Oliver's mission to the Lamanites stated—He to labor with Hiram Page, whom Satan had deceived—Hiram Page not appointed by the Lord nor accepted by the people as a revelator to the Church.

BEHOLD, I say unto thee, Oliver, that it shall be given unto thee that thou shalt be heard by the church in all things whatsoever thou shalt teach them by the Comforter, concerning the revelations and commandments which I have given.

The spirit of persecution being rampant in the City of Harmony, Pa., the Prophet Joseph moved to Fayette, N. Y., to Mr. Whitmer's house. On arriving there, he learned that Hiram Page had obtained a stone by means of which, as he thought, he received revelations concerning the upbuilding of Zion and the government of the Church, and that Oliver Cowdery, the Whitmers, and others were inclined to accept those revelations as the word of God. The Prophet felt concerned about the matter, for he perceived the cunning of the adversary. In answer to his earnest prayers,, the Lord gave this Revelation, addressed especially to Oliver Cowdery, in which He (1) reveals fully the great principle that divine revelations come only through the regular channels; (2) appoints Oliver Cowdery a missionary to the Lamanites; (3) instructs him to obey counsel, and (4) to set Hiram Page right before leaving on his mission; and (5) assures him of divine guidance while in the service of the master.

Thou shalt be obedient] To the voice of God. When the bugle sounds, those concerned govern themselves accordingly because a higher will than that of the bugler is heard in the call.

Oliver Cowdery might speak and teach, and even command, as long as he confined himself to the Revelations God had given, (v. 3); he might write as a wise counselor (v. 5) but, not as having authority, and he could not issue commands to the Prophet whom God had placed at the head of the Church, under His Son, our Redeemer (v. 6). It is the gift of the Prophet to declare mysteries and truths not known (v. 7).

Mysteries] A mystery is a truth that cannot be known except through divine revelation—a sacred secret. In the days of Paul the important truth that Gentiles were to be admitted to the Kingdom of God without observing the Law of Moses was a "mystery" (Eph. 1:9-11; Col. 1:25-27). In our day such great truths as those pertaining to the restoration of the Priesthood, the work for the dead, and the re-establishment of the Church are "mysteries," because they could not have been discovered except by revelation.

It should be noted that when God revealed a truth to anyone, through the Prophet Joseph, President Brigham Young, or any of their successors, that truth was just as true, and just as binding, as if Peter, James, John, Gabriel, or Michael had been sent with the message. He who does not believe the word of God through a mortal messenger, would not believe one from the other side of mortality (Luke 16:31).

General Notes

The case of Hiram Page was submitted to the Conference and settled in accordance with this Revelation.

In Acts (chap. 15) we have a remarkable record of a difficulty in the early church, which also was settled in a general conference. Some of the brethren taught, in opposition to Paul and Barnabas, that Gentile converts were under the necessity of being circumcised before joining the Church. The question was laid before a conference at Jerusalem, and, after some discussion, Peter moved that it be the sense of the Conference (if a modern expression be permitted) that both Jews and Gentiles are saved "by the grace of Christ"; that is, by the gospel. James seconded this motion and added the suggestion that the decision of the Conference be embodied in a letter to the Gentile churches. This was adopted, but the schism had threatened the Church for years.

The question of the proper channels of revelation was fully settled in the Conference at Fayette, September 26th, 1830.

Hiram Page was born in the year 1800, and, when a young man, traveled considerably as a physician. He joined the Church on the 11th of April, 1830, and became one of the Eight Witnesses to the Book of Mormon. In due time he removed to Independence, Mo., and later became one of the pioneers of the City of Far West. In 1838, however, he drifted away from the Church. He never rescinded his testimony. He died on the 12th of August, 1852.

The doctrine revealed in this Revelation (1-7) was well known to the former-day Saints. In the Patriarchal dispensation no one could take the place of the Patriarch. In the Mosaic dispensation no one could take the position of Moses (See, for instance, Numb., chap. 16). Aaron was the spokesman; Moses was to him "instead of God" (Ex. 4:14-16).

The Lamanite mission was a very important movement of the young but vigorous Church. Oliver Cowdery was the first-appointed member of the party. Peter Whitmer, Jr., was added by Revelation (Sec. 30); and then Parley P. Pratt and Ziba Peterson (Sec. 32). Soon after the Conference the little party set out on the perilous journey of about 1,500 miles. They started on foot, trusting in the Lord to open the way. Near Buffalo they visited the Catteraugus Indians and left the Book of Mormon with them. Then they proceeded to Kirtland, Ohio. Here they visited Sidney Rigdon, then a popular Campbellite minister. He and some of his friends joined the Church. Night and day, for some time, the missionaries were teaching the people in Kirtland and vicinity. After having ordained Rigdon, Isaac Morley, John Murdock, Lyman Wight and others, to the ministry, the missionaries left for the West. Near Sandusky they visited the Wyandot tribe and preached the gospel. In Cincinnati and St. Louis they met with very little success. At the latter place their progress was impeded by heavy snowstorms. With the opening of the New Year, 1831, they continued their journey, traveling on foot 300 miles over prairies, without shelter and fire, living on frozen corn, bread and raw pork. At length they reached Independence, Mo., on the extreme western frontier of the State. They had traveled four months and suffered untold hardships, they had preached to two Indian nations and to thousands of white people, and organized several strong branches of the Church.

After having rested a little at Independence, three of the brethren crossed the frontier and visited the Shawnee Indians. Then they went among the Delawares. These manifested a great deal of interest in the Book of Mormon. Therefore the jealousy of ministers was aroused and these prevailed upon the Indian agents to expel the missionaries from the Indian country. They, accordingly, returned to Jackson county, where they labored for some time with encouraging success.
