Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 29.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, in the presence of six Elders, at Fayette, New York, September, 1830. This revelation was given some days prior to the conference beginning September 26, 1830.—The gathering of the elect specified—The imminence of the Lord's advent affirmed—Calamities incident to the sinful state of the world—The Millennium and scenes of judgment to follow—Distinction between the spiritual and temporal creations—Purpose of the mortal probation—The agency of man—The assured redemption of children who die in infancy.

LISTEN to the voice of Jesus Christ, your Redeemer, the Great I AM, whose arm of mercy hath atoned for your sins;

The Saints at Fayette were looking forward with anticipation to the conference that was to be held on the 26th of September, 1830. The first conference had been the occasion of a Pentecostal outpouring of the Holy Spirit, and there was every reason to believe that the second would be a similar spiritual feast. Some time before the September Conference this Revelation was given in the presence of six Elders. In it the Lord (1) reveals the doctrine of gathering (1-8); (2) makes the important announcement that the second Advent and the Millennium are near (9-11); (3) makes known the position of the first Apostles in the coming of the Kingdom (12); (4) speaks of the first resurrection (13), (5) and the signs preceding the Advent (14-21); and (6) of events after the Millennium and the general resurrection (22-29); (7) reveals important truths regarding the creation (30-35), the fall (36-45), and the innocence of little children (46-50).

Arm of mercy] This is an unusual expression, but it occurs in the Book of Mormon (Jacob 6:5, III. Nephi 9:14), where it refers to Christ's gracious offer of salvation. It is the equivalent to His love, which prompted Him to make the atonement for the sins of the world. In Isa. 51:5, the Lord declares that His "arms" shall judge the people. That is, He shall exert His mighty power in judgment; in this Revelation He promises to exert that power in mercy. He is as "mighty to save" as to judge.

Gathered in unto one place] Jackson County, Mo., is the central gathering place of the Saints. On this subject the Prophet Joseph, in a letter to the Elders of the Church, dated September 1st, 1835, and published in the Messenger and Advocate, said, in part:-

"I received, by a heavenly vision, a commandment in June following [1831] to take my journey to the Western boundaries of the State of Missouri, and there designate the very spot which was to be the central place for the commencement of the gathering together of those who embrace the fulness of the everlasting gospel. Accordingly I undertook the journey, with certain ones of my brethren, and, after a long and tedious journey, suffering many privations and hardships, arrived in Jackson County, Mo., and after viewing the country, seeking diligently at the hand of God, He manifested Himself unto us, and designated unto me and others, the very spot upon which He designed to commence the work of the gathering, and the upbuilding of an Holy City: which should be called Zion—Zion, because it is a place of righteousness, and all who build thereon are to worship the true and living God, and all believe in one doctrine, even the doctrine of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ" (History of the Church, Vol. II, p.254).

The Saints were scattered, and established themselves in the Rocky Mountains, according to the prophetic word (Sec. 35:24; 49:25), but "Zion" was not "moved out of her place," and the Saints will return and build it up. "Will our mission end here [in Utah]? Is the State of Utah the proper monument of the 'Mormon' people? No. * * * The monument to 'Mormonism' will stand in Jackson County, Mo. There the great City will be built: There Zion will arise and shine, 'the joy of the whole Earth,' and there the Lord will come to His temple in His own time, when His people shall have made the required preparation" (Orson F. Whitney, in an address, Salt Lake City, April 9, 1916).

That which was spoken] By Paul, John the Revelator. and other prophets, concerning the coming of the Lord and the judgments of the latter days; all was about to be fulfilled. The great and terrible "day of the Lord" was nigh, when this Revelation was given. We have seen the dawn of it in blood.

A thousand years] The Millennium will then begin. Our Lord will dwell with men on Earth for a thousand years, as He blessed His disciples with His visible presence after His resurrection, for forty days. His Kingdom is then on Earth.

"It may be asked what I mean by the Kingdom of God. The Church of Jesus Christ has been established now for many years, and the Kingdom of God has got to be established, even that Kingdom which will circumscribe all the kingdoms of this world. It will yet give laws to every nation that exists upon the Earth. This is the kingdom that Daniel, the Prophet, saw should be set up in the last days. * * * If the Latter-day Saints think, when the Kingdom of God is established on the Earth, that all the inhabitants of the Earth will join the Church called Latter-day Saints, they are egregiously mistaken. I presume there will be as many sects and parties then as now. Still, when the Kingdom of God triumphs, every knee shall bow and every tongue confess that Jesus is the Christ, to the glory of the Father. Even the Jews will do it then: but will the Jews and Gentiles be obliged to belong to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints? No, not by any means. Jesus said to His disciples, 'In my Father's house are many mansions; were it not so I would have told you; I go to prepare a place for you, that where I am, there ye may be also.' There are mansions in sufficient numbers to suit the different classes of mankind, and a variety will always exist to all eternity, requiring a classification and an arrangement into societies and communities in the many mansions which are in the Lord's house, and this will be so for ever and ever" (Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, Vol. XI., p. 275).

It should be noted, however, that the preaching of the Gospel will continue during the millennium with greater power than ever before. Satan will be bound so that he will have no power to tempt any man, (Doc. and Cov. 101:28) and men will be more susceptible to the teachings of the elders of the Church who go forth to instruct them, until practically all have been brought into the Church. The Lord revealed to Isaiah that in that day the Lord in righteousness "shall judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of the earth: and he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked. And righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins. The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid; and the calf and the young lion and the fatling together; and a little child shall lead them. * * * They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain: for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea." (Isa. 11:4-9.) If righteousness is to cover the earth as the waters cover the sea, there cannot be many wicked men left. "There shall be no more thence an infant of days, nor an old man that hath not filled his days; for the child shall die an hundred years old; but the sinner being an hundred years old shall be accursed." (Isa. 65:20.)

''Christ and the resurrected Saints will reign over the earth during the thousand years. They will not probably dwell upon the earth, but will visit it when they please, or when it is necessary to govern it. There will be wicked men on the earth during the thousand years. The heathen nations who will not come up to worship will be visited with the judgments of God, and must eventually be destroyed from the earth. (D.H.C. 5:212. Teachings 268-269.)

"The Prophet's statement that there will be wicked men on the earth during the Millennium has caused considerable confusion in the minds of many who have read in the Scriptures in many places that when Christ comes the earth shall be cleansed from its wickedness, and that the wicked shall not stand, but shall be consumed. See Doc. and Cov. 5:18-19, 29:8-10, 101:23-25. Isa. 24:1-3. Malachi 4:1. The evil-minded inhabitants, those 'who love and make a lie' and are guilty of all manner of corruption, will be consumed and pass away when Christ comes. In using the term 'wicked men' in this instruction at the home of Judge Adams, the Prophet did so in the same sense in which the Lord uses it in the eighty-fourth section of the Doctrine and Covenants 49-53. The Lord in this scripture speaks of those who have not received the Gospel as being under the bondage of sin, and hence 'wicked.' However, many of these people are honorable, clean living men, but they have not embraced the Gospel. The inhabitants of the terrestrial order will remain on the earth during the Millennium and this class is without the Gospel ordinances. See Doc. and Cov. 76:73-76." (Footnote, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 268-269.)

It should be noted that our Lord does not state any time for the beginning of the thousand years. The famous Adventist, William Miller, in the year 1831, committed the error of predicting that the Millennium would be established in 1843. The Prophet Joseph took the charitable view that Miller was misled through certain errors in the Bible translations extant (History of the Church, Vol. V., p. 272), and emphasized the fact that certain signs, such as the darkening of the sun and the turning of the moon into blood, must precede the coming of Christ. The Lord has given His people certain signs by which those who watch and pray may know that the time is near; but He has not told them the time or the season.

A firm decree] Our Lord prepared a special reward for His first Apostles. He promised them, while yet with them in the flesh, that, seated on thrones of glory, they should judge the twelve tribes of Israel. Here we are informed that the promise had been ratified by the Father and that a firm decree had been issued, making that fact known. When our Lord comes to judgment, His Apostles will take the places promised to them, arrayed in the robes of their office.

They shall come forth] Not the Twelve alone, but all "the dead which died in me." All will receive crowns and robes. The victor at the Olympian games won, perhaps, a crown of olive branches, and he who was triumphant at the Pythian contests rejoiced in a laurel wreath; but those who conquer in life's conflicts, will wear a crown of righteousness. Their very righteousness in this life will be their glory hereafter.

A trump shall sound] The resurrection will be accompanied by divine manifestations similar to those that accompanied the giving of the Law on Sinai. The dead will hear and answer the summons. "If the spirit honors the body and the body honors the spirit while they are here united, the particles of matter that compose the mortal tabernacle will be resurrected and brought forth to immortality and eternal life: but it cannot be brought forth and made immortal, except it undergoes a change, by which it is prepared to dwell in the presence of God."

14-2 l . In these paragraphs some of the signs that are to precede and indicate the coming of the Lord to judge the world are given. (1) There shall be unusual manifestations among the heavenly luminaries; (2) men shall weep and wail; (3) crops shall be destroyed, causing shortages of food; (4) "flies" shall cause painful and nauseating diseases; (5) beasts shall multiply and destroy many; and (6) the "great. and abominable church" shall be cast down. Such are "the signs of the times" which the people of God must be looking for. And they do not belong to a distant future only.

"Immediately after the tribulation of those days shall the sun be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken. And then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven: and then shall all the tribes of the earth mourn, and they shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory." (Matt. 24:29-30.) Joel also speaks of this great day: "And I will shew wonders in the heavens and in the earth, blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke. The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great and terrible day of the Lord come." (Joel 2:30-31.) On this same theme the Prophet Joseph Smith has said. "Men profess to prophesy. 1 will prophesy that the signs of the coming of the Son of Man are already commenced. One pestilence will desolate after another. We shall soon have war and bloodshed. The moon will be turned into blood. I testify of these things, and that the coming of the Son of Man is nigh, even at our doors. If our souls and our bodies are not looking forth for the coming of the Son of Man; and after we are dead, if we are not looking forth, we shall be among those who are calling for the rocks to fall upon them." (Teachings, p. 160.) "There will be wars and rumors of wars, signs in the heavens above and on the earth beneath, the sun turned into darkness and the moon to blood, earthquakes in divers places, the seas heaving beyond their bounds: then will appear one grand sign of the Son of Man in heaven. But what will the world do? They will say it is a planet, a comet, etc. But the Son of Man will come as the sign of the coming of the Son of Man, which will be as the light of the morning cometh out of the east." (Teachings, p. 286-7.)

"And this shall be the plague wherewith the Lord will smite all the people that have fought against Jerusalem; Their flesh shall consume away while they stand upon their feet, and their eyes shall consume away in their holes, and their tongues shall consume away in their mouth." (Zech. 14:12.) There is no promise that this great plague of hail, destruction and disease shall be confined to any one section of the earth. It is a calamity which will come upon the wicked because they will not repent. We may well believe that in addition to the plague of flies there shall be included in this prediction the plague of microbes, or bacilli, new to the scientific world and with which they will not be able to cope, much of which will be the result of impure lives.

The great and abominable church] This is the great church spoken of by Nephi (1 Nephi 13:5-9; 26-28, and also by John in Revelation 17.) The Lord declares that this abominable church shall be cast down when Christ comes, when all things corrupt shall be consumed. Compare also Revelation 18.)

22-29. Here a view is presented of the condition of the world after the Millennium. (1) Men shall again deny God (v. 22); (2) for a "little season" the Earth will be spared, but the end is inevitable (vv. 23-25); (3) before the end, Michael will summon the dead; all shall rise—the righteous to eternal life, and the wicked to eternal fire (vv. 26-29; Rev. 20:7-15).

Michael * * * shall sound his trump] The world generally represents Gabriel as sounding the trump that summons the dead. Here we learn that it is Michael. How appropriate that the Ancestor of the race should perform this function! That the father should call his children in the morning of the resurrection day!

27-29. The language here employed is like that found in Matt. 25:31-46, where the Lord speaks of judgment upon nations. There has been a separation of nations, so that while some have the blessings of light, others are groping in darkness. Finally, there will be a similar separation of individuals.

Power] The power of the Spirit of God. The Spirit has left them. There remains only torment.

"Nature is but a name for an effect Whose cause is God. He feeds the secret fire By which the mighty process is maintained. [All things] are under one. One Spirit, His Who wore the platted thorns with bleeding brows, Rules Universal nature."—Cowper.

And are agreed] Note that this Revelation was given in answer to united prayer by the Elders in the house of the Prophet.

34-35. Not at any time * * * law which was temporal] Man makes a distinction between temporal and spiritual laws, and some are very much concerned about keeping the two separate. To the Lord everything is both spiritual and temporal, and the laws He gives are consequently spiritual, because they concern spiritual beings. When He commanded Adam to eat bread in the sweat of his brow, or Moses to strike the rock that the people might drink, or the Prophet Joseph to erect the Nauvoo House, or the Saints in Utah to build fences and roads, such laws were for their spiritual welfare, as well as physical. To obey such laws, when given, is a spiritual duty. One who performs his daily labor "as to the Lord, and not to men" (Eph. 6:7) derives spiritual benefit from whatever his duties are.

"A servant with this clause Makes drudgery divine; Who sweeps a room as for thy laws Makes that and th' action fine."—Herbert.

36-45. In these paragraphs the Lord reveals some important truths relating to the fall of man. (1) Adam was tempted (v. 36). (2) The devil was the tempter (vv. 36-40). (3) Adam fell and was expelled from the Garden of Eden (v. 41). (4) The penalty was death (vv. 41-42). (5) Through death man goes to eternal life (v. 43); or to damnation (vv. 44, 45).

The devil] The adversary of God and His Son, Jesus Christ, and the tempter and accuser of man. He is called the "angel of the bottomless pit," the "messenger" or representative, of the "abysm," (Rev. 9:11), as our Lord is the Messenger of the Great Council, or Counselor, (Is. 9:6; Sec. 10:10). The word "devil," from "diabolus," means "calumniator," "accuser," and calumny is his principal weapon of warfare. No wonder if the children of this world, whose "god" he is, employ that weapon against the Saints of the Most High!

After our Savior has finished his work and has gained the victory over death, (1. Cor. 15:24-26.) then the devil and his angels will go to their own place which the Lord has prepared for them, sometimes spoken of as "outer darkness," and "the bottomless pit."

"And in that day Adam blessed God and was filled, and began to prophesy concerning all the families of the Earth, saying, Blessed be the name of God, for because of my transgression my eyes are opened. and in this life I shall have joy, and again in the flesh I shall see God. And Eve, his wife, heard all these things and was glad, saying, Were it not for our transgression we never should have had seed, and never should have known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all" (Pearl of Great Price, Book of Moses 5:10-11).

46-50. The status of little children is a subject closely connected with that of the fall. The Lord here declares that the children are redeemed through Jesus Christ; that they cannot sin; and that they cannot be tempted.

General Notes

"With regard to the future state of those who die in infancy I do not feel authorized to say much. There has been a great deal of theory and many views have been expressed on this subject, hut there are many things connected with it which the Lord has probably never revealed to any of the prophets or patriarchs who ever appeared on Earth * * * It is sufficient for me to know that our children are saved, and that, if we ourselves keep the faith and do our duty before the Lord, if we keep the celestial law, we shall be preserved by that law, and our children will be given unto us there, as they have been given here in this world of sorrow, affliction, pain and distress" (Wilford Woodruff, Journal of Discourses, Vol. XVIII, p. 32).

That our Lord will reign upon this Earth, and that the Saints will reign with Him for a thousand years, is clearly revealed. This truth was generally accepted among the Christians till the fourth century. From that time till the Reformation, the general opinion was against a literal Millennium. At the time of the Reformation, the so-called Anabaptists declared their belief in it, and that was enough to damn the doctrine in the eyes of their bigoted opponents. In England it was condemned as "Jewish dotage." Later, Rome declared against a literal Millennium, while Protestants took the opposite view. Some who believe in a Millennium hold that Christianity will be gradually diffused until the entire race is Christianized, and that will be the Millennium. This is an error. The world will be redeemed through the mighty arm of Jehovah; through judgments and tribulation. The general conversion will take place during the Millennium.

Zion means the pure in heart, as well as a place of gathering, and it is to be noted that no place can be Zion, unless it is inhabited by those who are pure in heart. Jackson County, Mo., is to be the central place of Zion, and there the New Jerusalem will be built, and this will be just as soon as the Lord has a people prepared to make a Zion and a New Jerusalem there. "When the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall appear in his glory" (Psalm 102:16).

Some have asserted that the story of the fall is but a myth, or an allegory, but it is given in the Scriptures as part of the history of the human family, and must be either accepted as such, or rejected as fiction. The fall was as necessary for the development of the race as was the creation. The story of the first fall is, moreover, the story of every sin, Temptation begins with doubt as to the truth of the prohibition. "Has God said * * * ?" It is continued by a contemplation of the pleasure that may be derived from doing that which has been prohibited. It ends with a sense of shame and degradation and dread of the presence of God. Such is the beginning and development of every transgression.

There are many theories of the origin of sin. The Scriptures tell us that our first parents fell, and that sin thereby was introduced into the world. That there is sin in the world, cannot be denied. What is sin, then, and how did it happen to come among men? Where did it come from? Such are the questions asked by philosophy and theology alike. Some assume the existence of two eternal principles—one good and one evil, and they say that sin comes from the latter. Gnostics and Manichaeans regarded matter as evil and sin as a result of the contact of the spirit with matter. Others have held that sin is merely an absence of good, a negation, a limitation. God, they say, is the one good Being, all others being inferior to Him in attributes, and. therefore, sinful.

"Evil is what is finite," says Baur. "If other beings than God are to exist, there must be in them, so far as they are not infinite as God is, for that very reason, a minimum of evil." Leibnitz holds that sin is due to the imperfection of all that is created. No created being can be perfect. His knowledge is limited and so is his power, and sin comes because of this necessary limitation. "Evil is hidden under good as under a mask." Another theory derives sin from selfishness, but fails to account for the origin of selfishness, which itself is sinful. Another theory holds that sin is necessary, since all men must be developed by antagonism, and a moral world without sin would be as a stagnant pool. Professor Muller characterized this theory as an approach to "pansatanism."

How different from all these speculations is the revealed truth! Man has free agency. This presupposes a law and freedom to obey or disobey. The law was given, and man, tempted by the fallen angel, disobeyed. Through Christ Jesus his redemption was accomplished, by which he regained infinitely more than he lost, and thus the fall, as someone has said, became a "fall upwards." Sin, in its outward manifestations, is the breaking of the law.
