Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 30.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to David Whitmer, Peter Whitmer, Jun., and John Whitmer, at Fayette, New York, September, 1830, following the three days' conference at Fayette, but before the Elders of the Church had separated. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 115.—Individual instruction is given, and the fact of Oliver Cowdery's mission to the Lamanites is reiterated.

BEHOLD, I say unto you, David, that you have feared man and have not relied on me for strength as you ought.

There is some discrepancy in the records regarding the date of the second Conference of the Church, but Elder B. H. Roberts, in History of the Church, Vol. I., p. 110, gives sufficient reasons for accepting the 26th of September, 1830, rather than the first of that month, as the correct date. When this Conference convened, the question of the seer-stone of Hiram Page was discussed. The error was thoroughly exposed and acknowledged (Sec. 28:11), and harmony and unity were fully restored. The Saints partook of the Sacrament, and the Spirit of the Lord was poured out upon them in abundant measure. While the conference was still in session this Revelation and the following were received.

This Revelation contains three sections, one is addressed to David Whitmer, one to Peter Whitmer, Jr., and one to John Whitmer.

1-4. David Whitmer is mildly rebuked for listening to Hiram Page, and perhaps for using his influence over other members of the family in favor of the supposed seer-stone. He was told that he had feared man, and set his mind on earthly things, instead of taking care of the ministry and listening to the Spirit and the inspired Prophet, with the result that he had been left to inquire for himself, the Prophet could not inquire for him. He was also commanded to remain at home, until further instruction should be given, and confine his labors, for the time being, to the Church and the world in the neighborhood. Deviation from the narrow path always brings with it some consequences which remain after the sin has been pardoned. See also notes, Sec. 14.

5-8. Peter Whitmer is not rebuked. He, in all probability, was innocent in the matter of the seer-stone. He was called to go with Oliver Cowdery on the long and perilous mission to the Lamanites (Sec. 28:8), and he was admonished to give heed to him, follow his advice, share with him the trials and sufferings before him, and always pray and exercise faith. If he would do these things and keep God's commandments, he would have eternal life. Missionary labor is complete only when the missionary is willing to follow counsel and keep the commandments of God. See notes, Sec. 16.

9-11. John Whitmer is called at this time to labor especially among the Saints. He was very active in the Church as an aid to the Prophet. He assisted in the compilation of the Revelations, and accompanied Oliver Cowdery to Jackson County to superintend the printing of them. He was one of the seven High Priests appointed to preside in the Church in Jackson County. He was Church historian and editor of important Church publications. But he did not remain faithful. See notes Sec. 15.
