Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 31.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to Thomas B. Marsh, September, 1830. Thomas B. Marsh had been baptized earlier in the month, and had already been ordained an Elder in the Church when this revelation was given.—Commended for obedience and faithfulness—Assured as to the welfare of his family—Appointed to preach and administer—Promised the guidance of the Comforter in his ministry.

THOMAS, my son, blessed are you because of your faith in my work.

This Revelation was also received while the second Conference of the Church was in session. It was given for the benefit of Thomas B. Marsh especially.

Thomas B. Marsh was born at Acton, Mass., Nov. 1st, 1799. He came on a visit to Palmyra at the time when the Book of Mormon was being printed, and Martin Harris gave him a sheet containing the first sixteen pages of that book. He read these pages and showed them to his wife, and both received a testimony that the book was of God. When he learned that the Church had been organized, he moved to Palmyra and was baptized by David Whitmer. This was in the month of September, 1830, shortly before this Revelation was received. After a career of varied experiences, Marsh moved to Kirtland, where he was called to the Apostleship. In July and August, 1837, he accompanied the Prophet Joseph and Sidney Rigdon on a mission to Canada, and the following year he and David W. Patten were appointed presidents of the Church in Missouri, until the arrival of the Prophet. In August 1838, a year of apostasy, he became disaffected and turned traitor to his brethren. He made an affidavit to the effect that the "Mormons" had a company called "Danites," organized for the purpose of murdering "enemies"—a statement he certainly knew to he false. After that he became a vagabond, without resting-place, without peace, for many years.

In 1857, he came to Salt Lake City, and asked forgiveness and reinstatement in the Church. President Young introduced him to the audience in the Bowery, on the 6th of September. He told the congregation that he had suffered greatly during his absence from the Church, but that he acknowledged the hand of the Lord in the chastisement he had received. He made the following significant remark concerning the beginning of his apostasy:

"I became jealous of the Prophet, and then I saw double and overlooked everything that was right, and spent all my time in looking for the evil. * * * I saw a beam in Brother Joseph's eye, but it was nothing but a mote, and my own eye was filled with the beam. * * * I talked with Brother Brigham and Brother Heber, and I wanted them to be mad like myself; and 1 saw they were not mad, and I got madder still because they were not. Brother Brigham, with a cautious look, said, 'are you the leader of the Church, Brother Thomas?' I answered, 'No!' 'Well then,' said he, 'Why do you not let that alone?' Well, this was about the amount of my hypocrisy. I meddled with that which was not my business" (Journal of Discourses, Vol. V., p. 207).

At the conclusion of his address he was by unanimous vote received into full fellowship as a member of the Church.

Even as an Apostle of our Lord, he had no other commission. As long as he was faithful to this charge, he was singularly blessed, but when, through envy and pride, he turned away from the leadership of the Prophet, he fell.

9-13. The Lord here imparts special instructions for the guidance of His servant. Among these are:—Be patient in afflictions; revile not against those that revile; govern your house and be steadfast; pray always, lest you enter into temptation and lose your reward; and be faithful unto the end.

The Lord knew the dangers threatening Thomas B. Marsh and warned him of them.

General Notes

Thomas B. Marsh was commanded to govern his house in meekness, and to be steadfast. In this he utterly failed. And for that reason he apostatized and became active in drawing the mob against the Saints in Missouri, in persecution. George A. Smith, in an address delivered in Salt Lake City. April 6th, 1856, tells the story. When the Saints were living in Far West, the wife of Marsh and Sister Harris agreed to exchange milk, in order to enable each of them to make a larger cheese than they could do separately. Each was to take to the other the "strippings" as well as the rest of the milk. Mrs. Harris performed her part of the agreement, but Mrs. Marsh kept a pint of "strippings" from each cow. When this became known the matter was brought before the Teachers, and these decided against Mrs. Marsh. An appeal was taken to the Bishop. He sustained the Teachers. If Marsh had obeyed the Revelation and governed his house in humility and with steadfastness, he would have righted the wrong done, but, instead of doing so, he appealed to the High Council. Marsh, who at the time was President of the Twelve, possibly thought that the Council would favor him, but that body confirmed the Bishop's decision. He was not yet satisfied, but appealed to the First Presidency, and Joseph, the Prophet, and his two Counsellors consented to review the case. They approved the finding of the High Council. Was Marsh satisfied then? No. With the persistency of Lucifer himself, he declared that he would uphold the character of his wife, "even if he had to go to hell for it." Elder George A. Smith observes:

"The then President of the Twelve Apostles, the man who should have been the first to do justice and cause reparation to be made for wrong, committed by any member of his family, took that position, and what next? He went before a magistrate and swore that the 'Mormons' were hostile to the State of Missouri. That affidavit brought from the government of Missouri an exterminating order, which drove some 15,000 Saints from their homes and habitations, and some thousands perished through suffering the exposure consequent on this state of affairs" (Journal of Discourses, Vol. III., p. 284).

Marsh appears before us in the early history of the Church as a man of great faith. This attribute again became prominent, when, after many years of apostasy and suffering, he wended his way to Utah to confess his sins and ask for pardon. With all his efforts he could raise only five dollars and ten cents, and with this sum he started on his way from Harrison Co., Mo, to Salt Lake City. He looked at this money and said, "Lord, if you will help me, I will go." He says, "Before I got out of the State, the Lord had changed my fortune, and I had $65.05. I then concluded within myself that the Lord was with me."

At the time Marsh was reinstated as a member of the Church, President Brigham Young referred to the fact that Marsh said he was an old man. President Young said,

"Brother Thomas considers himself very aged and infirm, and you can see that he is, brethren and sisters! What is the cause of it? He left the gospel of salvation. What do you think is the difference between his age and mine? One year and seven months to a day; and he is one year, seven months, and fourteen days older than Brother Heber C. Kimball. 'Mormonism' keeps men and women young and handsome; and where they are full of the Spirit of God, there are none of them but will have a glow upon their countenances; and that is what makes you and me young; for the Spirit of God is with us, and within us" (Journal of Discourses, Vol. V., p. 210).
