Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 32.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to Parley P. Pratt and Ziba Peterson, October, 1830. Great interest and yearning desires were felt by the Elders respecting the Lamanites, of whose predicted blessings the Church had learned from the Book of Mormon. In consequence, supplication was made that the Lord would indicate his will as to whether Elders should be sent at that time to the Indian tribes in the West. The revelation followed. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 118.—The missionaries admonished to confine themselves to the expounding of the written word, as they shall be given understanding thereof.

AND now concerning my servant Parley P. Pratt, behold, 1 say unto him that as 1 live I will that he shall declare my gospel and learn of me, and be meek and lowly of heart.

Oliver Cowdery and Peter Whitmer had been called to go on a mission to the Lamanites (Sec. 28:8; 30:5). There was great interest among the Saints in this mission, for it was hoped that the time had come for the redemption of the scattered Remnant, according to the promises in the Book of Mormon (I Nephi 15:13-18, and many other places). The Prophet laid the matter before the Lord in prayer and received this Revelation, in which Parley P. Pratt and Ziba Peterson were called to join Oliver Cowdery and Peter Whitmer, Jr., on that important mission.

Parley P. Pratt was born on the 12th of April, 1807, in Burlington N. Y., a descendant of a venerable Pilgrim family that came with the Rev. Thomas Hooker and settled at Hartford, Conn., 1636. In September, 1830, he started on a journey east from his home in Ohio and, in the providence of God. obtained a copy of the Book of Mormon. He believed and hastened to Palmyra to investigate. At Manchester he met Hyrum Smith, who related to him the wonderful story of the coming forth of that Book. In company with Hyrum Smith he went to Fayette, where he was baptized by Oliver Cowdery, in September, 1830. He now continued his journey eastward. His brother, Orson Pratt heard the gospel and was baptized by him. Then he went back to Fayette, attended the Conference and received his call to go on a mission. Parley P. Pratt, previous to joining the Church, had identified himself with the Campbellite movement. After several successful missionary journeys, he was called to the Apostleship, in February, 1835 and in 1840 he accompanied Brigham Young and others to England where he commenced the publication of the Millennial Star, at Manchester. In 1846 he again performed a mission to Great Britain, having left his family at Council Bluffs upon the broad prairie, without adequate shelter. The following year he came to Salt Lake Valley. In the year 1857, on the 13th of May, his earthly life of usefulness and self-sacrifice was ended. His Voice of Warning and Key to Theology are known wherever there are Latter-day Saints.

Of Ziba Peterson less is known. He* was baptized on the 18th of April, 1830, together with Peter Whitmer, Sen., Mary Whitmer, William Jolly, and Elizabeth Ann Whitmer, Oliver Cowdery officiating. He went on a mission to the Lamanites, but, unfortunately, afterwards, he proved himself unworthy of being entrusted with further responsibilities, and the Lord commanded that that which had been bestowed upon him be taken away (Sec. 58:60). He had committed sins in secret, and refused to confess them.

—————

* In the Church History there appears among the names of those baptized on that date that of Richard B. Peterson. In the "Historical Record" the name is Richard Z. Peterson. In the Revelations we have Ziba Peterson.

—————

General Notes

Concerning the mission to the Lamanites, Oliver Cowdery wrote from Kaw Township, Mo., May 7th, 1831:—

"Brother Ziba Peterson and myself went into the county east, which is Lafayette, about forty miles; and in the name of Jesus, we called on the people to repent, many of whom are. I believe, earnestly searching for truth, and if sincerely, I pray they may find that precious treasure, for it seems to be wholly fallen in the streets; and equity cannot enter. The letter we received from you, informed us that the opposition was great against you. Now, our beloved brethren, we verily believe that we also can rejoice that we are counted worthy to suffer shame for His name; for almost the whole country, consisting of Universalists, Atheists, Deists, Presbyterians, Methodists, Baptists, and other professed Christians, priests and people, with all the devils from the eternal pit, are united and foaming out their shame [against us]. God forbid that I should bring a railing accusation against them, for vengeance belongeth to Him who is able to repay" (History of the Church, Vol. I., p. 182).

Parley P. Pratt was admonished to be meek and lowly of heart. In the year 1837, there were "jarrings and discord" in the Church at Kirtland, and he was overcome with that spirit. He even tried to turn John Taylor from the Prophet by pointing out to him what he regarded as Joseph's error. Elder Taylor rebuked him as a brother, and Parley P. Pratt went to the Prophet in tears and confessed his sin, whereupon the Prophet frankly forgave him, prayed with him, and blessed him. This was meekness. It was also manliness. Only a really strong character can possess true humility.
