Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 33.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to Ezra Thayre and Northrop Sweet, at Fayette, New York, October, 1830. In recording this revelation the Prophet avers that the Lord is ever ready to instruct such as diligently seek in faith.—The corrupted state of the world declared—Call for laborers in the ministry—Bringing forth of the Church from the wilderness and its establishment by the Lord—Commission of the Elders to proclaim repentance and baptism—Imminence of the Lord's coming.

BEHOLD, I say unto you, my servants Ezra and Northrop, open ye your ears and hearken to the voice of the Lord your God, whose word is quick and powerful, sharper than a two-edged sword, to the dividing asunder of the joints and marrow, soul and spirit; and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart.

In this Revelation the Lord calls Ezra Thayre and Northrop Sweet to missionary labors. It contains (1) a description of the condition in which the world is, and urges them to go to work (2-9); (2) states what they should preach (10-12); (3) gives special instructions relating to the ministry (13-18).

Quick and powerful] See Sec. 6:2.

Soul and spirit] The union of the spirit and the body is the soul (Sec. 88:15), and, if that definition is the only one, the expression is somewhat difficult to analyze. But "soul" also means "life," and this seems to be the meaning here.

Many object to the teachings of the gospel on the subject of the deviation from the original pattern. They take exception to the picture of total corruption presented but this only confirms the truth of the gospel. We have in holy writ successive portraits of human nature taken at various times. One was taken before the deluge: "All flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth" (Gen. 6:12). Another is presented by Eliphaz, in Job: "Man, which drinketh iniquity like water" (Job 15:16). David viewed the conditions in this light: "The Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there were any that did understand, and seek God. They are all gone aside; they are all together become filthy; there is none that doeth good, no, not one" (Psalm 14:2, 3). Paul, in his day, repeats this and draws a terrible picture of man outside the influence of the gospel (Rom. 3:10-18). "There is," he says, "no fear of God before their eyes." The picture presented in the Revelations given in our day has the same features. "They [the sects] were all wrong." "My vineyard has been corrupted, every whit." Let the reader compare these statements with those quoted from the Bible, and he will feel convinced that they originated in the same source—the Foundation of truth. The purpose of God in presenting these pictures is to call men to repentance. Even those who are doing good, according to the best of their understanding, err in many respects because of "priestcraft."

10-12. The servants of the Lord are here instructed what to preach to the world. This is their message:

(2) Prepare the way of the Lord] Eastern potentates, when traveling from one part of the kingdom to another, would proclaim their coming and order their subjects to prepare the way for them, by building roads where there were none, if necessary; by leveling hills and filling up depressions, and straightening out the winding paths. Semiramis is said to have had roads constructed especially for her journeys. In modern times the Turkish government built a good road from Jaffa to Jerusalem, when the German Emperor signified his intention of visiting the Holy City. To prepare the way of the Lord and make His paths straight is to acknowledge His sovereignty and to make all necessary preparations for His reception. He will not come to reign until all necessary preparations for his coming have been made. "Hear this, O Earth! The Lord will not come to reign over the righteous, in this world, in 1843 [as was expected by Miller] nor until everything for the Bridegroom is ready" (Joseph Smith, History of the Church, Vol. V., p. 291).

(5) Baptism "of fire and the Holy Ghost" is equally necessary. Baptism in water and in that fire which is "holy spirit" is but one baptism. Any ceremony which does not embrace both is empty and void.

These six subjects embrace the entire gospel. Repentance, acceptance of Christ as the Sovereign whose coming is near, baptism in water, reception of the Holy Ghost, and faith form the complete and perfect basis of true religion.

Upon this rock] The Lord reveals in this verse that it was not on Peter, but upon the rock of revelation that he built His church. President George A. Smith, counselor to President Brigham Young, in a discourse delivered June 24, 1855, said:

" * * * But, says the Savior, 'Whom do you say that I am?' Why, says Peter: 'Thou art the Christ the Son of the living God.' The Savior replied, 'Blessed art thou, Simon Barjona, for flesh and blood hath not revealed this unto thee, but my Father who is in heaven; I say unto thee thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.'

"This argument would be introduced by those who believe that Christ built His church upon St. Peter, and you then come to read the passage, and what do you learn by it? You simply learn that Peter had made the discovery, by revelation, that Jesus was the Son of the living God, and that upon the rock (revelation) He (Christ) would build His church, and upon nothing else, and that the gates of hell should not prevail against it." (George A. Smith, Tabernacle, June 24, 1855.)

Gates of hell] See Sec. 10:69.

The special instructions here given to Ezra Thayre and Northrop Sweet are of general application. Remember the Church articles and covenants to keep them (14); confirm those who have faith (15); seek knowledge by studying the Book of Mormon and the Bible (16); be faithful, prayerful, prepared to meet the Savior (17).

At that time He came in judgment upon an apostate church in the form of invasions from Asia, by which the candlesticks were removed and the world was plunged in darkness. Again the Lord's voice is heard, "I come quickly." This time He is coming to sit in judgment upon the nations and lay the foundations for His Millennial reign.

Northrop Sweet, it seems, notwithstanding this Revelation, very soon joined Wycom Clark and four other individuals and formed what they called "The Pure Church of Christ." Their organization did not live long.
