Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 34.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to Orson Pratt, at Fayette, New York, November 4, 1830. The recipient was nineteen years old at the time. He had been converted and baptized when he first heard the preaching of the restored Gospel by his brother, Parley P. Pratt, six weeks before. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 127.—Commended for obedience—Commanded to preach and to prophesy as the Holy Ghost shall give utterance—Certainty of the Lord's advent.

MY son Orson, hearken and hear and behold what I, the Lord God, shall say unto you, even Jesus Christ your Redeemer;

About this time Orson Pratt came to Fayette. He was then only 19 years of age, having been born on the 19th of September, 1811. His brother Parley had told him of the Book of Mormon and he had accepted the message and been baptized, on the 19th of September, 1830, his birthday. Orson was a studious boy, but, like Abraham Lincoln, he was under the necessity of relying mainly upon his own resources. He paid special attention to mathematics, grammar, geography, surveying, etc. In later years he delved into the mysteries of astronomy, theology, and languages, and became one of the most profound thinkers and logical speakers and writers of the early days of the Church.

As stated, Orson Pratt had just become a member of the Church, and he now came to Fayette to inquire of the Lord, through the Prophet, about the will of the Lord concerning him. This Revelation was then received, in which (1) he was called to preach the gospel (1-8); (2) was given some signs by which to know that the coming of the Lord was near (9); and (3) was assured of divine assistance, on condition of faithfulness.

1-3. The Lord first introduces Himself as Jesus Christ, the Redeemer, the Light and the Life of the world; the Light which shineth in darkness, though the darkness does not comprehend it; and He who so loved the world that He gave His own life. These are reasons why we should hearken to Him, when He speaks. See also Sec. 6:21; 11:30.

4-5. Blessed are you] Doubly blessed is he who accepts the Redeemer, through faith, and who is called to proclaim Him to the world. Living faith must precede the call to the ministry. God does not call unbelievers to preach the gospel. Blessed is he who believes and is called to preach. The reverse of this is, Wo to him who preaches without being authorized to do so.

"The ordinances of the gospel, being of divine origin, require divine authority in their administration. * * * No company, firm, society, court, or government would acknowledge or become responsible for the acts of any but its duly appointed and properly accredited agents. Why, then, should the great King endorse the doings of men who take upon themselves duties not required of them, or bestow, through their unauthorized performance, blessings that only belong to the administrations of His chosen ambassadors?" (Charles W. Penrose).

The following trenchant comments on Heb. 5:4, dealing with authority, are recommended to the thoughtful and intelligent reader:

"We have here the second qualification for Priesthood. A man's own caprice must not be the bishop which ordains him. He must be conscious of a divine call. Great stress is laid on this point in Scripture (Ex. 28:1). 'Any stranger that cometh nigh'—i.e., that intruded unbidden into the Priesthood—was to be put to death (Num. 3:10). The fate of Korah and his company (Num. 16:40), and of Uzziah, king though he was (II. Chron. 26:18-21), served as a terrible warning, and it was recorded as a special aggravation of Jeroboam's impiety that 'he made priests of the lowest of the people, which were not of the sons of Levi' (I. Kings 12:31). In one of the Jewish Midrashirn, Moses says to Korah, 'If Aaron, my brother, had taken upon himself the priesthood, ye would be excusable for murmuring against him; but God gave it to him'" (Dean Farrar, Hebrews, Cambridge Bible, p. 97).

"Whenever men can find out the will of God and find an administrator legally authorized from God, there is the kingdom of God; but where these are not, the kingdom of God is not. All the ordinances, systems, and administrations on the Earth are of no use to the children of men, unless they are ordained and authorized of God; for nothing will save a man but a legal administrator; for none others will be acknowledged either by God or angels" (Joseph Smith, History of the Church, Vol. V., p. 259)

Preparing the way of the Lord for His coming] This was Orson Pratt's mission. In his sermons and writings, the dominant note is always the coming of the Lord. "Divine Authority," "Kingdom of God," "Authenticity of the Book of Mormon," "New Jerusalem," "The First Principles of the Gospel"—such are the themes to which he recurs again and again in writing and speech, as a bee to a beautiful field of flowers, returning each time with sweet honey.

The sun shall be darkened, etc.] See Sec. 29:14. When thrones begin to fall and the kingdoms are torn to pieces, the coming of the Lord is near.

Prophesy] To prophesy is to speak in the name of the Lord, whether the message relates to the future, the present, or the past. It is the testimony of Jesus that is the spirit of prophecy (Rev. 19:10). He who has that testimony is a prophet, and a "fellow servant" of the messengers, or angels, who come from the presence of God.

"Orson Pratt was a true Apostle of the Lord. Full of integrity, firm as a rock to his convictions, true to his brethren and his God, earnest and zealous in defense and the proclamation of the truth, ever ready to bear testimony to the Latter-day work, he had a mind stored with Scripture, ancient and modern, was an eloquent speaker, a powerful minister, a logical and convincing writer, an honest man and a great soul who reached out after eternal things, grasped them with the gift of inspiration, and brought them down to the level and comprehension of the common mind. Thousands have been brought into the Church through his preaching in many lands, thousands more by his writings. He set but little store on the wealth of this world, but he has laid up treasures in heaven which will make him eternally rich."

General Notes

One truly amusing incident in the remarkable career of Orson Pratt may be recalled, viz., his debate with Dr. J. P. Newman. There has always been an impression in the world that the "Mormons" are ignorant. Dr. Newman thought so, too, and decided to display his learning in their midst. He came from Washington to Salt Lake City for the express purpose of engaging in a public debate with President Brigham Young, and he fairly seemed to gloat over the prospect of overwhelming him in an argument. Newman was the chaplain of the United States Senate. Brigham Young accepted the challenge and selected Orson Pratt to represent him. The Tabernacle was filled during three sessions, on the 12th, 13th, and 14th of August, 1870. Dr. Newman in his first address, fairly bristled with Greek, probably in order to impress the audience. In his second address he resorted to Hebrew, confident that he would have the field all to himself. To his astonishment Orson Pratt followed him, went into the argument and tore Dr. Newman's Hebrew and exegesis all to pieces. The learned gentleman from Washington had made himself ridiculous. He did not know that Orson Pratt had studied Hebrew in the school of the Elders at Kirtland under a competent instructor.
