Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 35.

REVELATION given to Joseph Smith the Prophet, and Sidney Rigdon, December, 1830. As a preface to his record of this revelation the Prophet wrote: In December Sidney Rigdon came to inquire of the Lord, and with him came Edward Partridge; the latter was a pattern of piety, and one of the Lord's great men. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 128.—How men may become sons of God—Sidney is promised that through him the Holy Ghost shall be given, as by the Apostles of old—Directed to assist the Prophet Joseph, and assured of the eventual redemption of Israel.

LISTEN to the voice of the Lord your God, even Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, whose course is one eternal round, the same today as yesterday, and forever.

Sidney Rigdon, who became noted in Church history, was born in Saint Claire, Pa., Feb. 19th, 1793. At the age of 25 years he joined a Baptist church. In 1819 he obtained a license as a minister, and a couple of years later he received a call to take charge of a church at Pittsburg, Pa. While engaged in this ministry, he became convinced that some of the doctrines of the Baptists were not Scriptural, and he resigned his position and joined his brother-in-law in the tanning business. At this time he became acquainted with Alexander Campbell, the reputed founder of the church known as "Disciples," or "Campbellites," and with one Mr. Walter Scott, and these three started that religious movement. Rigdon left Pittsburg and went to Bainbridge, and later to Mentor, preaching faith, repentance, baptism by immersion for the remission of sins, and righteous conduct. He had many adherents.

In the fall of 1830, Parley P. Pratt, Ziba Peterson, Oliver Cowdery, and Peter Whitmer, Jr., who were on their mission to the Lamanites, called at the house of Sidney Rigdon, and Parley P. Pratt, who knew him, presented him a copy of the Book of Mormon and related its story. He believed and was baptized, as were many members of his church in that vicinity. Sidney Rigdon and Edward Partridge shortly afterwards went to Fayette for the purpose of visiting the Prophet and learning something about the will of God concerning them.

Sidney Rigdon accompanied the Prophet to Ohio, visited Missouri, suffered persecution at Hiram, Ohio, received wonderful manifestations in Kirtland, labored as counselor in the First Presidency, visited Canada and the Eastern States, shared prison at Liberty with the Prophet, went to Washington on behalf of the persecuted Saints, and assisted in building up the Church. Unfortunately, he did not endure to the end. When the crucial trial came, he proved himself untrue and sought to lead the Saints astray. After the death of the Prophet he aspired to the leadership of the Church and refused to submit to the decision of the Apostles, which had been sustained by the people, and because he continued his agitation he was excommunicated by the High Council in Nauvoo, Sept. 8th, 1844. He died outside the Church on the 14th of July, 1876.

In this Revelation to Sidney Rigdon the Lord (1) introduces Himself, as He had done in the Revelation to Orson Pratt, and others (1, 2); then (2) He explains the difference between the ministry in which Rigdon had been engaged and that to which he would be called now (3-6); the Lord, next (3), sets before him what the true gospel is and the fruits of it (7-19); then follows (4) the divine appointment of Sidney Rigdon to his place in the Church (20-23). The Revelation closes (5) with promises to Sidney Rigdon and the Saints generally (24-27).

Crucified for the sins of the world, * * * name] For whom did Christ die? is a much-discussed question. Some hold, with Augustine, that God elected a certain number of the human race, and that our Lord died for them only. Opponents of this doctrine maintain that He, through His death, made it possible for all to gain salvation. In this Revelation we learn that Christ was crucified for the sins of the whole world, but that only those who believe on His name become the "sons of God."

Sin is a matter which concerns the individual. We are taught in the Second Article of Faith that men will be punished for their own sins and not for Adam's transgression. It would be contrary to the law of justice to punish all of Adam's posterity for his sin, although this doctrine has prevailed in the world in the midst of its spiritual darkness. While it is true, that we all partake of the mortal death because of the fall, this death is not a sin and from it we are redeemed by our Savior Jesus Christ.

"For as death hath passed upon all men, to fulfill the merciful plan of the great Creator, there must needs be a power of resurrection, and the resurrection must needs come unto man by reason of the fall, and the fall came by reason of transgression; and because man became fallen they were cut off from the presence of the Lord.

"Wherefore, it must needs be an infinite atonement—save it should be an infinite atonement this corruption could not put on incorruption. Wherefore, the first judgment which came upon man must needs have remained to an endless duration. And if so, this flesh must have laid down to rot and to crumble to its mother earth, to rise no more. * * *

"O how great the goodness of our God, who prepareth a way for our escape from the grasp of this awful monster; yea, that monster, death and hell, which I call the death of the body, and also the death of the spirit.

"And because of the way of deliverance of our God, the Holy One of Israel, this death, of which I have spoken, which is the temporal, shall deliver up its dead; which death is the grave." (2 Nephi 9:6-11.)

One in me] The oneness of the Saints of God with their Redeemer is the same as that of the Son with the Father. Concerning this divine unity John Taylor writes:

" 'His name shall be called Immanuel,' which being interpreted is, God with us.' Hence He is not only called the Son of God, the First Begotten of the Father, the Well Beloved, the Head, Ruler, and Dictator of all things, Jehovah, the I Am, the Alpha and Omega, but He is also called the very Eternal Father. Does not this mean that in Him were the attributes and power of the very Eternal Father?" (Mediation and Atonement, p. 138).

6 But now I give unto thee a commandment, that thou shalt baptize by water, and they shall receive the Holy Ghost by the laying on of the hands, even as the apostles of old.

3-6. Here the Lord gives Sidney Rigdon to understand that his efforts as a minister, previous to his acceptance of the gospel, had not been in vain. The eye of the Lord had been upon him, and his prayers had been heard; wherefore now he was prepared to do greater work. The Church of Jesus Christ is infinitely greater than any mere human organization. Sidney Rigdon had been sent forth, as this Revelation states, even as John the Baptist, to prepare the way before the Lord. There have been many forerunners of the great Latter-day work. The reformers who broke the chains of tyranny; Columbus, who discovered a new world where the oppressed of all nations might find a refuge the Pilgrim Fathers, who laid the solid foundations of a great, free nation; the authors of the Constitution that guaranteed the freedom the Fathers had come to the New World to enjoy; and, finally, the heroes who fought and died for the right of man—all were forerunners of the Church and Kingdom of our Lord.

Sidney Rigdon had been baptized in water unto repentance; he was now to baptize and to impart the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands (v. 5). The "Holy Ghost" in this paragraph is the same as the "Holy Spirit."

"The terms are frequently used synonymously. We often say the Spirit of God when we mean the Holy Ghost; we likewise say the Holy Ghost when we mean the Spirit of God. The Holy Ghost is a personage in the Godhead, and is not that which lighteth every man that comes into the world" (President Joseph F. Smith).

7-19. Here we learn what the gospel is and what some of its fruits are.

Among the Gentiles] "Gentiles" means "nations," as distinct from the Jews. It is the goyim of the Hebrews—a term applied to all outside the Mosaic faith. In the Church literature "Gentile" is not a term of disrespect, but merely one of convenience. It is not used frequently in our day.

Their folly * * * manifest] See Section 84:117.

Unto all those who believe] Miracles are not given as a foundation for faith, but to confirm the faith that has been built already upon the Word of God. The promise is given that those who, in faith, ask for the gift of miracles shall cast out devils and heal the sick, but without faith no other miraculous manifestation shall be given than the desolation of Babylon. That, according to God's unchangeable decree, will come to pass, whether anybody believes it, or not.

"The preaching of the everlasting gospel shakes the foundations of antichrist in the world. * * * The greatness of the papal Babylon will not prevent her fall, but will make it more dreadful and remarkable" (Henry and Scott, Rev. 14:8).

Thresh the nations] This expression is found in Habakkuk 3:12. Threshing, in olden times, was done by treading out the grain on a threshing-floor. The going forth of the messengers of the gospel among the nations is like trampling the wheat sheaves on the hard floor. The valuable kernels are carefully gathered up; the straw is left.

"This sign of events near at hand was equally applicable to the premonitory conditions which were to herald the fall of Jerusalem and the termination of the Jewish autonomy, and to the developments by which the Lord's second advent shall be immediately preceded" (Dr. James E. Talmage, Jesus the Christ, p. 574).

20-23. Here the Lord assigns Sidney Rigdon his special duty in the Church. He was to be the secretary of the prophet. Through the faithful co-operation of the two, by the inspiration of the Spirit, the Scriptures would be given to the world, for the salvation of the elect. He was to stay with the Prophet (v. 22) and accompany him on his travels. When they were not engaged in writing, the Prophet was to "Prophesy;" that is, to preach the gospel, and Rigdon was to prove from the Scriptures that the doctrines preached were true (v. 23). This was Sidney Rigdon's appointment. The Lord well knew that Rigdon, left to himself, would encounter insurmountable difficulties, but that by the side of the Prophet he would be a great help.

General Notes

Sidney Rigdon, it has been said, was the real inspirer, if not author, of the Book of Mormon. The story is that a mentally feeble clergyman, named Spaulding, wrote a book which he called the Manuscript Found, and which was left with a printer in Pittsburgh, Mr. Patterson, who did not print it because he failed in business. Then, it is alleged, it fell into the hands of Sidney Rigdon, and he induced the Prophet to publish it as the Book of Mormon. This untrue and highly improbable tale was, undoubtedly, invented by Doctor P. Hurlburt, [^1] a worthless character, who had been cut off from the Church for transgression, and who had vowed vengeance. Sidney Rigdon, however, maintained to the last that he had never seen or heard of the Book of Mormon until a copy of it was presented to him by Parley P. Pratt. And this is the truth. John W. Rigdon, his son, in the fall of 1865, put the question to his father, who replied:

"My son, I can swear before high heaven that what I have told you of the origin of the book is true. Your mother and sister, Mrs. Athalia Robinson, were present when that book was handed to me in Mentor, Ohio, and all I ever knew about the origin of the book was what Parley P. Pratt, Oliver Cowdery, Joseph Smith, and the Witnesses who claimed they saw the plates, told me; and in all my intimacy with Joseph Smith he never told me but the one story, and that was that be found it engraved upon gold plates in a hill near Palmyra, N. Y., and that an angel had appeared to him and directed him where to find it; and I have never, to you or anyone else, told but the one story, and that I now repeat to you."

The Prophet could not have assured Rigdon that he had taken the plates from the hill Cumorah, if Rigdon had been, as alleged, the originator of the scheme.

John W. Rigdon also gives another bit of information which may be referred to here. It has been claimed that the Prophet Joseph set his son Joseph apart to be his successor, when "young Joseph" one day visited his father in Liberty jail. Asked about this, Sidney Rigdon replied that no such act was performed while he was imprisoned there with the Prophet. He was absolutely certain of this.

The power to cast out devils was necessary for the progress of the Church. There were many odd manifestations in Kirtland when the Prophet first came there. There was a society with communistic ideas of property, and they had a negro, known as Black Pete, for "revelator." Sometimes these folks would be put through the most wonderful distortions, and these were to them an evidence that they had the Holy Spirit. One of the early converts in Kirtland was Ezra Booth, a Methodist minister. He was present in a log schoolhouse, in June, 1831, when the Prophet, under the influence of the power of God, set apart some of the Elders to the High Priesthood. The evil spirit came over Ezra Booth, and he was, as George A. Smith expressed it, "bound" and his countenance was distorted. The Prophet rebuked the evil spirit and commanded it to depart. Booth was relieved.

From paragraph 24 of this Section it appears that the Spirit of Prophecy, at this early date of the existence of the Church, directed the attention of God's people to the fact that Zion, His Church, would flourish in "the hills," meaning, as we now know from Church history, the Rocky Mountains. And this was at a time when the Rocky Mountain region was almost unknown to the people in the Eastern States. Later the prophecies on this subject became clearer, and the Prophet, before his death, was fully aware that the Saints would go to the Rocky Mountains and there become a mighty people. Brigham Young tells us:

"Remarks have been made as to our staying here in the Rockies. I will tell you how long we shall stay here. If we live our religion, we shall stay here in these mountains for ever and for ever, worlds without end, and a portion of the Priesthood will go and redeem and build up the Center [^2] Stake of Zion * * * In the days of Joseph we have sat many hours at a time conversing about this very country. Joseph has often said, 'If I were only in the Rocky Mountains with a hundred faithful men, I would then be happy, and ask no odds of mobocrats' " (Jour. of Dis., Vol. X1., p. 16).

——— Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] The Mighty One of Israel] In this Revelation our Lord announces Himself as "the Mighty One of Israel." This name also occurs in Isaiah (1:24; 30:29). It means JEHOVAH, the Lord of Hosts, who led His people out of Egypt, with a strong arm. While the "mighty one" of Assyria was a winged bull, and while earthly kingdoms adopt images of eagles, lions, etc., as emblems of strength, the "Mighty One" of the Kingdom of God is JEHOVAH.
[^2] And I will lay my hand upon you by the hand of my servant Sidney Rigdon, and you shall receive my Spirit, the Holy Ghost, even the Comforter, which shall teach you the peaceable things of the kingdom; I will lay my hand upon you by * * * Rigdon] Edward Partridge was called to the ministry by revelation, but it was, nevertheless, necessary that he should receive the spirit of his calling by the laying on of hands, and the Lord assured him that He would perform that ordinance by the hands of Sidney Rigdon. God regards the administrations of His authorized servants as though they were performed by Himself.
