Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 36.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to Edward Partridge, December, 1830. See heading to Section 35.—The recipient instructed to preach—Every man may be commissioned in the ministry if he will comply with the Lord's requirements.

THUS saith the Lord God, the Mighty One of Israel: Behold, I say unto you, my servant Edward, that you are blessed, and your sins are forgiven you, and you are called to preach my gospel as with the voice of a trump;

Edward Partridge was born at Pittsfield, Mass., the 27th of August, 1793. His ancestors came from Scotland. At the age of twenty he became impressed with the doctrine of "universal restoration," and in 1828 he joined the so-called Campbellites. At the time he lived at Painsville. Ohio. When Oliver Cowdery and companions came to Ohio, on their mission to the Lamanites, he obtained a copy of the Book of Mormon and began to investigate. In 1830 he accompanied Sidney Rigdon to Fayette, and on the 11th of December, that year, he was baptized by the Prophet Joseph. Edward Partridge had a prominent part in the development of the Church. He was called to the Bishopric February 4th, 1831 (Sec. 41:9), and on that occasion the Lord declared that he was pure before Him, "like unto Nathanael of old." As the Bishop, it became his duty to divide unto the Saints their inheritances in Zion, and to make preparations for the settlement of the Saints who were journeying to Zion from Ohio. He suffered persecution on sundry occasions. One day in July, 1833, a mob at Independence violently seized him and one Charles Allen, and dragged them to the public square. Here they were offered the alternatives of renouncing the Book of Mormon or going into exile. As American citizens they refused to comply with this un-American demand, but Bishop Partridge said he was willing to suffer for the Master. His voice was drowned in the tumult that followed. Some of the mob cried, "Call upon your God to deliver you!" Others cursed. Finally, the two brethren were stripped and maltreated by the persecutors, but they suffered in silence and with dignity, as true martyrs. Edward Partridge died in Nauvoo, May 27th, 1840, the same year in which Joseph Smith, Sr., and some other faithful Saints departed, in consequence of the effects of the persecutions in Missouri.

As with the voice of a trump] Edward Partridge was called to preach the gospel; not timidly, but boldly; not as a whisper, but as a trumpet blast. In the wilderness, Israel was warned by means of trumpets to advance, or to halt. They were called to their assemblies, or to the defense of the camp, by the same means. The trumpet announced the new moons, the festivals, the years of jubilee. The preaching of the gospel should be to us even more than the fanfares of trumpets were to Israel, anciently.

The peaceable things of the kingdom] The things that bring peace to men. They are of God. Those that engender strife and contention are not from Him.

Hosanna, blessed be the name of the most High God] A thought suggested here is this, that, as the disciples of our Lord and the multitude accompanied Him into Jerusalem, before His death, with songs of joy, and caused commotion among the entire populace, so His heralds at this time should fill the whole world with the proclamation of His advent. Hosanna means, "Save, I beseech you!" Here it is a prayer for the salvation of the world. Preaching, without praying, is in vain.

General Notes

The imposition of hands for the reception of the Holy Ghost is an ordinance that was clearly understood in the primitive church. In Acts (8:5-17) we read that Philip preached in Samaria, and that many believed and were baptized. Philip was one of seven appointed to take charge of the temporal affairs of the church in Jerusalem (Acts 6:1-6). When compelled to leave the city, because of persecution, he went to Samaria, but, although he had been preaching the gospel to the Samaritans, he did not impart the gift of the Holy Ghost. In all probability he did not hold the Melchizedek Priesthood at that time. But when the brethren in Jerusalem heard that Samaritans had received the gospel, they sent Peter and John to them, and these Apostles confirmed those who had been baptized and they received the Holy Ghost.

In this Revelation the Lord places the possession of the Holy Spirit first among the qualifications necessary for the ministry. On this subject Brigham Young well says:

"The idea generally prevails in Christian countries, that it requires men to be qualified, and learned, and eloquent, to stand before the people and act as religious teachers. I will give you the reason why this is so. When a false theory has to be maintained, it requires to be set forth with much care; it requires study, and learning, and cunning sophistry to guild over a falsehood and give it the semblance of truth, and make it plausible and congenial to the feelings of the people; but the most simple and unlearned person can tell the truth. A child can tell the truth. * * * Education is a good thing, and blessed is the man who has it. and can use it for the dissemination of the gospel without being puffed up with pride. But God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise; and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things which are mighty * * that no flesh should glory in His presence" (Journal of Discourses, Vol. Xl., p. 214).
