Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 37.

REVELATION given to Joseph Smith the Prophet, and Sidney Rigdon, December, 1830. Herein is given the first commandment respecting gathering in this dispensation.—The future migration of the Church westward—Duties of the Elders in strengthening the Church.

BEHOLD, I say unto you that it is not expedient in me that ye should translate any more until ye shall go to the Ohio, and this because of the enemy and for your sakes.

Before the close of this year, the first of the existence of the Church, the Prophet Joseph commenced preparing a new English version of the Bible. It is referred to as an inspired "translation," although that term, in its generally accepted meaning of rendition of the spoken, or written, word from one language into another, hardly gives a correct idea of the character of that work. But if by "translate" we mean, to render sentences which are obscure and difficult to understand, into language more easy of comprehension, and free from ambiguity and contradiction, then the attempted revision is a translation. For that is what the Prophet aimed at, by the guidance of the Holy Spirit. Sidney Rigdon aided him as secretary. On the 2nd of February, 1833, the New Testament was completed, and on the 2nd of July, the same year, the Old Testament, was completed, as far as the Prophet was directed to revise these records up to that time. This work of revision was never completed fully, and the Prophet intended to take up this work in Nauvoo, but persecution and difficulties prevented him from finishing this work.

Regarding the publication of this work, the Prophet, in a letter to W. W. Phelps, dated June 25th, 1833, wrote: "In regard to the printing of the New Translation: It cannot be done until we can attend to it ourselves, and this we will do, as soon as the Lord permits" (History of the Church, Vol. I., p. 365). From this it is clear that the publication of this version is not authorized. "It cannot be done until we can attend to it ourselves."

The prophet expected some indication from the Lord that the time for publication had come. But, during the later years of his life, events crowded upon him so fast that it became a physical impossibility for him to give his personal attention to everything that seemed to be necessary. The publication of the New Translation would, no doubt, have involved a final revision by himself; that no one else could do; and he did not do it; the Lord did not command him to put the finishing touch to the work, and, therefore, it remained in manuscript, unpublished.

But we must not suppose that the patient labor spent on the study of the Old and New Testament was lost. It was while Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon were engaged in this work that they received the wonderful Revelation on the resurrection, recorded in Section 76; also the Key to John's Revelation, recorded in Section 77. It was during the same time that the Prophet received the Revelation explaining I. Cor. 7:14. There can be no doubt that the close study of the Scriptures, such as that in which the Prophet engaged during these years particularly—for he was always a Bible student—was one of the means by which the Holy Spirit revealed to him the grand and glorious truths concerning the salvation of the children of men, before he sealed his testimony with his blood.

Until ye shall go to the Ohio] The Ohio valley. The work was resumed at Hiram, Portage Co., Ohio, during the forepart of October, 1831.

General Notes

This is the last of the nineteen revelations given in the year 1830.

During the year 1829, the Prophet was engaged in translating and preparing the Book of Mormon for publication, and answering questions concerning the finding of the plates, the report having gone abroad and caused many inquirers to come to the Prophet to ascertain the truth for themselves, or to engage in controversy with him. During this year the foundations of the Church were laid by the Almighty Himself. Not only did He reveal the existence of the plates, and endow the Prophet with the gift of reading the contents, but He also made it possible for him to publish the sacred record, an achievement that would have been as much beyond the reach of the unlettered young man, without financial resources, as would the translation have been without the inspiration of the Holy Spirit. It was entirely the work of God. Martin Harris, notwithstanding his naturally suspicious disposition and vacillating character, came to the aid of the Prophet. Oliver Cowdery arrived just when his services were needed. The Whitmers opened their home when there were no other visible resources. Joseph Knight was on hand when provisions and the protecting hand of a friend were needed. And thus the Lord took care of the work and of his Prophet during the first development of the Church. It was just as much of a miracle as the maintenance of the Prophet Elijah by ravens at the brook Cherith, or in the house of the widow of Zarephath (I Kings 17:1-16). During this year, also, the manifestations solemnly attested by the Witnesses were given.

During the year 1830, the Book of Mormon was published; a Revelation on Church government was given (Sec. 20): the Church was organized (Sec. 21); the duties of the Prophet Joseph, Oliver Cowdery, Hyrum Smith, Samuel Smith, and Emma Smith were defined by divine Revelation, as were those of Thomas B. Marsh (Sec. 31), the Pratts (Sec. 32 and 34), Sidney Rigdon (Sec. 35) and Edward Partridge (Sec. 36). The Revelation to Emma Smith (Sec. 25) calling her to great prominence in the Church is particularly noteworthy, because it was given years before the women in the English speaking world had ever thought of an organized effort for "woman's rights." That Revelation is the very beginning of the emancipation movement in the world. During this year were also revealed the important doctrine of Common Consent, which is one of the cornerstones in the government of the Kingdom of God (Sec. 26); the propriety of using water instead of wine in the Sacrament (Sec. 27), which may be regarded as the beginning of the great Prohibition movement in the Christian world; and the doctrine of the gathering (Sec. 29). The first mission to the Lamanites was undertaken, and the first gathering-place of the Saints indicated (Sec. 37).

If we consider only the work accomplished during this one year; or study, in their practical bearing upon human affairs, the wonderful truths revealed, we are overwhelmed with the vastness of the vistas opened up before us. It is like trying to penetrate the infinite depths of space, where the handiworks of God bear witness of His majesty, wisdom, power, and love, and where each glistening spark of light, on close examination, turns out to be a world.
