Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Second Period, 1831, Secs. 38-72

Section 38.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Fayette, New York, January 2, 1831, at a conference of the Church.—Jesus Christ proclaims himself as the Creator—Doom of the wicked depicted—Goodly inheritance promised to the righteous—Definite promise of endowment with power from on high—The riches of eternity extolled—Diligent service required of every member of the Church.

THUS saith the Lord your God, even Jesus Christ, the Great I AM, Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the same which looketh upon the wide expanse of eternity, and all the seraphic hosts of heaven, before the world was made;

On January 2nd, 1831, the third general Conference of the Church was held at Fayette, at the house of Peter Whitmer, Sr. On this occasion the Revelation in this Section was received.

In this Revelation our Lord (1) presents Himself to the Church under several names, expressing so many different attributes (1-6); then (2) He promises to appear, visibly, to the Saints (7-12), and (3) warns them of certain dangers that threaten them (13-14); then (4) He makes a covenant with them regarding the land of gathering (15-22), and (5) exhorts them to be united (23-27); and finally (6), He charges them to gather out "from the wicked," in order to escape the coming judgments (28-42).

1-6. In these paragraphs our Lord reveals Himself to the Church under these names: Lord and God, Jesus Christ, I AM, Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the End. See Section 35:1. He further describes Himself as pre-existent, all-knowing, the Creator of the world, and the Savior of His people. Well may we exclaim, in the language of the Hebrew poet, "O God, who is like unto thee!" (Psalm 71:19).

Seraphic hosts of heaven] In a vision of the Prophet Isaiah (6:2-3) seraphim are standing over [^1] the throne of God, in the attitude of service. They are the attendants of Jehovah, reflecting His glory and majesty, and, in His presence, they sing in chorus, "Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of Hosts: The whole Earth is full of His glory." Our Lord looked upon these hosts. They were standing before Him, awaiting His commands. even before the Earth had been created.

"This creative and administrative work of Christ the Word in the natural order of things is always emphasized in the writings of the Apostles when they touch on the doctrine of His person * * * With ourselves this idea has retired very much in the background * * * How much more hearty would be the sympathy of theologians with the revelations of science and the developments of history, if they habitually connected them with operations of the same divine Word who is the center of all their religious aspirations" (Lightfoot, Colossians).

Enoch, the seventh from Adam (Jude 14) built a city called Zion, after the people of God, so named by the Lord. because they were united, righteous, and prosperous. This city of Enoch flourished for three hundred and sixty-five years and then the Lord, by some process not known to us, took it with all its inhabitants' "to His bosom," thus saving them from destruction in the flood that was to come. "And from thence went forth the saying, Zion is fled" (Pearl of Great Price, Book of Moses 7:18, 19, 68, 69). The building up of another Zion in the latter days was predicted by the prophets of old. David, for instance, says, "When the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall appear in his glory' (Psalm 102:16). That the people of God in the latter days should be found in a mountain region, was also foretold. "O Zion, that bringest good tidings, get thee up into a high mountain" (Isaiah 40:9, see also Ezekiel 40:2, etc.)

Christ, by virtue of His atonement, is the Savior of those who believe. A repentant sinner needs someone to plead for him. Our Lord does that. In the presence of the Father He represents His people, and as a beloved Son in whom the Father is well pleased—He having kept the everlasting covenant and fulfilled its conditions—He is in a position to be the Author of their salvation. His atonement is the foundation for salvation. By faith, active in repentance and obedience, the inestimable gift is received.

5-7. The wicked, the disobedient, must plead their own cause. They are kept in "chains of darkness"—in a condition in which the light of revelation does not set them free from ignorance and prejudices, and in that condition they will be overtaken by the day of judgment.

7-12. Another promise that the Lord will soon appear.

10-11. Here the Lord draws a distinction between His people and the world. "Ye are clean * * * the powers of darkness prevail upon the earth." Witness the ignorance, superstition, the poverty, the sickness, sin, and wickedness existing among the children of men!

The revelations that are in the Bible, the predictions of the Patriarchs and Prophets who saw by vision and revelation the last dispensation and fulness of times plainly tell us what is to come to pass. The 49th chapter of Isaiah is having its fulfillment I have often said in my teachings, if the world want to know what is coming to pass, let them read the revelations of St. John. Read of the Judgments of God that are going to overtake the world in the last dispensation. Read the papers and see what is taking place in our own nation and in the nations of the earth, and what does it all mean? It means the commencement of the fulfillment of what the Prophets of God have predicted. In the Doctrine and Covenants there are many revelations given through the mouth of the Prophet of God; these revelations will all have their fulfilment, as the Lord lives, and no power can hinder it. In one of the revelations the Lord told Joseph Smith:

"Behold, Verily I say unto you, the angels are crying unto the Lord day and night, who are ready and waiting to be sent forth to reap down the fields:

"But the Lord saith unto them, Pluck not up the tares while the blade is yet tender (for verily your faith is weak), lest you destroy the wheat also.

"Therefore let the wheat and the tares grow together until the harvest is fully ripe, then ye shall first gather out the wheat from among the tares, and after the gathering of the wheat, behold and Lo! the tares are bound in bundles, and the field remaineth to be burned."

I want to bear testimony to this congregation, and to the heavens and the earth, that the day is come when those angels are privileged to go forth and commence their work. They are laboring in the United States of America; they are laboring among the nations of the earth; and they will continue. We need not marvel or wonder at anything that is transpiring in the earth. The world do not comprehend the revelations of God. They did not in the days of the Jews; yet all that the Prophets had spoken concerning them came to pass. So in our day these things will come to pass. I heard the Prophet Joseph bear his testimony to these events that would transpire in the earth. * * * We cannot draw a veil over the events that await this generation. No man that is inspired by the Spirit and power of God can close his ears, his eyes or his lips to these things. (Mil. Star, 58:738-9.)

13-14. In these paragraphs the Lord utters a warning to the Church.

Merciful unto your weakness] The Lord does not "look upon sin with the least degree of allowance," and yet He is as merciful as He is Holy and just, and it is not weakness in His children, but wilful rebellion, that calls down His wrath upon them.

"Like as a father pitieth his children.

So the Lord pitieth them that fear Him.

For He knoweth our frame;

He remembereth that we are dust."

Psalm 103:13, 14.

15-22. In the last Revelation given in the year 1830 (Sec. 37), the Saints were commanded to gather in Ohio. In this Revelation our Lord explains that the command was given for their salvation, and He establishes the Covenant of Gathering (v. 20).

The poor have complained] In the world there is an artificial and mischievous distinction between rich and poor. The Lord was mindful of His destitute children, as well as those who were wealthy, and He commanded His people to gather in a place where that class distinction could be wiped away.

The gathering-place of the Saints, then, was designed to be a place of temporal as well as eternal salvation; a place from which every "curse" shall be removed; a place in which our Lord shall be the Supreme Ruler and the laws be His laws.

"We have to learn that, in the first place, the Lord sent His servants forth to preach the principles of the gospel, to impress upon the inhabitants of the Earth the necessity of believing in Jesus Christ as the Savior of the world, repenting of their sins, and being baptized for the remission of them, and receive the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands and it was hoped and expected that when the Holy Ghost descended upon men and women they would be filled with the spirit of obedience, and that their understandings would be so awakened that they would begin to comprehend the object God had in view in restoring the everlasting gospel to the Earth. It has had that effect, but it has been slowly manifested; it has dawned upon us ray by ray, gradually opening our minds to the comprehension of the great work the Lord has established on the earth; and today, after years of experience, the Church of Christ has barely commenced to comprehend the great work God had in view in establishing His kingdom on the Earth. But we are learning it now more rapidly than we have in past years" (George Q. Cannon, Jour. of Dis., Vol. XI., pp. 32-3).

23-27. In the previous paragraphs our Lord has stated the conditions on which He would make a covenant with the Saints. He adds an admonition to unity: "If you are not one, ye are not mine."

26-27. I have given unto you a parable] The illustration in the previous paragraph shows the effects of class distinction among men. What would happen in a family where some children should be clothed in rags and made to suffer want, while others live sumptuously every day? There would be discontent, revolt, perhaps crime. The results are no less serious in society where unjust lines are drawn between classes. God does not make such lines. In the Church they must be obliterated, as they were in Enoch's Zion. "And the Lord called His people Zion, because they were of one heart and one mind, and dwelt in righteousness; and there was no poor among them" (Book of Moses 7:18). See also IV. Nephi 1:1-3. In these two verses, together with verses 24 and 25, the Lord sets forth the principle that the members of his Church are to look after the temporal needs of worthy poor Church members. This is the basic principle underlying the United Order and the Church Welfare Plan.

Again the warning is repeated: "The enemy in the secret chambers seeketh your lives."

"It has ever been the desire of the wicked to destroy the people of God. They have never slackened their efforts, nor failed to use all the means in their power, nor hesitated to resort to the most cruel, foul, and fiendish acts to accomplish their nefarious purpose * * * What a host of apostasies there have been since the organization of the Church! There have been Rigdonites, Strangites, Benemites, Wightites, Gladdenites, Cutlerites, Morrisites, * * * but what does the world care about these? Nothing. Why? Because they have forfeited the Priesthood, they have not the power, nor the principles of salvation except in part; they have deserted the cause, have struck hands alike with the infidel and the bigot, and formed an alliance with the maligners and persecutors of the saints, and therefore they are harmless in the eyes of the world" (Joseph F. Smith, Journal of Discourses, Vol. XIX., pp. 24-5).

There will soon be great wars] The Belgian revolution threatened to involve all Europe in war, because it broke up a kingdom established by a general treaty.

Ye know not the hearts of men in your own land] In the United States the opinion prevailed that internal troubles, such as those from which France, Belgium, Poland, and some other countries suffered, could not arise in the great Republic. The people generally did not know what was in the hearts of men, but the Lord knew, and He gave, in this paragraph, the first intimation that there would be civil war in the United States.

General Notes

Concerning the subject of gathering, the Prophet Joseph says:

"All that the prophets have written, from the days of righteous Abel. down to the last man that has left any testimony on record for our consideration, in speaking of the salvation of Israel in the last days. goes directly to show that it consists in the work of gathering" (History of the Church, Vol. II., p. 260; see Deut. 30:1-4; Rev. 21:3; III. Nephi 20:22; Ether 13:1-12).

It is evident, from this Revelation, that the Lord, from the beginning, intended to teach the members of the Church the principle of the United Order or consecration.

To acknowledge the Lord as the Supreme Ruler is not to be disloyal to any earthly government, but for any government to fail to acknowledge the Supreme Ruler, is an act of disloyalty to the Supreme Ruler.

——— Note

---
Notas:
[^1] From all eternity to all eternity] The Eternal One. Moses uses the same expression, when be says:
