Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 39.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to James Covill, at Fayette, New York, January 5, 1831. James Covill covenanted that he would obey any command that the Lord would give to him through Joseph the Prophet. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 143.—The Lord Jesus Christ specifies the conditions under which men may become his sons—James Covill promised blessing beyond all he had ever known conditioned on his obedience to the Lord's commandments.

HEARKEN and listen to the voice of him who is from all eternity, the Great I AM, even Jesus Christ—

Shortly after the conference, a gentleman, James Covill, who had been a Baptist minister for forty years, came to the Prophet at Fayette, and expressed a desire to yield obedience to any commandment God should be pleased to give him, through His servant. This Revelation came in answer to prayer on that subject. In it our Lord (1) introduces Himself as on former occasions (1-5); then (2) He makes known what the true gospel is (6); and (3) He tells James Covill what is required of him, and promises him great blessings if he will yield obedience (7-21).

1-5. The names under which our Lord here reveals Himself are all significant. See Secs. 29:1, 33; 6:21.

"Before the mountains were brought forth,

Or ever thou hadst formed the Earth and the world,

Even from everlasting to everlasting, thou art God."

—Psalm 90:2.

The word "eternity" in the Scriptures does not mean "never-ending duration." It means a "period," an "age." In Matt. 13:39, the word is translated "world," although a literal rendering would be, "The harvest is the completion of this age." But when the Lord says He is "From all eternity to all eternity," He states, as clearly as can be done in human language, that He exists in all ages: past, present, and future. He is everlasting.

This is my gospel] Mr. Covill was a Baptist. The Baptists are a rather venerable sect, in point of age. In the early days of ecclesiastical history there were many who protested against the changing of the ordinances, and the worldliness of the church. In Africa the Donatists refused to accept as valid the ordinances performed by the dominant church. In England Britons refused to "perform the office of baptizing according to the custom of the holy Roman church" (The Venerable Bede, in the year 731). Later, Waldenses, Albigenses, Petrobrusians, and others contended for baptism for believers. The Anabaptists at the time of the Reformation were the descendants of sects which had taught baptism by immersion. In Holland they were called Mennonites, after Menno Simonis; in England, Baptists. They believe in baptism by immersion after a confession of belief in our Lord and repentance of past sins. To them baptism is but an outward sign of inward grace, not essential to salvation but necessary to those who will "fulfil all righteousness." The Lord now states to Mr. Covill what His gospel is. It is repentance, and baptism in water and the Holy Ghost, and obedience to the teachings of the Comforter regarding "the peaceable things of the kingdom" (See Sec. 36:2).

7-24. In these paragraphs our Lord is pleased to give special instructions to James Covill and to offer him special blessings.
