Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 41.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to the Church, at Kirtland, Ohio, February 4, 1831. The Kirtland branch of the Church at this time was rapidly increasing in numbers, and the Saints generally were striving to live according to the commandments of the Lord; but, the Prophet states, some strange notions and false spirits had crept in among them. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 146.—Commandment regarding the observance of the law of the Lord—Promise of greater knowledge as to the government of the Church—Edward Partridge named as the first Bishop unto the Church.

HEARKEN and hear, O ye my people, saith the Lord and your God, ye whom I delight to bless with the greatest of all blessings, ye that hear me; and ye that hear me not will I curse, that have professed my name, with the heaviest of cursings.

4 And I will be your ruler when I come; and behold, I come quickly, and ye shall see that my law is kept.

In the latter part of January, 1831, the Prophet Joseph, accompanied by his wife, Sidney Rigdon, and Edward Partridge, started for Kirtland, Ohio, in compliance with the Revelation, (Sec. 37). They had a journey of about 200 miles before them. The following graphic account of their arrival at their destination is from the Contributor, Vol. VI., p. 125:

"About the first of February, 1831, a sleigh containing four persons drove through the streets of Kirtland and drew up at the door of Gilbert and Whitney's mercantile establishment * * * One of the men, a young and stalwart personage, alighted, and, springing up the steps, walked into the store and to where the junior partner was standing.

"'Newel K. Whitney! Thou art the man!' he exclaimed, extending his hand cordially, as if to an old and familiar acquaintance.

" 'You have the advantage of me,' replied the one addressed, as he mechanically took the proffered hand—a half-amused, half-mystified look overspreading his countenance—'I could not call you by name, as you have me.'

"'I am Joseph, the Prophet,' said the stranger. 'You have prayed me here; now what do you want of me?'

"Mr. Whitney astonished, but no less delighted, as soon as his surprise would permit, conducted the party * * * across the street to his house on the corner, and introduced them to his wife. She shared fully his surprise and ecstasy."

There were about a hundred members in the Kirtland Branch of the Church, at this time.

In order to understand this Revelation, it may be well to recall the conditions that existed. There was, for instance, a society, sometimes called the Morley Family, because located on the farm of Isaac Morley. They had been baptized, but knew very little about the gospel. "Black Pete," a negro, was their "revelator." They claimed to see angels and to receive letters from heaven. There was one Wycom Clark, who claimed to be a revelator, and he organized "The Pure Church." The Prophet says, "the Branch of the Church in this part of the Lord's vineyard * * * were striving to do the will of God, so far as they knew, it though some strange notions and false spirits had crept in among them. With a little caution and some wisdom, I soon assisted the brethren and sisters to overcome them." (History of the Church, Vol. I., p. 146.)

In this Revelation, the first given in Kirtland, our Lord (1) commands obedience to His law (1-6); and (2) indicates His will concerning the Prophet and his two companions (7-12) .

9-11. Edward Partridge (see Sec. 36) is here called to the office of Bishop, and as such to spend all his time laboring for the Church, in accordance with the law of God, "because his heart is pure before me." ln the kingdom of God it takes men with pure hearts to manage the temporal, as well as the spiritual affairs.

General Notes

The laws defining the duties of the Bishopric were not yet fully revealed, but in a general way it was understood that the gathering of the Saints was commanded for their temporary salvation, and that the office was instituted with this end in view. The Revelation concerning gathering (Sec. 38) also contained more than an intimation of the United Order (vv. 24-27). Orson F. Whitney well remarks:

"An order of unity and equality, a system of consecration and stewardships, the abolition of fraud and monopoly in all their phases, a sinking of individual into and for the purpose of the common good, the sacrifice of self at the shrine of principle—of pure religion, whose incense—call it charity, philanthropy, or what we will, is the pure love of God and humanity. It was to the establishment of such an order,—one object of which, in the arcane of the faith, was to pave the way for the Zion of Enoch, which the Saints believe will yet descend to Earth, the planet whence it was taken,—that Joseph Smith, as early as February, 1831 more than fifty years before Edward Bellamy and his ingenious book 'Looking Backward' were heard of, directed his thoughts and labors. A movement to that end was the organization of the Bishopric, representing the temporal wing of the Mormon Church government. The Apostleship, which pertains to the Priesthood of Melchizedek, through possessing general powers, has a special calling to minister in spiritual things; while the Bishopric, which is the presidency of the Priesthood of Aaron, administers, under the direction of the higher authority, in things temporal" (History of Utah, Vol. I., p. 85). See also Secs. 42:30-32; 51:3-6 and 13-17.

The controversy over the meaning of "Bishop" has never been settled satisfactorily in the world. The New Testament has no office into which the Bishops of the various churches fit, and therefore they are at a loss to explain their duties. They notice that the Bishops in the Bible are sometimes called Elders and sometimes Bishops, and they are confused because they cannot understand how a Bishop can be an Elder. In Eph. 4:11, the Bishops are "Pastors," or Shepherds, and are placed next to the teachers. This is another puzzle. The fact is, that the Apostles appointed some to superintend the spiritual, and others to have charge of the temporal wants of the churches. The latter were called "Bishops," which means "overseers." To the Latter-day Saints, the controversy, in the light of modern revelation, is meaningless.
