Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 42.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Kirtland, Ohio, February 9, 1831, in the presence of twelve Elders, and in fulfilment of the Lord's promise previously made; see Section 38:32. The Prophet specifies this revelation as embracing the law of the Church.—Elders commanded to go forth two by two westward, preaching and baptizing, according to the Bible and the Book of Mormon, and according to the latter-day revelations already given and to be given—Several commandments comprised in the decalog reiterated—Church members who commit crimes to be handed over to the law of the land—Members required to impart of their substance for the needs of the poor and the building up of the Church—Site of the New Jerusalem to be revealed later—Pride of heart and costly apparel forbidden—The idler denounced—Administration to the afflicted by the laying on of hands of the Elders—Comforting assurance concerning those who die in the Lord—Sexual sin proclaimed against—The fundamental principles of Church discipline.

HEARKEN, O ye elders of my church, who have assembled yourselves together in my name, even Jesus Christ the Son of the living God, the Savior of the world; inasmuch as ye believe on my name and keep my commandments.

In the Revelation given at Fayette, January 2nd, 1831, our Lord promised the Saints that He would give to them His law, if they would gather in Ohio (Sec. 38:32). On the 4th of February following, He added that they should receive the Law in answer to prayer. On the 9th of February these promises were fulfilled in this Revelation, which was given in the presence of twelve Elders and which is called the Law (v. 2). It is the Law or the Gospel. It may conveniently be studied under the following divisions: (1) Introduction (1-3); (2) the law of propaganda (4-10); (3) the law of ordination (11-17); (4) the law of moral conduct (18-29); (5) the law of charity (30-34), (6) the law of consecration (35-36); (7) the law of discipline (37-39), (8) the law of sundry duties (40-69); (9) the law of remuneration for services (70-73); (10) the law concerning new members (74-77); and (11) the law concerning transgressors (78-93).

1-3. This is the introduction to the Law. "Hearken, O ye Elders of my Church." They had gathered to hear the word of God; they had prayed for it; now their duty was to obey.

4-10. This is the law concerning the preaching of the gospel. It was given for the instruction of the Elders present when the Revelation came, but the principles it embodies are of general interest and application.

Lifting up your voices * * * a trump] They must make themselves heard, in order that the world may have no excuse.

Repent ye * * * the kingdom of heaven is at hand] This is the gospel message. A true messenger of the Lord may be put to this test. He preaches repentance and proclaims the coming of the kingdom of heaven. He knows something about this kingdom. A pretender may preach philosophical or ethical discourses. He may read essays on civic or political problems, but he does not deliver the all-important message of the gospel.

If he transgresses * * * another shall be appointed] The office was to be permanent. Note the almost identical expression regarding a successor to the Prophet Joseph (Sec. 35:18). The law of succession is the same.

11-17. The law of ordination is here stated: No one shall go forth to preach the gospel except he be ordained by one who has authority, and who is known to hold such authority. Those who are so ordained must teach the principles of the gospel as contained in the Bible, the Book of Mormon, and the Covenants and Church Articles, and to do so as they shall be directed by the Holy Spirit.

In the Bible and the Book of Mormon] The ministers of the Church are instructed to teach the principles of the Gospel as contained in these two volumes. This does not mean, necessarily, that they should always select a text from these books to preach from; but they should study these volumes, and know them, and teach what they contain. The Doctrine and Covenants was not published at this time.

18-29. This is the law of moral conduct, given especially to the Church, as the Decalogue was given to ancient Israel.

There are different kinds of divine laws. Some are binding for no other reason, as far as known to man, than the explicit command of God. They are called positive laws.

The commandment to Adam to offer sacrifices belongs to this class, for Adam knew of no reason for doing it, "save the Lord commanded me" (Pearl of Great Price, Book of Moses 5:6). Some are binding because of peculiar conditions or relations that may exist, and cease to be binding with the end of those conditions. New conditions require new laws, Israel in a settled condition in Canaan needed many rules and regulations which would have been inapplicable to their national life while in the wilderness. Laws regarding property, marriage, etc., belong to this class. Some laws are binding because they are founded on the nature and attributes of God. If God is love, it is our duty to love Him and teach others. If He is just, merciful, pure, it is our duty to conform our lives to the divine standards of justice, mercy, and holiness. And from this springs another class of laws which are founded on the permanent relations of men in their present state of existence. They are called the moral laws to distinguish them from statutes, which are founded on temporary relations of man to man. Statutes may vary from time to time and in different countries. Moral laws are permanent.

President J. Reuben Clark in the Improvement Era for November 1933:

"An illustration of how a regulation may be abrogated because not applicable to changed conditions, may be added. We take it from the law of health of ancient Israel. For evidently the Lord's law is as already indicated, that his people must be healthy and clean.

"To Moses was given a dietary and sanitary code that was to govern Israel. It was a code founded on scientific principles. It was the most complete not only of its own time, but of the millenniums that followed. It would be difficult for any student to escape the conclusion that the Mosaic dietary and sanitary code was dictated from a full knowledge of biological laws as well as a complete knowledge of human physiology and of advanced medical and scientific principles. One of the prohibitions of that code ran against the use by the Israelites of sea foods 'that have not fins and scales.'

"Today we eat many wholesome sea foods that do not meet this ancient requirement. Again it must be said that it is not for me to attempt to suggest the reasons why the Lord gave this great law, nor the reasons why he made this and other dietary distinctions. But looking at the matter from the point of view of human knowledge, one reason why the Lord forbade such things to ancient Israel might have been the extreme perishability of certain sea foods which would not be found either in the Wilderness or in Palestine, sea foods which rapidly decay, and which, in decaying, generate poisons, destructive of health and, indeed, of life itself. Ancient Israel had no such rapid transportation as would enable the delivery of such food materials while they were still fresh, and no refrigerating processes by which they might preserve such sea food materials pending the time they were to be eaten. Under such conditions, even a wise human lawgiver would today enact such a law as was given to ancient Israel, and for the reasons I have suggested. But however that may be, the Lord made to Israel an absolute prohibition against the eating of certain of such foods.

"But in our time, with our rapid transportation, our efficient refrigeration, such sea foods may be properly preserved and, so preserved, seem as wholesome as other sea foods that have fins and scales; the Lord has not forbidden these foods to us and we eat them.

"Thus the law that God's people must be clean and healthy has not changed, but the rule prescribed to secure obedience to the law has changed with the change in the manner of living."

Statement of the First Presidency delivered at the General Conference on April 6, 1942:

"When therefore a constitutional law, obedience to those principles (meaning the principles laid down in the scriptures which have been previously cited) calls the manhood of the Church into the armed service of any country to which they owe allegiance, their high civic duty requires that they meet that call. If hearkening to that call and obeying those in command over them, they shall take the lives of those who fight against them, that will not make of them murderers nor subject them to the penalty that God has described for those who kill, beyond the principle to be mentioned shortly, for it would be a cruel God that would punish his children as moral sinners for acts done by them as the innocent instrumentalities of a sovereign whom he had told them to obey and whose will they were powerless to resist."

The gospel has been given to save the world from sin against this commandment, as well as from all other sins. "He that stealeth and will not repent, shall be cast out of the Church."

22-26. In these paragraphs our Lord forbids impurity in behavior, words, and thought. Compare Matthew 5:28. There is, perhaps, no sin which has caused more sorrow, more ruined homes, more sickness, more bloodshed, than the one here prohibited. None has caused more falling away from the Church. George A. Smith observes:

"I have been conversant with early elders, and I am satisfied that a large number of them fell from their positions in the Kingdom of God because they yielded to the spirit of adultery; this was the cause of their destruction. There was an Elder named John Smith, who lived in Indiana, who was quite popular in that part of the country as a preacher. He apostatized but did not know it. In talking about his faith and how firm he was, he said, 'I have proved the Revelation given to Joseph Smith untrue, which says that if a man shall commit adultery he shall lose the Spirit of God and deny the faith. 1 have proved that not to be true.' He was so blind that he could not see through the darkness that the spirit of adultery had placed upon his head the great apostasy which seemed to shake the Church, and tried men's souls" (Journal of Discourses, Vol. Xl. p. 10).

Marriage is ordained of God and a commandment to his children as well as it was to Adam. Being ordained of God, marriage should be performed in accordance with His laws and that would be for time and all eternity in the Temple of the Lord. It was never intended that marriage should end at the death of the covenanting parties. Our Lord declared that when a man and a woman are married according to divine law, they twain become one flesh; therefore they are no more twain, but one "flesh." His laws are eternal, not temporary laws. Marriage in the world for time only are based on a misconception of the word of the Lord to the Sadducees who did not believe in the resurrection.

Celibacy virtually denies the sacred character of the marriage relation. It is contrary to the Word of God. Men and women should be taught to marry young and to keep themselves pure. If they have a correct understanding of their mission on earth, their duties and privileges as husbands and wives, fathers and mothers, they will no more be guilty of violating the laws of chastity, than of treating with disrespect anything that is sacred—the emblems of the Sacrament, for instance, or the revelations of the Lord.

30-34. The true law of charity is stated here. These paragraphs should be read in connection with the preceding one, "If thou lovest me * * * behold, thou wilt remember the poor." Christ's poor should be remembered for His sake.

—————

* The words, "or High Priests," were added by the Prophet some years after; and also the words, "High Council,', in the 34th verse.

—————

35-36. The law of charity is, in the kingdom of God, connected with the law of consecration, for the building up of the New Jerusalem, the gathering of Israel, and the coming of the Lord.

A word may be said here of the religio-social system by which the temporal salvation of the world is to be accomplished. According to the Revelations on the subject, each individual is to deed to the Bishop, his, or her, property, in toto. It would then belong to the Bishop. After all property has been thus "consecrated," all members are equal in ownership. Then the Bishop deeds back to each individual a portion of the common property. A man would probably receive back the same farm, or the same factory, that he owned before. Whatever he needs for himself and family is his, and the surplus goes back into the common treasury (See Whitney's History of Utah, Vol. I., p. 84). These are the main outlines of the "United Order," or "Order of Enoch." In all probability further revelations as to details are needed, before the Order can be established on a practical basis.

"Those who are inspired by the Holy Spirit to comprehend the dealings of God with His people, both ancient and modern, may be able to look forward to the future and behold a prosperous and happy people that should be one in temporal things, and rich in the enjoyment of heavenly things, and among whom there will be no poor or rich, having all things common, so far as property is concerned, when no one will say, "this is mine, and I have a right to do just as I please with it" (Erastus Snow, Jour. of Dis., Vol. X1X., p. 179).

37-39. The law concerning transgressors is that unrepentant offenders, when cast out of the Church, lose their standing in the Order also. This is necessary; for a community of this kind must be founded on morality. It is just, too. For those who consecrate their property to the Lord's service must do it with the understanding that they cannot demand the return of it whenever they experience a change of mind (See Sec. 85:11).

49-69. Various duties of the Latter-day Saints are set forth in these paragraphs. All are important.

"These six things doth the Lord hate: Yea, seven are an abomination unto him: A proud look, a lying tongue, And hands that shed innocent blood, A heart that deviseth wicked imaginations, Feet that be swift in running to mischief, A false witness that speaketh lies, And he that soweth discord among brethren." —(Prov. 6:16-19).

The opposite of pride is humility, and this beautiful virtue manifests itself by deference to others. "All of you be subject one to another, and be clothed with humility; for God resisteth the proud" (I. Pet. 5:5).

Let thy garments be plain] There is in every age a tendency to exaggerate personal adornment. Paul (I. Tim. 2:9) takes note of the "braided hair," gold, pearls, and costly array of his day. Peter (I. Pet. 3:3) warns against making the womanly adornment consist of "plating the hair," wearing of gold, or "putting on of apparel." The women of Greece and Rome, at that time, braided their hair and intertwined in it chains of gold and strings of pearls, while they imported cloth for their gowns, or garments, from factories known for the fineness and costliness of their fabrics. The Christians were not to adorn themselves with such things, but with the virtues that make up a beautiful character. Our Lord gives the same law in this dispensation.

"The non-producer must live on the products of those who labor. There is no other way. If we all labor a few hours a day, we could then spend the remainder of our time in rest and the improvement of our minds. This would give an opportunity to the children to be educated in the learning of the day, and to possess all the wisdom of man" (Brigham Young, Jour. of Dis., Vol. XIX., p. 47).

43-44.The Latter-day Saints believe in the healing virtue of the prayer of faith, but they do not proscribe the use of "herbs and mild food," nor the aid of a physician. In the month of November, 1842, Brigham Young was seriously ill. In his diary the Prophet Joseph notes that, "He was suddenly and severely attacked by disease, with strong symptoms of apoplexy," and then he adds, "We immediately administered to him by laying on of hands and prayer, accompanied with the use of herbs" (History of the Church, Vol. V., p. 126).

Under date of December 26th, 1842, the Prophet writes:

"General Law gave me in custody of Doctor Richards, with whom I visited Sister Morey, who was severely afflicted. We prescribed Lobelia for her, among other things, which is excellent in its place" (Ibid., p. 209).

If they die] All who have any experience in the Church know of instances of miraculous healing, but there is no promise that all afflicted persons for whom the Elders pray shall recover. But the promise to the Church members is that, if they die, "they shall die unto me."

"Parting, at best, is underlaid with tears and pain."

"Passing out of the shadow Into eternal day Why do we call it dying, This sweet passing away?"

"That which we call death is merely the slumber and rest of this mortal clay, and that only for a little season, while the spirit, the life, has gone to enjoy again the presence and society of those whence it came, and to whom it is joy again to return. And this will be the condition of the righteous until the morning of the resurrection, when the spirit will have power to call forth the lifeless frame to be united again, and they both become a living soul, an immortal being, filled with the light and power of God * * * What reason have we to mourn? None, except that we are deprived for a few days of the society of one whom we love" (Joseph F. Smith, Jour. of Dis., Vol. XIX., p. 263).

48-52. Appointed to death] Sometimes God intervenes even when the decree of death has gone forth, as in the case of King Hezekiah (II. Kings 20:1-7); but the rule is that he whose time for departure has come must follow the beck and call of the silent messenger. It is best so. But he who "is not appointed to death" shall be healed, in accordance with his faith. And those who have not faith to be healed may yet have faith in the Lord to become His children. It is a peculiar fact that it is easier to believe that the Lord is willing to give us celestial glory, than it is to feel absolutely certain that He will give us what we need in life. Many believe that He can give them back their body, in resurrection, but deny His power to heal them this side of the grave.

A most remarkable manifestation of the healing power of God was given in the early days of Nauvoo. Many of the Saints, driven from Missouri and weakened by the exposures, were taken sick, in the moist, malarial air of the new settlements. On the 22nd of July, 1839, the Prophet arose from a bed of sickness and went forth in the power of God to administer to the sick. Heber C. Kimball describes what followed thus:

"He commenced with the sick in his own house, then visited those who were camping in tents in his own dooryard, commanding the sick in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ to arise from their beds and be whole, when they were healed according to his words. He then went from house to house, and from tent to tent, upon the bank of the river, healing the sick by the power of Israel's God as he went among them. He did not miss a single house, wagon, or tent, and continued this work up to the 'the upper stone house,' where he crossed the river in a boat, accompanied by Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, John E. Page, John Taylor, and myself, and landed at Montrose. He then walked into the cabin of Brother Brigham Young, who was lying very sick, and commanded him in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ to arise and be made whole. He arose, healed of his sickness, and thus accompanied Joseph and his brethren of the Twelve, and went into the house of Elijah Fordham, who was insensible, and considered by his family and friends to be in the hands of death. Joseph stepped to his bedside, looked him in the eye for a minute without speaking, then took him by the hand and commanded him in the name of Jesus Christ to arise from his bed and walk. Brother Fordham immediately leaped out of his bed, threw off all his poultices and bandages, dressed himself, called for a bowl of bread and milk, which he ate, and followed us into the street. We then went into the house of Joseph B. Noble, who was also very sick, and he was healed in the same manner" (Orson F. Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball, p 273-4).

On this occasion, the Prophet, being importuned to come and administer to the twin children of a stranger, handed his handkerchief to Elder Wilford Woodruff and asked him to go with the stranger and wipe the faces of the little sufferers with it. Elder Woodruff did so, and they recovered.

Thou shalt pay] Avoid debt. On this point modern legislators might study the Mosaic legislation with profit.

59-60. The things which thou has received] Refers to the Revelations given. They are the law by which the Church shall be governed. According to that law men will be saved or condemned.

61-64. Here is a promise that, in answer to prayer, the Saints shall receive revelations and knowledge. The Spirit of Revelation is with the Saints whose hearts are opened to let the light in. The promise embraces especially a Revelation concerning the location of the New Jerusalem.

68-69. In view of such promises it is the duty of the Saints to pray for wisdom and to rejoice before the Lord.

70-73. The law of remuneration is that those who administer in spiritual affairs must have their stewardships and labor for their living, "even as the members." This is wisdom. For in that position they are absolutely independent and can preach the truth without fear. Those who administer in temporal affairs and give their entire time to public business are to have a just remuneration. If they were to earn a living for themselves, they could not give all their time and energy to the community.

74-93. This is the law concerning transgressors.

"We accept without reservation or qualification the affirmation of Deity, through an ancient Nephite prophet: "For I the Lord God, delight in the chastity of women. And whoredoms are an abomination before me; thus saith the Lord of Hosts (Jacob 2:28.) * * * We hold that sexual sin is second only to the shedding of innocent blood in the category of personal crimes; and that the adulterer shall have no part in the exaltation of the blessed." (President Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine, p. 388).

80-83. An adulterer, or adulteress, who is a Church member, is to be tried before a Church court and dealt with according to the Law of God (v. 75-77).

Others to be given up to the law of the land are, robbers (v. 84), thieves (v. 85), liars (v. 86). Those guilty of any other kind of iniquity are to be delivered up unto the Law of God (v. 87).

Note the perfect equality in responsibility of the sexes, in the Law of God. "If he or she" is guilty, the consequences are the same. There is no sex in crime. Equal "rights," to use a familiar expression, presuppose equality in responsibility.

88-92. This is the rule of procedure in case a brother or sister offend thee. The offender is to be labored with and brought to confess, and then there is to be forgiveness and reconciliation. The confession is to be as public as the offense and no more.

It may be remarked here that the Romanists have a sacrament which they call Penance, by means of which they deal with transgressors in their church. It is, they hold, a divine institution by which sins committed after baptism are remitted. It consists of contrition, confession, and satisfaction, on the part of the sinner, and absolution, on the part of the clergyman. By contrition is meant sorrow, or remorse. Confession is confiding whatever is done, to the priest. It must be "auricular" and include all "mortal sins," because "a sin not confessed is not forgiven." Confession, however, does not, in the Roman view, entitle the offender to obtain remission of temporal punishments or torture in purgatory, but if he makes "satisfaction" as directed by the priest, and the priest grants him "absolution," he escapes eternal death. Hence, a thief and a murderer may have to suffer here and in purgatory, though he may receive eternal bliss through penance. It is very instructive to compare this view with the law concerning transgression and transgressors, as enunciated in this Revelation.

In the special Bishops' meeting held at the April Conference, on the evening of April 5, 1946, President Clark said this:

"There is in the Church, as Bishop Richards said, the power to remit sins, but I do not believe that it resides in the bishops. That is a power that must be exercised under the proper authority of the priesthood and by those who hold the keys that pertain to that function. Rue back every sinner, forgive them personally, the Lord has said that. Do all you can, but short of that formal remission the matter then rests between the transgressor and the Lord who is merciful, who knows all the circumstances, who has no disposition but to aid his children, give them comfort, build them up, and help them, but the Lord has said, 'I can not look upon sin with the least degree of allowance,' so we leave it with him and our prayers go with the prayers of the transgressor that God will forgive him, but the path of the sinner was never smooth and I believe it never will be. We must pay the penalty, but God's mercy tempers his justice. His love is boundless, his desire to save us is infinite and he will he good to us. All of us have done something that would have been better left undone; all of us need the mercy of God and His love, and we should look at all others as our brothers and sisters, knowing that we with them have something for which to be forgiven, but we must remember that we must pay whatever the price may be that the Lord exacts."

General Notes

This Revelation is called the Law of Christ (v. 2). In the Scriptures the Law of God is always a manifestation of His will. In nature the laws of nature are His laws. God's will determines the moral standards. It is the rule of conduct. It is necessary that God should give laws to His children. There is in every man a disposition to lord it over others. Everyone, as soon as he has formed an opinion on a subject, is inclined to force it upon others, just as Lucifer proposed to do with regard to the plan of salvation. But when God manifests His will, all men and women are brought to a level of equality, without which there can be no true liberty. Hence, under the divine law liberty is possible, since all are under equal obligation to obey, and have an equal chance of obtaining the reward of obedience.

The ministers of the Church are instructed to teach the principles of the gospel, as found in the Scriptures, "as they shall be directed by the Spirit" (12-14). Studying the Scriptures without the guidance of the Spirit does not reveal their true meaning to us. But if we have the Spirit, we shall not fall into error, even if we are not great Bible scholars. As an illustration of this truth we may quote George Q. Cannon:

"I remember hearing related Brother Parley P. Pratt's first interview with the Saints at Fayette, Seneca County, where the Church was organized * * * On that occasion he was called upon to speak; the Prophet Joseph was not present at the time. He brought forth from the prophecies of Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and other prophets, abundant proofs concerning the work which the Lord had established through His servant Joseph. A great many of the Latter-day Saints were surprised that there were so many evidences existing in the Bible concerning this work. The Church had then been organized some five months, but the members had never heard from any of the Elders these proofs and evidences which existed in the Bible. And, if I remember correctly, he told me that Oliver Cowdery and the Prophet Joseph himself were surprised at the great amount of evidence there was in the Bible concerning these things. The Prophet Joseph was inspired of God to teach the doctrines of life and salvation, and he did so without reference to what the ancient prophets had said. I have heard President Young make the same remarks" (Jour. of Dis., Vol. XIX., p. 105).

The penalty for murder, adultery in certain cases, and a number of other crimes was, under the Mosaic law, death. The object of the seventy was to keep Israel pure. Criminal tendencies were extinguished by the enforcement of a rigorous law, the possibility of transmitting them to the next generation, by inheritance, being done away with. It should be remembered, if the Mosaic law is thought too severe, considering the infinite mercy of God, that Israel had a judiciary, a Priesthood, with access to the presence of Jehovah, who was the Supreme Judge and whose mind and will could be ascertained by means of urim and thummim. There was no danger of a wrong verdict, as long as the judges were in communication with God.

——— Notes
