Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 43.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Kirtland, Ohio, in February, 1831. At this time some members of the Church were disturbed by people making false claims as revelators. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 154.—First part of the revelation addressed to the Elders of the Church—Revelations to the Church given only through the one appointed to receive such—Elders warned against spurious claims and false teachings of others—Elders sent forth to teach according to the spirit of revelation and not to be taught in the precepts of men—Assurances of the Lord's future advent—Calamities to precede his coming—Latter part of the revelation addressed to the nations of the earth—Warning, proclamation, and commandment.

O HEARKEN, ye elders of my church, and give ear to the words which I shall speak unto you.

A short time after the Revelation in Section 42 was given, a woman named Hubble came to the Prophet Joseph and made the claim that she had received divine revelations. She was one claimant of many, at this time. Elder George A. Smith relates that, "There was a prevalent spirit all through the early history of this Church, which prompted the Elders to suppose that they knew more than the Prophet. Elders would tell you that the Prophet was going wrong" (Jour. of Dis., Vol. XI., p. 7.) On one occasion Sidney Rigdon began a sermon by saying that the Church and Kingdom had been rent from them and given to another people. Joseph was absent, and when he came home, he found Rigdon acting very strangely. There was a man named Hawley who said the Lord had commanded him to go to Kirtland and tell the Prophet that he had lost his office, because he had caused John Noah, a pretended prophet, to be cut off from the Church. Many were bewildered by the different voices and consequent confusion. It was therefore necessary to ask the Lord for light and guidance with regard to this matter, and this Revelation came in answer to prayer.

In this important communication to the Church our Lord (1) gives the law concerning the leadership of the Church and the succession (1-7); (2) states the duties of the officers and members with regard to (a) public assemblies (8-10); (b) the divinely-appointed leader (11-14); (c) the world (15-16) (d) in view of the advent of the Lord (17-28); and (3) gives a promise of the coming of the Millennium (29-35).

1-7. In these paragraphs the Lord declares that there is only one appointed at a time to receive divine Revelations and commandments for the Church. This law was more than adumbrated in a Revelation addressed to Oliver Cowdery in September, 1830 (Sec. 28:2-7); and again in a Revelation to Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon, in December, the same year (Sec. 35:18). Here it is again stated.

"It was necessary at that time that some provision be made for the perpetuity of the Priesthood with its keys and powers, and especially the prophetic office, in case that Joseph Smith should not prove faithful to the great trust in the days of his preparation and qualification, and before he became thoroughly seasoned and fitted for this important calling. In such an emergency the power of necessity must have been conferred by Joseph Smith on his successor, for he held the keys; therefore the Lord declared that in case of the Prophet's transgression, or removal, he would still retain the power in that case to ordain his successor, and to confer upon such successor, whom the Lord was to choose, the keys and authority that had been conferred upon him" (Joseph Fielding Smith, Origin of the 'Reorganized' Church, p. 39).

Except to appoint another in his stead] This clause, at first sight, may appear difficult to understand. If the Prophet should be removed through apostasy, for instance, would he, in his fallen condition, be willing, or have authority, to ordain a successor? Would he not, more probably, make an effort to retain the position for himself? Would Sidney Rigdon, when he aspired to the Presidency, have appointed somebody else, even at the request of the Church? On the other hand, if the Prophet should be removed by death, how could he "appoint another in his stead?" But whatever difficulty the passage may present, has been removed by God, when He inspired His servant to appoint a Council of Twelve Apostles and to confer upon this body all the keys, power, and authority which he held himself. Thus provision was made for a successor appointed and ordained, as the Revelation says he should be, through, or by, the Prophet, before his removal, fully equipped to step into the vacant place.

Note that this arrangement is the same as that which our Savior made when He was here in the flesh. He told the Twelve that it was the Father's good pleasure to give them the kingdom (Luke 12:32). Shortly before His death He said to the Twelve, "I appoint unto you a kingdom, as my Father hath appointed unto me" (Luke 22:29); and again, in His prayer, after the last passover, He said, "As thou hast sent me into the world, even so have I also sent them into the world" (John 17-18). He committed the Kingdom with its duties and responsibilities to their care. They were to administer it after His departure. Even so, in our day, He has provided that the leadership of the affairs of the Kingdom should devolve on the Twelve, in the case of the removal, by one cause or another, of the Prophet; see Secs. 90:4; 107:24 and 112:30-32.

President Anthon H. Lund, commenting on John 21:15-17, observes:

"The word which is here [v. 16] translated "feed" is different in the Greek text from the word so translated above. The word first used is boske, which is translated, "graze," "feed," "nourish." The word used in the second place is poimaine, which has been translated "feed," but which has a much broader meaning. My lexicon gives the following translation of poimaine, "to herd"; "to be a shepherd"; "to rule"; "to take care of"; "to tend." Peter was, therefore, called to be the shepherd, the caretaker, the ruler of the Church. * * * I consider that the charge which Jesus gave to Peter and the Apostles was that they should direct and take charge of His church here upon the Earth. Following the history of the Apostles, as it is given [in the Acts], we find that when any dimensions arose in the Church, men were sent to Peter and James and John at Jerusalem, to learn from them what was the Word of God on those matters, and the decision of the Apostles was the end of the controversy. There we have the precedent given us, that when the President of the Church was taken away, the Apostles took the place. Jesus presided over the Church while He lived in the flesh upon the Earth; He continued to preside over the Church through His Spirit, and revealed His Word to his servants, but His earthly representatives were the Apostles, and they took charge of the Church. So when the Prophet Joseph was martyred, the responsibility rested where he had placed it. There was no talk of heredity; there was nothing said about his relatives taking charge; but there was the Quorum of the Apostles, and upon them rested the responsibility of carrying on the work, and they did so, they continued the work that Joseph had commenced so well" (From a Conference Address given at Salt Lake City and quoted by the Liahona).

8-10. It is the duty of the Saints, when they assemble, to instruct each other in the Laws and Commandments already given, in order that all may be instructed, and edified, and sanctified by that which has been received; not to endeavor to bring forth new Revelations.

11-14. It is the duty of the Saints to sustain the Prophet God appoints, by prayer and by their works. There is an illustration of the latter in the history of the Prophet. When he, owing to the persecution in Missouri, was reduced to poverty, the Twelve addressed an appeal to the branches of the Church at Lima, Ramus, Augusta, and other places, and immediately the Saints sent him several wagon loads of grain and other provisions. Paul was in the same way relieved by the generosity of the Saints in Philippi (Phil. 4:16). It is not an idle ceremony to sustain the authorities at the general conferences. It means that we are willing to aid them by all honorable means at our disposal.

15-16. The duty of the Elders who are sent forth into the world is to teach the children of men that which the Lord has revealed; they are to be taught from on High. Elders sometimes come before audiences and confess that they have nothing to say; they are not prepared; or, that they never did give much time to study, or to meetings. etc. It is all wrong. If they are appointed to go forth into the world, they are ambassadors of the Lord, with a special message to the world, and they must deliver it by the power of the Holy Spirit. Before God they may be humble and confess their ignorance and weakness; but before the world they must magnify their office and calling.

17-28. There are certain duties the Saints must perform in view of the coming of the day of the Lord. Among these are the following:—They must separate themselves from the wicked (v. 19); they must call upon the nations to repent (v. 20); they must take up the labor in the vineyard for the last time (v. 28).

"Judah must return, Jerusalem must be rebuilt, and the temple, and water come out from under the temple, and the waters of the Dead Sea be healed. It will take some time to rebuild the walls of the City and the temple, etc., and all this must be done before the Son of Man will make His appearance. There will be wars and rumors of wars, signs in the heavens above and on the earth beneath, the sun turned into darkness and the moon to blood, earthquakes in divers places, the seas heaving beyond their bounds; then will appear one grand sign of the Son of Man in heaven. But what will the world do? They will say it is a planet, a comet, etc. But the Son of Man will come as the sign of the coming of the Son of Man, which will be as the light of the morning cometh out of the east" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. V., p. 337).

When the testimony of the Elders ceases to be given, and the Lord says to them, 'Come home; I will now preach my own sermons to the nations of the earth,' all you now know can scarcely be called a preface to the sermon that will be preached with fire and sword, tempests, earthquakes hail, rain, thunders and lightnings, and fearful destruction. * * * The sea will heave itself beyond its bounds, engulfing mighty cities. Famine will spread over the nations, and nation will rise against nation, kingdom against kingdom, and states against states, in our own country and in foreign lands; and they will destroy each other, caring not for the blood and lives of their neighbors, of their families, or for their own lives. They will be like the Jaredites who preceded the Nephites upon this continent, and will destroy each other to the last man, through the anger that the Devil will place in their hearts because they have rejected the words of life and are given over to Satan to do whatsoever he listeth to do with them."—(President Brigham Young, July 15, 1860.)

29-35. The Lord, in this Revelation, as in others, has placed before the world a picture of distress on Earth, as a consequence of divine wrath. He ends by a promise that after the day of judgment upon the nations, His people will be redeemed, and the Millennial reign established on Earth. In the revelations of God to man the final view is always one of redemption, glory, and alleluias. It is not Paradise Lost, but Paradise Regained, that is the purpose of the message of God to man.

The Earth shall pass away] Parley P. Pratt observes:

"Righteousness will abide upon its face, during a thousand years, and the Savior will bless it with His personal presence, after which the end soon comes, and the earth itself will die, and its elements be dissolved through the agency of fire. This death, or dissolution of the Earth, is a penalty of the original sin. Infants and righteous men die, not as a penalty of their own sins, but because Adam sinned; so the Earth dies, or undergoes a similar change, not because of the transgression of the children of Adam, but because of the original transgression. But all mankind are made alive from the first death through the resurrection, so the Earth will again be renewed, its elements will again be collected, they will be recombined and reorganized, as when it first issued from the womb of chaos" (Jour. of Dis., Vol. I., p. 331).
