Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 44.

REVELATION given to Joseph Smith the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon, at Kirtland, Ohio, in the latter part of February, 1831. In compliance with the requirements herein set forth the Church appointed a conference to be held early in the month of June following.—The Elders to assemble to receive further instruction—To organize according to the laws of the land, thus strengthening themselves against the machinations of their opponents.

BEHOLD, thus saith the Lord unto you my servants, it is expedient in me that the elders of my church should be called together, from the east and from the west, and from the north and from the south, by letter or some other way.

In the latter part of February, 1831, the Lord directed that the missionaries who had gone to the various parts of the Country be summoned to Kirtland to meet in a general Conference. Three Conferences had been held before, viz., one on June 9th, 1830; one on September 26th, the same year, and one on January 2nd, 1831. These were all held at Fayette, N. Y. The Conference referred to in this Revelation convened at Kirtland, June 3rd, 1831. It was the Fourth General Conference of the Church, and the first gathering of its kind in Kirtland.

3-5. One of the purposes of the Conference was to call Elders and send them forth to do missionary work in the neighborhood of Kirtland, in order that the Church might become so strong, numerically, as to be able to claim the protection of the law (v. 4). Then the enemies would have no power, that is, legal power, to destroy the work (v. 5).

General Notes

''The grand principle upon which the Gospel of life and salvation is founded and on which Zion is to be built, is brotherly love and good will to man. This was the theme of the angels of God in announcing the birth of the Savior. Hitherto, under the old systems, it has been, 'Every man for himself' * * * but the principle which the Lord proposes is that we should square our lives by a higher and holier one, namely, 'Everyone for the whole, and God for us all' " (Erastus Snow, Jour. of Dis., Vol. XVII., p. 75).

The Conference which covened in accordance with this Revelation was attended by about two thousand souls. And the Church was only fourteen months old! On that occasion the Saints again had wonderful manifestations of the divine power, and "the man of sin," the Prophet tells us, was also revealed. Several Elders were ordained High Priests—the first ordination to that position in the Melchizedek Priesthood in this dispensation. "The Spirit of the Lord," the record says, "fell upon Joseph in an unusual manner, and he prophesied that John the Revelator was then among the Ten Tribes of Israel that had been led away by Shalmaneser, hog of Assyria, to prepare them for their return from their long dispersion, to again possess the land of their fathers." Lyman Wight, who was among those ordained High Priests, prophesied concerning the coming of Christ, and said that some of his brethren would suffer martyrdom. "He saw the heavens opened and the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of the Father. He said that God would do a work in these last days that tongue cannot express and the mind is not capable to conceive. The glory of the Lord shone around" (History of the Church, Vol. I., p. 176).
