Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 45.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to the Church, at Kirtland, Ohio, March 7, 1831. Prefacing his record of this revelation, the Prophet states that at this age of the Church many false reports and foolish stories were published and circulated, to prevent people from investigating the work or embracing the faith. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 158.—Jesus Christ the advocate for His people with the Father—Blessed state of Enoch and his people—Prediction made to the disciples in former days cited—Times of the Gentiles signalized by the light of the Gospel—In the same generation the times of the Gentiles to be fulfilled—A desolating sickness named among the many tribulations preceding the coming of the Lord in judgment—Significance of the parable of the fig-trees and that of the ten virgins—Gathering of the people from the eastern lands into the western countries—Promise of the establishment of the New Jerusalem-Eventual triumph of Zion.

HEARKEN, O ye people of my church, to whom the kingdom has been given; hearken ye and give ear to him who laid the foundation of the earth, who made the heavens and all the hosts thereof, and by whom all things were made which live, and move, and have a being.

It is noted in the History of the Church that in the early spring of 1831, numerous false reports and foolish stories were circulated about the Saints in Kirtland, who were tried sorely on account of the enmity aroused against them by such means, for persecution is never pleasant to a refined, sensitive human being. But while the adversary was raging against them, our Lord inspired this Revelation, which may be divided into three parts:—(1) God's appeal to His people for obedience (1-15); (2) a revelation concerning the day of redemption (16-59); and (3) instructions regarding the new English Bible translation, the gathering of the Saints, and the building of the New Jerusalem (60-75).

In these paragraphs our Savior appeals to the members of the Church for obedience to His word. Many reasons are given why we should render implicit obedience.

Laid the foundation of the earth] That is another reason. In obeying Jesus Christ, we obey the Creator of the heavens and all the hosts thereof-all the worlds in our big universe—as well as the Earth and all it contains. There is no mightier ruler, no greater potentate, to whom we can yield obedience. And not only is he powerful but he is also wise and good, as is clearly seen in all that he has called into existence. He is, therefore, both able and willing to reward those who obey Him.

"The days of our years—therein are threescore and ten,

And if we be of much strength, fourscore years:

And their pride is but travail and misery.

For it is swiftly past, and we have taken flight."

—Psalms 90:10; translation by Dr. Kirkpatrick, Cambridge Bible.

If life is so uncertain, we are wise, if by obedience we prepare for the hereafter.

4-5. Behold the sufferings and death * * * spare these my brethren] This is the plea of the Son. In the Mosaic dispensation the priest presented before God a sacrifice slain in behalf of the Israelites. That was a type of Christ's sacrifice, who presents Himself as the Lamb of God, slain for us, and intercedes in our behalf, on the condition that we are willing to obey Him and leave our cause in His hands. There is but one Mediator between God and man, and that is our blessed Savior. His redeemed and sanctified brethren may pray for one another, but they cannot enter behind the veil in behalf of others, or even in behalf of themselves. Our justification, our salvation, is due only to the mediation of Christ.

That thyself might be glorified] Christ died, that His Father might be glorified, and the salvation of His children is His glory.

Harden not your hearts] Like Pharaoh, who refused to obey, notwithstanding the signs and wonders performed in his presence.

7-10. Here is another reason for yielding obedience. The Lord has again established the Everlasting Covenant in the world, as a preparation for His advent. Once before He came to His own, but was rejected. The Jews were "His own" then. They did not, as a nation, receive Him, but to those who did receive Him He gave power to work miracles, to become the sons of God and obtain eternal life. Let it not be said a second time, that Christ has come to "His own," even to His Church in this dispensation, but "His own" refused to hearken to Him.

It may be noted that the language here used is that of John (1:10-12). The meaning there, more fully explained, is that Christ came to His own inheritance, His own vineyard, the Holy Land (ta idia), but His own people (hoi idioi) did not receive Him. The Lord was about to come again in our dispensation to His own inheritance, the New Jerusalem in the land of Zion; let His people, the members of the Church, receive Him.

11-14. In these paragraphs another reason for obedience is stated. If the people would listen to Him, He would once more manifest the wisdom which was shown in the establishment of the City of Enoch, the inhabitants of which were taken from the earth and preserved from destruction by the flood. This is a divine promise that the conditions which prevailed in the City of Enoch will again be established, when God's people will obey Him.

"There was a remarkable work performed then [in the days of Enoch], according to the revelations which have been given to us, which will be more fully developed when the Lord shall see fit to reveal other things associated therewith. But we learn that there was a Church organized about as ours may be; we learn that they went forth and preached the gospel; we learn that they were gathered together to a place called Zion; we learn that the people of Zion were under the guidance, direction, and teaching of the Almighty; in order that they might be prepared for another Zion in the grand drama associated with the dealings of God and His purposes pertaining to the earth and the heavens * * * Enoch preached the gospel to the people, and so did hundreds of Elders, as they are doing today; and they gathered the people together and build up a Zion to the Lord, and when Enoch was not, but was caught up, Enoch's city was not, but was caught up, and there were certain things associated therewith that are very peculiar. And what came next? Why, the destruction of the world. It was overflowed, we read, by the flood" (John Taylor, Jour. of Dis., Vol. XXVI., p. 34).

"The Lord revealed to Joseph, that the people would gather out from Babylon, and establish the Kingdom of God upon the principles of heaven. They went up to Jackson Co., Mo., with this in their faith, and with the express understanding that when they got there, everything was to be laid at the feet of the Bishop * * * who was to distribute it among the people, according to the Revelation given for that purpose, for their benefit. But they could not bear this; consequently, they were driven from Jackson County, and finally they were driven from the State. This was in the fall of 1838 * * * While we were in Winter Quarters the Lord gave to me a Revelation just as much as He ever gave one to anybody. He opened my mind, and showed me the organization of the Kingdom of God in family capacity. I talked it to my brethren; I would throw out a few words here, and a few words there, to my first counselor, to my second counselor, and the Twelve Apostles, but with the exception of one or two of the Twelve, it would not touch a man. They believed it would come. O yes, but it would be by and by" (Jour. of Dis., Vol. XVIII., pp. 242, 244).

16-59. In these paragraphs our Lord repeats to the Prophet Joseph the substance of His address to the Twelve on the Mount of Olives, on His coming and the end of the world, as recorded in Matt. 24:1-35. Many details are added, which throw a wonderful light upon that exceedingly important portion of the Word of God.

In the construction of this sanctuary many stones of prodigious size had been used. Josephus says some were 45 cubits long, 5 high, and 6 broad—something like 78 x 8 x lO feet. How improbable it must have appeared that the time could ever come when one stone should not be left upon another (v. 20)! Yet, in the year 70 A.D., in the same month and on the same day that witnessed the destruction of the temple of Solomon, this temple was demolished. Roman soldiers, it is said, ploughed the ground on which it had stood.

"The times of the Gentiles" is their opportunity to hear and embrace the gospel (Rom. 11:25).

"Jesus came to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, but they rejected him, and the Apostles were moved upon to say, 'Lo, we turn to the Gentiles;' and they did so, the Jews having proved themselves unworthy of eternal life, 'and the kingdom of God shall be taken from you,' says the Savior, and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof. The Gentiles, to whom the gospel was to be given, received it, and the gifts and graces of the Church, which were before enjoyed by Israel were now manifested among the Gentiles. But behold, they corrupted themselves, after having received the kingdom" (Orson Pratt, Jour. of Dis., Vol. XVIII., p. 225).

Christ delayeth His coming] Another sign of the end of the times of the Gentiles is this, that men shall teach that Christ will not come until the end of the Earth. That is, even now, a very orthodox doctrine. In fact, the common doctrine of the world is that Christ will not come. until a majority of the race is converted, the Jews gathered and antichrist conquered, and then, it is taught, come the judgment and the destruction of the Earth. It is one of the signs of the end, that men shall teach that there will be no Millennium, no personal reign of Christ on Earth.

34-38. The disciples were troubled when they heard our Lord speaking about wars and earthquakes, and the hardening of the hearts of men against God, but He told them that these things were indications of the coming of the Son of God, just as the budding of the trees is an indication of the approach of summer. A wise statesman, when observing a state of decay of morals, prevalence of sordid selfishness in business and politics, widening of the gulf between classes, and love of ease and luxury, knows, by those signs, that the end of such a condition cannot he delayed long. For similar reasons the people of God know, from the signs enumerated by our Lord, that the end of a dispensation is approaching. Deviation from the teachings of the servants of God in any dispensation brings war and bloodshed among men. Revolt from the Priesthood of the Son of God means increased power of the adversary, and he will exert that power not only by seducing mortals to sin, but by causing sickness, and destruction by the forces of nature. to the extent that this is possible for him to do, and, undoubtedly as "the prince of the power of the air," and "the spirit that now worketh in the children of disobedience" (Eph. 2:2), his power to inflict injury is considerable, wherever the protecting hand of God is wholly, or partly, withdrawn, because of disobedience and sin. Hence, the unrestrained activity of the adversary in any dispensation is a sign that it is nearing the end. And when, towards the end, the gospel light "begins to break forth," then, "summer is nigh at hand." The change from one dispensation to another, radical though it be, is as gradual as the change from one season to another.

39-44. In the preceding paragraphs our Lord gave His disciples a number of signs by which they might know that the times of the Gentiles were about to be completed. Here He enumerates the signs immediately preceding "the day of the Lord."

"When He comes again He comes to take vengeance and to bring deliverance unto His Saints; 'for the day of vengeance,' it is said, 'is in my heart and the year of my redeemed is come.' It behooves us to be made well aware of which class we belong to" (Orson Hyde, Jour. of Dis., Vol. X., p. 116).

45-59. Having indicated the signs of the end, our Lord now proceeds to enumerate some of the events that will occur at his coming.

47-50. Then the judgment upon the nations shall be held. Our Lord will descend with His Saints. He will again stand upon "this mountain," the Mount of Olives. There will be an earthquake; the Mount will be cleft, and the whole "earth" shall hear it. The Lord will speak, as from Mount Sinai, and the nations of the Earth will hear it and mourn for their folly.

51-53. The Jews, gathered to Palestine, will accept the crucified Nazarene as their deliverer and King.

56-59. The Parable of the Ten Virgins will be seen to be true when the Lord comes. For even among those who have gone out to meet the Bridegroom, some will be foolish, not being fully prepared for His coming (Matt. 25:1-13). The wise virgins are described in this Section. v. 57.

58-59. The earth shall be given to them] The faithful members of the Church, compared to the five wise virgins, who have kept the faith, are not to be hewn and cast into the fire when the Lord comes, but shall abide the day. In that day the earth will be cleansed from its wickedness, and the "greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the saints," (Daniel 7:27) and the earth shall be given unto them for an inheritance. During this thousand years "they shall multiply and wax strong, and their children shall grow up without sin unto salvation." They will have the advantage of having the Lord in their midst and the Saints who have received the resurrection shall be their instructors.

Some of the grandest chapters in human history are here outlined in prophecy. Our Lord and Savior will return and establish His reign upon this Earth during a thousand years, preliminary to His celestial reign, which shall last forever.

"By and by, when all things are prepared—when the Jews have received their scourging, and Jesus has descended upon the Mount of Olives, the Ten Tribes will leave Zion, and will go to Palestine, to inherit the land that was given to their ancient fathers, and it will be divided among the descendants of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost. They will go there to dwell in peace in their own land from that time, until the Earth shall pass away. But Zion, after their departure. will still remain upon the Western hemisphere, and she will be crowned with glory as well as old Jerusalem, and, as the Psalmist David says, she will become the joy of the whole Earth * * * Zion will be caught up when Jesus comes, to meet Him. Jesus will descend not only upon the Mount of Olives, but He will descend and stand upon Mount Zion. But before He stands upon it, it will be caught up to meet Him in the air. Will the buildings of Zion be caught up? Yes. And its land? Yes. And Jesus will stand upon Mount Zion according to the prediction of John the Revelator, and He will reign over His people during a thousand years; and His associates will be the resurrected righteous of all former dispensations" (Orson Pratt, Jour. of D's., Vol. XVIII., p. 66) .

60-62. In December, 1830, the Prophet Joseph and Sidney Rigdon were instructed not to continue the translation of the Bible until their arrival in Ohio (Sec. 37:1); now they were living in that State and were given permission to resume the work. They were to make themselves familiar with the Scriptures, in order to "be prepared for the things to come."

"Pestilence, hail, famine, and earthquake will sweep the wicked of this generation, from off the face of the land, to open and prepare the way for the lost tribes of Israel from the north country. The people of the Lord, those who have complied with the requirements of the new covenant, have already commenced gathering together to Zion * * * Repent ye, repent ye, and embrace the everlasting covenant, and flee to Zion, before the overflowing scourge overtake you, for there are those now living upon the Earth whose eyes shall not be closed in death until they see all these things, which I have spoken, fulfilled" (History of the Church, Vol. I., p. 315).

"Why does the Lord gather them out? As the Prophet Isaiah has said in another place, He gathers them out to the mountains, and they say one to another, 'Come, let us go up to the mountain of the Lord and to the house of the God of Jacob.' What for? 'That he may teach us his ways, and that we may walk in his paths.' It seems, then, that the Lord will have one people somewhere on the face of the Earth, up in the mountainous region, who are going to teach the nations His ways, and how to walk in His paths" (Orson Pratt, Jour. of Dis., Vol. XVIII., p. 46).

General Notes

Our Lord, in this Revelation calls upon His people to obey Him. Is this not a hard requirement? Not if we love Him. "Love is the fulfilment of the law" (Rom. 13:10). Obedience prompted by love is the greatest happiness a man can enjoy, and that is the only kind of obedience God values: not the obedience of a servant, but that of a loving child.

The word "generation" (v. 30) is generally used to denote the race of men existing at the same time. In that sense it has been suggested that the duration of a generation would be about a hundred years. But it also means a "race," a "family," or a "nation."

The expression "signs in the heavens," such as the darkening of sun and moon, and the falling of stars, when used metaphorically, means the overthrow of kingdoms and the fall of potentates. But the last days will also be marked by strange phenomena in the sky. The Prophet Joseph notes in his diary for March 10, 1843, that he and others, about 7 p.m., saw a stream of light in the southwest quarter of the sky, which had the shape of a sword, with the hilt downward, the blade raised, and he took this as a sign that there would be a sanguinary war before long (Hist. of the Church, Vol. V., p. 301). This stream of light appeared for several evenings and formed itself into a large ring round the moon, two balls immediately appearing in the ring opposite each other. On the 21st of the same month the pilot and officers of the steamer William Penn, on the Ohio river, observed a great light in the sky, in the form of a serpent. It changed form and became letters, and observers thought it spelt G. O. D, thus blazing forth a warning in the sky to turn from the serpent and to God (Ibid. p. 309).

Heber C. Kimball relates the following:

"I had retired to bed. [Sep. 22nd, 1827], when John P. Greene, who was living within a hundred steps of my house, came and woke me up, calling upon me to come out and behold the scenery in the heavens. * * * We looked to the eastern horizon, and beheld a white smoke arise towards the heavens; as it ascended it formed itself into a belt, and made a noise like the sound of a mighty wind, and continued southwest, forming a regular bow dipping in the western horizon. * * * In this bow an army moved, commencing from the east and marching to the west. * * * They moved in platoons, and walked so close that the rear ranks trod in the steps of their file leaders, until the whole bow was literally crowded with soldiers. We could distinctly see the muskets, bayonets, and knapsacks of the men, who wore caps and feathers like those used by the American soldiers. When the front rank reached the western horizon a battle ensued. * * * This scene was gazed upon for hours, until it began to disappear. After I became acquainted with Mormonism, I learned that this took place the same evening Joseph Smith received the records of the Book of Mormon from the angel Moroni" (Whitney's Life of Heber C. Kimball, pp. 3-31).

Wars are calamities. The New Jerusalem will be a "land of peace." War was the last recourse of Lucifer, after he had been defeated in the Council. Peace is the rule in the Kingdom of God, for our Lord is the Prince of Peace, but His gospel of peace and good will came into a world where strife prevailed, and there has been a struggle between pacifism, so-called, and militarism ever since. Many of the first Christians refused to serve in the Roman legions, but after the great apostasy militarism obtained control of the church. But there have always been a few peacemakers in the world. Erasmus, the great New Testament student, was of the opinion that the settlement of disputes between nations by war was contrary to the teachings of Christ. Grotius, the first great constructive pacifist, suggested a world court of arbitration. Emanuel Kant, the great philosopher, in his tract, Eternal Peace, insisted that courts must supplant war, federations of nations drive away selfish individualism, treaties take the place of guns, and democracy render oppressive dynasties obsolete. Henry IV, of France, dreamed of a League of Nations on a plan similar to that so forcibly advocated by President Wilson, of the United States. The Revelations of our Lord to the Prophet Joseph make it clear that peace will finally be established on the Earth permanently, and that implements of war will be turned into agricultural tools.
