Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 46.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to the Church, at Kirtland, Ohio, March 8, 1831. A custom of admitting to the sacrament meetings and other assemblies of the Church only members and earnest investigators had become somewhat general. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 163.—Meetings of the Church to be conducted as the Holy Spirit shall guide—Neither members nor earnest seekers after the truth to be excluded from sacramental services—Many of the gifts of the Holy Spirit enumerated—Power of discernment promised so that manifestations not inspired by the Spirit of God may be recognized.

HEARKEN, O ye people of my church; for verily I say unto you that these things were spoken unto you for your profit and learning.

This Revelation was received the day after that recorded in the preceding Section. Elder B. H. Roberts (Hist. of the Church, Vol. I., p. 163) quotes John Whitmer to the effect that some of the Saints used to exclude unbelievers from their meetings, although this is forbidden in the Book of Mormon (III. Nephi 18:22, 23). The Lord, therefore, at this time (1) gave instructions regarding the meetings of the Saints (1-7); (2) explained why spiritual gifts are given (8-9); and (3) enumerated those gifts (10-33).

4-5. Sacrament meetings] The Sacrament meetings are also to be open to all; but Church members who have trespassed must make reconciliation before partaking of the sacred emblems.

Trespasses are, chiefly, sins against our fellowmen. The Law of God is so broad, the occasions to sin so numerous, that we should always be on our guard, and we should search ourselves each time we come to partake of the Sacrament, and make sure that we are not unworthy guests. During the Mosaic Covenant atonement was made specially for trespasses "in the holy things of the Lord" (Lev. 5:15, 16), by which God was defrauded in the payment of tithes and offerings. This should be a lesson to the people of God in all ages. It is inconsistent to come to the Lord's table and not be honest in tithes and offerings.

Note that some false doctrines come from men, while others are originated by the devil. The former may depend on human imperfection of perception or deductions. We do not always understand the Word of God correctly, and we are apt to draw hasty conclusions, and if we teach these for doctrine, we err. The latter are inspired by the adversary to deceive man.

8-9. There are many gifts of the Spirit. There is the "fruit of the Spirit," which all Saints enjoy, such as "love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance" (Gal. 5:22, 23). But there are also special gifts (Paul calls them Charismata, I. Cor. 7:7) vouchsafed by God to the Saints, for the benefit of those who love Him.

They are given in answer to prayer, but there is one kind of prayer that God does not grant—prayer for gifts to gratify carnal desires.

10-33. The main spiritual gifts are enumerated in these paragraphs. They are, (1) knowledge; (2) faith; (3) administration; (4) recognition of the operations of the Spirit; (5) wisdom; (6) gift to instruct; (7) faith to be healed; (8) faith to heal; (9) power to work other miracles; (10) gift to prophesy; (11) gift to discern spirits; (12) gift of tongues; (13) gift of interpretation; (14) gift to discern all these gifts.

"I told him that his doctrine was of the Devil, that he was in reality in possession of a wicked and depraved spirit, although he professed to be the spirit of truth itself. He said also that he possessed the Spirit of Christ. He tarried until Wednesday, 11th, when, after breakfast, I told him that my God told me that his god was the Devil, and I could not keep him any longer" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. II.. p. 307).

Thus the Prophet Joseph had the gift to discern spirits.

"We may look for angels and receive their ministration, but we are to try the spirits and prove them, for it is often the case that men make a mistake in regard to these things. God had so ordained that, when he has communicated, no vision is to be taken but what you see by the seeing of the eye, or what you hear by the hearing of the ear. When you see a vision, pray for the interpretation. If you get not this, shut it up" (Joseph Smith, Jour. of Dis., Vol. VI., p. 240).

"Be not so curious about tongues; do not speak in tongues except there be an interpreter present; the ultimate design of tongues is to speak to foreigners, and if persons are very anxious to display their intelligence. let them speak to such in their own tongues. The gifts of God are all useful in their places, but when they are applied to that which God does not intend, they prove an injury, a snare, and a curse instead of a blessing" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. V., p. 31).

"However well calculated the gift of tongues might be to arrest and compel attention when used properly, it is clear, says the Apostle, that its introduction at the public assemblies of the Church was not a proper use of it, unless (v. 27) it were restricted in its use by wise rulers. If not so restricted, so far from its being a sign to unbelievers, it would give them, as well as the great body of Christian laity, occasion of complaint, and even ridicule" (Cambridge Bible, I. Cor., p. 136).

General Notes

Our Lord, in His own life, has given His followers an example to imitate. He began His public career by baptism and prayer (Luke 3:21), and a forty days' fast. After a day of strenuous work, He prayed in order to find rest (Luke 5:16). He prayed at the beginning of the day in order to have strength for the work before Him (Mark 1:35). He prayed when He was about to take any decisive step in His ministry. Before He selected the Twelve, He continued a whole night in prayer, in order to have the wisdom necessary for that important duty (Luke 6:12). He prayed in order to have power over evil spirits (Mark 9:29). He prayed to have strength to bear up in the supreme hour of trial. as in Gethsemane, and, finally, in the hour of death, on the cross. He taught His disciples to pray always, "and not to faint" (Luke 18:1) . A Christian life without prayer would not be real, active life. It might be unconscious existence, as if in a swoon, and end in spiritual death.

The Prophet Joseph knew the power of prayer. It was while praying, that he received the glorious vision of the Father and the Son. The Church was founded and built up and every stone cemented to the rest of the structure, with prayer. Every new Revelation given, every new vision, came in answer to prayer. Many remarkable instances of prayer are recorded in the biography of the Prophet. On the 11th of January, 1834, he and some of his co-laborers united in prayer, asking the Lord that their lives might be spared and that angels would be given charge concerning them and their families, that they might prevail over their enemies, and especially one who had threatened to take the life of the Prophet; that the Lord would provide the Presiding Bishop at Kirtland with means to discharge every obligation; that he would protect the printing press, and that He would deliver Zion and gather His scattered people; and "finally, that God, in the name of Jesus, would gather His elect speedily, and unveil His face that His Saints might behold His glory, and dwell with Him" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. II., pp. 2, 3). He prayed to the Lord "that three thousand subscribers would be added to the [Evening and Morning Star] in the time of three years" (Ibid. p. 24). He prayed for "strength and wisdom and understanding to lead the people of the Lord, and to gather and establish the Saints upon the land of their inheritances, and organize them according to the will of heaven, that they may be no more cast down for ever" (Ibid. p. 51). He prayed when in trials and difficulties, privately and publicly, every day of his life, and his last word in mortality was a prayer committing himself into the hands of his Father in heaven—"O Lord, my God!"

There can be no spiritual progress, no growth of the Church, no victory over evil, without prayer. If faithful work is the steam that keeps the engines in motion, prayer is the sacred fire without which there is no steam.

"A praying heart is the one thing that the devil cannot easily counterfeit. It easy enough to imitate praying lips, so that hypocrites and Pharisees feign devoutness. But only God can open in the heart's depths those springs of supplication that often find no channel in language, but flow out in groanings which cannot be uttered" (ARTHUR PIERSON).
