Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 47.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, in Kirtland, Ohio, March 8, 1831. Prior to this time Oliver Cowdery had acted as Church historian and recorder. John Whitmer had not sought an appointment as historian, but, being desired to serve in this capacity had said that he would obey the will of the Lord in the matter. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 166.—John Whitmer designated as the keeper of the history of the Church.

BEHOLD, it is expedient in me that my servant John should write and keep a regular history, and assist you, my servant Joseph, in transcribing all things which shall be given you, until he is called to further duties.

General Notes

Previous to this time Oliver Cowdery had been the historian and recorder of the Church. When the suggestion was made that John Whitmer be appointed to do this important work, he expressed the wish that the Lord would make His will manifest through the Prophet Joseph. Then this revelation was received.

John Whitmer was now appointed custodian of the records of the Church. When he was excommunicated, March 10, 1838, at Far West, he refused to deliver up the documents in his possession, and at his death they were taken charge of by his nephew, John C. Whitmer, of Richmond, Mo.

The position of the Church Historian is one of great importance. One of the epoch-making events in the history of the world took place when the Church was organized. But without a specially-appointed recorder, that event would have passed almost unnoticed, or it would have been described from the viewpoint of enemies. The development of the Church would have had no proper place in the annals of man but for a truthful historian, well acquainted with and instructed in that part of human history. The Prophet began his history on May 2nd, 1831, "to disabuse the public mind. and put all inquirers after the truth into possession of the facts, as they have transpired, in relation to both myself and the Church, so far as I have such facts in my possession" (History of the Church, Vol. I., p. I), and that is the great reason for the existence of the office of the Historian of the Church.
