Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 49.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to Sidney Rigdon, Parley P. Pratt and Leman Copley, at Kirtland, Ohio, March, 1831. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 167. Leman Copley had embraced the Gospel, but still held to some of the teachings of the Shakers, or Shaking Quakers, of whom he had formerly been one. Many of these people were honest-hearted, and the Lord directed his servants to labor amongst them.—Exact time of the Lord's advent not to be revealed prior to the great event—Sanctity of marriage as a law of God unto man—Complete abstinence from meat not required—Development of Lamanites and establishment of Zion to precede the coming of the great day of the Lord.

HEARKEN unto my word, my servants Sidney, and Parley, and Leman; for behold, verily I say unto you, that I give unto you a commandment that you shall go and preach my gospel which ye have received, even as ye have received it, unto the Shakers.

In this Revelation the Lord appoints a special mission to a sect generally known as Shakers or Shaking Quakers.

The Elders who were set apart for that mission, shortly afterwards visited one of their settlements near Cleveland, Ohio, but were not received. The Lord (1) names the Elders selected for the mission (1-4); (2) in a brief synopsis of the gospel indicates the nature of their message (5-14); (3) points out some of the errors of the sect (15-23); (4) gives a prophecy concerning the future of Zion (24-25); and (5) gives His servants certain promises (26-28).

Leman] Leman Copley had been a Shaker. When he embraced the gospel he was anxious to impart the truth to his former associates. He was, therefore, by revelation, chosen to accompany Sidney Rigdon and Parley P. Pratt on a mission to them.

Shakers] The Shakers call themselves, The United Society of Believers in Christ's Second Appearing. In 1747, James Wardley and wife, English Quakers, united with some French members of that church and protested against all existing churches. Ten years later, Ann Lee joined this society and testified especially against what she called "the lust of generation." She became the "spiritual mother" of the Society. About the year 1772 Mother Ann had a "revelation," directing her to repair to America. Many of her friends emigrated with her, and they left Liverpool and landed in New York in the year 1774. In 1776 they moved first to Albany, and then to Watervliet. This was the origin of the sect.

They believed that "the true Christian church is a congregation of souls baptized with the degree of the Christ spirit which harvests them from the generative plane, and from the selfish, sinful elements of the world; consecrates their lives to God, absolves them from the bondage of sin and the power of sinful temptations, and opens their souls to receive continuous revelations of light, truth, love, mercy, charity, and forgiveness of penitents, combined with impartiality and merciful judgment from heaven's eternal fountain" (What the World Believes, edited by George J. Hagar).

The Society is now defunct.

5-14. The gospel message to the Shakers is the same as that to all the children of men.

Have sent mine Only Begotten] Jesus Christ is the "Only Begotten" of the Father, in the flesh. He is the Firstborn in the spirit. He is the only Savior of man. Without Him there is no salvation in this life; nor hereafter.

Since God commands all His children to believe, the question may be asked, "Can man regulate his belief?" "Is not belief the necessary consequence of the peculiar mental make-up of each individual?" The gospel does not give us an affirmative answer to these questions. It commands us to accept the truth, taking our ability to do so for granted. By attending to evidence and contemplating the truth, we become convinced, and faith is produced. Man is so constituted that he cannot fail to believe the truth, when he perceives it. Nobody can doubt that two and two make four, if he understands the proposition, or that the whole is equal to its parts.

"Faith and affection are both influenced, not by analyzing them or by violently attempting to strengthen and to purify them. but by examining truth and holding communion with the objects that deserve and claim our love" (Joseph Angus, M.A., D.D.).

"The doctrine which degrades marriage by making it a less holy state, has its foundation in Manicheism or Gnosticism. It assumes that evil is essentially connected with matter; that sin has its seat and source in the body; that holiness is attainable only through asceticism and 'neglecting of the body;' that because the vita angelica [the angelic life] is a higher form of life [^1] than that of men here on Earth, therefore marriage is a degradation. The doctrine * * * is thoroughly antichristian. It rests on principles derived from the philosophy of the heathen. It presupposes that God is not the author of matter; and that He did not make man pure, when He invested him with a body" (Charles Hodge, D. D., Systematic Theology, Vol. III., p. 369).

Forbiddeth] "Forbiddeth" here stands for "biddeth" or commandeth. The context is perfectly clear.

"And again, verily I say unto you, all wholesome herbs God hath ordained for the constitution, nature, and use of man. Every herb in the season thereof, and every fruit in the season thereof. All these to be used with prudence and thanksgiving. Yea, flesh of the beasts and fowls of the air, I the Lord have ordained for the use of man with thanksgiving. Nevertheless, they should be used sparingly; and it is pleasing unto me, that they should not be used only in times of winter, or of cold, or famine. All grain is ordained for the use of man, and of beasts, to be the staff of life, not only for man, but for the beasts of the field, and the fowls of heaven, and all the wild animals that run or creep on the earth; and these hath God made for the use of man only in times of famine, and excess of hunger" (Hyrum Smith, Times and Seasons, Vol. III., p. 799).

But although God has ordained animals for the use of man, He has not sanctioned the order of things under which some have an abundance of food and clothing, while others are destitute, for that very reason "the world lieth in sin" (v. 20). Nor must man waste animal life. To kill, when not necessary, is a sin akin to murder. "A righteous man regardeth the life of his beast" (Prov. 12:10). Man has been entrusted with sovereignty over the animal kingdom (Gen. 1:21), that he may learn to govern, as God rules, by the power of love and justice, and become fit for his eternal destiny as a ruler of worlds. A tyrant who has learned nothing but selfishness and cruelty can hope for no position of trust hereafter in the kingdom of the Father.

Neither of a man traveling] When He comes, He will appear in the Temples erected to receive Him, and not as a homeless wanderer.

24-25. The Shakers established their communities in the Eastern States. In 1886 they had no fewer than seventeen settlements scattered principally over the States of New York, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Maine, and Connecticut. The Spirit of Prophecy, therefore, revealed to the Saints that the gathering place He had chosen was in the Western mountains, in what was then known as the great American Desert, not in the East. This is the second intimation (see also Sec. 35:24) that the Saints would find a gathering-place in the Rocky Mountains, a region almost unknown in 1831, when this remarkable prophecy was given.

There are two distinct predictions in these paragraphs. One says that "Jacob shall flourish in the wilderness, and the Lamanites shall blossom as the rose," before the great day of the Lord shall come; the second tells us that "Zion shall flourish upon the hills and rejoice upon the mountains.' The first of these predictions refers to the Indians; the second, to the Latter-day Saints. Have they been fulfilled?

The American Indians are, indeed, flourishing today. On Government reservations they enjoy a measure of prosperity beyond the dreams of their fathers. In Indian Territory they have attained a high degree of both civilization and prosperity. Indians now occupy Government offices and seats in legislative assemblies, in schools and pulpits, and in every walk of life. They are flourishing. This is all the more remarkable because at one time the general belief was that they were a vanishing race When the United States became an independent nation, the number of Indians in North America was estimated at three millions, and in the year 1876 at only one million three hundred thousand. In 1907 the decrease had been checked, and an increase to one million four hundred and seventy-four thousand was reported. Only a prophet inspired by God could have foreseen such a decided turn in the tide of Indian affairs.

The Latter-day Saints, it is hardly necessary to say, by their location in the Rocky Mountains and their prosperity, are an irrefutable proof of the truth of the second part of this prophecy.

26-28. If the missionaries would repent of their sins, pray, and labor diligently ("knock"), the Lord would be with them, and they should not be "confounded."

General Notes

A wedding at Kirtland is noted in the History of the Church, Vol. II., p. 320. The Prophet Joseph writes under date of November 24, 1835:

"I had an invitation to attend a wedding at Brother Hyrum Smith's in the evening; also to solemnize the matrimonial ceremony between Newel Knight and Lydia Goldthwaite. My wife accompanied me. On our arrival a considerable company had collected. The bridegroom and bride came in, and took their seats, which gave me to understand that they were ready. After prayers, I requested them to rise and join hands. I then remarked that marriage was an institution of heaven, instituted in the Garden of Eden; that it was necessary it should be solemnized by the authority of the everlasting Priesthood. The ceremony was original with me, and in substance as follows—you covenant to be each other's companions through life, and discharge the duties of husband and wife in every respect; to which they assented. I then pronounced them husband and wife in the name of God, and also pronounced upon them the blessings that the Lord conferred upon Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden, that is, to multiply and replenish the Earth, with the addition of long life and prosperity."

John Whitmer, in his History, says "The above-named brethren [v. 1] went and proclaimed [the gospel] according to the Revelation given them, but the Shakers hearkened not to their words and received not the gospel at that time; for they are bound in tradition and priestcraft; and thus they are led away with foolish and vain imaginations" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. IV., p. 169).

——— Note

---
Notas:
[^1] Warning against False Spirits. Words of Wisdom] That is the name given to this Revelation concerning "the Church and the spirits which have gone abroad in the Earth." Section 89 is also called "A Word of Wisdom."
