Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 50.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Kirtland, Ohio, May, 1831. The Prophet states that some of the Elders present did not understand the manifestations of different spirits abroad in the earth, and that this revelation was given in response to his special inquiry on the matter. So-called spiritual phenomena were not uncommon among the members, some of whom claimed to be receiving visions and revelations. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 170.—False spirits deceiving the world—Means by which they may be detected—Between their manifestations and those of the Spirit of the Lord there is difference as between light and darkness—Special service required of certain Elders—Greater knowledge promised as the people shall grow in grace and truth—The Lord is the Good Shepherd and the Stone of Israel.

HEARKEN, O ye elders of my church, and give ear to the voice of the living God; and attend to the words of wisdom which shall be given unto you, according as ye have asked and are agreed as touching the church, and the spirits which have gone abroad in the earth.

Parley P. Pratt, in his Autobiography, says that, as he went forth among the different branches of the Church, he saw some very strange spiritual operations. Some persons would seem to swoon away and make unseemly gestures, and be drawn and disfigured in their countenances. Others would fall into ecstasies and be drawn into contortions, cramps, fits, etc. Others claimed to have visions and revelations. All these things had developed since Elder Pratt left for his mission to the Lamanites and before the arrival of the Prophet Joseph in Kirtland. On account of these strange phenomena, Parley P. Pratt, John Murdock, and several other Elders asked the Prophet to inquire of the Lord concerning these manifestations. They all united in prayer in the translating room of the Prophet, and this Revelation was received after the prayer. In it the Lord (1) warns them against false spirits, deception, and hypocrisy (1-9); (2) gives instructions on how to discern between false and true spirits (10-36); (3) gives personal directions to some of the Elders and encouragement to all (37-46).

"There was a prevalent spirit all through the early history of the Church, which prompted the Elders to suppose that they knew more than the Prophet. Elders would tell you that the Prophet was going wrong. Men who thought they knew all about this work, some of them thirty or forty years before the Lord revealed it, tried to 'steady the ark.' The Church was constantly afflicted with such a class of men" (Jour. of Discourses. Vol. XI., p. 7).

6-8. The Lord, in these paragraphs denounces deceivers. It is possible to save "sinners," when they repent, but a hypocrite cannot repent, until he becomes honest before God and men. The Prophet Joseph was not a deceiver.

19-20. The word of truth] That which comes from the Spirit of God is the word of truth, and it comes through the channels He has appointed. This is one sure sign of a true doctrine or any divine manifestation.

Both are edified] Another sign of truth is this, that both he who speaks it and those who hear it, who have the Spirit of God, are edified thereby. "That which doth not edify is not of God" (v. 23).

"During the fall of 1830, a gentleman who lived in our neighborhood went to western New York and saw the Prophet, got baptized and ordained an Elder; and that was Elder Solomon Humphrey [See Sec. 52:35]. Very few knew the old gentleman: he died in Missouri in 1835. He was a very faithful man. Previous to joining the Church he was a Baptist exhorter. He came back to our place of residence in company with a man named Wakefield, * * * They came and preached and baptized for the remission of sins" (Jour. of Dis., Vol. V., p. 104).

Elder George A. Smith was baptized by Joseph Wakefield, September 10, 1832.

45-46. The revelation closes with an assurance that the "day cometh that you shall hear my voice, and see me, and know that I am." Watch, therefore, and be ready.

General Notes

Since our Lord says, "None of them that my Father hath given me shall be lost," the question might be asked, "Was not John Corrill, who in all probability was present when this Revelation was given 'lost.' although the Lord said, You are of them that my Father hath given me?" It might seem like entering the field of fruitless speculation to consider that question. But it must be remembered that there are two entirely different classes of apostates. One class consists of members too weak to resist temptations and persecutions, wherefore they fall by the wayside, when the storms sweep over them. The other class deliberately join the forces of the adversary and make war upon Christ and His followers, because they love sin and hate righteousness. Who shall say that those who have fallen because of weakness will not ultimately be reclaimed by our Savior and given some degree of glory, although they may have lost their grandest opportunity? Who can say that they are "lost," in the same sense as the enemies who die in hatred? John Corrill at one time offered, with others, to give himself to the mob as ransom for the Church, but the mob refused the sacrifice. It was when the persecution raged at its worst in Missouri that he fell.
