Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 51.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Thompson, Ohio, May, 1831. At this time the Saints migrating from the State of New York began to arrive in Ohio; and it became necessary to make definite arrangements for their settlement. As this undertaking belonged particularly to the bishop's office, Bishop Edward Partridge sought instruction on the matter; and the Prophet inquired of the Lord. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 173.—Provision made for the allotment of property to the immigrant members—Care and proper use of moneys and other possessions—Gathering place in Ohio consecrated to the Church for a little season only.

HEARKEN unto me, saith the Lord your God, and I will speak unto my servant Edward Partridge, and give unto him directions; for it must needs be that he receive directions how to organize this people.

Shortly after the Revelation recorded in Section 50 had been received, the Saints from Colesville, N. Y., began to arrive in Ohio. They had been directed to gather in that locality (Sec. 37:3) and they had been promised that there they would receive The Law (Sec. 38:32). The Saints in Ohio had been instructed to divide their land with their Eastern brethren (Sec. 48:2), and it was the duty of Edward Partridge, who had been appointed Bishop (Sec. 36) to take care of the newcomers, as far as possible. Under the circumstances, Bishop Partridge asked for divine guidance. The Prophet inquired of the Lord for him, and received this answer to his prayers.

In this Revelation our Lord gives instructions concerning the temporal organizations of His people. We learn from it that it was the special duty of the Bishopric to have charge of the temporal affairs of the Church, under the direction of the Prophet. The temporal organization (1) must be effected in accordance with the Law of God (1-3); (2) it must include (a) the just and equitable treatment of transgressors (4-6); (b) the appointment of an agent for the community (7-9); (c) just and equitable dealing with other churches (10-12); (d) the establishment of a storehouse and a provision for adequate compensation for services rendered (13-15); (3) the location of the Colesville Saints in Ohio was only temporary (16-17); but (4) their organization was, nevertheless, to be a pattern for the future (13-19); (5) Christ's promise to His people (20).

Cut off] Unless the organization is in accordance with divine laws, it will not be permanent. There have been many attempts in the world to create a Utopia on the basis of the consolidation of interests. Their failure is due chiefly to the fact that God has not been consulted in their organization. An individualistic society is not much of a success without God; and a communistic society without Him is impossible. God warned His people at the outset of the consequences of attempting an organization, such as contemplated in the Revelations, except in accordance with His law; they will be "cut off" as the dry branches of a tree, that have become useless.

"In the house of Israel there is now clothing enough to last us ten years and make us comfortable, if it could be put into the storehouse of God and properly distributed, to clothe men, and their wives, and children, who may be worthy and needy. That is the Apostle's doctrine, you know" (Jour. of Dis., Vol. V., p. 33).

How many years' supply would there be in Israel now, if all necessaries of life were stored and distributed according to this plan?

Churches] See verse 10.

"Even so, come, Lord Jesus" (Rev. 22:20).

General Notes.

There have been some successful attempts to practice unity in temporal affairs. Enoch preached the gospel in his day, and those who believed were gathered and lived in a United Order. "They were of one heart and one mind, and dwell in righteousness; and there was no poor among them" (Pearl of Great Price, Book of Moses, 7:18). Their city existed for 365 years, and then the Lord took Enoch and his Zion up to Him, before the flood came. They were translated or changed in a moment, as the Saints of the latter days will be at His coming.

In the year 36 A.D. a great many Nephites and Lamanites were converted and united in a society in which all property was held common. "Therefore they were not rich and poor, bond and free, but they were all made free, and partakers of the heavenly gift" (IV. Nephi v. 3). This blessed condition lasted more than 150 years [George Reynolds Story of the Book of Mormon, p. 484], when they began to be lifted up in pride and to wear costly clothes and ornaments. "And from that time forth they did have their goods and their substance no more common among them" (IV. Nephi v. 25). Pride was the death of brotherhood.

The first converts in Jerusalem, who embraced the gospel at the time of Pentecost, sold their "possessions and goods" and distributed to all according to the needs of each. It may be supposed that they retained their homes, as provided by the Mosaic law, and also other things necessary for their own maintenance, and that they sold the rest for the benefit of the needy Saints, at the same time extending their hospitality to all (Acts 2:45). That which was intended for distribution was laid at the feet of the Apostles. They were the representatives of the Lord, and the money was, therefore, in fact, given to Him. Not one of them said that his possessions were his, but everyone considered himself as the Lord's steward. The consecration of their property was entirely voluntary, as is clear from the story of Ananias (Acts 5:4). In all ages, when the Spirit of God has been poured out upon the people in an abundant measure, they have proved their love of God by an unselfish love of their fellowmen, God's children.
