Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 52.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to the Elders of the Church, at Kirtland, Ohio, June 7, 1831. A conference had been held at Kirtland, beginning on the 3rd, and closing on the 6th. At this conference the first distinctive ordinations to the office of High Priest were made; and certain manifestations of false and deceiving spirits were discerned and rebuked. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 175.—Missouri designated as the place for the next succeeding conference—Elders named with their respective appointments to travel two by two, preaching and baptizing.

BEHOLD, thus saith the Lord unto the elders whom he hath called and chosen in these last days, by the voice of his Spirit—

On June 3, 1831, the elders who had been laboring in the country, in different parts, met in Kirtland, to attend the Fourth General Conference of the Church, which convened by a Revelation (Sec. 44).

Though the Church was only fourteen months old at this time, there were about two thousand attendants at the Conference. Among the elders present was Parley P. Pratt, who had returned from his mission to the Lamanites (See Sec. 32:2), to report his labors, while Oliver Cowdery, Ziba Peterson, and Peter Whitmer, Jr., his fellow-laborers in that Mission, remained in Missouri.

The Conference convened, probably on the third day of June, and lasted for three days. As had been promised in a Revelation (Sec. 44), the Spirit of the Lord was manifested in mighty power. The special office of High Priest was bestowed upon several Elders, this being done for the first time in the Church. The power of the adversary was also manifested. Two brethren, Harvey Whitlock and John Murdock, were "bound," so that they could not speak, and others were similarly affected, but the Prophet rebuked the adversary in the name of Jesus Christ, and the evil spirit departed. Lyman Wight, after having been ordained a High Priest, prophesied of the coming of the Lord and testified that he saw the heavens opened and the Son of Man sitting at the right hand of the Father (Hist. of the Church, Vol. I., p p. 175-6).

The next day after the Conference this Revelation was received, in which the Lord (1) appoints another Conference, to be held in some place in Missouri (1-2), (2) instructs Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon to go to Missouri (3-6); (3) calls Lyman Wight, John Corrill, John Murdock, and Hyrum Smith to take a journey to Missouri (7-13); (4) gives to the Elders instructions enabling them to discern between false and true spirits (14-21); (5) calls a number of Elders to go on a mission to Missouri (22-34); (6) calls two Elders to go east (35-36); (7) gives miscellaneous instructions (37-42); and (8) closes with a great promise (43-44).

4-5. But if they would be faithful in the performance of that duty, the Lord would reveal to them what to do, from time to time, and also make known to them the location of the land of their inheritance.

Ordinances] Abraham is said to have kept the commandments and ordinances of God (Gen. 26:5, LXX. version). The same is said of Jehoshaphat (II. Chron. 17:4). In Hebrews 9:1, "ordinances" means the requirements of the ceremonial law, as distinct from "Commandments," which refers to moral precepts. The ordinances of the gospel are, more especially, baptism, the laying on of hands for the reception of the Holy Spirit, the sacrament, and the rules and regulations of the Church given by divine inspiration. He who is sent of God obeys God's ordinances, as well as His commandments. Comp. Sec. 53:3, 6.

"Often, when I stand up here, I have the feelings of a person that is unable to convey his ideas, because I have not the advantages of language. However, I do not very frequently complain of that, but I rise to do the best I can and to give the people the best I have for them at the time" (Brigham Young, Jour. of Dis., Vol. V., p. 97).

Ezra Thayre] Secs. 33:1; 56:5; 75:31. Ezra Thayre was a member of Zion's camp, and was, later, with others who were selected to form the First Quorum of Seventy, ordained February 28th, 1835.

Ezra Booth] Ezra Booth was a Methodist minister. He was brought into the Church through a miracle, having witnessed the healing of the wife of Father Johnson, through the instrumentality of the Prophet Joseph (p. 275). He began to preach immediately, but soon apostatized. In his darkened condition he wrote a series of letters that were published in the Ohio Star, though they were full of falsehoods, and Elder George A. Smith says that "his apostasy culminated in collecting a mob who tarred and feathered Joseph Smith, and inflicted upon his family the loss of one of its members at Hiram, Portage Co., Ohio" (Jour. of Dis., Vol. XI., p. 5. See also Doctrine and Covenants, Sec. 64:15).

Martin Harris] Sec. 3. These two were called to join Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon (v. 3).

Orson Pratt] Sec.34.

Simeon Carter] The same note may refer to him. Parley P. Pratt, while on his mission to the Lamanites, stayed at the house of Simeon Carter, fifty miles west of Kirtland. They were in the act of reading the Book of Mormon, when an officer entered and arrested Elder Pratt. The book was left in the house. Pratt managed to escape, and Carter read the Book of Mormon with great interest. He was baptized and ordained an Elder, and soon organized a Branch of sixty members.

Zebedee Coltrin] He was another member of the Council.

Samuel Smith] See note, Sec. 23.

The Knight family were Universalists, and this miracle, the first performed in the Church, must have made a deep impression upon them. Newel Knight says that under the influence of the Spirit of God he was lifted up bodily from the floor, so that his head pressed against the ceiling.

Newel Knight was the leader of the Saints of the Colesville Branch in their migration from Ohio to Missouri (See Sec. 54:2).

Selah J. Griffin] He was, later, instructed to accompany Thomas B. Marsh (Sec. 56:5).

General Notes

Lyman Wight was a peculiar character. At times his faith seemed strong enough to move mountains. After the Saints were driven out of Jackson County, into Clay County, volunteers were called for to go to Kirtland to report the situation to the Prophet. Several Elders excused themselves. Lyman Wight volunteered. Asked what the circumstances were in which his family would be placed, he told the Bishop that his wife had been placed by the side of a log in the woods, for shelter, and that she had a child three days old. They had provisions for three days. Under such circumstances he went on a mission to Kirtland, in company with Parley P. Pratt.

On one occasion he was offered any office in the State he would name, if he would swear to a testimony against Joseph Smith. If you do not do it, the tempter added, you will be shot tomorrow at 8 o'clock. Wight replied, "General, you are entirely mistaken in your man, both in regard to myself and Joseph Smith. Joseph Smith is not an enemy to mankind; he is not your enemy, and is as good a friend as you have got. Had it not been for him, you would have been in hell long ago, for I should have sent you there, and no other man than Joseph Smith could have prevented me, and you may thank him for your life. And now, if you will give me the boys I brought from Diahman yesterday, I will whip your whole army." General Wilson said, "Wight, you are a strange man; but if you will not accept my proposal, you will be shot tomorrow morning at eight." Wight only made the characteristic reply that has become famous, "Shoot and be damned."
