Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 53.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to Algernon Sidney Gilbert, at Kirtland, Ohio, June, 1831. The Prophet had inquired of the Lord as to Gilbert's work and appointment in the Church.—Gilbert to be ordained an Elder—Also to be an agent unto the Church as the Bishop shall appoint.

BEHOLD, I say unto you, my servant Sidney Gilbert, that I have heard your prayers; and you have called upon me that it should be made known unto you, of the Lord your God, concerning your calling and election in the church, which I, the Lord, have raised up in these last days.

Elder B. H. Roberts, in a footnote on Page 118, Vol. II., Hist. of the Church, makes the remark that the Lord has had few more devoted servants in this dispensation than Algernon Sidney Gilbert. Where he was born is not known, but his father's family resided in Connecticut. For some years he was a successful merchant in Painesville, Ohio, and there the gospel found him in 1830. In the persecution that came upon the Saints in Jackson County he sacrificed all his goods. He was one of the six who offered their lives for their friends. He was a man of great practical sense, as is evidenced by the correspondence he and others engaged in with Governor Dunklin, on behalf of the brethren, but, nevertheless, he shrank from speaking publicly, and it appears that when called to go on a mission to preach the gospel, he said he would rather die. Not long afterwards he was attacked by cholera, and the disease proved fatal.

Shortly after the Revelation in Section 52 was received, Gilbert requested the Prophet to inquire of the Lord for him. The Prophet Joseph did so, and this communication was given, in which the Lord called him to forsake the world and give his services to the Church, as an Elder and an agent (Business representative).

"If you all live your religion and are faithful to the end of your days, that proves that you were chosen as were Jesus and John, who were prophesied of many hundred years before they came, as were many others. Mary, the mother of Jesus, was raised up to bear the Savior. Elizabeth was ordained and set apart to come along near the meridian of time, and we were ordained to come along near the end of time" (Heber C. Kimball, Jour. of Dis., Vol. V., p. 34).
