Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 54.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to Newel Knight, at Kirtland, Ohio, June, 1831. Members of the Church in the branch at Thompson, Ohio, were divided on certain questions of Church administration, and selfishness was manifest amongst them. Newel Knight and other Elders had come to the Prophet asking how to proceed. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 180.—Some who had entered the Church had broken their covenants—Newel Knight to journey to Missouri.

BEHOLD, thus saith the Lord, even Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, even he who was crucified for the sins of the world—

Bishop Partridge had been instructed to organize the Colesville Saints who were located at Thompson, near Kirtland, according to the laws of the United Order (Sec. 51), but all of them did not keep the covenants they had entered into, and the result was confusion. In their troubles, the Saints sent Newel Knight to Kirtland to receive counsel of the Prophet Joseph. In this Revelation, which was received in answer to prayer, the Lord (1) releases the Saints at Thompson from the obligation of the vows that had been broken and were, therefore, void, and pronounces wo upon him through whom the offense had come (1-6); (2) commands all to repent and to flee to Missouri (7-10).

The Colesville Saints had been given permission to form a United Order, and some of the Saints at Thompson, Copley and Thayre among others, had agreed to enter the Order with them. Copley had land which he offered to place at the disposal of the brethren. A contract was drawn up and work begun, but Copley, it seems, broke the agreement. That Ezra Thayre was guilty of some such offense appears from Section 56:8.

7-8. The Colesville Saints are here directed to leave Ohio and continue their journey westward, to Missouri.

9-10. In Missouri they were to make a living, as other men, until a place should be prepared for them. The Lord again promises that He will come quickly. If they were patient in tribulations, they would be rewarded at His coming. The Lord knew that the saints who went to Missouri, in search of the promised land, would meet tribulations; hence the promise of reward for patience. Saints bound for Zion should always remember the truth expressed in Eliza R. Snow's beautiful hymn,

"Think not, when you gather to Zion, Your troubles and trials are through; That nothing but comfort and pleasure Are waiting in Zion for you: No, no; 'tis designed as a furnace, All substance, all textures to try, To burn all the 'wood, hay, and stubble,' The gold from the dross purify."
