Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 55.

REVELATION through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to William W. Phelps, at Kirtland, Ohio, June, 1831. William W. Phelps and his family had just arrived at Kirtland; and the Prophet sought of the Lord information concerning him.—William W. Phelps designated as one called and chosen—Directed to be baptized and confirmed—Ordination as an Elder to follow—Appointed to assist Oliver Cowdery in literary work for the Church.

BEHOLD, thus saith the Lord unto you, my servant William, yea, even the Lord of the whole earth, thou art called and chosen; and after thou hast been baptized by water, which if you do with an eye single to my glory, you shall have a remission of your sins and a reception of the Holy Spirit by the laying on of hands;

About the middle of June, 1831, William W. Phelps with his family, arrived in Kirtland. He was born at Hanover, Morris County, N. J., February 17th, 1792. In the State of New York he had edited a newspaper and taken an active part in politics. In Missouri, whither he went in company with the Prophet Joseph, he founded The Evening and Morning Star, a monthly magazine devoted to the interests of the Church and published by the Church. Its first number appeared at Independence, June, 1832. The printing office was destroyed by a mob in July, 1833, but in the following December another printing office was established at Kirtland, and the publication of the Star was resumed there. Phelps, in 1837, was appointed to act, with David and John Whitmer, as a President of the Church in Zion. In 1848 he came to Utah, where he attained some prominence. He assisted in the drafting of the Constitution of Deseret, and became preceptor in the University. He died in Salt Lake City, March 7th, 1872, eighty years of age. Many inspiring hymns, popular among the Latter-day Saints, were composed by him.

As stated, he came to Kirtland to learn the will of God concerning him, whereupon he received this Revelation, through the Prophet. The Lord (1) calls him to the ministry (1-3); and (2) gives him the special mission of assisting Oliver Cowdery in educational work in Zion (4-6).

Thou art called and chosen] W. W. Phelps had been both called and chosen, but it was also his duty to be baptized in water and receive the Holy Spirit by the laying on of hands. There is no other entrance to the Kingdom of God.

One who wants to hold an office in a kingdom must take upon himself certain obligations as a citizen. He must be naturalized, if his citizenship is not one of birthright. He must enter into certain covenants as to loyalty, morality, etc. The rule is the same in the Kingdom of Heaven. We enter it through baptism and the laying on of hands, taking upon us the obligations of citizens in that Kingdom, and receiving the Holy Spirit which permeates it. Then we are qualified for appointment for such offices as the King may call us to take charge of.

The instruction of our Savior to His first disciples regarding baptism was, "Teach all nations, baptizing them;" that is, "Make disciples everywhere, in all nations, by baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; and by instructing them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you" (Matt. 28:19, 20, paraphrased). He has given the same instruction to His people in our day.

If baptism is performed and accepted with an eye single to the glory of God, remission of sins is granted. But that is the condition. Baptism for selfish purposes has no such promise. It is but an empty ceremony. Christ undertook to carry out the plan of redemption for the glory of God. If we are His disciples, we follow Him for the glory of God.

Laying on of hands] This ordinance is as necessary as baptism. By it the Lord gives us of His Spirit, through His authorized servants. Paul longed to see the Saints in Rome, "that I may impart unto you some Spiritual gift, to the end that ye may be established (Rom. 1:11); for, although they had been baptized, they had not yet been established under the hands of an Apostle of our Lord. John says, "Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he hath given us of his Spirit" (I. John 4:13).

Books for schools] It would be his calling to assist Oliver Cowdery in selecting and writing books suitable for the children, so that these might receive proper instruction.

"The Latter-day Saints have always been far in advance of the majority of their neighbors in regard to education of their children. Even in the earliest days they had schools that made real men and women not schools that produced weaklings and sycophants. The old schools made for character and real worth; they took the raw material, and moulded it into beings of personality and culture" (Levi Edgar Young).
