Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 56.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Kirtland, Ohio, June, 1831. Elder Ezra Thayre, who had been appointed to travel in the ministry with Elder Thomas B. Marsh, was unable to start on his mission when the latter was ready, and the Lord answered the Prophet's inquiry on the matter by giving this revelation.—The Lord may and does revoke as well as command—Ezra Thayre rebuked for pride and selfishness—Selah J. Griffin appointed in his place to travel with Thomas B. Marsh—Offenders reproved, both rich and poor—Necessity of repentance as expressed by the broken heart and contrite spirit.

HEARKEN, O ye people who profess my name, saith the Lord your God; for behold, mine anger is kindled against the rebellious, and they shall know mine arm and mine indignation, in the day of visitation and of wrath upon the nations.

One more Revelation was given before the Prophet Joseph and companions started upon the epoch-making journey to the western part of Missouri. It was given at the solicitation of Thomas B. Marsh. In this Revelation the Lord (1) declares His anger against the rebellious (1-3); (2) sets forth His freedom of action (4-7), (3) calls Ezra Thayre to repentance (8-11); (4) assures the Prophet that He will provide (12-13); (5) calls the Saints to repentance (14-17); and (6) promises blessings to the pure in heart (18-20).

In the day of visitation] The rebellious will come under the wrath of God, when it is poured out upon the nations.

Some take this to mean that the plans of God are never changed, never modified. Here we learn that He commands and revokes, as seemeth Him good; that is, not capriciously, but for good and sufficient reasons. God is a free agent. We must not suppose that His immutability deprives Him of free agency. And because He is a free agent, He can command and revoke at will. But those who make it necessary for God, because of rebellion, to revoke laws given for the benefit of His children, will be held responsible.

True repentance is both a change of mind and of conduct.

Repentance is not accomplished once for all. It is a spiritual experience that is completed only when this Earthly existence is ended. For, no matter how far advanced we may be, there is always something to better, something to improve, and the first step to improvement is repentance. The Saints always "have many things to do and to repent of," until they reach the stage of perfection. Our Lord, who told Peter the Apostle, that he had yet to be converted (Luke 22:32), also taught the Colesville Saints that they, though members of the Church, had many things to repent of.

Your sins have come up unto me] This refers to the sin of not organizing under the law of consecration. Those who were responsible for the failure to do so had not been pardoned, because they preferred their own counsel to that of God.

The fatness of the Earth * * * theirs] The Earth in its celestial state will be theirs.

General Notes

The following reference to Thomas B. Marsh made by John Taylor in a sermon in Salt Lake City, 1857, may be quoted here:

"You that do not know him, have heard of Thomas B. Marsh, who was formerly the president of the Twelve Apostles, but who apostatized some years ago in Missouri. He is on his way here, a poor, decrepit, broken-down, old man. He has had a paralytic stroke—one of his arms hangs down * * * In meeting with some of the apostates, he said to them, 'you do not know what you are about; if you want to see the fruits of apostasy, look on me' " (Journal of Dis., Vol. V., p. 115).

The Prophet was now ready to go on the journey to Missouri, as the Lord had commanded (Sec. 52:3). On the 19th of June, 1831, he left Kirtland, in company with Sidney Rigdon, Martin Harris, Edward Partridge, William W. Phelps, Joseph Coe, and Sidney Gilbert and wife. They went by wagon, canal boats, and stages to Cincinnati. In this city they took a steamer to Louisville, Ky. Here they were detained three days waiting for a steamer to St. Louis. The Prophet, Martin Harris, William W. Phelps, Edward Partridge, and Joseph Coe proceeded on foot from St. Louis to Independence, and arrived there about the middle of July. The rest of the company came a few days later, having traveled by water. The Prophet notes that an evil spirit was manifested towards them at many places, on account of their belief in the Book of Mormon, but God was with them.

In Independence they met Oliver Cowdery, Peter Whitmer, Jr., and Ziba Peterson, who had been on a mission to the Lamanites, and also Frederick G. Williams. It was a glorious meeting. It was a notable fulfilment of a prediction given in December, 1830 (Sec. 37:3). And now the Prophet of God, surrounded by a few friends, was standing on the western border of civilization, looking westward into an unknown expanse and veiled future. "How natural it was," he writes, "to observe the degradation, leanness of intellect, perversity and jealousy of a people that were nearly a century behind the time, and to feel for those who roamed about without the benefit of civilization, refinement, or religion; yea, and exclaim in the language of the prophets, 'When will the wilderness blossom as the rose?' When will Zion be built up in her glory, and where will thy temple stand, unto which all nations shall come in the last day?"
