Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 57.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, in Zion, Jackson County, Missouri, July, 1831. In compliance with the Lord's command, the Elders had journeyed from Kirtland to Missouri with many varied experiences and some opposition. In contemplating the degraded state of the Lamanites and the lack of civilization, refinement and religion among the people generally, the Prophet exclaimed in yearning prayer: When will the wilderness blossom as the rose? When will Zion be built up in her glory, and where will thy Temple stand, unto which all nations shall come in the last days? See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 189.——The land appointed and consecrated—The land of promise—The place for the city of Zion—The center place specified—The Saints directed to purchase land—Commanded to make preparation for others who are to come.

HEARKEN, O ye elders of my church, saith the Lord your God, who have assembled yourselves together, according to my commandments, in this land, which is the land of Missouri, which is the land which I have appointed and consecrated for the gathering of the saints.

In the Book of Mormon the Saints were told (Ether 13:1-12), that the new Jerusalem and Holy Sanctuary of the Lord should be located in America (Comp. III. Nephi 20:22; 21:23), and they were anxious to know where the site for the City was. In September, 1830, the Lord gave them to understand that the City should be erected "on the borders by the Lamanites" (Sec. 28:9). In February, 1831, they were promised that a Revelation should be given on that subject, if they would pray for it (Sec. 42:62). On the 7th of March, the same year, they were given to understand that the gathering from the eastern States and the sending out of Elders on the mission to the West were preparatory steps to the establishment of that City, wherefore the Saints should gather up their riches and purchase an inheritance in the place to be indicated, which should be a place of refuge for the Saints of the most High God (Sec. 45:64-66). The time had now come for the fulfilment of the promise referred to (Sec. 42:62), and this Revelation was received. In it the Lord (1) designates the location of the City and the Temple site (1-3); (2) instructs the Saints how to locate (4-5); (3) gives special directions concerning the first settlement (6-15); and (4) closes with a promise (16).

On the 2nd of August, 1831, the Prophet assisted the Colesville Saints, who had just arrived from Thompson, O., to lay the first log for a house, as a foundation of Zion in Kaw Township, twelve mites southwest of Independence. The log was carried by twelve men, each representing one of the twelve tribes of Israel, and the land was dedicated by Sidney Rigdon for the gathering of the Saints. On the 3rd day of August the Temple site was dedicated. This sacred act of the holy Priesthood is as binding today as it was then.

Brigham Young, before the Saints were driven out of the State of Missouri, was shown in a vision that they were scattered in all directions, but that they eventually returned to Jackson county, from the west. He says, "When this people return to the Center [^1] Stake of Zion, they will go from the west" (Jour. of Dis., Vol. XI., p. 17).

"'Sell goods without fraud.' That is a point I wish our merchants to look at; if that does not hit them squarely in the face, I am mistaken" (Brigham Young, Jour. of Dis., Vol. XI., p. 326).

Sidney Gilbert's store was not a money-making scheme for him. His business was to be conducted as for the Lord. The profit was to be used for the building up of Zion.

9-10. For that reason his traveling agents were also to labor with the end in view of enabling the Saints to preach the gospel.

"I am thankful that I do not hear, of late, since the Spirit has been generally diffused among the people, 'O Lord, give Revelations to Brother Brigham.' I wish to fulfil what we have received before I ask for more. I said to Brother Joseph, the spring before he was killed, 'You are laying out work for twenty years.' He replied, 'You have as yet scarcely begun to work; but I will set you enough to last you during your lives, for I am going to rest" (Journal of Discourses, Vol. V., p. 331).

General Notes

The city of Independence is situated in one of the most attractive and healthful parts of Missouri, 338 feet above the level of the Missouri River, and 1,075 feet above sea level. It is an old town. It was laid out in 1827, but in 1831 it was only a village. It is now a suburb of Kansas City.

As soon as this Revelation had been received, Edward Partridge and the other brethren, appointed to "plant" themselves in Zion, began the work of building. During the first winter the settlers put up with many inconveniences. In some log cabins, without windows and with the frozen ground for floor, several families were living together. They had very little to eat, but they were united, and their hearts were filled with brotherly love and a fervent desire to build up Zion. As a consequence, their meetings were times of refreshing, and in their family devotions they were blessed with the presence of the Holy Spirit. And as soon as the Saints in Ohio and elsewhere learned that the site of the City of Zion had been made known, the spirit of gathering was poured out upon them, and many sent money to Sidney Gilbert, the agent, and instructed him to secure land for them. So rapidly did they gather, that in 1832 there were 830 souls in the new settlements, and a certain degree of prosperity had begun to attend their efforts.

Very soon the spirit of the world entered the Church in Zion. Seven High Priests, Oliver Cowdery, William W. Phelps, John Whitmer, Sidney Gilbert, Edward Partridge, Isaac Morley, and John Corrill, had been appointed to preside over the Saints in Missouri, but many of those who came, refused to acknowledge their authority. Others did not obey the Law of Consecration. Jealousies, covetousness, light-mindedness were followed by neglect to keep the commandments of God, and His wrath was kindled against Zion. A word of warning seemed to have the desired effect, for a general assembly was called and the Saints promised repentance. However, the Spirit of Revelation indicated that they must pass through tribulation, before they could receive the blessings in Zion.

This remarkable prediction was fulfilled, for they were driven out of Missouri, and the persecution extended into Illinois, until the Church had no resting-place within the confines of the United States, but was compelled to go to the Mountains, as foretold by the Prophet.

In 1845, Brigham Young and associates addressed letters to all the Governors of the States and Territories in the Union, except Missouri and Illinois, for obvious reasons, asking them for an asylum, within their borders, for the Saints. Everyone of them, with the single exception of the Governor of Arkansas (See Whitney's Hist. of Utah, Vol. I., p. 243), either refused to comply with the request or neglected to reply. Three members of Congress advised the Saints to leave the Country. They took this advice and went to Utah, which then was part of Mexico. The Lord led His people to the Valleys of the Mountains. He will also lead them back to the Land of Promise; not all of them; but such as are prepared to live in accordance with His laws and commandments.

"Will the time ever come that we can commence and organize this people as a family? It will. Do we know that? Yes; what was lacking in these revelations from Joseph to enable us to do so was revealed to me" (Brigham Young, Jour. of Dis., Vol. XI., p. 326).

"Several very important facts are here presented for the consideration of God's people. In the first place, they are reminded of the great object for which this latter-day work was instituted, namely, the building up of Zion, preparatory to the glorious coming of the Lord. Prior to that expulsion, the place for the City, New Jerusalem, unto which a people will gather, to make the preparation that is absolutely essential before the Lord will come—the very place for the City had been designated, and from this Revelation we learn why those who had been sent to Jackson County to build up Zion were not permitted to accomplish the work at that time. Inferentially—nay, directly, we are told what kind of people will be permitted to do that work, namely, 'the pure in heart,' for that is the meaning of Zion, according to the word of the Lord. A prophecy is contained in this Revelation (Sec. 10:18): "The colony driven from that land in 1833, or their descendants, joined with Zion's other children, or a people gathered out from among them, a pure-hearted people, are eventually to return and build up the waste places of Zion. In the meantime other places, likewise appointed of God, are to be inhabited by the Latter-day Saints" (Orson F. Whitney, Address delivered in Salt Lake City, April 9, 1916).

———

Note

* See page 189, footnote.

---
Notas:
[^1] Glory Promised after Tribulation. So called after Mr. Granville Hedrick, who became one of the leaders of some apostate Saints in Woodford County, III., several years after the martyrdom at Carthage and the exodus of the Church. About the year 1867 he and others moved to Independence, Mo., where he presided, until his death, over the group that originated in Woodford County.
