Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 58.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, in Zion, Jackson County, Missouri, August 1, 1831. On the first Sabbath after the arrival of the Prophet and party in Jackson County, Missouri, a religious service was held and two members were received by baptism. During that week, members of the Colesville branch and others arrived. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 190. Many were eager to learn the will of the Lord concerning them in the new place of gathering.—Great things to follow, with glory, after much tribulation—Certain duties of the Bishopric—The Bishop is warned—People instructed to observe the laws of the land, and to regard the commandments given through revelation as the laws of the Church—Servants not to be compelled in all things but to be diligent and active—Lands to be purchased in Independence—Some of the people to stay, others to travel in the ministry—Assignment of duty to individual Elders—Those returning to the East to bear record of what they have seen and know concerning the land of Zion—Gathering of the Saints not to be conducted in haste.

HEARKEN, O ye elders of my church, and give ear to my word, and learn of me what I will concerning you, and also concerning this land unto which I have sent you.

The Colesville Branch had just arrived; also Sidney Rigdon, Sidney Gilbert and wife, and Elders Isaac Morley and Ezra Booth. This Revelation concerning the Elders of the Church and the land of Zion was then received. In it the Lord (1) promises glory to the faithful, and warns the Elders of tribulation (2-5); (2) sets forth the reasons why they had been commanded to go to Missouri (6-14); (3) warns Edward Partridge (15-33); (4) gives further directions concerning the land and its settlement (34-65).

In these paragraphs the Lord warns the Elders and Saints against expecting a life of ease, free from trials, in Zion. They were to receive blessings, but not until they had endured tribulation. They were to be crowned with glory, but only after severe trials. They did not comprehend this, and needed the warning given in this Revelation. Many of them had gone west to escape persecution, as did the Pilgrim Fathers in their day. Were they to encounter new outbursts of violence in their God-given home? We know now how the tribulation came, but when the prediction was first given, it must have been to most of the Saints almost a riddle.

Note that one of the first predictions regarding Zion made it known to the Saints that they would meet tribulation there; and yet they gathered; so strong was their faith.

"Notwithstanding the many drawbacks and difficulties encountered, in the shape of drouth, crickets, grasshoppers, and the cold, sterile climate, the Spirit of the Lord was hovering over the great basin. * * * I never was at the crossing of the Sevier River in summer for seven years after our settlement in Iron County had been established, without experiencing frost; and now the Sevier Valley produces luxuriant fields of grain and vegetables in the season thereof * * * To have told the mountaineers ten years ago that grain could be raised in the upper valleys of the Weber, where they encountered heavy frosts every month in summer, would have incurred their ridicule; but the genial influence of the Spirit of the Almighty has softened the rigor of the climate, and the flourishing counties of Morgan and Summit are the result. I suppose that Provo Valley, this season, with all its losses, will raise not less than thirty thousand bushels of grain and vegetables. * * * Go to Pottawatomie, Iowa; Nauvoo, Ill.; or Kirtland, Ohio, and ask for apples and peaches, and you will find them few and far between. In February, 1857, I visited my former field of labor in Western Virginia, and inquired of an old friend for fruit; his reply was, 'My peach trees are all killed, and I have not been able to raise any peaches for six years * * * ' It is so wherever the Saints have lived and been driven away—their glory has departed to return no more, until the land is dedicated and consecrated to God and occupied by the Saints" (Journal of Discourses, Vol. XI., pp. 177-8).

Blessings came to the Saints after the tribulation. They will yet be crowned with glory in Zion.

The hour is not yet, but is nigh at hand] It must be much nearer now than when this inspired line was first penned.

The Lord here gives six reasons for calling the Elders and Saints to go to the land of Zion.

To render obedience to lawful authority, is not humiliating or degrading. Even the Son learned obedience (Heb. 5:8), before He became the Author of eternal salvation. Disobedience, or rebellion, is as bad as idolatry (I. Sam. 15:23). The Lord does not stand personally in the midst of His people to direct their affairs but He speaks to them through His inspired servants. When we obey their counsel, we obey God. Those who refuse to obey them, would refuse to obey the Lord, even if He spoke to them Himself, in person.

That your hearts might be prepared to bear testimony] This is another reason. There were truths which the Lord would reveal only in Zion. Those who were there could testify of those truths, as witnesses. They could bear witness of that which they had heard.

Bearing record of the land] This is the fourth reason. They were to testify, not only of what they had heard but of what they had seen themselves, of the land.

ll. After that cometh the day of my power] Zion will be built. The Temple will be reared. Enoch's Zion, the "Jerusalem which is above," will meet the Saints who have part in the first resurrection, and those who will be changed in the twinkling of an eye, and they will all be united. Then will come the day of God's power. The poor and the lame, the blind and the deaf will all be invited to partake of the blessings of the Millennium. The Earth will not be freed from all defects at once. The work of redemption will be gradual

"Unbelief," in this case means "weak faith" (as in Mark 9:24), and it was, perhaps, the cause of the blindness of heart.

Unbelief and blindness are sins. They must be repented of. Some teach that we are not responsible for our beliefs. This is not the Lord's view. If we are weak in faith and blind in affections, we need to go to this Great Physician, who can heal us, and if we neglect to do this, we are guilty.

17, Judge in Israel] The calling of Edward Partridge was that of a judge among the Saints. As such he was to divide the land among them. The Patriarchs during their dispensation divided the land by divine revelation (Comp. Acts. 17:26) among the nations. The judges in Israel performed the same office for the Twelve Tribes. Partridge and his successors were to distribute God's inheritance among the Saints in the same way.

"There is not a righteous person in this community, who will have difficulties that cannot be settled by arbitrators, the Bishop's court, or the High Council * * * far better and more satisfactorily than to contend with each other in law courts, which directly tends to destroy the best interests of the community, and to lead scores of men away from their duties, as good and industrious citizens" (Brigham Young, Jour. of Dis., Vol. III., p. 238).

Civil authority is of divine origin. It may be more or less adapted to the needs of man; more or less just and benevolent, but, even at its worst, it is better than anarchy. Revolutionary movements that aim at the abolition of government itself are contrary to the law of God; those which are aimed at the correction of abuses are not wrong. Despotism is not supported by Divine law, but it must be abolished through the influence of the gospel. Christ will subdue all enemies; tyranny is one of them.

24-29. Having imparted these instructions, the Lord commanded Edward Partridge, his counselors, and Sidney Gilbert to bring their families to Missouri and to settle there. They were to apply themselves with all diligence to their respective callings and not wait for a Revelation concerning every duty. They were to act as intelligent beings on their own initiative. All those engaged in the Lord's service are expected to act as intelligent, free agents, and not to move as a watch, which depends on somebody to wind it up.

During the Patriarchal Dispensation, the family government, which was patterned after the government in the celestial kingdom, obtained. In our dispensation, which is the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times, that form of government must be restored, in order that the Saints may learn something of celestial government, by their experience here.

These revelations are remarkable because in them men are told of their sins and admonished to repent. This is one mark of their divine origin. If the Prophet Joseph had been an impostor, it would have been immaterial to him whether his associates were humble or proud; whether they were looking for the approbation of the world, or not. He would not have rebuked them, as he did, at the risk of losing their support. He could not have admonished them to repent, for they would have known his true character. But he was no impostor. He told his friends the truth and they knew that the Spirit of God spoke through him. This is a proof of his divine calling, for it is one of the functions of a Prophet of God to show His people their sins. Micah 3:8.

The land was dedicated the day after that on which this Revelation was received. Sidney Rigdon asked the Saints present:

"Do you receive this land for the land of your inheritance with thankful hearts, from the Lord?"

Answer from all:—"We do."

"Do you pledge yourselves to keep the law of God in this land, which you never have kept in your own lands?"

"We do."

"Do you pledge yourselves to see that others of your brethren who shall come hither do keep the laws of God?"

"We do."

After prayer Elder Rigdon said, "I now pronounce this land consecrated and dedicated unto the Lord for a possession and inheritance for the Saints, and for all the faithful servants of the Lord to the remotest ages of time. In the name of Jesus Christ, having authority from Him. Amen." (Hist. of the Church, Vol. I., p. 196).

The Temple lot was dedicated on August 3rd. Joseph Smith the Prophet, Edward Partridge, William W. Phelps, Oliver Cowdery, Martin Harris, and Joseph Coe were present. "The scene," says the Prophet, "was solemn and impressive."

On the 9th of August, the Prophet and ten Elders left Independence and began the return journey to Kirtland, where they arrived on the 27th of the same month.

"The Lord will have a place whence His Word will go forth, in these last days, in purity; for if Zion will not purify herself, so as to be approved in all things, in His sight, He will seek another people, for His work will go on until Israel is gathered, and they who will not hear his voice, must expect to feel his wrath" (Joseph Smith, Hist. of the Church, Vol. I., p. 316).

General Notes

The Church will proclaim the Gospel during the Millennium with greater power and with more success than before the advent of our Lord.

The Temple lot, as owned at present by the Church of Christ, commonly called "Hedrickites" [^1] comprises the summit of a hill and consists of about three acres. In 1827 one Jones H. Flournoy owned the quarter section of which it is a part. In 1831 the Saints purchased the land, either the entire section or a portion of it, and subsequently 63 acres and 43 square rods were deeded to Edward Partridge for $130. In 1848 the land became the property of one James Pool, having been sold to him by the heirs of Partridge. Pool sold it to one Maxwell for $1,315. "Maxwell's heirs" divided the land into building-lots and disposed of them to different parties. The Hedrickite brethren, in 1867, secured the three acres they now hold, at a cost of about $1,500. They built a meeting-house of lumber upon the lot. Some years ago, the so-called Reorganized church sought to obtain possession of the part held by the so-called Hedrickites, by means of a law suit, on the ground that their church was, as they alleged, the legal successor of the Church founded through the instrumentality of the Prophet Joseph. The courts took a different view, and the Hedrickite brethren remained in possession.

Concerning the first Elders of the Church mentioned in this Revelation and others, Brigham Young on one occasion said:

"I am a witness * * * that the persons whose names are mentioned, and many others of the first Elders of the Church, were looked upon almost as angels. They were looked upon by the young members as being so filled with the Spirit of God, that we were hardly worthy to converse with them. You hear the names of Bishop Partridge, of Brother W. W. Phelps, who is now sitting on this stand [^2]; of Parley P. Pratt, of David Whitmer, of Oliver Cowdery, and the names of many others of the first Elders who had been up to Zion, and I declare to you the brethren in other parts of the land, those who had not seen the persons named, felt that, should they come into their presence, they would have to pull off their shoes, as the ground would be so holy upon which they trod" (Jour. of Dis., Vol. III., p. 335).

The word "damned," which occurs in this Revelation (v. 29), and elsewhere, means to be deprived of the highest glory. It does not mean "lost." Says Brigham Young:

"To be damned is to be banished from, or be deprived of living in, the presence of the Father and the Son. Who will live with Him? * * * Those who live as Father Abraham did and improve upon every means of grace, and upon every privilege given to them of the Lord. What is going to become of the others? Brother Joseph F. Smith told us the truth this morning. None will become angels to the devil except those who have sinned against the Holy Ghost" (Journal of Dis., Vol. XI., p. 271).

From the same discourse the following is quoted:

"It was said to Joseph Smith, the Prophet, 'According to your faith and the teachings of your Elders, nobody will be saved but you Mormons; now, Mr. Smith, will all be damned but the Mormons?' Joseph Smith replied, 'Yes, and many of them [the "Mormons"] unless they repent and do better.' "

——— Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] The Inhabitants of Zion Blessed. Blessed * * * they who have come up unto this land] "Blessed" means "happy." The inhabitants of Zion are happy; but there is a condition: If they have come "with an eye single to my glory, according to my commandments." Those who go there to get wealth and honor have something else in view than the glory of God, and they have no promise of happiness.
[^2] For those that live shall inherit the earth, and those that die shall rest from all their labors, and their works shall follow them; and they shall receive a crown in the mansions of my Father, which I have prepared for them. They that live * * * the earth] They that live in Zion, and keep the commandments of God, shall receive their inheritances. This earth is the Lord's, and He will share it with them. The Two Great Commandments.
