Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 59.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, in Zion, Jackson County, Missouri, August 7, 1831 Preceding his record of this revelation, the Prophet writes descriptively of the land of Zion wherein the people were then assembled. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 196. The land was consecrated, as the Lord had directed, and the site for the future Temple was dedicated. The Lord makes these commandments especially applicable to the Saints in Zion.—The people commended for their obedience in gathering to Jackson County—Certain of the commandments given in the decalog reiterated—Sanctity of the Sabbath emphasized-Not confessing the hand of God in all things a grievous offense.

BEHOLD, blessed, saith the Lord, are they who have come up unto this land with an eye single to my glory, according to my commandments.

The Fifth Conference of the Church was held August 4th, 1831 (Sec. 58:58), and on the 7th, the Prophet attended the funeral of Sister Polly Knight, wife of Joseph Knight, Sr. Her health had been failing for some time, and she was very ill during the journey from Kirtland to Independence, but she had a strong desire to see the Land of Zion. She lived to have that wish gratified, and then she slept in peace. She was the first of the Saints to pass away in that country. This Revelation was received on the day of the funeral. In it the Lord (1) assures the Saints in Zion that they are blessed, whether they live or die (1-4); (2) reiterates the great commandments (5-6); (3) shows how love of God is manifested (7-14); (4) promises blessings to the obedient (IS-21); and (5) gives further promises (22-24).

They that die * * * rest] They that die shall rest from their labors. Death to them is but a sweet repose, a rest from toil, a refreshing sleep, from which they shall awake in the morning of the resurrection.

Their works shall follow them] We are not to suppose that those who die in Zion before the coming of the Lord lose the reward of witnessing that great event and partaking in its glory. For both they and their good works have as real an existence after death as before. They are resting from their labor, but what good they have accomplished, remains. The architect may rest, but his house stands there, a monument to his genius and diligence.

This is a notable passage. In Rev. 14 we read about the restoration of the gospel in our day, through the instrumentality of an angel flying in mid-heaven, proclaiming the advent of our Lord. The contents of the message are indicated as follows: First, worship God as He is revealed in the story of the Creation; not the God of man-made creeds; second, fallen is Babylon; and, third, doomed to drink of the wrath of God are all who worship the "beast" and his "image." These are characteristics of the everlasting gospel, as regards the living. There is another, which more especially pertains to the dead; for the gospel embraces both living and dead. It is this, "Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth" (Rev. 14:13). From henceforth, that is to say, from now onward, since the gospel has been restored, the state between death and resurrection is no longer conceived of as a gloomy existence, torture in hell, or purgatory, unconsciousness, or annihilation, but as a conscious, active existence under the influence of the mercy of the eternal Father. John, in the Revelation, saw this feature of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, as restored to the Earth in our day, and here is a clear indication of the doctrine of the blessedness of the dead as seen by him, by which we may identify the gospel preached by the Prophet Joseph with that proclaimed by the angel in Rev. 14. Later, the glorious truth of vicarious work for the dead, which is here indicated, was more fully revealed.

They shall receive * * * good things of the earth] God blesses the soil and the labor expended upon it, for the good of His children who keep His commandments.

And with commandments] Those who love God, love His commandments, as blessings bestowed upon them. Love prompts them to render obedience.

5-6. Our Lord has declared that these are the greatest commandments in the Law, because upon them "hang" all the Law and the Prophets. The Word of God presupposes and depends on love of God and fellowmen. If there is no such love, laws and instructions are of but little avail.

Heart, might, mind, and strength] "Heart" stands for "emotions," "sentiment." "Might" here stands for "soul," the term used in Matthew 22:37, and means the spiritual faculties. "Mind" refers to the intellect, and "strength" to the physical attributes. This commandment enjoins on us to love our heavenly Father so that our entire beings—our emotions, our spiritual faculties, our mental and physical activities are all devoted to Him and His service.

In Deuteronomy 6:5, the great commandment reads "Heart"," "soul," and "mind"; Matthew has, "Heart," "soul," and "mind,"; Mark has, "Heart," "soul," "mind"; and Luke, "Heart," "soul ' "strength," and "mind." In the Doctrine and Covenants the text differs somewhat from all. When the Spirit of the Lord speaks through a human instrument, He acts independently, even when proclaiming truths formerly revealed. Strictly speaking, the Holy Spirit does not quote the Scriptures, but gives Scripture.

Love thy neighbor as thyself] This law is eternal. It was given to Israel (Lev. 19:18): "Thou shalt not avenge, nor bear grudge against the children of thy people, but thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself." Is it impossible to do this? God does not give a command that cannot be obeyed.

We are commanded to thank God "in all things;" in adversity as well as prosperity; in sorrow as well as joy; in death as well as life. If we love God, we shall never pray for benefits without thanking Him for blessings already bestowed.

On the Sabbath, the Saints should be in the house of prayer and offer up their "sacraments"; that is, present their devotions before the Lord, in the form of songs of praise, prayer and thanksgiving, testimonies, partaking of the Sacrament, and contemplation of the Word of God. All this is meant by the word "sacrament," which, in its widest range, stands for any sacred rite or ceremony whereby we affirm our allegiance to our divine Lord.

"Instead of suffering our labors to occupy the Sabbath—instead of planning our business to infringe upon the first day of the week, we should do as little as possible; if it is necessary to cook food, do so; but even if that could be dispensed with, it would be better. * * * Under the new covenant, we should remember to preserve holy one day in the week as a day of rest—as a memorial of the rest of the Lord and the rest of the Saints; also for our temporal advantage, for it is instituted for the express purpose of benefiting man" (Brigham Young Jour. of Dis., Vol. VI., p. 277).

"We do not believe in worshiping God, or being religious on the Sabbath day only; but we believe it is as necessary to be religious on Monday, Tuesday and every day of the week, as it is on the Sabbath day; we believe that it is as necessary to do unto our neighbors as we would they should do unto us, during the week as it is on the Sabbath. In short, we believe it is necessary to live our religion every day in the week, every hour in the day, and every moment. Believing and acting thus, we become strengthened in our faith, the Spirit of God increases within us, we advance in knowledge, and we are better able to defend the cause we are engaged in" (Joseph F. Smith, Jour. of Dis. Vol. XII. p. 329)."

Oblations] In the Mosaic dispensation, an oblation, or offering, was anything presented to God to atone for sins, to merit favors, or to express gratitude for favors received. The firstlings of the flock, first fruits, tithes, incense, the shewbread, all these were oblations or offerings; some prescribed by law, some entirely voluntary. In the New and Everlasting Covenant the Lord graciously accepts tithes and offerings, donations and gifts; and the Lord's day is a very proper day upon which to remember such oblations, as well as to confess sins, publicly among the brethren, if necessary; privately before the Lord, which is always necessary.

Our Lord, on one occasion, entered the house of Martha and Mary. Martha was cumbered about much serving, desirous of giving the Master many courses, and all in grand style. Mary was anxious to listen to the Master. To Martha's rebuke of her younger sister, our Lord gently replied, "But one thing is needful." This might well be always remembered on our Lord's day.

Fasting should be rejoicing.

Fasting, as an expression of sorrow, is natural, for in deep affliction man does not crave nourishment to the same extent as under normal conditions. In the Law of Moses one annual fast day was provided—the day of atonement (Lev. 23:27-29). But on solemn occasions other fast days were observed. Joshua and the leading Elders of Israel were prostate before the Ark one entire day after the defeat in the battle of Ai (Jos. 7:6). David fasted when his child was sick (II. Sam. 12:16). Moses fasted forty days on Mount Horeb. Elijah fasted a similar period, as did our Lord before entering upon His ministry. The children of God, in all ages, have found comfort and strength in fasting and prayer. In answer to prayer with fasting, extending over a period of two days and nights, Alma was healed (Mosiah 27:22, 23). Alma fasted and prayed many days, in order to receive a testimony of the truth (Alma 5:46). There are many instances of fasting recorded in the Book of Mormon. Paul reminded the Saints that he and his companions had proved themselves to be ministers of God in "fastings" as well as in all other circumstances (II. Cor. 6:5). Our Lord warns His disciples not to fast as hypocrites who look sad and distort their countenances, in order to be seen by men, but to appear as if going to a social function, in order that God, "who seeth in secret" may reward them openly (Matt. 6:16-18). This is in harmony with what God revealed through Joseph the Prophet, that fasting should be rejoicing. It is also in harmony with the view taken by Isaiah (58:3-8). The Latter-day Saints have a Fast Sunday every month, on which they bear testimony to the goodness of the Lord to them, and remember the poor by donations. If they understand the gospel, they will make every Sunday a fast-Sunday, by abstaining from work, partaking of simple food, and devoting the day to spiritual matters.

15-21. In these paragraphs the Lord promises the Saints certain blessings on certain conditions. If we shall keep His law concerning the Sabbath, with thanksgiving and cheerful hearts and countenances, though not with much laughter, He will bless us with the fulness of the Earth.

"Never give way to vain laughter. I have seldom laughed aloud for twenty or thirty years without regretting it, and I always blush for those who laugh aloud without meaning. I am often full of joy and gladness, and were I to give way to the promptings of my nature at such times, it would lead to unreasonable levity, which would be a source of mortification and sorrow to me * * * I am satisfied that those persons who stamp, clap hands, whistle, and make other noisy and boisterous demonstrations in the theatres, so untimed and uncalled for, have but little sense, and know not the difference between a happy smile of satisfaction to cheer the countenance of a friend, and a contemptuous sneer that brings the curses of man upon man" (Brigham Young, Jour. of Dis., Vol. IX., p. 290).

"We should observe the Sabbath as a day of rest, and if we do it faithfully, we shall live longer; for my impression is, saying nothing about the commandment of the Lord, that nature requires one-seventh of our time for rest, and that when a man has worked fifty-two Sundays in a year, he is at least fifty-two days older than he needs to be, and has not done as much work during the year, as if he had worked only six days and had rested the seventh. * * * The evidence is plain on the face of the Book of Mormon, that when men commence to live in accordance with the laws of the gospel, as the people of Nephi did for about two hundred years after the Savior visited the land Bountiful, they shall be stronger and live longer. Amos, the son of Nephi, kept the records on the plates of Nephi eighty-eight years, and his son Amos kept them one hundred and eleven years (See IV Nephi vv. 20, 21). Previous to this period the Book of Mormon shows that the Nephites were a short-lived race. The observance of the Sabbath, as well as the observance of every other commandment of God, has a tendency to prolong human life" (George A. Smith, Jour. of Dis., Vol. XII., p. 197).

General Notes

This Revelation is especially intended to instruct the Saints concerning the observance of the Sabbath.

The Lord has always given prominence to the law pertaining to the weekly rest. It is one of the first on record in the Bible. God had no sooner completed the creation than he "blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it; because that in it he had rested from all his work which God created and made" (Gen. 2:3). That the seventh day thus was separated from other days, by God Himself, accounts for the fact that the division of time into weeks has been almost universal. Noah certainly counted days by sevens (Gen. 8:10, 12). So did Laban (Gen. 29:27, 28). Israel observed the Sabbath before the Law was given on Sinai (Ex. 16:23), but when the Decalogue was promulgated, the Sabbath law was incorporated in it among the commandments dealing with man's duty to God. The prophets of Israel pronounce blessings upon those who keep the Sabbath (Is. 56:2). They tell us that when the people polluted the Sabbath the fury of the Lord was poured out upon them (Ez. 20:13), but that Israel restored will again "hallow my Sabbaths" (Ez. 44:24). That the Sabbath was observed by the first Christian churches, with the sanction of the Apostles, is beyond doubt. Jesus proclaimed Himself "Lord also of the Sabbath" (Luke 6:5) and His followers honored Him by observing His day, in the spirit of Christ, who taught, contrary to the traditions of the Pharisees, that "the Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath" (Mark 2:27). The Saints at Troas assembled to break bread on the Lord's day (Acts 20:7). Paul counseled the Galatian and Corinthian Saints to make their donations on that day, as part of their worship (I. Cor. 16:2). John observed the Lord's day, even in his exile (Rev. 1:10). In the Book of Mormon we read that the people of Nephi kept the Sabbath (Jarom v. 5), and that Alma commanded his people to keep the Sabbath day holy (Mosiah 18:23).

From this Revelation (Sec. 59) we learn that the Sabbath law was among the first that were given in the Land of Zion, after the place for the City had been located and the Temple site designated. And again, when the Pioneers had entered Salt Lake Valley, President Young advised them, and all who should come after them, to observe the Sabbath.

"He told the brethren," says Apostle Woodruff, "that they must not work on Sunday, that they would lose five times as much as they would gain by it. None were to hunt or fish on that day, and there should not any man dwell among us who would not observe these rules" (Whitney's History of Utah, Vol. I., p. 133).

It is certain that a community which ignores the Sabbath and the services of the Lord's house will become pagan and sink to a low level of morality. It is not true that man can worship alone, and any day, with as much benefit as he can derive from worshiping in the assemblies of his brethren on the day appointed by the Lord The "Reign of Terror" stands on the pages of history as an illustration of human government without a Sabbath.

The question may now be asked, "Is the observance of Sunday as the Sabbath acceptable to God?" There is a great deal of confusion in the world on that subject.

Christian observers of Saturday as the Sabbath tell us that some pope is responsible for the change from the seventh to the first day of the week, and almost in the same breath they declare that Constantine the Great is the author of it. Roman Catholics, of course, accept, for the head of their church, the responsibility, but the change was made long before there was an ecclesiastical "head" in Rome. There is no uncertainty in the minds of the Latter-day Saints on the question. This Revelation recognizes Sunday, the Lord's day, as the Sabbath in this dispensation.

It might, further, be observed that the Sabbath law does not, primarily, set apart either Saturday or Sunday as the Sabbath, but A SEVENTH PART OF THE WEEK. "Six days shalt thou labor, but the seventh is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God." It is immaterial where you begin counting, as long as the rule of working six days and resting on the seventh is observed. The rule is the same as that which governs tithe-paying. One dollar out of ten belongs to the Lord. Which one? Any of them. Which day of the seven belongs to the Lord? Any of them, but as the Sabbath is for the entire community, one day must be agreed upon for the good of all.

Which day of the week was observed before the exodus of Israel from Egypt, is not known, but, whichever it was, at the time of the exodus some change must have occurred, for a new reckoning began with that event (Ex. 12:2). The month of the exodus became the first month of the Jewish ecclesiastical year and the Sabbaths were, accordingly, rearranged. The beginning of the year was counted from the new moon of the passover, which festival was celebrated between and including the 14th and 21st of the month. The 10th, 14th, and 16th were work days, and could never be Sabbaths (See. Ex. 12:3, 5, 6, 24). From the fact that the Hebrew festivals seem to have been observed on fixed dates, as our Christmas, and were not movable holidays, like Easter, it has been thought that the weekly Sabbaths also were celebrated on fixed dates. If that is correct, the Hebrew Sabbath must have fallen on every day in the week in rotation, as does our New Year's day.

Aside from this argument, it would be impossible to observe as Sabbath any one and the same day all over the Earth, simultaneously. What would be the beginning of the Seventh-day Sabbath—Friday evening at sundown—at a given point in Asia Minor, would be Friday noon in Greenland, Friday morning in Alaska, midnight between Thursday and Friday in Australia, and Thursday evening at a given longitude east of the point of beginning. So, while the Sabbath day cannot be observed all over the Earth on the same day, a seventh part of the week can be dedicated to the service of the Lord everywhere.

Before the Mosaic dispensation, the Sabbath was observed in memory of the creation; Israel celebrated it in memory of the exodus, and the followers of our Savior hold the day sacred to the memory of His Resurrection.

When President Brigham Young said that Sabbath-breakers were not to live among the Saints, he enunciated a true and important principle. The Saints were entitled to rest on that day, but unless all were agreed that needless work should be discontinued for that purpose, there would be but little rest for anybody.

The Sabbath is necessary for the maintenance of free institutions and morality. No one living in a Christian community has the right to undermine these, by his conduct, no matter what his personal views may be.
