Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 60.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, in Jackson County, Missouri, August 8, 1831. The occasion was that of the Elders who had been appointed to return to the East desiring to know how they should proceed, and by what route and manner they should travel.—Reproof for those who neglect to use their talents and who fail to testify of the knowledge they have received—Specific instructions as to the return of Elders to Ohio—Others, yet to arrive in Zion, are to return, proclaiming the word of God.

BEHOLD, thus saith the Lord unto the elders of his church, who are to return speedily to the land from whence they came: Behold, it pleaseth me, that you have come up hither;

Some of the Elders who had come to Independence, but were not to remain, were anxious to learn the will of the Lord concerning them, especially with regard to their return journey. In reply to their prayers this Revelation was given, in which the Lord (1) warns them against yielding to fear of man (1-4); (2) gives instructions regarding the journey (5-9); (3) regarding expenses (10-11); (4) regarding other elders who intended to come to Zion (12-16); and (5) promises further revelations (17).

5-9. These paragraphs contain detailed directions for the return journey to Kirtland, Ohio. The Elders are instructed to preach the gospel by the way, and especially in the City of Cincinnati. Oliver Cowdery and companions, when on their mission to the Lamanites, preached the gospel in that city without a great deal of success, but they were not to pass by the place on that account.

10-11. The expenses of the journey might be borne by the common funds, but those who were able to refund the money, were expected to do so.

12-16. Other elders were to be appointed to go on a mission to Jackson County. They were to preach the gospel to the world diligently, and not idle their time away (v. 13); and when they had reached their destination, they were to return and continue preaching, without being in a hurry and without stirring up strife (v. 14).
