Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 61.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, on the bank of the Missouri river, McIlwaine's Bend, August 12, 1831. The Prophet and ten Elders had traveled down the river in canoes. On the first day of the journey many dangers were experienced. Elder William W. Phelps, in daylight vision, saw the destroyer riding in power upon the face of the waters. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 203.—Elders not to travel swiftly upon the river, thus losing opportunity to preach—Elders had been permitted to come thus far by boat that they might bear record of the power of the destroyer over the waters—Those who come later to Zion to be warned thereof—Attention of the First Presidency needed in the organized branches—Special labor of declaring the Gospel to non-members left to the Elders thereto appointed.

BEHOLD, and hearken unto the voice of him who has all power, who is from everlasting to everlasting, even Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end.

On the 8th of August, 1831, the Lord in a Revelation (Sec. 60) directed the Prophet Joseph and his companions to return to Kirtland by way of St. Louis. The following day the Prophet, in company with ten Elders, left Independence in canoes and proceeded down the river. The journey was uneventful, until the third day, when the dangers of river-navigation became manifest. The travelers had landed at McIlwair's or McIlwaine's, Bend, where they encamped on the bank of the river. While here William W. Phelps had a vision in which he saw "the destroyer" riding upon the face of the waters. Some of the Elders heard a noise, though they did not see anything.

The "destroyer" seen by William W. Phelps in a vision, was, in all probability, the Evil One himself, "the prince of the power of the air" (Eph. 2:2).

The brethren retired that evening, we may feel sure, with peculiar feelings. Their gratitude for the escape from the dangers of the river must have been mixed with misgivings and anxiety for the Saints who were preparing for emigration to the promised land. In the morning they received this Revelation, in which God (1) released them from the obligation of traveling on the river (2-3); (2) declared His decree of destruction on the waters (4-6); (3) urged Sidney Gilbert and William W. Phelps to hasten on their journey (7-12); (4) gave a remarkable revelation concerning the waters (13-22); (5) issued special instructions to Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery, and Sidney Rigdon (23); (6) and the Saints (24-29); (7) gave directions concerning the preaching of the gospel (30-32); and (8) the journey of other Elders (33-35) and (9) closed with general instructions and promises (36-39).

Destructive tornadoes have visited the depression through which the Missouri and Mississippi rivers flow, many times. On May 7th, 1840, the city of Natchez was laid in ruins. The people were at dinner when, suddenly, the place was enveloped in darkness, the rain descended in torrents, and the strongest buildings shook as if tossed by an earthquake. Hundreds of lives were lost (Times and Seasons, Vol. I., pp. 104-5). During the year 1843, it was estimated that for a number of weeks the loss of steamboats averaged one a day.

These two were directed to continue their journey on the river (vv. 9-12). The little company was, consequently, divided. They met at St. Louis, but from there they again took separate routes to Kirtland.

In the beginning the Spirit of God "moved upon the face of the waters," and life and order came forth from chaos.

"Darkness profound Covered the abyss; but on the watery calm His [^1] brooding wings the Spirit of God outspread, And vital virtue infused, and vital warmth, Throughout the fluid mass."-Milton, Paradise Lost.

In the last days * * * I cursed the waters] "By the mouth of my servant John." In the Revelation by John, sixteenth chapter, we read that seven angels poured out vials of wrath on the Earth. The third of these was poured out upon the rivers and fountains of waters, "and they became blood" (Rev. 16:4). That this refers to convulsions in nature and sanguinary conflicts, by which persecutors and enemies of the Church will be visited before the coming of the Lord in His glory, is the opinion of most commentators.

"But before that day he saw great tribulations among the wicked; and he also saw the sea, that it was troubled, and men's hearts failing them, looking forth with fear for the judgments of Almighty God, which should come upon the wicked" (Pearl of Great Price, Book of Moses 7:66).

Many have seen in the world war that broke out in 1914 a remarkable fulfilment of these predictions concerning troubles upon the waters. The extent of the losses of ships and lives is hardly realized. On the 21st of March, 1916, it was reported from Washington that more than 2,000 merchant vessels had been sunk by U-boats and mines. Submarine warfare is something new. It dates no farther back than 1885. Through the ingenuity of militarism the waters have been "cursed" by torpedoes and mines. The latter is a diabolical memento of the Russo-Japanese war, mines being for the first time extensively used at Port Arthur. The conflict in 1914, defies description for its horrors both on land and on the waters, but its successor, the conflict of 1939, far outstripped the first in the horrors of destruction both on land and on the sea.

In the last days have I blessed it, in its time, for the use of my saints] While it is true that the Lord pours out his blessings upon the unjust as well as the just, "for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust" (Matt. 5:45), yet he has in store for his Saints great blessings upon the land in its time. He has promised to give to them the fulness of the earth, and all he has asked is that we keep his commandments. "Yea, blessed are they whose feet stand upon the land of Zion, who have obeyed my gospel; for they shall receive for their reward the good things of the earth, and it shall bring forth in its strength" (Doc. and Cov. 59:3). Compare the blessings to Israel, Deut. 28.

The Mississippi river is navigable a distance of 2,500 miles. As late as 1866 there were seventy-one steamers plying on the part of the river that flows through the State of Missouri alone. Twenty years later this number had dwindled to ten, three of which were tow boats. It is very remarkable that the Prophet, as far back as 1831, was led to anticipate the cessation of passenger traffic on this mighty water-way, by establishing a land route for the Saints.

Reynolds Cahoon held many important positions in the Church. In 1833 he was associated with Hyrum Smith and Jared Carter in a committee appointed to raise money for a house of the Lord in Kirtland, in which to accommodate the Elders who might come there to receive instructions before engaging in missionary work. In 1839 he was appointed second counselor to John Smith, who, at that time, presided over the Saints in Iowa. In 1840 he was a member of a committee appointed to superintend the building of the Nauvoo Temple.

Samuel H. Smith] See Sec. 23:4.

General Notes

The prophecy in this Section furnishes a good illustration of double application of the prophetic word. There are many such "double" prophecies in the Scriptures. To that class belong the promises to Abraham (Gen. 15), the predictions of Jacob concerning Judah and the sons of Joseph (Gen. 49); of Balaam (Numb. 24:17); of Nathan (II Sam. 7:12-17); our Lord's prediction concerning the destruction of Jerusalem, and prophecies concerning the restoration of Israel. In this Section the Elders are shown the destroyer making the great rivers of North America unsafe for navigation, and at the same time the vision is opened up and they are made aware of the general application of the "curse" in the latter days.

God's educational methods are wonderful. He commanded the Elders to go by the river to St. Louis. They complied with this command until, on the third day of their voyage, they met with an experience which caused them to land. The destroyer then appeared, and that vision was followed by the Revelation concerning destruction upon the waters. And thus the lesson was impressed on their minds.

Our Lord says He has blessed the land for the use of the Saints. These paragraphs from a sermon by Elder George A. Smith are to the point:

"We came to this land [Utah] because it was so desert, desolate and God-forsaken that no mortal upon Earth ever would covet it; but, as Colonel Fremont reported, that at the mouth of the Bear River, in the early part of August, his thermometer stood at 29 degrees Fahrenheit, three degrees below the freezing-point, which would kill grain, fruit, or vegetables, our enemies said, 'You Mormons may go there and welcome,' chuckling to each other over what seemed to them our annihilation. * * * The newspapers recorded the joy, and gratification felt at the utter end of 'Mormonism.' * * * Notwithstanding, however, the many drawbacks and difficulties encountered in the shape of drought, crickets, grasshoppers, and the cold, sterile climate, the Spirit of the Lord was hovering over the Great Basin * * * and the climate became genial and soft" (Jour. of Dis., Vol. XI., p. 177).

——— Note

---
Notas:
[^1] Succor them who are tempted] Our Lord addresses the Elders as their advocate (comp. Sec. 29:5), who knoweth the weakness of man, and how to succor those who are tempted. He suffered temptation. Not only did He pass through two great crises—one at the beginning of His ministry, in the desert, and one at its close, in Gethsemane—but His entire life on Earth was a trial, such as no other human being can comprehend. Can we imagine a man with an unstained character, pure, refined, unselfish, and beautiful in soul, compelled to live, for some time, in association with fellow-beings the very opposite of all this—morally crippled and deformed, full of bigotry, hatred, selfishness? If so, we can vaguely understand some of the sufferings of our Lord while on this Earth. But, thank God! because of the temptations He endured, He can sympathize with His brethren and plead their cause. Someone has well said, "By His passion, He acquired compassion."
