Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 62.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, on the bank of the Missouri River, August 13, 1831. On this day the Prophet and his Counselors met several Elders who were on their way to the land of Zion, and alter joyful salutations, received this revelation to the encouragement of all.—Labors of faithful Elders commended—Those on their way to Zion told of their prospective return in continuation of their ministry.

BEHOLD, and hearken, O ye elders of my church, saith the Lord your God, even Jesus Christ, your advocate, who knoweth the weakness of man and how to succor them who are tempted.

On the 13th of August, the day after the Revelation regarding the curse upon the waters had been given, the Prophet met a company of Elders from Kirtland, presumably some of those called on the 7th of June to go to Missouri on a mission (See Sec. 52). There was great rejoicing when the two companies met.

Our Lord, on one occasion, gave an interview to some Greeks who had come to Jerusalem to worship. He saw in the presence of those strangers an assurance of the coming of the day when He shall be glorified and, being lifted up, draw all men unto Him (John 12:20-32). In the same way, we may be assured, the Prophet Joseph, on this occasion, looked far into the future, when from every land and every direction, multitudes, and not only a few Elders, would go up to redeem Zion, with songs of everlasting joy. On this inspiring occasion the Revelation in this Section was received.

General Notes

Orson Pratt, on the 14th of July, 1849, closed a treatise on The Kingdom of God with this prophetic utterance:

"Awake, for troublous times are at hand! Nations shall no longer sit at ease! The troubled elements shall foment and rage, and dash with tremendous fury. A voice is heard unto the ends of the Earth. A sound of terror and dismay! A sound of nations rushing to battle: fierce and dreadful is the contest; mighty kingdoms and empires melt away. The destroyer has gone forth, the pestilence that walketh in darkness. The plagues of the last days are at hand, and who shall escape? None but the righteous; none but the upright in heart; none but the children of the Kingdom. They shall be gathered out from among the nations; they shall stand in holy places and not be moved. But among the wicked, men shall lift up their voices and curse God because of His sore judgments, and die. And there shall be a voice of mourning and lamentation unto the ends of the Earth; for the cup of the indignation of the Almighty shall be poured out without mixture of mercy, because they would not receive His messengers, but hardened their hearts against the warning proclamation; against the gospel of the Kingdom, and against the great, preparatory work for the universal reign of the King of kings and Lord of lords."

It is difficult to decide which is the more striking feature of this prophecy: The resemblance of the language to that of the ancient prophets, or the literal fulfilment that is now, since 1914, a matter of history.
