Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 63.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Kirtland, Ohio, August, 1831. Prefacing his record of this revelation the Prophet wrote: In these infant days of the Church, there was a great anxiety to obtain the word of the Lord upon every subject that in any way concerned our salvation; and as the land of Zion was now the most important temporal object in view, I inquired of the Lord for further information upon the gathering of the Saints, and the purchase of the land, and other matters. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 207.—Solemn warning to the wicked—Divine manifestations, and signs wrought by evil powers—Sin of adultery especially condemned—Saints commanded to gather to Zion as they are able, but not with undue haste lest confusion result—Lands to be secured by purchase and not by seizure—Blessed are they who die in the Lord—Condition of those who shall die during the Millennium—Sidney Rigdon rebuked for pride—Those who use the name of the Lord without authority declared to be under condemnation.

HEARKEN, O ye people, and open your hearts and give ear from afar; and listen, you that call yourselves the people of the Lord, and hear the word of the Lord and his will concerning you.

The Prophet Joseph and his companions arrived in Kirtland on August 27th, 1831, having traveled by stage from St. Louis. The building up of Zion and the gathering of the Saints were now the most important objects in view. Wherefore the Prophet humbly asked the Lord for further information on those subjects. Then he received this Revelation, in which the Lord (1) calls for the attention of the Saints to His Word (1-5); (2) warns the wicked (6-21); (3) commands the Saints to gather (22-31); (4) gives an important reason for gathering (32-37), and (5) some special directions (38-47), (6) promises blessings (48-54); (7) warns Sidney Rigdon (55-56); (8) directs that ministers be ordained (57-58); and (9) closes with warnings and a promise (59-66).

Our heavenly Father is the sovereign Ruler of the worlds, and when He speaks, He is entitled to our undivided attention and implicit obedience.

"The potter tried to bring a lump of clay into subjection, and he worked and tugged at it, but the clay was rebellious and would not submit to the will of the potter, and marred in his hands. Then of course he had to cut it from the wheel and throw it into the mill to be ground over in order that it might become passive; after which he takes it again and makes of it a vessel unto honor, out of the same lump that was dishonored * * * Ten thousand millions of men may go to hell, because they dishonor themselves and will not be subject, and after that they will be taken and made vessels unto honor, if they will become obedient" (Whitney's Life of Heber C. Kimball, pp. 475-6).

6-21. In these paragraphs the Lord warns the wicked, especially apostates and unbelievers, but also those who only profess to be Church members, of the day of wrath, and reminds them of the reward they will lose, when the Earth shall be transfigured.

He that seeketh signs] Some unbelievers are asking for signs. They are here promised signs, but not unto salvation. The Prophet Joseph relates an incident which may be of interest in this connection. He was holding a meeting in Philadelphia on one occasion, when a man asked for a sign. The Prophet writes:

"After the sermon he again asked for a sign. I told the congregation the man was an adulterer; that a wicked and adulterous generation seeketh after signs; and that the Lord had said to me in a Revelation, that any man who wanted a sign was an adulterous person. 'It is true,' cried one, * * * and the man afterwards confessed" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. V., p. 268).

Signs follow faith] Mark 16:17. Hundreds of miracles have been performed in this dispensation, through the power of God. Signs and miraculous manifestations prove the genuineness of man's faith; they do not produce it. The speed of the vessel proves the good quality of her engines and the skill of the designer and builders; it does not produce these qualities or that skill.

The second death] The death of the body is not the end of the existence of the individual that passes through that experience. There is a life hereafter, and there is a death more terrible than the first. There is a death by which the sinner is separated from God forever.

On the 30th of December, 1842, the Prophet Joseph, in a conversation with Judge Adams, Springfield, said:

"Christ and the resurrected Saints will reign over the Earth during the thousand years. They will not, probably, dwell upon the Earth, but will visit it when they please, or when it is necessary to govern it. There will be wicked men on the Earth during the thousand years. The heathen nations who will not come up to worship will be visited with the judgments of God, and must eventually be destroyed from the Earth" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. V., p. 212).

"It was the design of the councils of heaven before the world was, that the principles and laws of the Priesthood should be predicated upon the gathering of the people in every age of the world. Jesus did everything to gather the people, and they would not be gathered" (Joseph Smith, History of the Church, Vol. V., p. 423).

"Why gather the people together in this place (Jackson County, Mo.)? For the same purpose that Jesus wanted to gather the Jews—to receive the ordinances, the blessings, and glories that God has in store for His Saints" (Ib., p. 427).

24-31. In these paragraphs special instructions concerning gathering are given. It was not to be undertaken in haste, but after due preparation, "lest there should be confusion, which bringeth pestilence" (v. 24). If they went on the long journey without the necessary preparations, proper food and suitable clothing, the consequence would be sickness. This was the experience of some American military training camps during the war with Spain, in 1898. Here a truth is revealed, in 1831, of which the world, half a century later, had but little knowledge.

The land of gathering belonged to the Lord (v. 25), but the Saints, mindful of the injunction of Christ, to "render unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's," were to purchase their inheritance (v. 27). A contrary course would lead to bloodshed (v. 28). But that would mean that the Saints would be slaughtered, for they were forbidden to shed blood (v. 31). They would be "scourged from city to city, and from synagogue to synagogue."

The Latter-day Saints are forbidden to make war in order to secure a gathering-place, and especially such a sacred place as that in which the greatest of all God's temples is to be located. They are not forbidden to defend their lives, their homes, their loved ones, their liberty and country, against murderers and thieves, but they are forbidden to be the aggressors.

32-37. In these paragraphs our Lord states one of the most solemn reasons for the gathering of His Saints—a reason which concerns the entire world. He is angry with the wicked (v. 32), and He has decreed wars upon Earth; "the wicked shall slay the wicked" (v. 33). In order that the Saints might escape this general slaughter, they were commanded to gather upon the land of Zion (v. 36). Our Savior, when He had predicted the destruction of Jerusalem, directed His people to "flee into the mountains"; that is, to gather in the mountain region, when they should see the desolating armies surround the City and the Roman Eagles planted upon the battlements. In the same way, in this dispensation, He provided a place of gathering, in order that the Saints might not perish in the general destruction. There are other important reasons for gathering.

"The multitude we see assembled here today are here, because the Kingdom of God is to be built up; for if the Kingdom of God is to be built up, there must be people to constitute it" (Amasa M. Lyman, Jour. of Dis., Vol. X., p. 84).

But our Father in heaven desired, by the law of gathering, to save his people from the doom of the wicked.

On January 4th, 1833, the Prophet wrote to a New York paper:

"I declare unto you the warning which the Lord has commanded me to declare unto this generation * * * 'Fear God and give glory to Him, for the hour of His judgment is come.' Repent ye, repent ye, and embrace the everlasting covenant, and flee to Zion, before the overflowing scourge overtake you, for there are those now living upon the Earth whose eyes shall not be closed In death until they see all these things which I have spoken, fulfilled" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. I., p. 315).

38-47. The Lord, through His Prophet, instructs the Saints in Kirtland to settle their affairs, (v. 38), dispose of their land, and go to the Land of Zion in the spring (v. 39); and to send funds to the agent in Zion (v. 40); He promises to give to the Prophet power to discern, by the spirit of God, who should go (v. 41); He directs that Newel K. Whitney be appointed an agent for those who were to remain (vv. 42-45); and that he and Oliver Cowdery visit the Branches and collect funds for the building up of Zion (v. 46).

Titus Billings] In the month of April, 1832, he led a company of Saints from Kirtland to Jackson County. He is said to have been the second person baptized in Kirtland, having joined the Church in Kirtland in November, 1830. In 1837, at Far West, he was appointed second counselor to Bishop Partridge, Isaac Morley being the first counselor, and in 1849 he became a member of the Salt Lake Stake High Council.

"Heaven's broad day hath o'er me broken Far above Earth's span of sky! Am I dead? Nay, by this token, Know that I have ceased to die."

''Tradition has taught us that the great purpose of religion is to prepare people to die; that when they have passed through a change of heart and become converted, they are ready for glory at any moment, and to dwell with the Father and the Son in the heavens to all eternity. This is a mistake; for they have to improve, become substantially changed from bad to good, from sin to holiness, here or somewhere else, before they are prepared for the society they anticipate enjoying" (Brigham Young, Jour. of Dis., Vol. X., p. 172).

Foolish virgins are those who suppose that they need less preparation for their attendance at the Court on High than they would need if they were to attend the court function of an earthly monarch.

55-6. Sidney Rigdon had been instructed, by revelation (See, 58:50), to write a description of the Land of Zion. His first effort was not acceptable to God. The reason for his failure is stated. He was too proud to receive counsel. He was, however, given another chance, and his second effort proved a success and was accepted.

59-66. Our Lord again addresses the Saints in His divine character of Alpha and Omega, and His name and title, Jesus [the] Christ, the Anointed One (v. 60). He warns them not to take His name in vain (vv. 61, 62), and calls upon them to repent of their sins (v. 63); counsels the Prophet Joseph and Sidney Rigdon regarding their temporal affairs (v. 65), and closes this important Revelation with the promise that those who overcome, through patience, shall receive eternal glory (v. 66).

In the common formulas, such as "adieu!" "good-bye" etc., few recognize the divine name, although the meaning is, "to God!" and, "God be with ye!" If the expressions are used reverently, there can be no objection, but in many cases they are spoken without any meaning and might as well be omitted. (Comp. Doc. and Cov. 112:24-26; 121:18-22; 136:21.)

The prohibition means, in the third place, Thou shalt not pretend to speak in the name of the Lord, or as His representative, when He has not sent thee (v. 62). That is an offense as serious as false swearing. It was the sin of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram (Numbers 16:31-33).

General Notes

Before leaving this Section, we may recall the important fact that the gathering of the Saints is for a purpose entirely different from that which emigrants to a foreign country usually have in view. If they have the spirit of the gospel, their gathering will be for the purpose of building up the Kingdom of God and, as far as depends on them, hasten on the day when the Millennial reign shall begin. Consequently, they will go to Zion duly prepared. They will repent of their weaknesses and imperfections; they will go according to counsel (v. 41), and they will realize that to gather to Zion is a religious undertaking similar to that of joining the Church.

"The City of Zion, in beauty and magnificence, will outstrip anything that is now known upon the Earth. The curse will be taken from the Earth, and sin and corruption will be swept from its face" (Brigham Young, Jour. of Dis., Vol. X., p. 172).

The doctrine of the sovereignty of God, as stated in the first five verses of this Section, is in perfect accord with all that God has revealed in the Scriptures on this subject. In the Revelations of St. John, the Elders, representing the Church, declare, "Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power: for thou hast created all things. and for thy pleasure they are and were created" (Rev. 4:11). The Lord Himself declares, "As truly as I live, all the Earth shall be filled with the glory of the Lord" (Num. 14:21). Again, "For mine own sake, even for mine own sake, will I do it; for how should my name be polluted? And I will not give my glory unto another" (Is. 48:11). God's sovereignty is absolute, but the exaltation and happiness of His creation and of His children are His glory. His absolutism is that of a loving Father who knows of no greater happiness than the promotion of the welfare of his family.

How sovereignty in God can be exercised upon free agents, may be difficult to explain, but we know that yielding obedience voluntarily does not take away our free agency. Sometimes we know beforehand how we are going to act in a certain case; it is determined; and yet we are conscious of being free agents. There is, therefore no inconsistency in the doctrine of God's sovereignty and man's freedom.

In this Revelation and others, especially those relating to Temple work, the Latter-day Saints are committed to the cause of peace. "You are forbidden to shed blood" for the building up of Zion (v. 31); and this Revelation was given at a time when that cause was but little known. Since then the peace propaganda has taken more or less definite shape, and peace friends are confidently looking forward to the birth of a League of Nations for the maintenance of peace in a United Nations league; but there will be no peace again among the nations of the earth, until the Prince of Peace comes to cleanse the earth and establish His righteousness. (Doc. and Cov. 97:23.)

The peace propaganda is not a movement of modern origin. See pp. 269-70. In our own day such men as Victor Hugo, Cobden, William Ladd, and many of the foremost statesmen now living, have lifted their voices for universal peace. Among the greatest peace advocates of modern times we must place the Prophet Joseph, who, by proclaiming the gospel of peace, prepared the field, as far as his influence went, for the precious seed which philosophers and statesmen before him had sown in soil but imperfectly prepared.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints takes the stand held by our Lord and His first followers on the question of peace and war. He enunciated the principle of the Fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man. This doctrine He proclaimed in a world where militarism held sway. It made many converts, for even at that time men were weary of bloodshed and sick of brutality. Many of the Christians preferred death as martyrs to that of murderers in the Roman legions. But militarism obtained control of the early church, and it has dominated it ever since. That was one result of the general apostasy from our Lord Jesus Christ and the placing of usurpers on His throne in the church.

What the first followers of Christ thought of militarism may be gathered from the early ecclesiastical writers.

Justin Martyr, who died about 165 A.D., proclaims, "that the prophecy is fulfilled we have good reason to believe, for we [Christians], who in the past killed one another, do not fight our enemies."

Irenaeus, about 140-202 A.D., boasts that "The Christians have changed their swords and their lances into instruments of peace, and they know not how to fight."

Clement of Alexandria (second century) writes: "The followers of Christ use none of the implements of war."

Tertullian (150-230 A.D.) asks, "How shall a Christian go to war, how shall he carry arms in a time of peace, when the Lord has forbidden the sword to us?"

Origen (185-230 A.D.) says: "For no longer do we take arms against any race, or learn to wage war, inasmuch as we have been made sons of peace through Jesus."

Cyprian (200-257 A.D.) says: "Christians do not in turn assail their assailants, since it is not lawful for the innocent even to kill the guilty; but they readily deliver up their lives and blood."

Athanasius (296-373 A.D.) says that when people "hear the teaching of Christ, straightway, instead of fighting, they turn to husbandry, and instead of arming their hands with weapons they raise them in prayer."

Augustine (354-430 A.D.) holds that "defensive wars are the only just and lawful ones; it is in these alone that the soldier may be allowed to kill, when he cannot otherwise protect his city and his brethren."

To these testimonies of early church fathers, that of the scholarly Erasmus may be added. He declares: "If there is in the affairs of mortal men any one thing which is proper to explode, and incumbent upon every man by every lawful means to avoid, to deprecate, to oppose, that one thing is doubtless war" (From an article in the Christian Work).

The gospel of Jesus Christ, as proclaimed by the Prophet Joseph, is, on this question, as on others affecting the welfare of the human race, in full accord with the best thought of all ages.
