Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 64.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to the Elders of the Church, at Kirtland, Ohio, September 11, 1831. A company of brethren who had been commanded to journey to Zion were busily engaged in making preparations to leave in October.—The Lord's rebuke to sinners—Forgiveness for the repentant sinner whose sin is not unto death—Forgive one another, and all men—Instruction to individuals—The intervening time, until the coming of the Son of Man, called today—This is a time of sacrifice and for the tithing of the people—The Saints warned against debt—Liars, hypocrites, and those who falsely pretend to be Apostles and Prophets to be exposed.

BEHOLD, thus saith the Lord your God unto you, O ye elders of my church, hearken ye and hear, and receive my will concerning you.

The Prophet Joseph during the first part of September, 1831, made preparations for removing to Hiram, about 30 miles from Kirtland. This place was the home of Father Johnson, who invited the Prophet to come and stay with him while he was engaged upon the revision of the Bible. Joseph accepted the invitation gladly, [^1] and moved there on the 12th of September. The day before, the Revelation contained in this Section was given, in which the Lord (1) rebukes some of the leading men in the Church (3-17); (2) gives special direction concerning Zion (18-25); (3) warns against contracting debts with enemies (26-33); and (4) gives further instructions and promises (34-43).

I have forgiven you] There were others, besides those whose sins have led them into apostasy, who had fallen into error, but the Lord had forgiven them, for His own glory and the salvation of souls. "The Lord is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy" (Psalm 103:8).

"There was a prevalent spirit all through the early history of the Church, which prompted [some of] the Elders to suppose that they knew more than the Prophet. Elders would tell you that the Prophet was going wrong. Men who thought they knew all about this work, some of them thirty or forty years before the Lord revealed it, tried to 'steady the ark.' The Church was constantly afflicted with such a class of men" (George A. Smith, Jour. of Dis., Vol. XI., p. 7).

"If ever Joseph got wrong, it was before the public, in the face and eyes of the people; but he never did a wrong in private that I knew of. In his private instructions to the Saints, the angel Gabriel could not have given better * * * and my firm conviction is, that Joseph Smith was as good a man as any Prophet or Apostle that ever lived upon this Earth, the Savior excepted" (Journal of Dis., Vol. X., p. 364).

8-11. Here the Lord teaches the Saints that it is their duty to forgive one another (v. 9), for he who does not forgive his brother "stands condemned before the Lord" and is the greater sinner of the two. They are also taught to forgive "all men," and leave it with the Lord, whether He will forgive or not (v. 10).

"Forgive as we forgive," that is the prayer of the followers of Christ, and our Savior comments as follows:

"For if we forgive men their trespasses your Heavenly Father will forgive you; but if we forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses." Read also His denunciation of those who treat their brethren with taunts and sneers and contempt (Matt. 5:22). Some people who call themselves Christians are bitter and arrogant. The religion of Christ is humanity and love.

One of the worst traits of human nature is that exhibited by the debtor who said to his fellow-servant, "Pay me what thou owest." But we are all apt to feel that way. We flame into anger at the smallest provocation. We brood over injuries and magnify them. We often hear the coarse threat, "I'll get even."

"When thou sayest 'I will not forgive,' and standest before God with thy precious pater noster, and mumblest with thy mouth 'Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors,' what is it but saying: 'I do not forgive him, so do not Thou, God, forgive me' "—Luther.

18-19. Sidney Gilbert] He is directed to return to Zion, to his business and agency. The Saints there needed his experience and knowledge, "that they perish not." To settle and to build up a new country is an ardent task, full of trials and perils. In a letter dated Kirtland, April 21, 1833, the Prophet Joseph, referring to Brother Gilbert, wrote:

"We are well aware of the great care upon his mind, in consequence of much business, but he must put his trust in God, and he may rest assured that he has our prayers day and night, that he may have strength to overcome every difficulty. We have learned of the Lord that it is his duty to assist all the poor brethren that are pure in heart, and that he has done wrong in withholding credit from them, as they must have assistance; and the Lord established him in Zion for that express purpose" (History of the Church, Vol. I., p. 341).

"The word of the Lord given in September, 1831 * * * to make Kirtland a strong hold for the space of five years, gave rise to a new development in the feelings and sentiments of the Saints. The Prophet said, purchase land in the vicinity of Kirtland; men were induced to buy farms, and to go to work and build houses, to quarry rock, and haul them on the ground, to build a Temple" (Journal of Discourses, Vol. XI., p. 9).

But for this Revelation, the Kirtland Temple might not have been built, and the glorious manifestations in that sacred structure would not have been received.

A day of sacrifice and a day for the tithing] "Sacrifice" and "tithing" seem to be used as synonymous terms here, for the law of tithing had not yet been introduced. The law of consecration was still in force. The law of tithing was first given as the standing law of the Church on the 8th of July, 1838, at Far West.

"This event signalized the discontinuance of the United Order, which had practically been dissolved some time before * * * The law of tithing * * * bears about the same relation to the order of Enoch as the Mosaic law to the gospel of Christ" (Whitney's Hist. of Utah, Vol. I., p. 141).

The mention of tithing here is prophetic, indicating a restoration of that lesser law, instead of the greater.

Shall not be burned] The importance of the law of tithing is here shown. In the day of the Lord the proud and the evil-doers will be destroyed, as completely as straw in a furnace (Mal. 4:1, 2). Those who obey this law will not be counted as "straw" on that day (v. 24).

26-33. In these paragraphs Newel K. Whitney and Sidney Gilbert are warned against contracting debit with enemies. The Lord reminds them that He can take from His inexhaustible storehouse whenever He pleases, and pay the debt contracted on His behalf (v. 28). He acknowledges Whitney and Gilbert as His agents (v. 29), to conduct His business (v. 30), as long as they were acting in accordance with His instructions. But it was not His will that His people should be in debt to enemies, and they were not authorized to conduct His business on principles involving such obligations. Nor was it necessary to do so, for what God has said will surely come to pass (v. 32); wherefore they were not to be discouraged, but lay the foundations of Zion and always remember that "out of small things proceedeth that which is great" (v. 33).

"Would to God that all the people were prophets! Why? Then they would all have the light of truth in them, and the knowledge of truth that would save them. If this was the case, what would be among the results? Sinners in Zion would be afraid, and fearfulness would surprise the hypocrite. Why? Because they would feel uneasy, for this simple reason: They would know that they were not honest, and they would be afraid lest they should be overtaken in their guilt" (Jour. of Dis., Vol. V., p. 37).

——— Note

---
Notas:
[^1] Hearken, and lo, a voice as from one on high] The prophet Joseph, in his retreat at Father Johnson's, like John on Patmos, heard a voice and naturally turned to see where it came from (Comp. Rev. 1:10-12). This is implied in "hearken," and "lo." The voice which John heard sounded like a trumpet. That which Joseph heard was "as from one on high," a messenger from heaven. It was "mighty and powerful," like thunder, rolling forth "unto the ends of the earth." And this Revelation contains the message.
