Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 65.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Hiram, Ohio, October, 1831. The Prophet designates this revelation as a prayer.—Commitment of the keys of the kingdom of God unto man—The kingdom of God and the kingdom of Heaven named separately—Supplication that the kingdom of God, already on earth, may go forth that the kingdom of Heaven may come.

HEARKEN, and lo, a voice as of one sent down from on high, who is mighty and powerful, whose going forth is unto the ends of the earth, yea, whose voice is unto men—Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight.

The prophet Joseph was now living at Hiram, about thirty miles south-east of Kirtland. He had gone there, on invitation of Father Johnson, in order to devote himself to his work on the Bible revision. From Sept. 12, 1831, until the first of October, he did little more than prepare to re-commence the translation of the Bible" Hist. of the Church, Vol. I., p. 215). What the preparations consisted in is not stated, but this Revelation, which is an inspired prayer, indicates that an important part of such preparation was communion with God in prayer.

At Hiram, several important conferences were held. There thirteen Revelations were received, including the memorable vision recorded in Section 76. There a mob, excited by the agitation of Ezra Booth, who had denied the faith and become an enemy, tried to take the life of the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon. No doubt, this Revelation came to strengthen them for the work and experiences before them. By prayer we obtain the faith which is the grasp of our immortal spirit upon the realities and verities of an unseen world. By prayer we receive strength to "walk with God" in obedience and defy the wind and waves of human opposition.

Prepare ye the way * * * make his paths straight] The message begins with this proclamation, quoted from Isaiah 40:3 and Malachi 3:1. The coming of the Lord is near at hand. Prayer should be preceded by a preparation for His reception. The paths must be made straight and level.

This imagery is Oriental. An Eastern ruler, anciently, when about to visit the provinces, sent a messenger to proclaim his coming and to instruct the people to be prepared to receive him. Among the preparations was road-building. Crooked paths along which he would travel were to be made straight, and uneven roads to be leveled out. Loyal subjects would comply with the instructions, and if they had favors to ask, they could present their petitions with confidence, because of their loyalty. The application is obvious. Our Lord has sent His messengers to proclaim His coming and to instruct His people to be prepared to receive Him. When we comply with His commandments and prepare for His advent, our prayers are acceptable to Him.

From thence] From the Church, and more especially from Zion.

As the stone which is cut out of the mountains] The gospel of Jesus Christ is destined to fill the Earth, as the stone in Nebuchadnezzar's dream (Dan. 2:35). The Church will fill the Earth before the end of the Millennium, but the principles of the Gospel will roll forth, as that stone, and prevail from one end of the Earth to another. Even now, many of the truths revealed through the Prophet Joseph are being preached from pulpits in which to name him with reverence would be deemed sacrilege.

General Notes

Luther was at Wartburg, hidden by friends, when he began his Bible translation. The Prophet Joseph wrote a large part of his Bible revision among friends at Hiram.

Our Savior taught His disciples the prayer that has become known in every land and clime. "Our Father, who art in heaven." The central thought in this sublime address to God is, "Thy kingdom come." He closed His last celebration of the Passover, with an equally sublime prayer, in which the same thought predominated (John 17). Again, in this Revelation on prayer, which the Prophet seems to have heard, the prayer is that the Kingdom of God may come.

In this Revelation the two expressions, the kingdom of God, and the kingdom of heaven, occur. The Prophet Joseph tells us that the kingdom of heaven is the Church. 'The kingdom of heaven," he says, "is like unto a mustard seed. Behold, then, is not this the kingdom of heaven that is raising its head in the last days in the majesty of its God, even the Church of Latter-day Saints?" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. II., p. 268.) He also states that, "Where there is a prophet, a priest, or a righteous man unto whom God gives His oracles, there is the kingdom of God" (Ibid., Vol. V., p. 268). The Church, then, is also the Kingdom of God. The two terms seem to be used as synonyms, but there may be this distinction between them, if a distinction it be, that the domain of God on the other side of the veil is referred to in a particular sense as the Kingdom of Heaven, while that on this side is the Church or Kingdom of God. The two constitute the Kingdom of God. One is God's Kingdom in heaven; the other is His Kingdom on Earth.

The interesting question whether all men on Earth during the Millennium will belong to the Church, is answered by Brigham Young, in the paragraph quoted on pages 147-8.
