Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 66.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to William E. M'Lellin, at Orange, Ohio, October 25, 1831. This was the first day of an important conference. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 219.—The recipient commended for his repentance and reformation—Warning against personal weaknesses and liability to specific temptation—Great achievements in righteousness, with consequent blessings, predicted on condition of devotion to the work of the ministry.

BEHOLD, thus saith the Lord unto my servant William E. M'Lellin—Blessed are you, inasmuch as you have turned away from your iniquities, and have received my truths, saith the Lord your Redeemer, the Savior of the world, even of as many as believe on my name.

A conference was held at Orange, Ohio, on the 25th of October, 1931. There were present, twelve High Priests, seventeen Elders, four Priests, three Teachers, four Deacons, and a large congregation. The subject of consecration of property was considered, and many of those present expressed a willingness to give all they had for the furtherance of the cause of God. The divine presence was felt in these conferences, and where God is, parsimony is stifled. Among those present was William E. McLellin. He desired to know the will of the Lord concerning him, and, in answer to prayer, the Prophet received this Revelation, in which the Lord (l) commends him for having embraced the gospel and urges him to further repentance (1-3); (2) calls him to the ministry (4-11) and gives him a promise (12-13).

4-11. In these paragraphs the Lord calls McLellin to the Ministry. The call includes (I) that he should send whatever money he could spare to Zion, but not to go there as yet (v. 6); (2) that he should take Samuel Smith for a companion on his mission (v. 8); (3) that he should lay his hands on the sick and heal them (v. 9); (4) that he should forsake all unrighteousness (v. 10); (5) and that he should be faithful and magnify his office (v, 11).

Continue in these things even unto the end] Such is the condition. It is he who is faithful unto death that will have a crown of life (Rev. 2:10).

General Notes

William E. McLellin was born in the State of Tennessee. He was about a year younger than the Prophet. Having heard Samuel H. Smith and Reynolds Cahoon preach the gospel, in the early summer of 1831, when they were on their way from Kirtland to Independence, he accompanied these two Elders, and was baptized and ordained an Elder by them. Shortly afterwards he returned to Kirtland and met the Prophet Joseph at a conference held at Orange. Later he became prominent in the Church. He was at one time a member of the first Council of Apostles. However, unfortunately for him, he did not heed the warning given in this Revelation. He fell, and on May 11th, 1838, he was severed from the Church, at Far West.

Healing the sick was part of the commission of McLellin. It was one of his special gifts. In January, 1836, important meetings were held at Kirtland and holy ordinances administered. On one of these occasions the Prophet had remarkable visions. He saw the Apostles standing in a circle, their clothes tattered and their feet swollen, and Jesus standing in their midst. He saw McLellin standing upon a hill and surrounded by a multitude, and a lame man standing before him, who was healed through the power of God. He saw Brigham Young in a strange land, in a desert place, upon a rock in the midst of about a dozen men of color, who appeared hostile, but the angel of God stood above him, though he did not see him. Finally, the Prophet saw the Twelve in the celestial kingdom of God (Hist. of the Church, Vol. II., p. 381).

There are two kinds of healing. One is mental; the other we may call spiritual. Mental healing is as old as the race. It is done through "suggestion," or even "auto-suggestion." The spirit within is an intelligent being and is greatly helped, in its efforts to repair tissue or withstand the attacks of adverse agencies, by the suggestion of others who have great will-power; or even by auto-suggestion. The disciples of the Pharisees cast out demons by that power, and many modern "healers" operate under the law of suggestion. This is mental healing. Spiritual healing is by the Spirit of God, through the Priesthood. It is healing effected by the Holy Spirit imparting the strength necessary to overcome the causes of diseases, and it often operates instantaneously. Its power is circumscribed, for all men must die; but those who live so that they are receptive to the healing influences of the Holy Spirit should live to a ripe age, and then fall "asleep" in sweet slumber, conscious of the beginning of a new life in the morning of the resurrection. Spiritual healing is divine healing. It is part of the gospel. Mental healing is human. It is good in its place, but it is not part of the gospel any more than common therapeutics, or surgery.
