Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 67.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Hiram, Ohio, November, 1831. The occasion was that of a special conference, and the publication of the revelations already received from the Lord through Joseph Smith the Prophet was considered and acted upon. See heading to Section 1. Many of the brethren bore solemn testimony that the revelations then compiled for publication are verily true as was witnessed unto them by the Holy Ghost shed forth upon them. The Prophet records that after the revelation known as Section I had been received, some conversation was had concerning revelations and language. The present revelation followed.—The Lord affirms the truth of the commandments—Secret ambitions of some there present to express themselves in language superior to that of the revelations exposed—The Lord's challenge to even the wisest to imitate the least of the revelations.

BEHOLD and hearken, O ye elders of my church, who have assembled yourselves together, whose prayers I have heard, and whose hearts I know, and whose desires have come up before me.

A special conference was held at Hiram, Ohio, on the first day of November, 1831. Oliver Cowdery and John Whitmer were making preparations for the journey to Independence, where the Revelations received up to this time were to be published, and the brethren devoted a great deal of time to the consideration of this important undertaking. The conference authorized the printing of ten thousand copies under the title of the Book of Commandments. The Revelation contained in Section 1, and known as The Lord's Preface to the Book of Commandments (Sec. 1:6) was also received on this occasion. The Prophet asked what testimony those present were willing to bear to the Commandments. Several declared that they were willing testify that they were of the Lord, On the second day of the Conference, Oliver Cowdery read The Lord's Preface, and then the brethren arose, and each in turn testified to the truth of all of the Revelations received (Hist. of the Church, Vol. I., p. 222).

However, there was not perfect harmony among the brethren. A few criticized the language found in some of the Revelations. They forgot that the spirit of God uses as they are, the instruments through which He communicates with man, just as an author, when writing, makes use of whatever pen, paper, and ink he may be able to obtain. They forgot that God calls to the prophetic office men as He finds them, be it behind the plough, among the sheep, in the royal courts, or the study of the scholar.

Some of the brethren did not fully realize that divine inspiration is independent of university education, and they were wavering in their faith. The Lord, therefore, gave this Revelation in which He (1) assured them of His presence (1-2); (2) gave the reasons why blessings are withheld (3); (3) offered them a test of the divine origin the Revelations received (4-9); and (4) closed with promises and admonitions (10-14).

5-8. The Book of Commandments was before the Conference, in manuscript. Any Church member might examine it and select the Revelation which might be considered the least (v. 6). Then the wisest among them might be appointed to compose one like it; if he succeeded, the Saints would be justified in concluding that the book was of no higher than human origin (v. 7); if he failed, they would be under obligation to accept it as divinely inspired, and to bear testimony to the truth of it (v. 8).

Wm. E. McLellin accepted the offer and, in a spirit of presumption, undertook to imitate the Revelations of the Lord. His effort to produce a Revelation was witnessed with great interest by the Elders, and when they became aware of his complete failure, all doubt concerning the Revelations of God vanished, and they signified their willingness to testify of their truth. Accordingly, a document containing their testimony was drawn up and given to the world (Hist. of the Church, Vol. I., p. 226; see also the Introduction to this Volume, pp. 15-17).

Not with the carnal mind, etc.] Visions of our Lord are not perceived with the outward eye, or reflected in the natural mind, but with the spiritual eye. There is a spirit within, whose range of vision is limited by the capacity of physical organs, so that it can neither see nor hear that which lies beyond the boundaries of what we call "matter," but when the veil is lifted, the spirit can perceive the spiritual world.

12-13. But such a temporary removal of the veil is only partial. Natural man cannot see God, or abide in His presence, nor in the presence of angels, unless he be "quickened" by the Spirit of God. Comp. Dan. 10:7-10;. 1 Cor. 13:12; Rev. 1:17.

General Notes

Miraculous manifestations do not keep men from falling away. Referring to some of the Elders who had seen great visions, Elder George A. Smith asks:

"Where are those men? A number of men who manifested the greatest gifts, and had the greatest manifestations have fallen out by the wayside. You look around you, and they are not here. Many who received the knowledge of the things of God by the power of His Spirit, and sought not after signs and wonders, and when the Spirit rested upon them, it seemed to produce no visible demonstration—you look around among the Saints in the Valleys of the Mountains, and you find they are here with us, bearing on high the standard of Zion, or have descended into honorable graves" (Jour. of Dis., Vol. XI., p. 10).

According to the order of the kingdom of God, there is only one man appointed at any one time to receive revelations for the Church. McLellin, had he been faithful and humble, might have received revelations for himself, though not for the Church. On this subject Heber C. Kimball observes:

"Oliver Cowdery received revelations and wrote them; so did David Whitmer, and so did Thomas B. Marsh. About the time he was preparing to leave this Church, he received a Revelation in the printing office. He retired to himself, and prayed, and was humble, and God gave him a Revelation, and he wrote it. There were from three to five pages of it and, when it came out, he read it to Brother Brigham and me. In it God told him what to do, and that was to sustain Brother Joseph and to believe that what Brother Joseph had said was true" (Jour. of Dis., Vol. V., p. 28).
