Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 68.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Hiram, Ohio, November, 1831, concerning Orson Hyde, Luke S. Johnson, Lyman E. Johnson, and William E. M'Lellin. This was given in response to supplication that the mind of the Lord be made known concerning the Elders named.—Utterances of men ordained to the Holy Priesthood when they speak as moved upon by the Holy Ghost designated as Scripture—Ordination of additional Bishops foreshadowed—Right of literal descendants of Aaron—High Priests may be ordained Bishops—Duties of parents respecting their children, particularly as to the teaching of the principles of the Gospel—Observance of the Sabbath as a holy day—Idleness and greed for worldly things condemned.

MY servant, Orson Hyde, was called by his ordination to proclaim the everlasting gospel, by the Spirit of the living God, from people to people, and from land to land, in the congregations of the wicked, in their synagogues, reasoning with and expounding all scriptures unto them.

Elders Orson Hyde, Luke S. Johnson, Lyman E. Johnson, and William E. M'Lellin being anxious to learn the will of God concerning them, the Prophet inquired and received this Revelation. It is divided into two main parts. The first (1-12) contains directions to the Elders mentioned and to all who are called to the ministry. The second (13-35) contains (a) instructions on the Bishopric (13-24); (b) on the duty of parents toward their children (25-28); (c) on the Sabbath (29-30) and (d) rebuke and commandments (31-35).

The prophecy in this verse was literally fulfilled. Orson Hyde proclaimed the gospel "from people to people, from land to land." In 1832 he and Samuel H. Smith traveled in the States of New York, Massachusetts, Maine, and Rhode Island—two thousand miles—on foot. In 1835 he was ordained an Apostle, and in 1837 he went on a mission to England. In 1840 he was sent on a mission to Jerusalem. He crossed the Ocean, traveled through England and Germany, visited Constantinople, Cairo, and Alexandria, and, finally, reached the Holy City. On October 24th, 1841, he went up on the Mount of Olives and offered a prayer dedicating Palestine for the gathering of the Jews.

7-12. This section contains the commission to all Elders in the ministry. It is their duty to go to every part of the world (v. 8) and preach the gospel to every "creature"; i.e., to every human being. No one stands so low down in the scale of civilization, or is so degraded, that he is not one of God's creatures. The gospel message is for him, or her. Those who believe and repent are to be baptized, and signs will follow faith. Comp. Mark 16:15-18.

Two special promises are given to the faithful Elders; one is this that they shall know the "signs of the coming of the Son of Man" (v. 11). To many, wars, pestilence, famine, and commotion among the nations are but ordinary events of history, but to the Saints they are "signs" indicating the advent of our Savior. They read these signs, as the navigator reads the indications of the sky or the meaning of the lights that pass his view at night. Another promise is this that they shall have authority to ''seal up to eternal life" as many as the Father shall indicate to them (v. 12).

Luke Johnson] He was born November 3rd, 1807, and was baptized May 10th, 1831, by the Prophet Joseph. On February 14th, 1835, he was ordained an Apostle. He was one of the prominent men who fell away in 1838, but he repented and was re-instated in the Church in 1846. In 1847 he came to Salt Lake Valley. In 1858 he was appointed Bishop of St. John's Ward, Tooele County. He died in Salt Lake City, at the home of Orson Hyde, December 9th, 1861.

Lyman Johnson] He was a brother of Luke Johnson. He was born October 24th, 1811, and baptized in February, 1834, by Sidney Rigdon, He performed successful missions, went with Zion's Camp to Missouri, and was ordained an Apostle, February 14th, 1835. He, too, was disfellowshiped in 1838, but remained friendly to his former associates in the Church. He lost his life by drowning, in the Mississippi River, December 20th, 1856.

Luke S. and Lyman E. Johnson were sons of John Johnson, at whose home in Hiram the Prophet found the welcome hospitality that enabled him to attend to his study of the Bible and to other important work for the Church.

M'Lellin] See Sec. 66. M'Lellin, unlike the Johnson brothers, became a bitter enemy of the Prophet Joseph and the Church, when he fell by the wayside. In 1838 he confessed before a Bishop's court at Far West that he had ceased praying and keeping the commandments of the Lord, but, when he was disfellowshiped, he, nevertheless, tried to establish a church of his own. Failing in this, he took an active part in the persecution by which the Saints were driven from Missouri (Hist. Record, p. 38).

(a) On the Bishopric.

13-24. In these paragraphs the Lord gives instructions regarding the appointment of Bishops. Edward Partridge was the first Bishop appointed (Sec. 41:9). Other Bishops were to be called in due time (v. 14). It was, therefore, necessary to have instructions concerning their appointment. Isaac Morley and John Corrill, who had been Bishop Partridge's counselors, were selected as second and third Bishops respectively. Morley was to select Christian Whitmer and Newel Knight for his counselors; and Corrill, Daniel Stanton and Hezekiah Peck (Hist. of the Church, Vol. I., p. 363).

Bishops must be High Priests, and they must be worthy; they must be appointed by the First Presidency of the Melchizedek Priesthood, unless they are literal descendants of Aaron (v. 15), in which case, if they are firstborn, they have a right to the Bishopric, as heirs; but even a lineal descendant of Aaron must be designated, found worthy, anointed, and ordained by the First Presidency (v. 20), any High Priest of the Melchizedek Priesthood may officiate in the Bishopric, if he is called, ordained, and set apart by the First Presidency.

The Bishop, with his counselors, is the head of the Ward, under the direction of the President of the Stake, of which the Ward is an ecclesiastical division. He presides over the Aaronic Priesthood.

"You may see him in charge of the Sunday Sacrament meetings, the fast meetings, and the Priesthood meetings. He is to be seen at the Quorum meetings, at the Sabbath school, and at the Young People's Mutual Improvement meetings—and at all times observing what is going on, and often giving instruction and counsel. His official duties require him to visit the homes of the members, administering comfort and blessing to the sick and needy, and encouragement to all; besides this, he mingles freely with the people in a social way. On account of this constant paternal watch-care over all, he is affectionately styled 'the father of the Ward.' " Joseph B. Keeler, First Steps in Church Government, p. 13).

One of the prerogatives of the office of the Presiding Bishop is, that the incumbent can be tried only before the First Presidency of the Church (vv. 22-4).

(b) On the Duty of Parents Toward Children.

25-8. Many people in the world consider that they have done their full duty to their children, when they have given them shelter, food, clothing, and education, and accumulated property for them to inherit. But Latter-day Saints have a still more important duty, as parents. They must teach their children, when they are eight years old, the doctrines of the gospel—faith, repentance, baptism, and the gift of the Holy Ghost (v. 25). It is not enough to send them to Primaries, Sunday-schools, and day-schools. The parents themselves have a personal duty to perform as teachers of their children. They must see to it that the little ones are baptized at the age of eight years (v. 27), and that they are taught to pray and walk uprightly before the Lord (v. 28). If parents will do this, they will be blessed. God says of Abraham, that "he shall surely become a great and mighty nation * * * for I know him, that he will command his children and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment" (Gen. 18:17-19). God could make Abraham the head of a numerous posterity, because of his faithfulness in teaching his children to keep the commandments.

"Now, my brethren and sisters, will you try to take care of your children, and look after them on the Sabbath day, see where they are, bring them to meeting and teach them something they do not know? I recollect, when on my mission in England, I visited a number of my relatives there. They were what we might call sectarian; they did not believe the true gospel * * * but when the Sabbath day came, their children were called in, and if they did not go to meeting, they were taught to take a book and read, and the parents sat down and taught them and they read by turns and explained passages of Scripture and history, and they talked to and instructed one another, and thus they spent the day, and when evening came the children had learned something, their minds were improved, and they were better than when the day began" (Joseph F. Smith, Jour. of Dis., Vol. XIV., p. 286).

(c) On the Sabbath.

29-30. See Sec. 59:9, 12. The inhabitants of Zion are commanded to observe the Sabbath; but also to work on other days. They were members of one family, and if one of them shirked his duties, the others would be imposed upon to that extent. Idlers were to be "had in remembrance before the Lord"; their case was to be handled in the Church courts. "Joseph Smith never tolerated in the least indolence, idleness slothfulness, drunkenness, or anything of the kind wherein exists sin" (Brigham Young, Jour. of Dis., Vol. X., p. 364)

(d) Rebuke and Commandments.

31-5. The Lord found idlers in Zion; also children growing up in wickedness, and Church members who thought more of money than of the riches of eternity (v. 31). These things He condemned (v. 32). He also found those who did not pray regularly; they were to be dealt with by the Church (v. 33).

General Notes

Speaking of the authority of Bishops, President Brigham Young says:

"Now and then one believes that he has a right, when ordained a Bishop, to officiate and preside over every temporal and spiritual interest in his district, by virtue of the Bishopric; he believes that he ought to go into a Seventies' Council in his Ward and preside because he is a Bishop; and under this impression he dictates, guides, and directs all things in his district; he baptizes, confirms, and administers the Sacrament as a Bishop, performing, under this impression, every spiritual and temporal duty. * * * The duties and powers of a Bishop cease the very moment he steps over the Aaronic Priesthood, which is to officiate in temporal things; when he passes this, he immediately begins to officiate by the authority and power of the Melchizedek Priesthood, though he may not know it" (Jour. of Dis., Vol. X., p. 96).

From the Sixth Chapter of Acts we may gather what the duties of a Bishop in the Church are. There we read that when the disciples multiplied, a complaint was made that the widows of men of Grecian descent were discriminated against in the daily distribution of supplies. The Twelve, therefore, suggested that seven men be appointed to attend to this business, since it was not meet that they themselves, should leave the Word of God and serve at the tables, where the contributions were placed. Accordingly, seven men were chosen and ordained to have charge of the temporal affairs of the Church. Bible commentators generally refer to these seven men as "Deacons," but without sufficient grounds. They were, rather, Bishops (Episcopoi). Stephen, the powerful preacher and first martyr of the Church, was one of them. Philip, also a mighty witness for the Lord and a successful missionary, was another.

In this Revelation important instructions are given to parents concerning their children. Children are a precious gift of God, and should be taken care of as such. And yet, in the world there are those who advocate—perhaps for so-called eugenic reasons—the limitation of child-birth, while others are guilty of practices that should be classed as infanticide. The Latter-day Saints have been taught that "some of the most noble spirits are waiting with the Father to this day, to come forth through the right channel and the right kind of men and women," and that "there are thousands, and millions, of spirits waiting to obtain bodies upon this Earth" (Heber C. Kimball, Jour. of Dis., Vol. V., p. 92). The Latter-day Saints know, therefore, that it depends largely upon parents whether the spirits to whom they give bodies of their own flesh and blood will be able to profit to the fullest extent by their experience on Earth. To the immortal spirits waiting for an opportunity to pass through mortality, a body bred on the principles that obtain in the production of race horses, or meat for the table, is of infinitely less importance than a tabernacle morally pure, in which the Spirit of God can dwell.

On the subject of the rearing of children, President Brigham Young on one occasion made these pertinent remarks:

"Kind words and loving actions towards children, will subdue their uneducated natures a great deal better than the rod, or, in other words, than physical punishment, although it is written that 'The rod and reproof give wisdom, but a child left to himself bringeth his mother to shame', and, 'He that spareth the rod hateth his son, but he that loveth him chastens him betimes.' These quotations refer to wise and prudent corrections. Children who have lived in the sunbeams of parental kindness and affection, when made aware of a parent's displeasure, and receiving kind reproof from parental lips, are more thoroughly chastened than by any physical punishment that could be applied to their persons. * * * When children are reared under the rod * * * it not infrequently occurs, that they become so stupefied and lost to every hightoned feeling and sentiment that though you bray them in a mortar among wheat, with a pestle, yet will not their foolishness depart from them" (Jour. of Dis., Vol. X., p. 360-1).
