Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 70.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Kirtland, Ohio, November, 1831. The documentary history written by the Prophet states that four special conferences were held from the Ist to the 12th of November, inclusive. In the last of these assemblies the great importance of the Book of Commandments, later called the Doctrine and Covenants, was considered; and the Prophet refers to it as being the foundation of the Church in these last days, and a benefit to the world, showing that the keys of the mysteries of the kingdom of our Savior are again entrusted to man. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 235.—Management of printing and distributing the books entrusted to the Prophet and the other Elders named—Any surplus means accruing from the undertaking to be consecrated for the benefit of the Church—Provision to be made for the temporal support of the ministry—The diligent laborer worthy of his hire, whether appointed to temporal or spiritual duties.

BEHOLD, and hearken, O ye inhabitants of Zion, and all ye people of my church who are afar off, and hear the word of the Lord which I give unto my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., and also unto my servant Martin Harris, and also unto my servant Oliver Cowdery, and also unto my servant John Whitmer, and also unto my servant Sidney Rigdon, and also unto my servant William W. Phelps, by the way of commandment unto them.

This Revelation also contains instructions concerning the publication of the book of Commandments and Revelations. At the Conference held at Hiram, November 12th, 1831, the Saints, by vote, expressed their appreciation of that work, whereupon the Prophet suggested that Oliver Cowdery and John Whitmer, who were about to leave for Independence with the priceless manuscript (Sec. 69:1, 2), be dedicated to the Lord by prayer. He also suggested that the Church grant Sidney Rigdon, Oliver Cowdery, Martin Harris, and himself some compensation for their labors in the Church. "I feel," said he, "that it will be according to the mind of the Spirit, for by IT these things were put into my heart which I know to be the Spirit of Truth." The Conference decided that the Prophet should dedicate the manuscript and the two Elders who had charge of it; also that Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery, John Whitmer, and Sidney Rigdon be appointed a committee to manage the publication in accordance with the laws of the Church and the commandments of God; and, further, that the families of Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith, Peter Whitmer, Christian Whitmer, Jacob Whitmer, Hiram Page, and David Whitmer, who had administered to their wants, and also Samuel H. Smith, Peter Whitmer, Jr., William Smith, and Don Carlos Smith, for labor performed, be remembered to the Bishop in Zion as worthy of inheritances there. See Hist. of the Church, Vol. I., pp. 235-6.

It was about this time that the Revelation in the present Section was received, in which our Lord (1) appoints a committee to manage the business connected with the printing of the Commandments and Revelations (1-5); (2) instructs this committee concerning the disposition of the proceeds (6-14); and (3) assures them of His favor (15-18).

1-5.To the committee appointed by the Conference the Lord adds the names of Martin Harris and W. W. Phelps (v. 1). It was an important position, for the Lord would ask them for an account of their stewardship in the day of judgment.

6-14. As to the "benefits," these were not to be given to the Church entirely, nor to the world (v. 6), but if more were realized than the Elders in charge needed, the surplus was to be turned over to the Lord's storehouse (v. 7), and thus become a perpetual benefit to the inhabitants of Zion (v. 8). The business part was, in other words, to be conducted in accordance with the Law of God relating to the United Order. According to that Law, all share alike; one who administers in spiritual things is "worthy of his hire" (v. 12) equal with one who manages some business, though the world generally rates business ability higher than spiritual excellence. "In your temporal things you shall be equal" (v. 14). That is the law of the Kingdom of God.

15-18. In these paragraphs the Lord says that this commandment (concerning the stewardship of the Elders named in verse 1) was given as a manifestation, or token, of God's willingness to bless them with temporal blessings, as well as spiritual (v. 16). To those who receive temporal blessings from the Lord, and acknowledge His hand in everything, there is joy in the possession of those things; for the Earth, and the fulness thereof, are the Lord's, the same as the heavens and their fulness. Those who can enjoy heaven can enjoy the Earth, also.
