Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 71.

REVELATION given to Joseph Smith the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon, at Hiram, Ohio, December 1, 1831. The Prophet had resumed the translation of the Scriptures with Sidney Rigdon as his scribe; and the two so labored until this revelation was received.—Circumstances of the times required that the two devote themselves to travel and preaching for a season—To meet the opponents of the Church, both in public and in private—To bear testimony of the commandments that have been received and in preparation for others yet to come.

BEHOLD, thus saith the Lord unto you my servants Joseph Smith, Jun., and Sidney Rigdon, that the time has verily come that it is necessary and expedient in me that you should open your mouths in proclaiming my gospel, the things of the kingdom, expounding the mysteries thereof out of the scriptures, according to that portion of Spirit and power which shall be given unto you, even as I will.

Oliver Cowdery and John Whitmer left, at the appointed time, for Independence, and the Prophet resumed his work on the Bible revision, with Sidney Rigdon as secretary. On December 1st, however, this Revelation was received, in which they were instructed to discontinue, for the time being, their Bible studies, and to take up missionary work in the neighborhood of Kirtland, and elsewhere. This was necessary because of the enmity that had been aroused, and the ignorance concerning the Church, that prevailed among the people generally.

Ezra Booth had just published a series of anti-"Mormon" letters, in an Ohio paper. These letters, the Prophet says, "by their coloring, falsity, and vain calculations to overthrow the work of the Lord, exposed his weakness, wickedness, and folly, and left him a monument of his own shame for the world to wonder at." It was to meet the situation that had been created by this hostile agitation, that Joseph and Sidney were called to take this mission. Sometimes it is wise to ignore the attacks of the wicked; at other times it is necessary to meet them, fearlessly and with ability.

General Notes

Referring to this mission, the Prophet Joseph says:

"From this time [December 4th, 1831] until the 8th or 10th of January, 1832, myself and Elder Rigdon continued to preach in Shalersville, Ravenna, and other places, setting forth the truth, vindicating the cause of our Redeemer: showing that the day of vengeance was coming upon this generation like a thief in the night; that prejudice, blindness and darkness filled the minds of many, and caused them to persecute the true Church, and reject the true light; by which means we did much towards allaying the excited feelings which were growing out of the scandalous letters then being published in the Ohio Star, at Ravenna, by the before mentioned Ezra Booth" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. I., p. 241).

One reason why the Church is hated is that it is practical. It makes men and women practice what they profess to believe. The world is fond of something pretty, something poetical, in religion. It delights in eloquent, glowing descriptions of the land "over there," which no living mortal has seen in the flesh; it likes to hear about crowns, harps, white robes, and angels' wings; it enjoys elegies of dead heroes, and, to a moderate extent, mild suggestions concerning social reforms, which nobody needs to take offense at. But the Church is not such a nerve-soothing, caressing religion. It is a message from Almighty God to a world steeped in idolatry and sin; it comes like the rolling thunders of Sinai, or the prophecies of Elijah to Ahab and Jezebel, and it makes Carmel ring with the frantic cries of the prophets of Baal. It does something. It takes the poor out of the clutches of oppression and makes them free and independent. It interferes with the profits of those who live on human weakness and shame. It opens a new era in which there will be no room for the government of Satan. No wonder it is hated! Christ, too, was hated because He did something. He might have denounced with impunity the Pharisees as hypocrites and whited sepulchers, but when He interfered with the money-bags on the temple ground. He was crucified. It was always thus.
