Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 72.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Kirtland, Ohio, December 4, 1831. Several Elders and members had assembled to learn their duty and to be further edified in the teachings of the Church. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 239.—The need of another Bishop being appointed, he to attend to the affairs pertaining to the Bishopric in the eastern branches—His records to be delivered to the Bishop in Zion—Newel K. Whitney named as the second Bishop to be ordained in the Church—Duties of the Bishop enlarged upon—Certificates of membership provided for.

HEARKEN, and listen to the voice of the Lord, O ye who have assembled yourselves together, who are the high priests of my church, to whom the kingdom and power have been given.

Having received the call to perform special missionary labors (Sec. 71), the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon went to Kirtland, September 3rd, 1831. The following day a number of Elders met with them, and after they had been conversing on their temporal and spiritual welfare, the Prophet received this Revelation, in which the Lord (1) designates Newel K. Whitney to be Bishop in Kirtland (1-8); (2) enumerates his duties (9-23); and (3) adds instructions regarding the credentials of Saints going to Zion (24-6).

"We are trying to teach this people to use their brains, that they may obtain knowledge and wisdom to sustain themselves and to dictate for others; that they may be worthy to be made Priests and Kings to God, which they never can be unless they learn, here or somewhere else, to govern, manage, legislate, and sustain themselves, their families, and friends, even to the making of nations, and nation after nation. If they cannot attain to tints they will have to be servants somewhere" (Jour. of Dis., Vol. XI., p. 328).

The duties of the Bishop in Kirtland are here enumerated. They are (a) to keep the Lord's storehouse and receive the funds of the Church in that part of the vineyard (v. 10); that is, to look after the needy and preside over the temporal affairs of the Church; (b) to keep an account of property consecrated for public use, as commanded (Sec. 42:31-2), and administer to the need of the Elders (v. 11), whether these were able to pay for the services rendered, or not (vv. 12-13); the Lord here makes it clear that faithful service in administering in spiritual things is also a contribution to the general funds (vv. 14-15). (c) The Bishop is, further, under obligation to furnish every Elder entitled to it, a certificate, by which the Bishop in Zion may know that the bearer has the right to receive an inheritance (vv. 16-18), he is (d) to receive an account of the labors of every Elder, in order that these might be properly recommended to the Branches they might visit (v. 19); (e) he was, finally, to aid, financially, the "stewards" appointed to look after the literary interests of the Church (Sec. 72:20). "This," we read, "shall be an ensample"—a pattern, or model for imitation—for all Branches of the Church (v. 23). All were to have Bishops with similar duties to perform.

24-6. Members of the Church going to Zion were to carry a Bishop's certificate, or recommend, to show their standing in the Church. "Otherwise he * * * shall not be accounted as a wise steward" (v. 26). Wisdom was required in those who went to Zion. They would show their wisdom in the management of their temporal affairs.

Brigham Young is a striking illustration of wise management. In September, 1833, he came to Kirtland, absolutely destitute, a widower with two children to take care of. He had borrowed a pair of shoes and some other articles of clothing, and he had spent every dollar he had on missionary labors. Of the thirty or forty Elders who came to Kirtland that fall, he was the only one who remained there during the winter. The others went wherever they could obtain higher wages than in Kirtland. He went to work for Brother William F. Cahoon, one of the trustees of the Temple. As for wages, Brother Cahoon divided what little he had with Brigham Young. But, when the work was done, the balance due was paid, and it was subsequently found that none of those who had left Kirtland for higher wages had been able to save as much as he had. He stayed in Kirtland till the year 1837, and then he practically abandoned property valued at $5,000. In Nauvoo he also left some houses, and came to Utah without a farthing, except a span of horses, a carriage and harness, all of which had been given him in payment for a house in Nauvoo. See Journal of Discourses, Vol. XI., pp. 295-6. Brigham Young was a wise steward, because he always placed the interests of the Kingdom of God first.

General Notes

This is the last of thirty-seven Revelations given during the year 1831, the second of the existence of the Church. The development was marvelous. During this year the Prophet moved to Kirtland, and this city was shortly afterwards designated as a gathering place of the Saints. The important office of the Bishopric was instituted (Secs. 41 and 72); the Revelation on Church government was given (Sec. 42); a Church Historian was appointed (47:4), and missionaries were sent to Missouri (Sec. 52). Rules were given for the United Order (Sec. 51), and High Priests were ordained; the Prophet made a trip to Missouri, and shortly afterwards a Revelation was received designating Independence, Jackson County, in that State, as the center of the Land of Zion (Sec. 57); the foundations of Zion were then laid, and the Temple ground dedicated, and at the same time it was predicted that the "blessings" would come after "much tribulation", that is, that the Saints would pass through many trials before Zion would be redeemed. The vision of the Destroyer on the waters was received on the return journey to Kirtland (Sec. 61); a press was bought for the printing of a Church paper at Independence, The Evening and Morning Star, and arrangements were made for the publication of the Book of Commandments and Revelations at the same place.

There is a wonderful feature connected with these Revelations—their Unity. Although neither the Prophet Joseph nor his associates had any pre-arranged plan regarding the work in which they were engaged, yet every Revelation fits into its place perfectly, as does each separate stone which the skilful architect lays in the walls of his magnificent cathedral, and as we follow the development from Section to Section, we perceive that there is a plan so grand, so beautiful, and so well adapted to human needs, as to leave no room for doubt concerning its divine origin. Each Revelation, considered by itself, though full of beauty, may be but a stone detached from the building to which it belongs, but seen as a part of the entire structure, it speaks with convincing eloquence of the wisdom, power, and love of the Divine Builder of the Church, our Lord Jesus Christ.
