Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 74.

BY REVELATION to Joseph Smith the Prophet, this explanation of the First Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians, chapter 7, verse 14, was given, at Hiram, Ohio, January, 1832.

FOR the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband; else were your children unclean, but now are they holy.

Complying with the instructions in the previous Section, the Prophet Joseph resumed his Bible studies, whereupon he received this Revelation. The central thought expressed here is found in the first and last verses, and may be stated thus: Little children, sanctified through the atonement of Jesus Christ, are holy.

Two conclusions follow from this proposition. The first, fully set forth in this Revelation, is, that little children do not need circumcision to become sanctified, as taught by the adherents of the Mosaic faith. The second is equally important, that is, little children are holy being sanctified through the atonement of Jesus Christ.

In the Corinthian Church, some evidently held that when the husband, or wife, had been converted, he, or she, ought to abandon the unconverted partner as unclean and contaminating Not at all! St. Paul says, in substance, that the conversion of one of the partners has brought a sanctifying influence into the family. As Meyer puts it, "The non-believing partner in a marriage * * * becomes partaker—as if by sacred contagion—of the higher, divinely consecrated character of his consort." "Else," the Apostle argues, "were your children unclean." If the wife—this is the argument—must abandon a husband because he is not a Church member, she would also be obliged to abandon her children. But this is not required.

The consecration of the believing parent includes the children. They are sanctified through the atonement of our Lord. They need no ordinance, until they arrive at the age of accountability, when they should be baptized, after proper instruction. Christians were forbidden to marry outside the Church (II. Cor. 6:14), but marriages contracted before conversion were not to be broken up, if the unconverted partner desired to continue the marriage relation.
