Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 75.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Amherst, Ohio, January 25, 1832. The occasion was that of a conference before appointed. Certain Elders, who had encountered difficulty in bringing men to an understanding of their message, desired to learn more in detail as to their immediate duties. This revelation followed. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 242.—Instructions for individual guidance of Elders who are to travel two by two—Necessity of constant prayer and unwavering faith—Directions for the care and support of the families of absent Elders.

VERILY, verily, I say unto you, I who speak even by the voice of my Spirit, even Alpha and Omega, your Lord and your God—

The date of the Amherst Conference* had now arrived. The Elders who had been promised instructions, by revelation, concerning their duties as missionaries, were present, and eager for the word of the Lord through His inspired servant. In answer to prayer this Revelation was received, in which the Lord (1) demands the attention of his servants (1-2); (2) calls them to go on missions (3-5); (3) selects especially (a) M'Lellin and Luke Johnson (6-12); (b Orson Hyde and Samuel H. Smith (13); (c) Lyman Johnson and Orson Pratt (14); (d) Asa Dodds and Calves Wilson (15-16); and (e) Major N. Ashly and Burr Riggs (17); (4) gives general instructions (a) to the Elders (18-22), and (b) to the Church members (23-9); and (5) calls a number of missionaries (30-6).

—————

* At this Conference the Prophet Joseph was ordained as President of the High Priesthood.

—————

At all events, faithful Elders have the promise that they will be crowned with "honor, and glory, and immortality, and eternal life."

(a) M'Lellin and Luke Johnson.

"What is preaching without praying! Sermons are but pulpit performances, learned essays, rhetorical orations, popular lectures, or it may be political harangues, until God gives, in answer to earnest prayer the preparation of the heart, and the answer of the tongue. It is only he who prays that can truly preach. Many a sermon that has shown no intellectual genius and has violated all homiletic rules and standards has had dynamic spiritual force. Somehow it has moved men, melted them, moulded them. The man whose lips are touched by God's living coal from off the altar may even stammer, but his hearers soon find out that he is on fire with one consuming passion to save souls" (Arthur T. Pierson, The Fundamentals, Vol. IX., p. 67).

Even unto the end] The end of their mission. The Lord will be with His servants, as long as they are laboring faithfully in their calling.

(b) Orson Hyde and Samuel H. Smith.

(c) Lyman Johnson and Orson Pratt.

(d) Asa Dodds and Calves Wilson.

15-16. In the Doctrine and Covenants, as in the New Testament and the other inspired writings, there are names of whose bearers nothing more is placed on record. There are several such names in Rom. 16, and there are some in this Revelation. Asa Dodds and Calves Wilson are among them. They were assigned to a mission in the Western States, and were promised victory and exaltation as a reward of faithfulness. Note that the Lord rewards faithfulness, whether the visible success is great, or not.

(e) Major N. Ashley and Burr Riggs.

23-9. In these paragraphs the Lord provides that the families of the missionaries be looked after by the Church members (v. 24); the Elders, before leaving, were to obtain places for those dependent on them, "inasmuch as your brethren are willing to open their hearts" (v. 25). Those who were able to obtain places and support for their families during their absence, were to perform, without fail, the missions to which they had been called (v. 26). To those who were under the necessity of providing for their families, themselves, the Lord says, "Let him provide, and he shall in no wise lose his crown" (v. 28).

Emer Harris] A brother of Martin Harris. Simeon Carter and Emer Harris, at the Conference at Orange, Oct. 25th, 1831, were appointed members of a committee charged with the duty of instructing the Saints on how to conduct their meetings. David Whitmer and Reynolds Cahoon, appointed by the Conference at Hiram, Oct. 11th, 1831, were members of the same committee, as were also Orson Hyde and Hyrum Smith.

Seymour Brunson] Andrew Jenson, Historical Record, notes that he was "a lieutenant-colonel in the Nauvoo Legion, and a prominent Elder in the Church; died in Nauvoo, August 10th, 1840, aged 40 years, 10 months, and 23 days." He solemnized the marriage of Louisa Maria Tanner to Amasa M. Lyman, in Kirtland, 1835 (Hist. Rec., p. 125). In 1838 he preferred the charges against Oliver Cowdery on which this prominent witness to the great Latter-day work was tried by the High Council at Far West. He was also a member of the first High Council organized at Commerce in 1839.

Gideon Carter] He was killed in an encounter with a mob near Far West, in what is known as "the Crooked River Battle," Oct. 24th, 1838. At that time word had reached Far West that one Samuel Bogart, with a band of seventy-five marauders, was committing depredations. Judge Elias Higbee then ordered the military authorities to disperse the mob, and Captain David W. Patten and others volunteered for that expedition. With a company of about seventy-five men, Patten met the marauders at a point near Crooked River, and routed them completely. But in the melee David W. Patten, Gideon Carter, and Patrick O'Bannion were mortally wounded. Carter was left on the ground dead, but his body was afterwards recovered and buried.

35-6. Stephen Burnett and Eden Smith were appointed, a month later, to go on a mission. See Section 80.

General Notes

Referring to the subject of the servants of the Lord being judges, at the end of this dispensation, Parley P. Pratt says:

"He [Joseph Smith] will continue holding those keys through all eternity, and will stand—yes, again in the flesh upon this Earth, as the head of the Latter-day Saints, under Jesus Christ, and under Peter, James and John. He will hold the keys to judge the generation to whom he was sent, and will judge my brethren that preside over me; and will judge me, together with the Apostles ordained by the word of the Lord through him and under his administration. When this is done, those Apostles will judge this generation and the Latter-day Saints; and they will judge them with that judgment which Jesus Christ will give unto them; and they will have the same spirit and the same mind as Jesus Christ, and their judgment will be His judgment, for they will be one * * * Brother Brigham, who now presides over us, will hold the keys under Brother Joseph; and he and his brethren, who hold the keys with him, or under his direction, will judge the people; for they will hold those keys to all eternity, worlds without end. By those keys they will have to judge this generation; and Peter, James, and John will hold the keys to preside over, and judge, and direct Brother Joseph to all eternity; and Jesus Christ will hold the keys over them and over us, under His Father, to whom be all the glory" (Journal of Dis., Vol. V., p. 196).

"With regard to preaching, let a man present himself before the Saints, or go into the world before the nobles and great men of the earth, and let him stand up, full of the Holy Ghost, full of the power of God, and though he may use words and sentences in an awkward style, he will convince and convict more of the truth, than can the most polished orator destitute of the Holy Ghost" (Brigham Young, Jour. of Dis., Vol. IV., p. 21).

Speaking of the financial support of missionaries of the Church, Brigham Young, on one occasion said:

"I came into this Church in the spring of 1832. Previous to my being baptized, I took a mission to Canada at my own expense; and from the time that I was baptized until the day of our sorrow and affliction, at the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum, no summer passed over my head but what I was traveling and preaching, and the only thing I ever received from the Church, during over twelve years, and the only means that ever were given me by the Prophet, that I now recollect, was in 1842, when Brother Joseph sent me the half of a small pig that the brethren had brought to him * * * and that fall Brother Heber C. Kimball * * * was credited $2 in the Church books for one day's services, by Brother Willard Richards, who was then keeping these books. Brother Heber said, 'Blot it out, for I do not want it.' * * * I have traveled and preached, and, at the same tune, sustained my family by my labor and economy" (Ibid., p. 34).

Brigham Young states that it was never hard for him to travel without purse and scrip. As an illustration, he relates his experience in England in 1839. He and his companions had left home, sick and without money. Some time after their arrival in Preston, they decided to begin the publication of a magazine, under the name of The Millennial Star, with Parley P. Pratt as editor. The Star was printed and paid for with borrowed money. Three thousand hymn-books, five thousand Books of Mormon, and thousands of tracts were also printed. Brigham Young remained in England a few days over a year. During that time he paid out $380, expenses incurred by the establishment of the Church in London, in addition to the means expended for printing. When he left, he had paid the debt. He had books, for the mission, to the value of $2,500, and money to pay for the passage home. "And that," he says, "though I had not a sixpence when we first landed in Preston, and I do not know that one of the Twelve had" (Ibid., p. 36).
