Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 76.

A VISION, given to Joseph Smith the Prophet, and Sidney Rigdon, at Hiram, Ohio, February 16, 1832. Prefacing his record of this vision the Prophet wrote: "From sundry revelations which had been received, it was apparent that many important points touching the salvation of man had been taken from the Bible, or lost before it was compiled. It appeared self-evident from what truths were left, that if God rewarded every one according to the deeds done in the body, the term Heaven, as intended for the Saints' eternal home, must include more kingdoms than one." While he and Sidney Rigdon were engaged in studious and doubtless prayerful consideration of this matter, the glorious vision here recorded was given them. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 245.——Revelation of truth, wisdom, and even mysteries promised unto those who are worthy—The eventual resurrection of both just and unjust—The two Elders bear solemn personal testimony that Jesus Christ lives—The expulsion of Lucifer, and his evil activities as Satan on the earth—Awful fate of those who become sons of perdition—Distinctive glories of the celestial, the terrestrial, and the telestial states—Qualifications of souls that shall be assigned to each—Glorious consummation of the Savior's work.

HEAR, O ye heavens, and give ear, O earth, and rejoice ye inhabitants thereof, for the Lord is God, and beside him there is no Savior.

This is one of the grandest and, in some respects, most remarkable visions ever vouchsafed to man in mortality. Human language can but imperfectly portray the glory in the midst of which the various scenes, as a panorama, passed before the minds of the enraptured Prophets of God, quickened by the divine Spirit. "The glory of the Lord shone round about," as on the Mount of Transfiguration. They saw and conversed with the Redeemer of the world, and were given to understand the very mysteries of eternities.

The Prophet Joseph says of this Revelation:

"Every law, every commandment, every promise, every truth, and every point touching the destiny of man, from Genesis to Revelation, where the purity of the Scriptures remains unsullied by the folly of men, goes to show the perfection of the theory, and witnesses the fact that that document is a transcript from the records of the eternal world. The sublimity of the ideas; the purity of the language; the scope for action; the continued duration for completion, in order that the heirs of salvation may confess the Lord and bow the knee; the rewards for faithfulness, and the punishments of sins, are so much beyond the narrowmindedness of men, that every honest man is constrained to exclaim, 'It came from God'" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. I., p. 252).

Charles W. Penrose, in a sermon delivered in Salt Lake City, March 4th, 1883, expressed the appreciation of the Church for this Revelation, in the following words:

"There is nothing in the book called the Bible that can compare with it. It is full of light; it is full of truth; it is full of glory; it is full of beauty. It portrays the future of all the inhabitants of the earth, dividing them into three grand classes or divisions—celestial, terrestrial, and telestial, or as compared to the glory of the sun, the glory of the moon, and the glory of the stars. It shows who will be redeemed, and what redemption they will enjoy; and describes the position the inhabitants of the earth will occupy when they enter into the future state" (Jour. of Dis., Vol. XXIV., p. 92).

This Revelation was received shortly after the return of the Prophet to Hiram, from the Amherst Conference, where he had been ordained President of the High Priesthood. It contains, (1) an introduction (1-10); (2) a statement of the circumstances under which it was given (11-19); (3) a vision of the glory of the Son (20-4); (4) a vision of the fall of Satan (25-9); (5) a vision of the sufferings of the lost (30-49); (6) a vision of those who will come forth in the resurrection of the just (50-70); (7) a vision of the terrestrial world (71-80); (8) a vision of the telestial glory (81-8); (9) a comparison between the three glories (89-112); and (10) the conclusion (113-19).

The Lord is God] There is an all-sufficient reason why all should listen to this Revelation. It is the Lord that speaks; it is Jehovah, and He is God. "Know that Jehovah is God; He it is that made us, and we are His; His people and the sheep of His pasture" (Ps. 100:3). He made Israel of old to be a people for Himself (Deut. 32:6, 15). He gathered, and is still gathering. His Saints, and He owns them as His people. He is God. He is also the Redeemer, and besides Him there is no Savior.

Savior] Deliverer. The expression is used by Isaiah (43:3, 11) where the Lord promises the redemption of Israel; "I gave Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia, and Seba for thee." In the same way He is the Savior, the Redeemer, of His latter-day Zion. There is none besides Him. He will surely "ransom" His inheritance in due time.

The world has almost forgotten that Jehovah, our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, is God. When they think of God, they endeavor to perceive either an imperceptible Being without body and without direct influence on the events of history; or a Thor hurling his flashing, murderous hammer in every direction; or an angry judge opening dungeons and ordering tortures, for His own glory. It is high time the world should hear again that Christ is God, and learn to worship Him who is revealed in Christ Jesus. The only true idea we have of God is the one we can obtain by seeing Him as revealed in His Son. Hence this important Revelation to which the attention of all the world is directed. The Lord Jesus Christ, is God.

Marvelous are his ways] See Isaiah 29:14, where the Prophet predicts the destruction of the wisdom of the wise men, and the concealment of their understanding, and gives the assurance that the Lord will "do a marvelous work" among the people. This was literally fulfilled when the Prophet Joseph was called to lay the foundations of the Church in this dispensation. Again and again the Lord declared, through the Prophet, "Now behold, a marvelous work is about to come forth" (Doctrine and Covenants, Secs. 4:1; 11:1; 18:44). This work far surpassed all human conceptions and calculations.

His years never fail] Never come to an end. There will never be a last year of His existence.

In the Gospels, several occasions are noted on which our Savior manifested His compassion. When He saw the scattered, fainting multitude, without shepherd to take care of them, He was "moved with compassion" (Matt. 9:36; 14:14). He was full of compassion when He met lepers (Mark 1:41), blind (Matt. 20:34); mourners (Luke 7:13), and when He contemplated the fate of Jerusalem in the hands of blind leaders, in rebellion against God (Luke 19:41).

Honor those who serve me] As He is merciful and gracious to those who fear Him, so He takes delight in honoring those who serve Him in righteousness and in truth to the end. Note the difference between these two classes—those that fear Him, and those that serve Him.

11-19. Upon the return of the Prophet Joseph and Sidney Rigdon from the Amherst Conference, the work on the Bible revision was resumed. While studying the Scriptures, they were led to reflect on the great truth that in the hereafter, God will reward all men according to the deeds done in the body, and the conclusion seemed inevitable that "heaven" must include more than one glory. When, in the Bible reading, they came to John 5:29, "And shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation," the whole subject was opened up before their minds in visions, and they were commanded to write them as they saw them in the spirit.

20-24. The first vision given was one of the glory of the Son on the right hand of the Father. They saw holy angels and those "who are sanctified" before His throne, worshiping God and the Lamb. They also heard a voice testifying that the Son is the Only begotten of the Father and the Creator.

* * * *

"There is no impropriety, therefore, in speaking of Jesus Christ as the Elder Brother of the rest of human kind. That He is by spiritual birth Brother to the rest of us, is indicated in Hebrews: 'Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people' (Heb. 2:17). Let it not be forgotten, however, that He is essentially greater than any and all others, by reason (1) of His seniority as the oldest and firstborn; (2) of His unique status in the flesh as the offspring of a mortal mother and of an immortal, or resurrected and glorified Father; (3) of His selection and foreordination as the one and only Redeemer and Savior of the race; and (4) of His transcendent sinlessness" (The Father and the Son, a Doctrinal Exposition by the First Presidency and the Twelve, Millennial Star, Vol. LXXVIII., pp. 482, 500).

Note that the worlds were "created," which means, "formed," "organized." They were not "made" out of "nothing," or ex nihilo, as the learned express that impossible proposition. Nor are they without beginning, in their present form. The world, as we know it, has a beginning; it will have an end. Matter itself has neither beginning nor end, as far as mortals can know.

John, the beloved, in his visions on Patmos, saw the Lord in the midst of the seven candlesticks, or the seven principal churches in Asia Minor, among which the Apostle had been laboring for some years. He describes His appearance (Rev. 1:13-16). John had known the Master intimately in the flesh, but in His glory He inspired even John with terror (v. 17). In this vision of Joseph and Sidney, the element of terror was absent. The Lord had opened their eyes and quickened them beforehand, so that they could gaze on His glory though its radiance surpassed that of the sun.

25-9. The curtain here falls on the glorious scene in which the throne of God and His Son form the radiant center, and another picture is rolled up before the view of the awe-stricken spectators. They see Lucifer rebelling against the Son (v. 25), and thrust down from the divine presence; they see the heavens weeping over him, as he goes to perdition, a fallen being; they see him continuing in rebellion and making war upon the Saints, for the purpose of taking away the kingdom from the Son of God.

God's well-beloved Son was also there and He said, "Here am I, send me." But He added, "Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever."

Lucifer proposed to destroy the free agency of man and save every soul by compulsion. The Son of God proposed salvation by free choice on the part of man.

Christ's proposition was accepted; wherefore Lucifer decided to carry out his plan without the consent of the heavenly Council, and to subject the human race to his will. He began his agitation for followers among the spirits, and such was his eloquence and influence that he turned away one-third part of the hosts of heaven from the Son of God (Sec. 29:36, 37). He and his followers were cast out. But they have never ceased to oppose the Son of God. They have never ceased to endeavor to establish their kingdom among the children of men, and their efforts are visible in false doctrines, corrupt morals, strife and contention, persecution, and abortive efforts to combat sin by legislation instead of by the influence of the gospel.

Lucifer] The name means "Light-bearer" and indicates the exalted position of him who was so called, for a "light-bearer" is a sun in the firmament. But when he was cast out, he was called Perdition.

Again the scene changes. The shadows deepen as the picture of mystery and despair comes into view for a brief moment and then fades away. Some of the children of men will finally be lost, through the influence of the adversary, and this vision is concerning them.

Two questions are involved in the subject of this vision: (a) Who are the lost? (b) What is their fate? To these important questions this Revelation gives the answer.

"The 'sons of perdition' are those who have received the gospel, those to whom the Father has revealed the Son; those who know something concerning the plan of salvation; those who have had keys placed in their hands by which they could unlock the mysteries of eternity; those who received power sufficient to overcome all things, and who, instead of using it for their own salvation, and in the interest of the salvation of others, prostituted that power and turned away from that which they knew to be true, denying the Son of God and putting Him to open shame. All such live in the spirit of error, and they love it and roll it under their tongue as a sweet morsel; they are governed by Satan; becoming servants to him whom they list to obey, they become the sons of perdition, doomed to suffer the wrath of God reserved for the Devil and his angels," Charles W. Penrose, Journal of Discourses, Vol. XXIV., p. 93).

It follows from what has been revealed concerning the sons of Perdition, that they are but a small portion of the human race. Formerly, the gloomy view was widely held that the greater number by far of human beings were doomed to eternal hell-fire. A theologian of the old school said that souls were daily falling into the sulphury lake, as numerous as snowflakes during a winter storm. But this is all wrong. John the Revelator represents the redeemed as "a great multitude which no man could number" (Rev. 7:9). The lost are nowhere so represented. Our Lord will finally triumph over the adversary, even in regard to the number of His followers. Glory to Him for evermore!

36-49. The fate, or the final destiny, of the sons of Perdition, is set forth in these paragraphs, as far as God has deemed it wise to give any revelation upon that subject.

39-43. These paragraphs point to the fact that all but sons of perdition will be redeemed and obtain some place in one of the three kingdoms. See verses 111-112. Alma states that sons of perdition, while not redeemed because they partake of the second death cannot die again:

"Then I say unto you, they shall be as though there had been no redemption made; for they cannot be redeemed (i.e. from Satan's power) according to God's justice; and they cannot die, seeing there is no more corruption. (Alma 12:17-18.)

To reign with the devil] This is a peculiar, but a highly significant expression. The Lord is the sovereign ruler. He reigns. Sin is said to reign, when men submit to its behests. Grace is also said to reign (Rom. 5:21). The Saints will reign with Christ. But here the sons of Perdition are said to "reign" with the Devil and his angels in eternity, in the place where the worm dieth not and the fire is not quenched. The conflict between Lucifer and the Son has been, from the beginning, for sovereignty. Men have ranged themselves on one side or the other. The Saints are, and will be, citizens and officials in the Kingdom of God and there they will "reign," as citizens in a free country. The sons of Perdition are, and will remain, citizens and officials in the kingdom of Lucifer. But that kingdom will, finally, be confined to Gehenna. There they will "reign," under such laws and rules as obtain in the kingdom of the Devil, and of which we have had numerous illustrations in human history, during the dark ages of ignorance, superstition, tyranny, and iniquity. Think of a place where the evil passions of human beings and evil spirits rage, unrestrained by the influence of the gospel! Such is the kingdom of the Devil, where the sons of Perdition will reign.

Which is their torment] Not literal fire! The necessity of living in a place where the Devil is the supreme ruler and applies the law of compulsion to minutest details of existence, and where, consequently, hatred consumes every heart, is torment enough.

50-70. From a sense of dark despair, the vision again changes, this time to one of effulgent glory, as those who come forth in the resurrection of the just pass before view.

Two questions are here answered: (a) Who are those resurrected beings? (b) What will be their final glory?

(a) Who Are They?

Receive the Holy Spirit] They have not only been baptized in water, but have received the Holy Spirit by the laying on of hands. They are "born" of water and the Spirit; not of water alone; nor of Spirit alone; neither alone would be a complete baptism.

Some take exception to the glorious doctrine here taught, that those who are called forth in the first resurrection are destined to become gods. There is no valid reason for objection. The expression "gods" is applied to men, in the Bible as well as here. The Lord said to Moses, "I have made thee a God to Pharaoh" (Ex. 7:1). The Psalmist declares that "God standeth in the congregation of the mighty; he judgeth among the gods" (82:1). And again, "I have said, Ye are gods; and all of you are the children of the Most High (Ps. 82:6). Here the judges in Israel are called gods, and they are rebuked for dishonoring their exalted position by judging unjustly. Our Lord was accused of blasphemy because He claimed Godhood. His answer was an appeal to this Psalm (John 10:34). The judges of old, He said, were called gods and sons of the Most High, by virtue of their calling; was it, then, blasphemy for Him to call Himself the "Son of God?" The doctrine, therefore, is perfectly Scriptural, and is denied only by those who, like the opponents of our Lord, do not know the Scriptures. Says Brigham Young:

"Jesus is the elder Brother, and all the brethren shall come in for a share with Him; for an equal share according to their works and calling, and they shall be crowned with Him. Do you read of any such thing as the Savior praying that the Saints may be one with Him, as He and the Father are one? The Bible is full of such doctrine, and there is no harm in it, as long as it agrees with the New Testament * * * The Lord created you and me for the purpose of becoming gods * * * How many will become thus privileged? Those who honor the Father and the Son; those who receive the Holy Ghost, and magnify their calling; and are found pure and holy; they shall be crowned in the presence of the Father and the Son" (Jour. of Dis., Vol. III., p. 93).

"The Scriptures are a mixture of very strange doctrines to the Christian world, who are blindly led by the blind. I will refer to another Scripture. 'Now,' says God, when He visited Moses in the bush * * * 'Thou shalt be a god unto the children of Israel.' God said, 'Thou shalt be a god unto Aaron, and he shall be thy spokesman.' I believe those gods that God reveals as gods to be sons of God, who exalt themselves to be gods even from before the foundation of the world, and are the only gods I have reverence for (Joseph Smith, Hist. of the Church, Vol. VI., p 478).

"Gods have an ascendancy over the angels, who are ministering servants. In the resurrection, some are raised to be angels; others are raised to become gods" (Joseph Smith, Hist. of the Church, Vol. V., p. 426).

(b) What Is Their Final Glory?

Where God and Christ are judge of all] That insures absolute justice and perfection in the Record. No name will be entered by mistake; none will be left out by mistake. No one worthy of a place in the Book will be forgotten; no unworthy name will be inscribed. Both the Father and the Son are interested in the Record. Infinite justice and infinite mercy stand guardians over its pages.

On January 21st, 1836, while the Prophet Joseph and his associates were attending to holy ordinances in Kirtland, the heavens were opened to their vision. The Prophet says he beheld the Celestial Kingdom of God and the glory thereof. He saw the gate through which the heirs of that Kingdom will enter, and it appeared to him like circling flames of fire; also the radiant throne of God, whereon were seated the Father and the Son. He saw streets which seemed to be paved with gold. He saw also Adam, Abraham, his own father and mother, and his brother Alvin, who departed this life in 1824, and he marveled. Then the voice of the Lord came to him:

"All who have died without a knowledge of this gospel, who would have received it if they had been permitted to tarry shall be heirs of the Celestial Kingdom of God; also all that shall die henceforth without a knowledge of it, who would have received it with all their hearts, shall be heirs of that Kingdom, for I, the Lord, will judge all men according to their works, according to the desire of their hearts."

The Prophet, further, beheld that all children who die before they arrive at the years of accountability, are saved in the celestial kingdom of heaven (Hist. of the Church, Vol. II., p. 380-1).

In an address at Nauvoo, May 12th, 1844, the Prophet said, in part:

"All men who are immortal dwell in everlasting burnings.

"In order for you to receive your children to yourselves you must have a promise—some ordinance, some blessing, in order to ascend above principalities, or else it may be an angel. They must rise just as they died; we can there hail our lovely infants with the same glory—the same loveliness in the celestial glory, where they all enjoy alike. They differ in stature, in size; the same glorious spirit gives them the likeness of glory and bloom; the old man with his silvery hairs will glory in bloom and beauty. No man can describe it to you—no man can write it" (Ibid., Vol. VI., p. 366).

71-80. Another grand scene is now presented. The seers have been given a view of the celestial world and have learned that those who have accepted the gospel in this world, and remained faithful, and all who have lived before the restoration of the gospel and would have accepted it, had they heard it; also those who live now in ignorance of the gospel and who would gladly believe, if they had an opportunity of hearing it; and, finally, all infants who die before the age of accountability, will have an inheritance in the celestial kingdom. But what about those who have heard the gospel and rejected it, and yet have remained morally upright men and women? What about those who have passed away. and those who live, in ignorance of the truth, and who would not have accepted it here, even if they had heard it? These questions are answered in this vision. There is a terrestrial, as well as a celestial world. There is the glory of the moon, as well as of the sun, and they will be partakers of this lesser glory.

76-78. Receive of his glory * * * They are bodies terrestrial] Because they were honorable men, free from lying, adultery and kindred sins, they will receive of the Savior's glory. In other words they will be entitled to visits from the Son, but not from the Father. They do not "obtain the crown over the kingdom of our God."

"Are we all magnifying our calling? No; we are not! We have indeed a sort of skeleton fixed up; but I think sometimes it needs flesh on the bones and the breath of life, the Spirit of the Living God breathed into it. We need to realize the position we occupy and the duties devolving upon us. We see this in almost everything around us associated with the Church and kingdom of God. While many men are diligent and their whole hearts are engaged in the work of God, there are a great many astride of the fence * * * And yet they are High Priests, and Seventies and Elders. What will be the condition of such? We are told that 'Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in Thy name and in Thy name have cast out devils, and in Thy name done many wonderful works?' Yet to all such he will say; 'Depart from me, ye that work iniquity.' You say that means the outsiders? No, it does not. Do they do many wonderful works in the name of Jesus? No; if they do anything, it is done in the name of themselves or of the devil. Sometimes they will do things in the name of God; but it is simply an act of blasphemy. This means you, Latter-day Saints, who heal the sick, cast out devils and do many wonderful things in the name of Jesus. And yet how many we see among this people of this class, that become careless, and treat lightly the ordinances of God's house and the Priesthood of the Son of God; yet they think they are going by and by, to slide into the kingdom of God; but I tell you unless they are righteous and keep their covenants they will never go there. Hear it, ye Latter-day Saints! Hear it, ye Seventies and ye High Priests! Whatsoever a man soweth that shall he reap. * * * You have the Priesthood, and if you do not magnify that Priesthood, God will require it at your hands. He expects us all to be alive and energetic, honoring our callings, our Priesthood and our God; for he expects it of all of us. Now hear it, for as sure as God lives it will be so. * * * If you aim at a celestial glory you must have a celestial spirit and be governed by it. You must be honest, virtuous and benevolent; you must be men full of the Holy Ghost, magnifying your Priesthood, if you would obtain an entrance into the kingdom of God."—President John Taylor, Salt Lake Stake Conference, January 6, 1879.

Speaking of the departed ones, President Brigham Young (Jour. of Dis., Vol. III., p. 95) makes the statement that the spirits of the righteous and those of the ungodly, all go to "prison" after death. If the word "prison" is used as a synonym for hades, the statement is perfectly correct, for hades is understood to be the domain of all the dead. But the righteous and the unrighteous are, of course, not in the same locality in that domain. President Young also explains that the wicked, after death, are unhappy, while the righteous dead have passed beyond the reach of the adversary and are resting in peace until the morning of the resurrection, and this makes it clear that he did not mean to say that all the departed spirits are in the same place or the same condition.

The prison into which the antediluvians who perished in the flood were cast is the same place where the spirits of men all through the ages have gone. The Lord said to Enoch: "But behold, these which thine eyes are upon shall perish in the floods; and behold, I will shut them up; a prison have I prepared for them. And That which I have chosen hath plead before my face, wherefore, he suffereth for their sins; inasmuch as they will repent in the day that my Chosen shall return unto me, and until that day they shall be in torment."-(Moses 7:38-39.) Alma tells us that the righteous are received in a state of happiness, which is called paradise, a state of rest, but those who have done evil are "cast out into outer darkness" where they are in a state of "awful, fearful looking for the fiery indignation of the wrath of God upon them."(Alma 40:12-14.)

"If we accept the record of St. Peter's speeches in the Acts as a true record, and compare the assured clearness and freedom of his teaching there with his imperfect insight into the character of our Lord's work during the whole period of His ministry prior to the resurrection, we can scarcely fail to see in the interpretation of His words, 'Thou shalt not leave my soul in hell,' the first fruits of the method of prophetic interpretation which he had learned from our Lord Himself when He expounded to His disciples the things that were written concerning Himself in the Law, and the Prophets, and the Psalms (Luke 24:44)" (Cambridge Bible, Note on I. Peter 3:19).

St. Peter, then, had heard from Christ Himself of His descent into hades, the visit to the "prison," and the preaching of the gospel there.

81-88. Again there is a change of scene. A lesser glory than the terrestrial passes before the view of the seers. When the gospel had been preached on both sides of the veil, and those who have accepted it are gathered into celestial, or terrestrial, spheres, there still remains a large class, consisting of those who have not received the gospel, and yet not committed the unpardonable sin of denying the Holy Spirit.

What will be their fate? And who are they? For them there is the telestial glory.

Can anybody who has been thrust down to hell] be an "heir of salvation?" Yes. (v. 88.) Hell must deliver up its dead (Rev. 20:13) and they are to be judged according to their works. The Lord calls this a kingdom of glory, and therefore it is a kingdom of salvation as they are freed from the devil and his angels in the final resurrection. Salvation is condition of degree. The inhabitants of this kingdom do not get what is called an exaltation, for this blessing is reversed for those who become heirs of the celestial kingdom. Those who enter the telestial kingdom are judged at death and thrust down to hell. They receive their final judgment at the last day.

"How much does it take to prepare a man or woman, or any other being, to become angels to the devil, to suffer with him to all eternity? Just as much as it does to prepare a man to go into the celestial kingdom, into the presence of the Father and the Son, and to be made an heir to His kingdom and all his glory, and be crowned with crowns of glory, immortality, and eternal lives" (Brigham Young, Jour. of Dis., Vol. III., p. 93).

In glory] This means in power, knowledge, privilege and dominion, the celestial exceeds the other kingdoms in that its inhabitants have obtained the fulness and have become the sons of God. The terrestrial, while limited, has greater privileges and knowledge than the telestial.

In power] In the world beyond, as here, there are "powers that be," officials who hold authority delegated to them by the Lord. In the terrestrial world such divine authority exceeds by far that held in the telestial sphere.

In might, and in dominion] The remark just made applies also to these. "Might" refers to the ability to do, or perform whatever must be done; "dominion" refers to the extent of the field of action. The terrestrials have more intelligence, more authority, more strength, and a larger expanse in which to operate, than the telestials.

Paul also speaks of "thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers" (Col. 1:16); and of "principality, and power, and might, and dominion," (Eph. 1:21) alluding to different degrees of authority in the government of the world beyond. They were created, or appointed by our Lord, and when He was resurrected He was placed "far above" all these various authorities, namely upon the right hand of the Supreme Throne, as co-regent with the Father (Eph. 1:20-1).

96-8. This is a repetition of the wonderful truth that one glory differs from another in degree, and another important truth is added, that in the telestial glory there are many degrees, just as there are many gradations of brilliancy among the stars.

99-112. These paragraphs contain additional information concerning the inhabitants of the telestial sphere. Among them are those who have followed religious leaders and formed churches and sects, but who have refused to accept the gospel here, or the testimony of Jesus beyond the veil; they have refused to enter into the everlasting covenant and to gather with the Saints (vv. 99-102).

Among them are also "liars, and sorcerers, and adulterers, and whoremongers, and whosoever loves and makes a lie" (v. 103). In the Revelation by John this class is said to be excluded from the celestial city (Rev. 22:15). The reader of this portion of the Revelation by John might ask, Why are they not in the bottomless pit with the sons of Perdition? The answer is found in this Section of the Doctrine and Covenants: Because they had not committed the unpardonable sin. Having suffered all the consequences of their transgressions and paid the "uttermost farthing," they have been released. They have suffered "the wrath of God on the earth" (v. 104), for even here the way of the transgressor is hard. "They have suffered the vengeance of eternal fire," and through these sufferings they have learned submission to the will of God (v. 110), and they can, therefore, enjoy telestial happiness (v. 105), through the redemption of Jesus Christ (vv. 106-8). Their redemption is the completion of Christ's work as a Savior.

113-19. The vision here recorded is one of the most remarkable that any mortal ever had. The record, however, contains but a part of that which passed before the view of the favored seers.

General Notes

In one portion of this Revelation the eternal misery of a certain class of apostates is graphically set forth. But if such opponents of the Kingdom of God would tell the truth about themselves, they would reveal the fact that their sufferings have already commenced. Lyman E. Johnson, the first to be called to the Apostleship when the first Council of Twelve was organized, fn left the Church, but he never had a really happy day after that. According to President Brigham Young he, on one occasion, said, at a meeting of the Council:

"Brethren,—I will call you brethren—I will tell you the truth. If I could believe Mormonism—it is no matter whether it is true or not—but If I could believe Mormonism as I did when I traveled with you and preached, if I possessed the world I would give it. I would give anything. I would suffer my right hand to be cut off, if I could believe it again. Then I was full of joy and gladness. My dreams were pleasant. When I awoke in the morning, my spirit was cheerful. I was happy by day and by night, full of peace and joy and thanksgiving. But now it is darkness, pain, sorrow, misery in the extreme. I have never since seen a happy moment" (Jour. of Dis., Vol. XIX., p. 41).

All men will be judged "according to their works," but all will not be judged in the same way, or at the same time, "He that heareth my word, and believeth on him that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation" (John 5:24). "Condemnation" here means "judgment." [^1] They shall not come into "judgment." There is a difference between the status of a son, or daughter, appearing before a father, and a stranger standing as a transgressor before a judge. "If we become the sons of God, we shall be joint heirs with Jesus Christ to all the inheritances that the Father hath prepared for the faithful."

Some people deny the existence of the Devil and evil spirits. Heber C. Kimball relates:

"When I was in England, Brother George D. Watt was the first man baptized * * * The night previous * * * I had a vision * * * I saw legions of wicked spirits that night, as plain as I now see you, and they came as near to me as you now are, and company after company of them rushed towards me; and Brother Hyde and Brother Richards also saw them. It was near the break of day, and I looked upon them, as I now look upon you" (Journal of Dis., Vol. III., p. 229).

Brigham Young: "When Lucifer, the Son of the Morning, was cast out * * * he came here, and one-third part of the spirits in heaven came with him. Do you suppose that one-third part of all the beings that existed in eternity came with him? No, but one-third part of the spirits that were begotten and organized and brought forth to become tenants of fleshly bodies to dwell upon this Earth; they forsook Jesus Christ, the rightful heir, and joined with Lucifer, the Son of the Morning, and came to this Earth; they got here first. As soon as Mother Eve made her appearance in the Garden of Eden, the Devil was on hand" (Ibid., p. 368-9).

"The Lamanites, or Indians, are just as much the children of our Father and God as we are. So also are the Africans. But we are also the children of adoption through obedience to the gospel of His Son. Why are so many of the inhabitants of the Earth cursed with a skin of blackness? It comes in consequence of their fathers rejecting the power of the Holy Priesthood, and the law of God. They will go down to death. And when all the rest of the children have received their blessings in the Holy Priesthood, then that curse will be removed from the seed of Cain, and they will then come up and possess the Priesthood, and receive all the blessings which we now are entitled to" (Brigham Young, Jour. of Dis., Vol. XI., p. 272).

——— Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Sea of glass] St. John, in this chapter of the Revelation, is taken up to heaven, where thrones were placed. There was the central Throne, and seated upon it One "who was to look like a jasper and a sardine stone." There were twenty-four thrones occupied by Elders in white raiment. There were seven lamps burning symbolizing the "seven spirits of God," and there was a "sea of glass like unto crystal." In the Temple of Solomon there was an immense basin called "a molten sea" (I. Kings 7:23). In the Temple in heaven, of which the temples on Earth are feeble representations, there is a glassy sea, calm, transparent, and solid, and here we are informed that this "sea" is "the Earth in its sanctified, immortal, and eternal state." The "sea" connected with the temples of God is a baptismal font. It represents the Earth. All who desire access to the Church of Jesus Christ must come through the baptismal font, and be buried with Christ.
