Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 77.

REVELATION given to Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Hiram, Ohio, March, 1832.—An explanation of part of the Revelation of John.

Q. WHAT is the sea of glass spoken of by John, 4th chapter, and 6th verse of the Revelation?

A. It is the earth, in its sanctified, immortal, and eternal state.

"This Earth will become a celestial body—be like a sea of glass, or like a Urim and Thummim; and when you wish to know anything, you can look in this Earth and see all the eternities of God. We shall make our homes here, and go on our missions as we do now" (Brigham Young, Jour. of Dis., Vol. VIII., p. 200). See also Sec. 130:9.

A. They are figurative expressions, used by the Revelator, John, in describing heaven, the paradise of God, the happiness of man, and of beasts, and of creeping things, and of the fowls of the air; that which is spiritual being in the likeness of that which is temporal; and that which is temporal in the likeness of that which is spiritual; the spirit of man in the likeness of his person, as also the spirit of the beast, and every other creature which God has created.

A. They are limited to four individual beasts, which were shown to John, to represent the glory of the classes of beings in their destined order or sphere of creation, in the enjoyment of their eternal felicity.

A. Their eyes are a representation of light and knowledge, that is, they are full of knowledge; and their wings are a representation of power, to move, to act, etc.

It is needless to say that many opinions have been expressed concerning these creatures. One very ancient idea is that they represent the four gospels, Mark being the lion, Matthew the man, Luke the ox, and John the eagle. Others see in them a representation of all created beings, and others hold that the lion represents Christ's royalty; the calf His sacrifice; the man His humanity, and the eagle His union with the Father. The explanation in the text is natural, easy of comprehension, and full of meaning.

A. We are to understand that these elders whom John saw, were elders who had been faithful in the work of the ministry and were dead; who belonged to the seven churches, and were then in the paradise of God.

A. We are to understand that it contains the revealed will, mysteries, and works of God; the hidden things of his economy concerning this earth during the seven thousand years of its continuance, or its temporal existence.

"By the seven thousand years of temporal existence is meant the time of the earth's duration from the fall of Adam to the end of time, which will come after the Millennium and 'a little season' which will follow. The earth and all on it were in a spiritual condition before the fall, for mortality had not come bringing temporal conditions. We are now living in the second period of the earth's history, which is referred to as being a telestial condition. In other words, a condition where wickedness and all the vicissitudes of mortality endure. It is the earth and its inhabitants in the fallen state which Adam brought through his transgression. This condition will continue until Christ comes." (Ch. History and Modern Revelation, p. 64, second series.)

A. We are to understand that the first seal contains the things of the first thousand years, and the second also of the second thousand years, and so on until the seventh.

Some ancient books consisted of parchment rolled round a piece of wood. This book contained seven skins, rolled upon one another. When the first seal was broken, the first skin was unrolled, and was found to contain a hieroglyphic painting, as described in ch. 6:2-12. Each skin contained some drawing. Ancient books of the East were often beautifully illustrated in this manner.

A. We are to understand that they are four angels sent forth from God, to whom is given power over the four parts of the earth, to save life and to destroy; these are they who have the everlasting gospel to commit to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people; having power to shut up the heavens, to seal up unto life, or to cast down to the regions of darkness.

A. We are to understand that the angel ascending from the east is he to whom is given the seal of the living God over the twelve tribes of Israel; wherefore, he crieth unto the four angels having the everlasting gospel, saying: Hurt not the earth, neither the sea, nor the trees, till we have sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads. And, if you will receive it, this is Elias which was to come to gather together the tribes of Israel and restore all things.

A. They are to be accomplished in the sixth thousand years, or the opening of the sixth seal.

A. We are to understand that those who are sealed are high priests, ordained unto the holy order of God, to administer the everlasting gospel; for they are they who are ordained out of every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, by the angels to whom is given power over the nations of the earth, to bring as many as will come to the church of the Firstborn.

A. We are to understand that as God made the world in six days, and on the seventh day he finished his work, and sanctified it, and also formed man out of the dust of the earth, even so, in the beginning of the seventh thousand years will the Lord God sanctify the earth, and complete the salvation of man, and judge all things, and shall redeem all things, except that which he hath not put into his power, when he shall have sealed all things, unto the end of all things; and the sounding of the trumpets of the seven angels are the preparing and finishing of his work, in the beginning of the seventh thousand years—the preparing of the way before the time of his coming.

A. They are to be accomplished after the opening of the seventh seal, before the coming of Christ.

A. We are to understand that it was a mission, and an ordinance, for him to gather the tribes of Israel; behold, this is Elias, who, as it is written, must come and restore all things.

A. They are two prophets that are to be raised up to the Jewish nation in the last days, at the time of the restoration. and to prophesy to the Jews after they are gathered and have built the city of Jerusalem in the land of their fathers.

General Notes

In the opening words of the Revelation John says, "Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the words of this prophecy, and keep those things which are written therein" (1:3), but, notwithstanding this promise, the book is commonly left unread. The prophetic part of it is mostly regarded as an unsolvable riddle. And to those who read it, a multitude of opinions concerning the meaning of the visions described present themselves, until Apocalyptic exegesis appears to be a Babylonian babble.

The reason for this confusion is that the modern interpreters have lost the key to the book. The Revelation of John can never be understood by anyone who supposes that the Church of Christ has remained in uninterrupted activity and development from its first organization till the present time. That book was written to show that the Church would conquer paganism, but that it would itself be driven into exile and remain in absolute obscurity for 1260 "days"—prophetic years of 354 days each—and that then it would again be established by messengers from heaven, preparatory to the second advent and the Millennium. If this purpose of the book is kept in view, it becomes intelligible. It is then also seen why he who reads it and they who hear are blessed; they have in this sublime record the "more sure word of prophecy," shining as a light in a dark place, indicating the entrance to the true Church of latter days. In the 10th chapter they see the coming of the mighty angel with the "Little book" open, and hear his message to the world. In the 14th chapter again, they view the angel with the everlasting gospel, flying in midheaven, and delivering his divine message.

The Book of Revelation is one of the grandest books in sacred literature, and the Lord clearly designs that the Saints should become familiar with it. Else, why this Revelation in the Doctrine and Covenants?

But this Revelation is not a complete interpretation of the book. It is a key. A key is a very small part of the house. It unlocks the door through which an entrance may be gained, but after the key has been turned, the searcher for treasure must find it for himself. It is like entering a museum in which the students must find out for themselves what they desire to know. The sources of information are there.

The Lord has, in this Section, given His people a key to the book. He explains the "sea of glass," the "four living creatures," the "four and twenty Elders," the "book," the "seals," the "four angels," and the fifth angel with the "seal" of God; the "sealing," the "sounding of trumpets," the "locusts," the "four angels" from Euphrates, an "angel with the little book," and the "two witnesses." From the key thus given, from the Old Testament prophecies, and from history, ecclesiastical and political, it should be possible to interpret the rest. As Champollion, by the key furnished in the brief test on the Rosetta stone, was able to open the secrets of Egyptian hieroglyphics, so the Bible student should be able to read the Apocalypse with a better understanding of it, by the aid of this key.
