Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 78.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Hiram, Ohio, March, 1832. The Order given of the Lord to Enoch [Joseph Smith, Jun.] for the purpose of establishing the poor. In the documentary history of the Church, vol. 1, p. 255, appears this note: It was not always desirable that the individuals whom the Lord addressed in revelations should at the time be known by the world, and hence in this and in some subsequent revelations the brethren were addressed by other than their own names. The temporary necessity having passed for keeping the names of the individuals addressed unknown, their real names were subsequently given in brackets.—A fuller organization of the people for the regulation of their temporal affairs necessary—Spirit of equality among the Saints inculcated—Additional revelation from time to time to be given—Membership in the Church of the Firstborn defined.

THE Lord spake unto Enoch [Joseph Smith, Jun.], saying: Hearken unto me, saith the Lord your God, who are ordained unto the high priesthood of my church, who have assembled yourselves together;

During the month of March, 1832, the Prophet Joseph was engaged on the Bible revision. He continued to reside at the house of Father Johnson, at Hiram. This is one of the four Revelations received during that month. It is addressed to the High Priesthood of the Church. In it, the Lord taught His people (1) that equality was necessary (1-7); and (2) that the Saints in Zion needed counsel (8-10); (3) gave them a commandment to organize themselves (11-16), and (4) promised certain blessings (17-22).

l 5. That you may come up unto the crown prepared for you, and be made rulers over many kingdoms, saith the Lord God, the Holy One of Zion, who hath established the foundations of Adam-ondi-Ahman;

In the legal document securing to the donor his stewardship, the Bishop leased to him the property described to be used "as to him shall seem meet and proper." The donor agreed to pay the taxes and to turn over to the Bishop all the accumulations over and above what he needed for the support of himself and family. The Bishop bound himself to support the donor out of the Church funds, in case of sickness and inability to work, while he was a Church member (Whitney's History of Utah, Vol. I., p. 90-1).

Above all other creatures beneath the celestial world] The term "creatures" is used here in its widest meaning, to signify all that is created, and refers especially to the various organizations in the world, whether ecclesiastical, political, financial, or industrial.

Adam-ondi-Ahman] Rendered, by Orson Pratt, "the Valley of God." He says:

"Adam-ondi-Ahman, the Valley of God, where Adam dwelt, was located about fifty miles north of Jackson County, in the State of Missouri. The Lord has revealed to us that Adam dwelt there toward the latter period of his probation. Whether he had lived in that region of country from the earliest period of his existence on the Earth, we know not. He might have lived thousands of miles distant, in his early days" (Journal of Dis., Vol. XVI., p. 48). Comp. Sec. 116.

The place was settled by Lyman Wight in 1836 or 37. In the spring of 1838 the Prophet Joseph, Sidney Rigdon, and George W. Robinson went up to Wight's Ferry for the purpose of selecting a city plat. They did so at a place which was called Spring Hill, but which the Prophet named Adam-ondi-Ahman, as instructed by the Lord, "because," said He, "it is the place where Adam should come to visit his people, or the Ancient of Days shall sit, as spoken of by Daniel the Prophet." Settlers flocked rapidly to the place, and that summer about 200 houses had been built, while many families lived in their wagons. On the 28th of June, 1838, a Stake was organized, with John Smith as president and Reynolds Cahoon and Lyman Wight as counselors. The influx of Church members and the rapid growth of the new settlement excited the animosity of the neighbors. When an armed mob threatened Far West, Lyman Wight, with 120 mounted men went from Adam-ondi-Ahman to assist the Saints at Far West, and in their absence a mob despoiled their homes and destroyed the prosperous settlement. The site of the city is now in a pasture, and nothing remains but broken rock and brick to mark the spots where there once were homes and business houses.
