Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 81.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Hiram, Ohio, March, 1832.—Frederick G. Williams called to be a High Priest and a Counselor in the First Presidency of the Church.

VERILY, verily, I say unto you my servant Frederick G. Williams: Listen to the voice of him who speaketh, to the word of the Lord your God, and hearken to the calling wherewith you are called, even to be a high priest in my church, and a counselor unto my servant Joseph Smith, Jun.;

1-7. Frederick G. Williams was not ordained a counselor in the First Presidency until March 18th, 1833. A Revelation was given on March 8th, that year, on that subject (See Sec. 90:6). This Revelation seems to have been given to prepare him for the important calling that awaited him. The Lord told him that the keys of the kingdom had been given to Joseph. Rebellion against the Prophet would, therefore, be disloyalty to Him who gave Joseph the keys. He promised Williams blessings, it he would be faithful. His duties were, to "succor the weak, lift up the hands which hang down, and strengthen the feeble knees." The office of the First Presidency, as here outlined, is one of salvation under the great Captain of Salvation. Of Him, too, it was said, "A bruised reed shall He not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench, till he send forth judgment unto victory" (Matt. 12:20). To Frederick G. Williams our Lord says, "If thou art faithful unto the end, thou shalt have a crown of immortality." See also Sec. 64:21.

General Notes

Attention may be called, at this time, to the fact that on the 25th of March, 1832, the Prophet Joseph and Sidney Rigdon were violently assaulted by a mob consisting of apostates and individuals whose passions had been excited by false and libelous newspaper articles written by Ezra Booth. But there is no Revelation occasioned by that event. There is no denunciation of the brutes who thirsted for the blood of the servants of God. In the Revelation given immediately after that event, the Lord says, "Leave judgment alone with me, for it is mine, and I will repay" (See 82:23). Never was the Spirit of Christ manifested to a greater degree. The mobbing took place on a Saturday night, and the Prophet and his friends spent many hours attending to his injuries, but the next morning, he preached the gospel as usual, and among the audience were some of the mobbers, including Simonds Ryder.

Some people apostatize for very trivial reasons. Simonds Ryder furnishes an illustration of this. He received a letter at one time, in which the Prophet Joseph and Sidney Rigdon informed him that it was the will of the Lord that he should preach the gospel. In this letter, as in the Revelation (Sec. 52:37), his surname was spelled with an "i" instead of "y," and that was his pretext for apostatizing (Hist. of the Church, Vol. I., p. 261).

Many of the individuals who took part in this murderous assault came to a tragic end. One had an attack of a spinal affection; another died of cholera, and another ended his days in the penitentiary, convicted of some grave crime. (Millennial Star, Vol. XXVI., pp. 834-5).
