Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 82.

REVELATION given to Joseph Smith the Prophet, in Jackson County, Missouri, April 26, 1832, showing the order given to Enoch, and the Church in his day. The occasion was a general council of the Church, at which Joseph Smith the Prophet was sustained as the President of the High Priesthood, to which office he had previously been ordained at a conference of High Priests, Elders and members, at Amherst, Ohio, January 25, 1832. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 267. For explanation of unusual names see heading to Section 78.——The Lord reproves for sin and commends for repentance—Those who seek the mind of the Lord and then fail to abide by it are transgressors—The Lord is bound when his commandments are complied with—The Saints commanded to enter into covenant in the administration of their stewardships—Selfishness to be curbed and every man to seek the interest of his neighbor.

VERILY, verily, I say unto you, my servants, that inasmuch as you have forgiven one another your trespasses, even so I, the Lord, forgive you.

In the Revelation recorded in Section 78, our Savior commanded His servants of the High Priesthood to effect an organization for the temporal benefit of the people, and directed the Prophet Joseph, Newel K. Whitney, and Sidney Rigdon to go from Hiram, Ohio, to Missouri, and "sit in council with the Saints which are in Zion," on that matter. The Prophet commenced the journey on April 1st, 1832, accompanied by Newel K. Whitney, Peter Whitmer, and Jesse Gause, and they were joined by Sidney Rigdon at Warren, the same day. The excitement of the mob in Kirtland, owing to the falsehoods circulated by apostates, was so intense that the Prophet and his companions avoided passing through the city. Some of the mobbers followed them all the way to Cleveland, but the protecting hand of the Lord was over His servants. The captain who took them to Louisville protected them in his boat, and gave them their meals, free of charge. They arrived at Independence, Missouri, on the 24th of April, and were greeted with joy by the Saints.

On the 26th a general council of the Church was called. The Prophet was acknowledged as the President of the High Priesthood, to which exalted position he had been ordained at the Conference at Amherst, Ohio, Jan. 25th, 1832. Bishop Partridge gave him the right hand of fellowship in behalf of the Church.

On this occasion a misunderstanding between Sidney Rigdon and Edward Partridge was cleared up, and unity and peace prevailed. The Lord then gave this Revelation, in which He (1) warns the Saints against sinning, lest judgments fall upon them (1-3); (2) sets forth the necessity of obeying the laws revealed (4-7); (3) gives them a commandment concerning the Order of Enoch (8-19); and (4) closes with admonitions and promises (20-24).

4-7. The Saints in Zion prayed for, and received, Revelations. But if they did not keep the laws received, they became transgressors and incurred the penalties affixed to the law. The adversary holds sway in the world, and Zion is surrounded by darkness; the Saints must, therefore, be on their watch continually; for if they permit the darkness to come in, the anger of God will come with it.

8-19. The Saints had prayed for new revelations (v. 4); the Lord, at this time, gave them directions regarding the management of the temporal affairs of the Church, for the benefit of the poor, both in Missouri and in Kirtland (v. 12). The brethren mentioned in verse 11 were to form a corporation under the law of consecration and stewardship (v. 15). Each of them was to have an equal claim on the common property, for the management of the particular work over which he had been made a steward (v. 17), for the benefit of the Church (v. 18); and each one was to promote the interests of his neighbor, and in all things have "an eye single to the glory of God" (v. 19).

"The law of Enoch is so named in the book of Doctrine and Covenants, but, in other words, it is the law given by Joseph Smith, Jr. The word 'Enoch' did not exist in the original copy; neither did some other names. The names that were incorporated when it was printed, did not exist there, when the manuscript revelations were given, for I saw them myself. Some of them I copied. And when the Lord was about to have the Book of Covenants given to the world, it was thought wisdom, in consequence of the persecutions of our enemies in Kirtland and some of the regions around, that some of the names should be changed, and Joseph was called Baurak Ale, which was a Hebrew word meaning, 'God bless you.' He was also called Gazelam, being a person to whom the Lord had given the Urim and Thummim. He was also called Enoch. Sidney Rigdon was called Baneemy and the Revelation where it read so many dollars into the treasury was changed to talents. And the name of the City of New York was changed to Cainhannoch. Therefore, when I speak of the Order of Enoch, I do not mean the Order of ancient Enoch; I mean the Order that was given to Joseph Smith in 1832-3-4, which is a law inferior to the celestial law, because the celestial law required the consecration of all that a man had. The law of Enoch only required a part. The law of consecration in full required that all the people should consecrate everything that they had; and none were exempt. The law of Enoch called upon certain men only to consecrate" (Orson Pratt, Jour. of Dis., Vol. XVI., p. 156).

"Now, did the people keep this second law, inferior to the first? The Lord picked out some of the best men in the Church, and tried them, if they would keep it. 'Now I will,' says He, 'try the best men I have in the Church, not with the celestial law, but they shall consecrate in part, and have a common stock property among them.' And in order to stir them up in diligence, He fixed certain penalties to this law, such as, 'he shall be delivered up to the buffetings of Satan'; 'sins that have been remitted shall return to him and be answered upon his head.' How did they get along then? The Lord tells us that the covenant had been broken. And consequently it remained with Him to do with them as seemed to Him good. Many have apostatized since that day. Sidney Rigdon for one, Oliver for another, and John Johnson for another. Why have they apostatized? They did not comply with the covenant that they made in regard to the law given to Joseph Smith, that was afterwards called the Law of Enoch" (Orson Pratt, Ibid.).

"Does every man receive an exact equality? No. Why not? Because some men have more ability for managing a stewardship than other men. Some men, perhaps all their lifetime, have been accustomed to carrying on great establishments and know how to conduct great establishments. Is it to be supposed that such a man would be limited to the same amount of stewardship as the man who has fifty acres of land? It may require twenty, or a hundred times the amount of stewardship to be placed in the hands of such a man, than what is required of other stewards who manage farming only. Does not that make them unequal? No. They are all stewards. The property belongs to the Lord" (Orson Pratt, Ibid., p. 154).

"We would suggest to the brethren, that there be no organization of large bodies upon common stock principles, until the Lord shall signify it in a proper manner, as it opens such a field for the avaricious, the indolent, and the corrupt-hearted, to prey upon the virtuous, the industrious, and the honest. We have reason to believe that many things were introduced among the Saints, before God had signified the time, and notwithstanding the principles and the plans may have been good, yet aspiring men, who had the form of Godliness, but not the substance, by their aspiring notions brought trouble both upon themselves and the Saints at large. However, the time is coming, when God will signify many things which are expected, for the well-being of the Saints" (Millennial Star, Vol. V., p. 71).

This letter was written in Liberty Jail. It was signed by Joseph Smith, Jr., Hyrum Smith, Lyman Wight, Caleb Baldwin, and Alexander McRay, and parts of it are embodied in the Revelations contained in Sections 121 and 123.
