Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 83.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Independence, Missouri, April 30, 1832. This revelation was received as the Prophet sat in council with his brethren.——Claims of women and children for support upon their husbands and fathers—Claims of widows and orphans upon the Church.

VERILY, thus saith the Lord, in addition to the laws of the church concerning women and children, those who belong to the church, who have lost their husbands or fathers:

1-6. After the council meeting on the 26th of April, 1832, the Prophet visited the Saints of the Colesville Branch, situated in Kaw township, and other Saints, and transacted a great deal of business necessitated by the fact that the Church members were settling among bitter opponents. "It was my endeavor," he says, "to so organize the Church, that the brethren might eventually be independent of every incumbrance beneath the celestial kingdom, by bonds and covenants of mutual friendship and mutual love"(Hist. of the Church, Vol. I., p. 269). On the 30th, the council meeting was resumed. It is probable that the question came up, "What, under the law of Enoch, would be the status of women and children, whose natural protectors were dead?" In answer to some such inquiry, the Revelation in this Section was received. Widows, if faithful, have fellowship in the Church, and, therefore, a claim on the Church; if not in the Church, they were, nevertheless, to remain on their inheritances, according to the law (1-3). Children have a claim upon the Church, if the parents are unable to provide for them (4-6).

The rule laid down in the New Testament, for the support of widows is found in I. Tim. 5:8-11. There Paul teaches that it is the duty of the husband to provide for "his own," and not leave the family destitute at his death, and that he who neglects this, is "worse than an unbeliever," having fallen below the normal standard recognized even among the pagans. But when it was necessary to support the widows from public funds, none under sixty years should be enrolled as a widow; and they were to have a good reputation as mothers, neighbors, and church members.
