Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 84.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Kirtland, Ohio, September 22 and 23, 1832. During the month of September, Elders had begun to return from their missions in the eastern States, and to make reports of their labors. It was while they were together in this season of joy that the following communication was received. The Prophet designates it a Revelation on Priesthood. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 286.——A Temple to be built in the land of Zion during this generation—The line of the Holy Priesthood from Moses back to Adam—Relation between the Holy Priesthood and the Lesser Priesthood—Bearers of these two Priesthoods called the sons of Moses and of Aaron respectively—Blessings and privileges of those who attain to these Priesthoods—The bondage of sin—The new and everlasting covenant—Gifts of the spirit specified—The Lord calls his servants, friends—Missionary service imperative—Plagues impending because of wickedness.

A REVELATION of Jesus Christ unto his servant Joseph Smith, Jun., and six elders, as they united their hearts and lifted their voices on high.

During the month of September, 1832, the Elders who had been doing missionary work in the Eastern States began to return to Kirtland, where the Prophet now resided, and on the 22nd and 23rd of the month, this Revelation was received, in the presence of six Elders. It is called, "A Revelation of Jesus Christ unto His Servant Joseph Smith, Jr.," and, "The Word of the Lord concerning His Church." (vv. 1-2.) It contains (1) a promise regarding the place and the time of the building of the New Jerusalem and the Temple (3-5); (2) A Revelation on the Temple service, including the Priesthood (6-34); (3) a Revelation on the importance of the Priesthood (35-59); (4) a commission to preach the gospel (60-102); and (5) special directions (103-120).

3-5. In these paragraphs the Lord promises that the New Jerusalem will be built on the spot dedicated for that purpose. No matter what trials and difficulties the Saints might have to pass through, the place had been selected, and the Lord would keep His word (v. 3-4).

This is quite generally understood to be the meaning of this prophecy; but it is quite possible that a complete explanation of it cannot be obtained until it is fulfilled. That is the case with many divine predictions. When they are fulfilled they are clear.

A cloud shall rest upon it] The Lord manifested Himself in ancient Israel in a cloud, shaped as a pillar, which became luminous at night. It guided the people on the journey to Canaan. It stood at the entrance to the Sanctuary, and in it God spoke to Moses. It rested on the Sanctuary and filled it, when that sacred tent was set up. It was the visible sign of God's guiding and protecting care over His people. This glory of the Lord is known as the Shekinah. When the first temple was dedicated, it filled the house (II. Chron. 7:1-3), and the people bowed down and worshiped. The Shekinah departed when the Temple was profaned (Ez. 10:19; 11:22), but Ezekiel, in his vision of the Temple in the latter days, saw the glory of the Lord returning (Ez. 43:2-3). The presence of the Lord will be manifested in this Temple of the Latter-day Zion.

This is the beginning of a sentence which is continued in paragraph 31. All that intervenes is parenthetic, containing a statement regarding the lineage through which the Priesthood came to Moses and Aaron, and how it was restored in our day.

A History of the Priesthood.

according to the Holy Priesthood which he received under the hand of his father-in-law, Jethro;

6-16. The Holy Priesthood which he received] These verses give us by revelation a clear order of descent of the Priesthood from Adam to Moses, and in the following paragraphs (17-18) we are informed that the "Priesthood continueth in the Church of God in all generations, without beginning of days or end of years." Among the scholars who are uninspired, there is doubt as to who Jethro was. In Exodus 3:1, he is called the father-in-law of Moses, but these scholars say the name may mean any male relative by marriage. In Exodus 2:18, Reuel, or Raguel, appears as the name of the father-in-law of Moses. Then it is maintained that the transaction related of Jethro in Exodus 18:12-27, is told of Hobab in Numbers 10:29. These may have been names given to Jethro by different scribes, or in different countries. We know, however, by the information given in this revelation that Jethro was the father-in-law of Moses and that Moses received the Priesthood from him. This has been a mystery to some, who have thought that only the children of Israel were blessed with the authority of Priesthood. We know that the Midianites were descendants of Abraham who had sons by his wife Keturah, they were named, Zimran, Jokshan, Medan and Midian, Ishbak and Shuah. Evidently among the "gifts" which Abraham gave his other sons was the authority of the Priesthood. We know that the "Midianites" held it. We read that Balak of Moab, sent for Balaam, of the "elders of Midian," to come and curse Israel. The story which follows strongly implies that Balaam was a prophet, and the Lord commanded him what he should say. (Num. 22-24.)

"Adam, our great progenitor, the first man, was, like Christ, a pre-existent spirit, and like Christ he took upon him an appropriate body, the body of a man, a 'living soul,' The doctrine of the pre-existence—revealed so plainly, particularly in latter days—pours a wonderful flood of light upon the otherwise mysterious problem of man's origin. It shows that man, as a spirit, was begotten and born of heavenly parents, and reared to maturity in the eternal mansions of the Father prior to coming upon the earth, in a temporal body to undergo experience in mortality. It teaches that all men existed in the spirit before any man existed in the flesh, and that all who have inhabited the earth since Adam have taken bodies and become souls in like manner.

"It is held by some that Adam was not the first man upon this earth, and that the original human was a development from lower orders of the animal creation. These, however, are the theories of men. The word of the Lord declares that Adam was 'the first man of all men,' (Moses 1:34) and we are therefore in duty bound to regard him as the primal parent of our race.

"Joseph F. Smith,

"John R. Winder,

"Anthon H. Lund.

"First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" (Era. 13:75-81).

The genealogy of the Savior given in the Inspired Version, states this "And of Enos, and of Seth, and of Adam, who was formed of God, and the first man upon the earth" (Luke 3:45).

"The Priesthood was first given to Adam; he obtained the First Presidency, and held the keys of it from generation to generation. He obtained it in the creation, before the world was formed, as [related] in Genesis 1:26-28. He had dominion given him over every living creature. He is Michael, the archangel, spoken of in the Scriptures. Then to Noah who is Gabriel; he stands next in authority to Adam in the Priesthood; he was called of God to this office, and was the father of all living in his day, and to him was given the dominion. These men held keys first on Earth, and then in heaven. The Priesthood is an everlasting principle, and existed with God from eternity, and will to eternity, without beginning of days or end of years. The keys have to be brought from heaven whenever the gospel is sent. When they are revealed from heaven, it is by Adam's authority" (Joseph Smith, Hist. of the Church, Vol. III., p. 385).

"There are two Priesthoods spoken of in the Scriptures, viz., the Melchizedek and the Aaronic, or Levitical. Although there are two Priesthoods, yet the Melchizedek Priesthood comprehends the Aaronic, or Levitical Priesthood, and is the grand head, and holds the highest authority which pertains to the Priesthood, and the keys of the kingdom of God in all ages of the world to the latest posterity in the Earth, and is the channel through which all knowledge, doctrine, the plan of salvation, and every important matter is revealed from heaven" (Joseph Smith, Hist. of the Church,Vol. IV., p. 207).

Speaking of the importance of the Aaronic Priesthood, the Prophet says:

"From a retrospect of the requirements of the servants of God to preach the gospel, we find few qualified even to be Priests, and if a Priest understands his duty, his calling, and ministry, and preaches by the Holy Ghost, his enjoyment is as great as if he were one of the presidency; and his services are necessary in the body, as are also those of Teachers and Deacons. Therefore, in viewing the Church as a whole, we may strictly denominate it one Priesthood" (Joseph Smith, Ibid., Vol. II., p. 778).

Abideth forever] The Aaronic Priesthood is never to be abolished. It remains forever with the Melchizedek Priesthood.

19-22. The mission and authority of the greater Priesthood are here set forth. It administers in the gospel, and reveals the "mysteries of the kingdom"—even the knowledge concerning God, without which there would be no eternal life (v. 19). It administers the ordinances of the gospel, in which the power of godliness is manifest (v. 20); and it holds the authority which enables man to see God, even the Father, and live (v. 22). To quote again from the History of the Church:

"President Joseph Smith, Jun., addressed the assembly and said, the Melchizedek High Priesthood was no other than the Priesthood of the Son of God; that there are certain ordinances which belong to the Priesthood, from which flow certain results; and the Presidents or Presidency are over the Church; and revelations of the mind and will of God to the Church, are to come through the Presidency. This is the order of heaven, and the power and privilege of the Priesthood. It is also the privilege of any officer in the Church to obtain revelations, so far as relates to his particular calling and duty in the Church. All are bound by the principles of virtue and happiness, but one great privilege of the Priesthood is to obtain revelations of the mind and will of God. It is also the privilege of the Melchizedek Priesthood, to reprove, rebuke, and admonish, as well as to receive revelation" (Vol. II., p. 477).

24-25. But Israel did not keep the covenant, and the result was that Moses was taken from them, and with him the greater Priesthood (v. 25).

"The Children of Israel were not capable of living up to all the requirements of the Higher or Holy Priesthood and the law of the Gospel so the Lord, through Moses, gave them a new law and order of the Holy Priesthood, and another set of officers to administer to the people under the new conditions. How long did the Israelites sojourn in Egypt? * * * .

"This new authority, or new Priesthood, or rather this new adaptation of and order of the old Priesthood, is called the 'Lesser Priesthood.' It is an appendage of the Higher Priesthood, because it belongs to or grows out of it." (Joseph B. Keeler, "The Lesser Priesthood," p. 8.) The Lord had promised to Israel that if the people would obey His voice he would make of them a royal Priesthood, and He would give them the fulness of the Priesthood and the Gospel, but they hardened their hearts against him. Through Moses he said: "Now, therefore, if ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people: for all the earth is mine. And ye shall be unto me a kingdom of Priests (i.e. of the Melchizedek order), and an holy nation. These are the words which thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel." (Ex. 19:5-6.) "But they hardened their hearts and could not endure His presence, therefore, the Lord in his wrath, for his anger was kindled against them, swore that they should not enter into his rest while in the wilderness, which rest is the fulness of his glory." (v. 24.) This Aaronic Priesthood was to remain with them until the coming of Christ in his ministry.

The angel who conferred upon John the power of the Priesthood and the authority to overthrow the kingdom of the Jews, we do not know; but he was one commissioned with all the authority and power to confer these keys, and his name matters not. From this revelation we learn that it was deemed expedient that John should be so blessed at the time he was named, when only eight days old. When he reached the age appointed, he was also baptized and prepared for his ministry when the full time had come.

29-30. The offices of Elder and Bishop are appendages belonging to the High Priesthood, and again, the offices of Teacher and Deacon are here mentioned as appendages to the lesser Priesthood.

While it is here stated that these offices are "necessary appendages" to the Priesthood, this does not signify, as some have supposed, that the other offices in the Priesthoods are not appendages. All the offices grow out of, and are appendages to the Priesthood as well as those mentioned here. (Doc. and Cov. 107:5.)

31-4. The subject introduced by the first words of the 6th paragraph is resumed here. The house of the Lord is to be reared in Zion before ''this generation" has passed away, and the sons of Moses and the sons of Aaron shall officiate therein (v. 31), and be filled with the glory of the Lord. However, "sons of Moses," and "sons of Aaron" do not refer to their literal descendants only, for all who are faithful and obtain these Priesthoods, and magnify their calling, are sanctified by the Spirit and become the "sons" of Moses and of Aaron, and the seed of Abraham, as well as the Church and Kingdom, and the elect of God (v. 34). Paul expresses this thought as follows, "Know ye therefore that they which are of faith, the same are the children of Abraham" (Gal. 3:7).

"It is generally supposed that sacrifice was entirely done away with, when the great Sacrifice was offered up, and that there will be no necessity for the ordinance of sacrifice in the future; but those who assert this are certainly not acquainted with the duties, privileges, and authority of the Priesthood, or with the Prophets. The offering of sacrifice has ever been connected with, and forms a part of the duties of the Priesthood. It began with the Priesthood and will be continued until after the coming of Christ, from generation to generation" (Joseph Smith, History of the Church, Vol. IV., p. 207).

35-42. Here the importance of the holy Priesthood is shown. Those who receive the Priesthood in sincerity, thereby prove that they receive the servants of the Lord, as His servants; for they would not accept their administration, if they did not regard them as His representatives; and when they so receive them, they receive the Savior, whose ambassadors His servants are, and when they receive Him, they receive the Father, who sent Him, and His Father's kingdom. He who receives an ambassador, receives the king, the government, and the entire kingdom which that official represents. What mortal can fully realize the importance of receiving the holy Priesthood, or the consequences of breaking the covenants belonging to the Priesthood, which includes, on the part of man, obedience to the laws of God and loyalty to His cause.

Here in these verses (33-41) we learn that the Lord has promised to all those who are faithful, and who magnify their calling, that they shall be in fellowship with both the Father and the Son, and if they continue faithful, they shall eventually inherit "all that my Father hath." This means that they shall become the sons of God, joint heirs with Jesus Christ, and as expressed in Section 76:55-60, they shall receive the fulness of His glory. When the Lord offers the fulness of his glory on conditions of faithfulness, he attaches a penalty for the breaking of such a glorious and far-reaching covenant. Therefore he has decreed that all those who trample this covenant (which every person receiving the Melchizedek Priesthood receives) under his feet, "and altogether turneth therefrom, shall not have forgiveness of sins in this world nor in the world to come." This means that all who treat this covenant of the Priesthood with contempt shall never have the privilege of exercising it in the world to come. Therefore they will be barred from celestial exaltation.

The Prophet has written:

The Melchizedek Priesthood holds the right from the eternal God, and not by descent from father and mother; and that priesthood is as eternal as God Himself, having neither beginning of days nor end of life.

The 2nd Priesthood is Patriarchal authority. Go to and finish the temple, and God will fill it with power, and you will then receive more knowledge concerning this priesthood.

The 3rd is what is called the Levitical Priesthood, consisting of priests to administer in outward ordinance, made without an oath; but the Priesthood of Melchizedek is by an oath and covenant.

(Aug. 27, 1843.) D.H.C. 5:554-556.

The following anecdote, which was told by David Whitmer to Elders Orson Pratt and Joseph F. Smith in 1878, may be retold here:

"When I was returning to Fayette, with Joseph and Oliver, all of us riding in the wagon, Oliver and I on an old fashioned wooden spring-seat, and Joseph behind us—when traveling along in a clear, open space, a very pleasant, nice-looking old man suddenly appeared by the side of the wagon and saluted us with, "Good morning, it is very warm," at the same time wiping his face or forehead with his hand. We returned the salutation, and, by a sign from Joseph, I invited him to ride, if he was going our way. But he said very pleasantly, 'No, I am going to Cumorah.' This name was something new to me. I did not know what Cumorah meant. We all gazed at him and at each other, and as I looked around inquiringly at Joseph, the old man instantly disappeared, so that I did not see him again." Whitmer described his appearance and added, "It was the messenger who had the plates [of the Book of Mormon], who had taken them from Joseph just prior to our starting for Harmony" (Andrew Jenson, Historical Record, p. 209).

43-53. Our Lord teaches the important truth that His Spirit, or Spirit of Jesus Christ, gives light to every man who comes into the world and hearkens to its voice (v. 46), and that those who hearken to that voice come to God; that is, they receive the gospel (v. 47), and God will teach them of the covenant which He has renewed; that is to say, God, through His Spirit, will bear witness to the truth of the gospel (v. 48). However, the world is in darkness and under the bondage of sin, and the proof of that is, that men refuse to come to God by accepting the gospel (v. 51). By this the righteous may be known from the wicked (v. 53).

"I do not believe for one moment that there has been a man or woman upon the face of the Earth, from the days of Adam, to this day, who has not been enlightened, instructed, and taught by the revelations of Jesus Christ. 'What! the ignorant heathen? Yes, every human being who has possessed a sound mind. I am far from believing that the children of men have been deprived of the privilege of receiving the Spirit of the Lord to teach them right from wrong.

" 'Do you suppose the Hindoos have the light of the Spirit of Christ?' I know they have; and so have the Hottentots, and so has every nation and kingdom on the face of the Earth, even though some of them may be cannibals, indulging in a practice most repugnant to our refined feelings of any we know of among any people * * * But when the light of the knowledge of God comes to a man and he rejects it, that is his condemnation. When I have told all I have been authorized to declare to him in the name of the Lord, if he does not have visions of eternity, it is all nonsense to him. To know the truth of my testimony he must have the visions and revelations of God for himself. And when he gets them, and turns aside, becoming a traitor to the cause of righteousness, the wrath of God will beat upon him, and the vengeance of the Almighty will be heavy upon him" (Jour. of Dis., Vol. II., pp. 139, 140).

"We often say the Spirit of God when we mean the Holy Ghost; we, likewise, say the Holy Ghost when we mean the Spirit of God. The Holy Ghost is a personage in the Godhead, and is not that which lighteth every man that comes into the world. It is the Spirit of God which proceeds through Christ to the world, that enlightens every man that comes into the world, and that strives with the children of men, and will continue to strive with them, until it brings them to a knowledge of truth and the possession of the greater light and testimony of the Holy Ghost" (Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine, page 82 (1st edition), page 67 (later edition). (Compare John 1:4-9).

"For behold, the Spirit of Christ is given to every man, that he may know good from evil; wherefore I show unto you the way to judge; for everything which inviteth to do good, and to persuade to believe in Christ, is sent forth by the power and gift of Christ; wherefore ye may know with a perfect knowledge it is of God." (Moroni 7:16).

54-59. The Lord, having told His servants that the world is in darkness, turns to them, and reproves them, because they had been in the dark, as a consequence of having treated the things received, lightly, thereby causing the whole Church to be brought under condemnation (v. 55). And this condition, they were told, would remain until the Saints had repented. Nothing but sincere repentance can turn away the wrath of God (v. 57).

The Lord hath redeemed his people, Israel,

According to the election of grace,

Which was brought to pass by the faith

And covenant of their fathers.

And Satan is bound and time is no longer.

The Lord hath gathered all things in one.

The Lord hath brought down Zion from above.

The Lord hath brought up Zion from beneath.

And truth is established in her bowels;

And the heavens have smiled upon her;

And she is clothed with the glory of her God;

For he stands in the midst of his people.

Be ascribed to our God; for he is full of mercy,

Justice, grace and truth, and peace, Forever and ever, Amen.

(a) Where to Preach.

60-2. All the world] The commission of the servants of God is valid in all the world (62). They are not confined to a parish, or a city, nor even to a continent. Their field is the world. This Globe must be reclaimed for our Lord Jesus Christ.

(b) Effects of the Preaching.

63-73. Several effects of the proclamation of the gospel are noted here. Those who believe and are baptized in water for the remission of sins, shall receive the Holy Ghost (v. 64). Signs shall follow also those who believe (v. 65). A "sign" is a miraculous manifestation designed to confirm a message for which the claim is made that it is from God.

"While thus engaged, I was struck with great force by some invisible power, and fell senseless to the floor. The first thing I recollected was being supported by Elders Hyde and Richards, who were praying for me * * * Elders Hyde and Richards then assisted me to get on the bed * * * when a vision was opened to our minds, and we could distinctly see the evil spirits, who foamed and gnashed their teeth at us. We gazed upon them about an hour and a half (by Willard's watch). We were not looking towards the window, but towards the wall. Space appeared before us, and we saw the devils coming in legions, with their leaders, who came within a few feet of us. They came towards us like armies rushing to battle. They appeared to be men of full stature, possessing every form and feature of men in the flesh who are angry and desperate; and I shall never forget the vindictive malignity depicted on their countenances as they looked me in the eye * * * We distinctly heard those spirits talk and express their wrath and hellish designs against us. However, the Lord delivered us from them, and blessed us exceedingly that day" (See also p. 471).

Elder Orson Hyde, in a letter addressed to Heber C. Kimball several years later, says in part:

"After you were overcome by them and fallen, their awful rush upon me with knives, threats, imprecations, and hellish grins, amply convinced me that they were no friends of mine. When you were apparently senseless and lifeless on the floor and upon the bed * * * I stood between you and the devils and fought them and contended with them face to face, until they began to diminish in number and to retreat from the room" (Whitney's Life of Heber C. Kimball, pp. 144-5).

"In all the churches of which we have any knowledge, there has yet to be heard the promise made by one of its ministers to the humble believer who submits to its ordinances, that he shall receive the Holy Ghost as they did in ancient days, with its accompanying gifts and blessings and powers. Joseph Smith made this promise. The world has the opportunity of testing it. If people did not receive the Holy Ghost, then he was an impostor. If they did receive it, then his ministry was sealed by the power of God, and it was indisputable" (Jour. of Dis., Vol. XXIV., p. 136).

"While at this place [Greenville, Indiana, where he stayed with Newel K. Whitney during May, 1832, the latter suffering from a fractured leg] I frequently walked out in the woods, where I saw several fresh graves; and one day, when I rose from the dinner table, I walked directly to the door and commenced vomiting most profusely. I raised large quantities of blood and poisonous matter, and so great were the muscular contortions of my system, that my jaw, in a few moments, was dislocated. This I succeeded in replacing with my own hands, and made my way to Brother Whitney (who was on the bed), as speedily as possible; he laid his hands on me and administered to me in the name of the Lord, and I was healed in an instant * * * Thanks be to my heavenly Father for his interference in my behalf at this critical moment, in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. I., p. 271).

A. Clarke observes that there is no record or tradition indicating that any of the Apostles of our Lord ever suffered death by poison, while Mohammed came to his end by that means, as did, it may be added, Socrates. The promise of immunity from poison is, therefore, very remarkable.

It has been asserted that miracles are impossible, because they are contrary to the laws of nature, and that the supernatural element in the history of religion is, in our enlightened age, the main difficulty in the way of its acceptance. It is assumed that the so-called laws of nature are immutable, and that nothing can take place that appears to be contrary to such laws. To this objection the answer is, that we do not know all the laws of nature. We can, therefore, not maintain that the miracles performed by the servants of the Lord are not in perfect accord with some law of which we are ignorant. All we can say is that they do not belong to any of the classes of ordinary events with which men are familiar. But that is far from saying that they are impossible. As a matter of fact, violations of the best established laws of nature appear to be occurring constantly. We raise a weight from the ground. That seems to be contrary to the law of gravitation. Our bodies, for years, resist decay because of the action of the life-force within. That seems to be contrary to chemical laws governing matter. One force counteracts another; and besides, God's universe is not exclusively controlled by physical forces. Superior to these, directing and controlling them, is the divine will. As a captain, with a word of command, turns his immense ship in whatever direction he chooses, and controls his engines and everything, so God directs and controls His universe and all that pertains thereto, not contrary to, but in conformity with, laws and forces known to Him, even though unknown to us.

(c) Effects on those who Reject the Gospel.

74-6. Spiritual gifts were to follow acceptance of the message of the Gospel. Here we are told that those who do not believe and, therefore, are not baptized, shall be damned.

Your brethren in Zion for their rebellion] It is evident from the history of the Church that not all the brethren in Zion were actuated by that spirit of brotherly love, unselfishness, and willingness to follow counsel, which should predominate in such a place. At the general Council of the Church held on the 26th of April, 1832, "all the differences [were] settled and the hearts of all were united together in love," but the perfect condition had not yet come. Therefore, they, as well as the children of the world, were to be upbraided.

In obedience to this commandment a conference of twelve High Priests, held at Kirtland, January 14th, 1833, appointed Orson Hyde and Hyrum Smith to address a letter "to the Bishop, his Council, and the inhabitants of Zion," and warn them, on behalf of the Conference, of the consequences of rebellion. The letter was written, and received the endorsement of the brethren.

In this epistle it was pointed out that the children of Zion were under condemnation, until they repented and remembered the new covenant and the commandments of God; and a scourge and a judgment would be poured out upon them, if they did not repent (Hist. of the Church, Vol. I., pp. 317-21). The letter was not without effect, for the Saints of Zion began to humble themselves, and the Lord took notice of the change of heart (Sec. 90:34).

(d) Equipment of a Herald of the Gospel.

77-86. When a young man of the world decides to devote his life to ministerial, or missionary, work in the interest of one of the popular churches, he generally enters some college, or university, in order to get a special education for such a position. That is part of his equipment. Having obtained the necessary instruction in the art of preparing sermons, he seeks an opportunity to come in contact with the members of the board of some missionary society with ample means, or the trustees of some church, in order that he may secure a salary, and, if everything is agreeable, he obligates himself to preach certain doctrines at so much a year. The salary is an essential part of the equipment. All arrangements being made, the missionary starts for his field with so many trunks and boxes that he needs several beasts of burden to carry them, unless he can load them on a railroad car.

The Lord did not want His servants to travel in this manner. They were commanded to go without both purse and scrip, which means without salary and baggage (v. 78). They were not even to take two coats with them. If they were faithful, the Lord would provide for them, so that they would not grow weary, nor go hungry or thirsty (v. 80). As missionaries, they were not to take any thought "for tomorrow" concerning what to eat and drink, etc. (v. 81). Neither were they to take any thought beforehand as to what to say. If they would but treasure up in their minds continually the words of life, they would, on each occasion, be given what to say (v. 85). The command is repeated, "Let no man among you. * * * from this hour take purse or scrip, that goeth forth to proclaim the gospel of the kingdom" (v. 86). An ideal, different from that of the world!

Young missionaries are apt to make the mistake of supposing that the main strength of a sermon can be drawn from books, and they read good authors and repeat their arguments and illustrations faithfully, and then they wonder why their efforts fall flat. The substance of a discourse should be drawn from experience, rather than from the printed page. Good books are helpful, but that which we bring forth from our own experience is that which is of the greatest value to those who hear us. A man who prays can speak of prayer, because he knows something about communion with God, by his experience. One who keeps the Word of Wisdom, or obeys the Law of Tithing, can speak on these principles with authority. Only those who live pure lives can speak convincingly of the happiness virtue gives. This rule obtains in everything. One who desires to teach his neighbor agriculture, must, himself, have practical knowledge of the subject. A pilot must have personal knowledge of the course over which he undertakes to steer the ship. The soldier who has been at the front, can speak to some purpose about the trials and hardships of life in the trenches. No study of books can take the place of personal experience.

(e) What to Preach.

Judgment which is to come] The servants of the Lord must know, through the spirit of prophecy and the prophetic word of God, something of the judgments that are to pass over the Earth, and the fate that necessarily will befall unrepentant sinners, and it is their duty to tell the world of these things. The Prophet Joseph and his associates warned the people everywhere of judgments in the form of wars, pestilence, famine, etc. (Sec. 1:17-18), unless, for some special reason, they were commanded to "talk not of judgment" (Sec. 105:24). The law of God regarding this subject is: "When I say unto the wicked, Thou shalt surely die; and thou givest him not warning, nor speakest to warn the wicked from his wicked way, to save his life; the same wicked man shall die in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at thine hand. Yet, if thou warn the wicked, and he turn not from his wickedness, nor from his wicked way, he shall die in his iniquity; but thou hast delivered thy soul" (Ezekiel 3:18, 19).

(f) God's Messengers Well Protected.

88-94. In these paragraphs the Lord promises His servants that He will be their companion; that His Spirit will be in their hearts; and His angels round about them (v. 88). What a glorious promise!

(g) Coming Judgments.

95-7. Our Lord, in loving kindness, warns all men against rejecting His messengers and their testimony, as He warned the cities in which His mighty works were performed during His earthly ministry. Though He was meek and lowly, and though His boundless love impelled Him to sacrifice Himself on the cross, yet He pronounced a woe upon Chorazin and Bethsaida and warned Capernaum that it would be brought down from its exalted position and fall lower than the cities in which His mighty works had not been done (Matt. 11:20-24).

Shall not be taken from the earth] It is a fact that, although medical science has performed wonders, by way of stamping out some diseases and mitigating the horrors of others, yet plagues are more common than ever and defy all attempts at staying their onward course. Witness the reports of tuberculosis congresses, or statistics on the growth of cancer. This is only to be expected; for the Lord declared that plagues would continue until His work is completed.

My work * * * cut short] Several circumstances helped to shorten the duration of the siege of Jerusalem by Titus, as promised by the Lord (Matt. 24:22). The supply of provisions was cut off; important fortifications were abandoned, and internal dissension prevented the defenders from utilizing their resources to the best advantage. Similarly, during the time of trouble that is to precede the Millennium, circumstances will occur to shorten that period for the sake of the elect. The time of trouble will not be prolonged beyond the time necessary for the redemption of the human race from the power of evil, through repentance.

When the Lord cuts short his work in righteousness it has a far more significant meaning than bringing his purposes to pass by calamity and punishment. He will cut short the time of preaching the gospel, and "will hasten my (his) work in its time." (Sec. 88:73.) We can see how this will be accomplished. The missionaries who are sent forth are not going forth in sufficient numbers to contact all the peoples of the earth, but the Lord will use other agencies in order to get his message before the people—the press, radio, television, and other wonderful ways to get the message before the world where the elders will not be able to go. All of this will help to hasten His work to its end.

(h) Coming Glory.

98-102. The prophetic word does not leave us in contemplation of the gloomy view of wrath and judgment. It bids us look beyond and see the glories of the Millennial reign of the Redeemer, when all shall know the Lord, and see eye to eye (v. 98) and sing the new song of the redeemed (v. 99-102).

And shall see eye to eye] When our Lord comes to His Zion, the New Jerusalem, He shall be seen in person, as clearly as when two men look each other in the face.

This new song] In the Revelations contained in the Doctrine and Covenants, reference is frequently made to the songs of Zion. See Secs. 25:12; 45:71; 66:11; 101:18; 133:33. The Saints are to come to Zion with songs of everlasting joy, and when the Lord comes to His people in the New Jerusalem, they will sing the new song. The Latter-day Saints are famous for their love of singing and music. There is, perhaps, no other community on Earth of an equal size, in which the divine art has as many, as ardent devotees.

Brought up Zion from beneath] The City of the Saints; for the former-day Zion and the latter-day Zion shall meet (Book of Moses 7:21, 60-67).

(a) Concerning the Offerings of Friends.

103-105. Missionaries with families were to send the money which friends might put into their hands, to their families (v. 103); those without home-ties were to remit such gifts to the Bishop in Zion, or in Ohio, to be used for the propagation of the gospel (v. 104). Clothes given should be accepted, and the old pieces of clothing given to the poor (v. 105). The missionary should not attempt to accumulate means. while preaching the gospel. He should not refuse gifts offered in a spirit of kindness and love, but he should use them wisely and for the blessing of others. He should not pile them up for his own benefit. And thus the temptation to a miserly, sordid course was removed from their path, if they would obey this divine counsel. They would never have any use for purse, nor scrip.

(b) Concerning the Weak.

106-11. The rule in the kingdom of God is that the strong shall take care of the weak. In the world the rule is to leave the weak behind to perish. The expressions "strong" and "weak" are evidently adapted from Rom. 15:1, where they mean "able" and "unable" respectively. The idea is, further, that those who are able should bear, or carry, the infirmities of those that are not so able. But to carry a burden involves not only strength but also patience and perseverance to the higher Priesthood, because of their age and experience (v. 106). In compliance with this rule those who were ordained should take with them those holding the lesser Priesthood and give them every opportunity to learn and to develop (v. 107). This follows from the fact that all are members of the same body, each having need of all the others (109, 110). All may travel except Teachers and Deacons (v. 111).

(c) Concerning the Poor.

112-13. Newel K. Whitney had been appointed Bishop at Kirtland (See Sec. 72:2, 8). One of his duties was to travel among the churches and look after the poor.

(d) Concerning Those who Reject the Gospel.

114-16. Bishop Newel K. Whitney was given a special mission to go to the cities mentioned (v. 114) and warn the inhabitants that the hour of judgment was near at hand, if they should reject the gospel message (v. 115). The promise was added that he should go and return in safety, if he would trust in the Lord (v. 116).

Shortly after this Revelation was given, the Prophet Joseph, accompanied by Bishop Whitney, took a hurried journey to Albany, New York, and Boston. In the Millennial Star, Vol. X., p. 286, there is an extract from an article from the Albany Express, in which a conflagration is described, by which buildings and property to the value of $2,000,000 was destroyed at Albany. Several lives were lost and many business men were utterly ruined.

Ancient prophets and the Lord Himself by prophetic vision have seen the great calamities and destructions which await great cities, countries in these last days because they will not repent and forsake their iniquities. Isaiah (Ch. 24) speaks of the time when "the land shall be utterly emptied, and utterly spoiled," and a "curse devoureth the earth," and there shall be few men left.

(e) Concerning the End.

117-20. The servants of the Lord are called upon to warn the world and to set forth, clearly and understandingly, the "desolation of abomination" in the last days. This expression is found in Daniel (11:31), where it refers to the pollution of the Temple and the destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans. Compare Matthew 24:15. In this Revelation it has a similar meaning, referring, however, to different agents of destruction. The "abomination of desolation" is "the abomination that maketh desolate." It is, in other words, sin and transgression, and especially the profanation of sacred things, for in the wake of sin follows destruction, sooner or later. When the Roman standards were planted on the battlements of the sacred precincts, desolation was near, but those pagan insignia were but symbolical of the apostasy that had taken place, which was the abomination which caused desolation.

General Notes

As an illustration of the power of God made manifest in our dispensation, this incident, published in a Welsh paper, The Merlin, may be retold:

"During the night of Friday week (September 22nd, 1848), between the hours of eleven and twelve, a very extraordinary occurrence took place in Newport. A young man named Reuben Brinkworth was, in 1840, at Bermuda, on board the Terror, * * * when, in the midst of thunder and lightning, he was suddenly deprived of both hearing and speech; and in this deplorable condition returned to Stroud in England, of which place he was a native. He has since been residing with Mr. Naish, basket maker, Market Street, Newport, who, with several other persons, is attached to the community of the people known as 'Mormons.' Persons of this denomination have been able to communicate their doctrines to Brinkworth, by means of writing, signs, and the finger alphabet. * * * On Friday night week, the young man was suddenly seized with a kind of fit, in which he continued some time; and on his recovery he was called upon by signs to believe in the Savior, that the healing power of God might be exercised in his behalf. He was, moreover, earnestly entreated to be baptized; but this was very strongly opposed by a person in the room. The deaf and dumb man, however, signified his acquiescence. He was taken to the canal and baptized in the name of our Savior; and immediately on coming up out of the water, he cried out, 'Thank the Lord, I can speak and hear again, as well as any of you" ' (Millennial Star, Vol. X., p. 349).

If only a small part of all the miraculous manifestations of the power of God witnessed by Latter-day Saints, were recorded, they would fill volumes. But the Saints do not boast of miracles. They do not expect the Lord to interpose miraculously in their behalf at all times. Brigham Young says on this subject:

"If we are sick, and ask the Lord to heal us, and to do all for us that is necessary to be done, according to my understanding of the gospel of salvation, I might as well ask the Lord to cause my wheat and corn to grow, without my plowing the ground and casting in the seed. It appears consistent to me to apply every remedy that comes within the range of my knowledge, and to ask my Father in heaven, in the name of Jesus Christ, to sanctify that application to the healing of my body" (Jour. of Dis., Vol. IV., p. 24).

Some would have us believe that miracles of healing are no longer necessary. But the fact is that such miracles are inseparably connected with the gospel. He who forgives sins, also heals "all thy diseases" (Psalm 103:3). When the healing power of God is separated from the gospel, it is no longer the gospel our Lord committed to His disciples to preach to all the world.

There is, however, such a thing as "lying wonders." There are signs and wonders that owe their origin to evil spirits and that are designed to promote error instead of truth. Only through the Spirit of the Lord can we discern, between the true and the false.

The Elders are charged with the duty of warning the world of judgments. But not unless directed to do so by the Holy Spirit. In the Evening and Morning Star, published in July, 1932. we read:

"You are to walk in the valley of humility, and pray for the salvation of all; yea, you are to pray for your enemies and warn in compassion without threatening the wicked with judgments which are to be poured out upon the world hereafter. You have no right to take the judgments which fell upon the ungodly before the flood, and pour them upon the head of this generation; you have no authority to use the judgments which God sent upon Pharaoh in Egypt, to terrify the inhabitants of America, neither have you any direction by commandment, to collect the calamities of six thousand years and paint them upon the curtain of these last days to scare mankind to repentance; no, you are to preach the gospel, which is the power of God unto salvation, even glad tidings of great joy unto all people" (Hist. of the Church, Vol., I., p. 280).

——— Notes
