Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 85.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Kirtland, Ohio, November 27, 1832, concerning the Saints in Zion, Missouri. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 298.——Inheritances in Zion to be received through consecration—Provision made for the assignment of inheritances among the Saints.

IT is the duty of the Lord's clerk, whom he has appointed, to keep a history, and a general church record of all things that transpire in Zion, and of all those who consecrate properties, and receive inheritances legally from the bishop;

About this time the Prophet Joseph received letters from the brethren in Missouri concerning the conditions there. In his reply, he says he fancies to himself that William W. Phelps was saying or thinking something like this:

"My God, great and mighty art thou; therefore show unto Thy servant what shall become of all those who are essaying to come up into Zion, in order to keep the commandments of God, and yet receive not their inheritance by consecrations, by order or deed from the Bishop, the man that God has appointed in a legal way, agreeably to the law given to organize and regulate the Church, and all the affairs of the same."

The Prophet then goes on to dictate the instructions contained in this Section.

A General Church Record.

1-5. It is the duty of the Lord's clerk to keep a History and a genera; Church Record, containing the particulars mentioned in these paragraphs. But those who receive not their inheritance by consecration shall not have their names enrolled in that Record.

One Mighty and Strong.

7-12. It was necessary that the Church Record should be kept correctly, for "it shall come to pass that I, the Lord God, will send one mighty and strong * * * to set in order the house of God, and to arrange by lot the inheritances of the saints, whose names are found * * * enrolled" in that Record—"the book of the law of God" (v. 7), or, "book of remembrance" (v. 9).

Who is this Mighty and Strong?

In an article over the signatures of Joseph F. Smith, John R. Winder, and Anthon H. Lund, First Presidency, published in the Deseret News, November 13, 1905, that question is comprehensively and clearly discussed. After having quoted in full the letter of the Prophet Joseph to William W. Phelps, the authors of the article say:

"It is to be observed first of all that the subject of this whole letter, as also the part of it subsequently accepted as a revelation, relates to the affairs of the Church in Missouri, the gathering of the Saints to that land, and obtaining their inheritances under the law of consecration and stewardship; and the Prophet deals especially with the matter of what is to become of those who fail to receive their inheritances by order or deed from the Bishop."

It is then pointed out that Edward Partridge, the Bishop of the Church, was the one "called and appointed to divide by lot unto the Saints their inheritances." But was Edward Partridge the one who, in 1832, was "putting forth his hand to steady the ark," and was threatened with falling "by the shaft of death like as a tree that is smitten by the vivid shaft of lightning"? In the article quoted, this question is answered in the affirmative. It is shown that Edward Partridge, though a worthy man, one whom God loved, at times arrayed himself in opposition to the Prophet, so strenuously that Ezra Booth made their differences an excuse for his apostasy. On the 26th of April, 1832, Partridge gave the Prophet the right hand of fellowship, and it was supposed that all differences were settled, but afterwards he brought them up again. Edward Partridge was, when this Revelation was written, neglecting his own duty and putting "forth his hand to steady the ark"; hence the warning. Partridge repented, in part at least, but in March, 1833, the Lord again took occasion to say that He was "not well pleased with him" and others. In the midst of the troubles and persecution of Missouri, Partridge acted a most noble and self-sacrificing part, offering himself as one of five willing to suffer and be put to death by the mob, if by so doing they could secure freedom for the rest of the Saints. He bore persecution with meekness and dignity, and the Lord, in November, 1835, said He was well pleased with him. But that he was the man threatened with sudden and untimely death "there can be no question."

But let us quote again:

"Now as to the 'one mighty and strong' who shall be sent of God, to 'set in order the house of God, and to arrange by lot the inheritances of the Saints'; who is he? What position will he hold in the Church? In what manner will he come to his calling? We draw attention first of all to the fact that this whole letter to William W. Phelps, as well as the part afterwards accepted as the word of the Lord, related to the affairs of the Church in Zion, Independence, Jackson County, Missouri: and inasmuch as through his repentance and sacrifices and suffering, Bishop Edward Partridge undoubtedly obtained a mitigation of the threatened judgment against him of falling 'by the shaft of death, like as a tree that is smitten by the vivid shaft of lightning,' so the occasion for sending another to fill his station—'one mighty and strong to set in order the house of God, and to arrange by lot the inheritance of the Saints'—may also be considered as having passed away and the whole incident of the prophecy closed."

* * * *

"If, however, there are those who will still insist that the prophecy concerning the coming of 'one mighty and strong' is still to be regarded as relating to the future, let the Latter-day Saints know that he will be a future Bishop of the Church who will be with the Saints in Zion, Jackson County, Missouri, when the Lord shall establish them in that land; and he will also be blessed with the spirit and power of his calling, that he will be able to set in order the house of God, pertaining to the department of the work under his jurisdiction; and in righteousness and justice he will 'arrange by lot the inheritances of the Saints.' He will hold the same high and exalted station that Edward Partridge held."
