Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 87.

REVELATION AND PROPHECY ON WAR, given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, December 25, 1832.—Wars predicted—Division between the Northern States and the Southern States—Great calamities in manifestation of the chastening hand of God.

VERILY, thus saith the Lord concerning the wars that will shortly come to pass, beginning at the rebellion of South Carolina, which will eventually terminate in the death and misery of many souls;

This remarkable Revelation was given through the Prophet Joseph on Christmas day, 1832.

At that time there was considerable commotion in the United States. The tariff question was one of great issue. The State of New York, before its acceptance of the Federal Constitution, surrounded itself with protective tariffs, and this policy was gradually approved by other Northern States. The Southern States, on the other hand, regarded free trade as best serving their interests, as their products were limited to a few articles of raw material, which they exported, while they imported practically all the manufactured commodities they needed. In 1824, Congress enacted a protective-tariff bill. A few years later, a stricter measure was adopted against Great Britain, in retaliation for efforts to exclude American trade from the British West Indies. This met with vigorous opposition in the South, especially in South Carolina. In this State, in 1832, a convention of the citizens declared that the tariff acts of 1828 and 1832 were not binding within their territory, and fixed February 1st, 1833, as the date after which they would be considered abrogated, unless Congress should, before then, remove the difficulty. Many Northerners were in favor of carrying the laws of the Union into effect by means of arms, at that time, and a bill empowering the President to use force was introduced in Congress. It was during this political agitation that the Prophet Joseph made the condition of his Country the subject of prayer and received this Revelation (See Sec. 130:12, 13).

While all of these differences existing between the North and the South had a tendency to drive the people apart, yet it was the question of slavery, and the contention over the expansion of new territory and the creation of new states and whether or not slavery should be permitted in such new territory, that became the crux which brought upon the people the great Civil War. The historian, John Fisk wrote:

"The story of the disputes over slavery, which led to the Civil War, is inseparably connected with the story of the westward expansion of the United States." (History of the United States for Schools, p. 349.)

"The longer the dispute about slavery in the new territory went on, the hotter it grew. Three methods of settlement were proposed. The extreme Southern men said, Every citizen of the United States has the right to go to any part of the country he pleases, and take his property—including his negroes—with him. Give us, said they, that right, and we ask no more. But the advocates of the 'Wilmot Proviso' and other FreeSoil men answered, we will have no more slave states. All territory shall be free. Finally, a third class said: Congress has no right to meddle in this matter, one way or the other. The people of the territories are the sovereigns; let them decide for themselves between freedom and slavery." (D. H. Montgomery, Leading Facts of American History, p. 273.)

In this revelation on war, the Lord reveals to the Prophet:

(1) That the agitation will lead to war;

(2) That South Carolina will take the initiative;

(3) That the war will bring death and misery to many souls;

(4) That the rebellion in South Carolina is only the beginning;

(5) That there will be a division between Southern and Northern States;

(6) That the South will appeal to Great Britain and other nations for aid;

(7) That finally nations shall rise against nations, until war is poured out upon all.

Have all these predictions been fulfilled?

(1.) All the world now knows that the agitation in the United States in the first part of the last century resulted in a long, devastating war. But at the time this prophecy was given, American statesmen and the American people generally firmly believed that the problem could be solved by constitutional means. In fact, a settlement was agreed on, the basis of which was a law providing for a gradual, moderate reduction of the tariff. This law enabled South Carolina to withdraw her Nullification Ordinance, while the necessity for the Force Bill was removed. Thus it was hoped that the crisis was passed. The Lord, however, declared, through His Prophet, that war would come. No statesmanship could avert the calamity.

(2.) South Carolina took the initiative. From a mere human point of view this appeared improbable. The probability was that the Northern States, conscious of their numerical and financial strength, would throw down the gauntlet. A bill was before Congress authorizing President Andrew Jackson to use force in defense of the Union. But, notwithstanding this, the North did not begin the war. South Carolina took the first step, by recalling her representatives in the United States Senate, November 10, 1860. This was followed by an ordinance of secession, passed by the State Legislature on the 17th of November, the same year. And on the 12th of April, 1861, the first shot of the war was fired by General Beauregard against Fort Sumpter, and thus the conflict was begun by South Carolina, as foretold by the Prophet, and not by any of the Northern States.

(3.) It was a war that brought death and misery to many souls. The entire loss on both sides, including deaths from diseases and wounds, is estimated at a million men,—an enormous total at that time. The sufferings of prisoners in forts where food was scarce and sanitary arrangements imperfect, and in hospitals where there were but few facilities for the proper treatment of wounds, were beyond anything that can be imagined.

"To the terrible loss of life and property let there be added the consideration of the suffering of the wounded and the sick who languished in loathsome prisons; the sorrow of widows and orphans who looked in vain for the return of husbands and fathers who marched in the fulness of manly strength to the war; the anguish of parents, whose dim eyes looked in vain for sons thrown into unknown graves; and the gentler yet equally tender sorrow of sisters who in the fierce war lost the companion of their childhood. Let all this, I say, be taken into account, and the fact that Joseph Smith was a Prophet of the living God will be found written in characters of blood to this generation, and witnessed by the heartache and tears of millions" (B. H. Roberts, A New Witness for God, p. 330).

(4-5.) The Southern and Northern States were divided against each other. No State escaped. All became involved, as stated in the prophecy. This no mere human wisdom could have foreseen. But the Spirit of prophecy knew. South Carolina led the way in December, 1860. Would any other States follow the lead? Let history answer. Mississippi, Florida, Alabama. Georgia, and Louisiana seceded during the month of January 1861; Texas in February; Virginia in April; Arkansas, and North Carolina in May; and Tennessee in June, 1861, and thus the prophecy concerning the division between the South and the North was fulfilled.

(6.) Did the South appeal to Great Britain and other nations for aid? Historians tell us that in May, 1861, the Southern States sent commissioners abroad to seek recognition for the Confederacy. Mr. William L. Yancy, of Alabama, was sent to England; Mr. P. A. Rost, of Louisiana, to France; and Mr. A. Dudley Mann, of Virginia, to Holland and Belgium. In October, the same year, James M. Mason and John Slidell were appointed ambassadors to England and France, respectively, to induce those countries to aid the Southern cause. That their mission failed was due to the firm stand taken by the workingmen of the United Kingdom, who regarded the cause of the North as a righteous cause even though they suffered greatly through the Northern blockade of Southern ports, especially on account of the "cotton famine" resulting therefrom.

(7.) Thus far, the prophecy deals with the American Civil War. Then it takes a wider scope and predicts a general world war, something like the prediction of our Lord concerning the destruction of Jerusalem, which connects His second coming with that local catastrophe. The Prophet declares (v. 23) that "the days will come that war will be poured out upon all nations," and that the fire kindled in South Carolina was but the beginning of a general conflagration. Great Britain and other nations will, he further says, "call upon other nations" for "aid against other nations"; and thus war shall be poured out upon all nations. We have lived to see this prediction literally fulfilled. We have lived to see war poured out upon every continent and every ocean. And it is a great question whether this war will not be followed by a race war, still more destructive.

The American Civil War was only the beginning of a series of conflicts, each leading up to the world-war of 1914. This is all the more remarkable, because since the middle of the 19th century, the peace movement in the world assumed so definite proportions as to warrant the hope that there would be no war in the 20th century. Peace friends were hopeful that the institution of the Hague Tribunal (July 27th, 1899), would mark the end of warfare between civilized nations, but the Prophecy on war has to be fulfilled. The Civil War was, in fact, the beginning of war which was eventually to engulf all nations. There are some critics of this revelation who, shortly after the Civil War, declared that any one could have made the prediction that the Southern States would rise against the Northern States, and that others had declared that such a conflict was inevitable. The fact remains, however, granting this contention, there was no one wise enough to predict that out of and following this conflict, nations would make alliances for their protection and in spite of these alliances eventually war would sweep the nations of the earth. One eminent educator, Dr. David Starr Jordan, in the Salt Lake Tabernacle, and at other times declared as late as 1914:

"What shall we say of the great war of Europe, ever threatening, ever impending and which never comes. We shall say that it will never come. Humanly speaking, it is impossible, not in the physical sense, of course, for with weak, restless and godless men nothing evil is impossible. It may be, of course, that some half-crazed Arch-Duke, or some harassed minister of state shall half knowing, give the signal for Europe's conflagration. * * *

"The bankers will not find the money for such a fight, the industries of Europe will not and statesmen cannot. No matter whatever the bluster of apparent provocation, it comes to the same thing at the end. There will be no general war until the master directs the fighters to fight. The masters have much to gain, but vastly more to lose and their signal will not be given." (Quoted from remarks by Elder Charles H. Hart, Conference pamphlet, Oct. 6, 1914.)

Yet, within a few weeks following this repeated prediction as given in the Salt Lake Tabernacle, the whole world was thrown into turmoil and bloodshed in the struggle of 1914-1918. Then again, with more terrible loss of life and property the world was plunged into the second conflict of 1939-1945. Some sneering critic may arise and say, that this prophecy was not fulfilled, for there were some countries which were not engaged in this deadly conflict; but what is war? Does it not partake of many things besides the carrying of arms and open battle? None can deny that every nation on the earth suffered from the effect and ravages of this stupendous struggle. Truly the effects of war reach every quarter of the earth. Nor is this the end. The clouds are now gathering in preparation for another conflict even more terrible and destructive of life and property. League of Nations, or United Nations delegates, cannot stop it, because people will not repent and they have rejected the Gospel. Peace has been taken from the earth (Doc. and Cov. 1) and it will not return until the Lord shall come to establish it. (Doc. and Cov. 97:23.)

The Prophet also indicates (Sec. 130:12, 13) that the slave question might be the outstanding issue in the conflict between the North and South. There were two points on which the two groups of States disagreed. The North wanted protection for manufacturing interests against foreign competition; the South demanded free trade. The South profited by the products of slave labor; the North determined to abolish slavery. The assertion of the rights of the States to secede was prompted by these two issues, but the slave question, which at first was of subordinate importance, soon took the chief place in public view, as the Prophet predicted.

In all these important particulars the prophecy has been fulfilled. There are other parts which yet remain unfulfilled, but they, too, will come to pass, in time. "Slaves are to rise up against their masters" (v. 4), and the "Remnant" is to "vex the Gentiles with a sore vexation" (v. 5). There will, finally, be "famine, and plague, and earthquakes, and the thunder of heaven, and the fierce and vivid lightning also," and thus the inhabitants of the Earth will feel the wrath of God (v. 6).

"It reads in the current print of Doctrine and Covenants, 'and "thus" war shall be poured out upon all nations.' But, revising the History of the Church some years ago, we found that in the manuscript it read, 'then'; this is, when Great Britain shall call upon other nations to defend herself against other nations, 'then war shall be poured out upon all nations' " (Report of Eighty-seventh Semi-annual Conference, p. 141).

Thunder * * *] Not only by sword and cannon were the inhabitants of the earth to be called upon to mourn because of their iniquity, but even the elements were to become angry, and by famine, plague, and the vivid lightnings and thunder, earthquakes and other disturbances, the inhabitants of the earth are to feel the wrath, and indignation, and chastening hand of the Almighty. We have discovered in another revelation (Sec. 43) that the thunders shall utter their voices from the ends of the earth in a manner never witnessed before. This will come after the testimonies of the elders of Israel have been declared.

Until * * * hath made a full end of all nations] How long is the time of trouble to last? This is the answer to that question. All the kingdoms of the world will become the kingdom of the Son of God.

General Notes

We have seen that this prophecy has been literally fulfilled. Was it not written after the Civil War? Orson Pratt tells us:

"When I was a boy, I traveled extensively in the United States and the Canadas, preaching this restored gospel. I had a manuscript copy of this Revelation, which I carried in my pocket, and I was in the habit of reading it to the people among whom I traveled and preached" (Jour. of Dis., Vol. XVIII., p. 224).

Orson Pratt was born in 1811, and was, therefore, only 21 years of age when this Revelation was first given.

President George Q. Cannon says:

"I recollect very well that in the fall of 1860, while going to England, we were invited at Omaha to preach the gospel to the people of that City. A good many of the leading citizens procured the court house for us, and Brother Pratt preached. By request, I read the Revelation given through Joseph Smith, on the 25th of December, 1832, respecting the secession of the Southern States. It created a great sensation, the election of Abraham Lincoln having just been consummated, and it being well known that there was a great deal of feeling in the South in relation to it. A great many persons came forward and examined the book from which the Revelation was read to see the date, to satisfy themselves that it was not a thing of recent manufacture. The Revelation was in the Pearl of Great Price which was published in 1851."

A copy of the edition of 1851 is still preserved in the Millennial Star library, Liverpool. It was published by Franklin D. Richards and has a preface by him, dated the 11th of July, that year. That was ten years before the war broke out.

There is no doubt that the prophecy was given in 1832 and circulated in manuscript form; nor that it was read publicly and privately as soon as it was given. There is no doubt that it was committed to the "immortal custody of the press" in 1851.

Christ teaches that the meek shall inherit the Earth, not the warriors. History teaches the same truth.
