Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 88.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Kirtland, Ohio, December 27, 1832. Designated by the Prophet, the Olive Leaf. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 302.—Ministrations of the Comforter—The light of truth is the light of Christ—The spirit and the body constitute the soul—Parable of the man sending his servants into the field and visiting them in turn—Search for the truth through study and prayer enjoined—Testimony of the Elders to be followed by that of calamity—Scenes incident to the Lord's coming—The angels sounding their trumpets in turn as appointed—Duties of the Presidency of the School of the Prophets—The ordinance of washing of feet.

VERILY, thus saith the Lord unto you who have assembled yourselves together to receive his will concerning you:

This Revelation is known as The Olive Leaf. The Prophet Joseph, in a letter to Elder Wm. W. Phelps, dated Kirtland, January 14th, 1833 referred to it under that name. "I send you," he wrote, "the 'Olive Leaf' which we have plucked from the tree of Paradise, the Lord's message of peace to us." At that time some of the Saints in Zion did not strictly obey the commandments of the Lord, and their feelings towards the Prophet Joseph were not those of perfect harmony. But the Prophet had only one desire, that the Saints in Zion and in Kirtland would merit the approbation of God. In this spirit he sent a copy of this Revelation to Elder Phelps. who was the editor of the Evening and Morning Star, and accompanied it by a letter in which the Saints were admonished to repent. He wrote: "For if Zion will not purify herself, so as to be approved in all things, in His sight, He will seek another people; for His work will go on until Israel is gathered, and they who will not hear His voice, must expect to feel His wrath." A copy of the Revelation was sent to Zion, by the Prophet, as a message of peace, as "oil upon troubled waters"; hence, it was called the "Olive Leaf."

In this Revelation our Lord (1) expresses His gracious approval of the assembly that had convened for the purpose of learning the will of God concerning the Saints (1, 2); (2) promises them another Comforter (3, 4); (3) explains the nature of celestial glory (5-13) and (4) the resurrection (14-24); (5) promises the redemption of the Earth (25-35); (6) reveals the great truth that there are many kingdoms in space, each governed by law (36-62); (7) explains acceptable prayer (63-5) and (8) how to obtain spiritual light (66-9); (9) gives instructions regarding preparations for missionary labor (70-85); (10) sets forth the doctrine of the last days and the Millennium (86-116); and (11) gives special instructions (117-26) and (12) commandments concerning the School of the Prophets (127-41).

1-2. Evidently, some of the Elders had come together for the purpose of learning something regarding the will of God concerning them. The Revelation on war had just been received, and it must have made a deep impression upon them. They desired further instructions as to their duties in view of the critical times that had been predicted. This was pleasing to God. The angels, too, rejoiced (v. 2).

Lord of Sabaoth] "Sabaoth" is a Hebrew word meaning "hosts." It sometimes refers to the armies of Israel and other nations; sometimes to the priests officiating in the Sanctuary; sometimes to the people of God generally, and sometimes to the stars and planets in the sky. "Lord of Hosts" is equivalent to the "all-sovereign," or "omnipotent" Lord. When we pray, we should remember that He, to whom we speak, has all power in heaven and on Earth—the Lord of Hosts. The Lord has given His interpretation to this word to be: "The Creator of the first day, the beginning and the end."

Recorded in the book] The prayers were placed on record in the book in which the names of the Sanctified are enrolled.

3-4. Another Comforter] This is the Holy Spirit, who gives to the Saints the assurance of eternal life. See also John 14:16.

5-13. In the world the opinion prevails that celestial glory is of a different nature from anything known on Earth. As the poet expresses it:

"We know not, O we know not, What joys await us there; What radiance of glory, What bliss beyond compare."

Paul also says, "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love Him (I. Cor. 2:9). And that is literally true as to the details of eternal life in celestial glory. But in this Revelation it is made known to us that celestial glory is not of a different nature from that in which God manifests Himself to us on this Earth, in the gospel, in nature, or in the gift of the Holy Spirit. In other words, celestial glory is the glory of truth and love—the glory of the Church of the Firstborn (v. 5); it is the glory of wisdom and power, as manifested in the sun, the moon, the stars, and the Earth (vv. 7-10); it is the glory of intelligence and life, as manifested in the gift of the Holy Spirit (vv. 11-13).

The meaning seems to be this: Our Lord lived with the Father in celestial glory; consequently, the Church is founded upon, and developed by, celestial truth. For the same reason, the universe was framed in accordance with a celestial pattern; the glory and intelligence of the Creator are manifested everywhere. And for the same reason, the gifts of the Holy Spirit—the gift of wisdom, of faith, of knowledge, of healing, of prophecy—are of the same kind, in a small degree, as those powers possessed by our heavenly Father in the celestial realms, in infinite perfection. The change from mortality to immortality is, therefore, not to be compared to taking a fish out of water, or a bird out of the air into the ether of space. It is a change from imperfection to perfection; it is a birth to a life of which the existence on Earth is the beginning.

14-24. The entrance to celestial glory is through death and resurrection (v. 14). And the Earth itself must pass through the same process, in order to become the dwelling-place of celestial beings (vv. 18-20). Each one can receive only the glory for which obedience to law has prepared him. Those who have been able to obey celestial law are prepared for celestial glory; This is equally true of those who have obeyed inferior laws (vv. 21-4).

"The spirits in the eternal world are like the spirits in this world. When those have come into this world and received tabernacles, then died and again have risen and received glorified bodies, they will have an ascendancy over the spirits who have received no bodies, or kept not their first estate, like the devil" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. V., p. 403).

25-35. The subject of the redemption of the Earth is resumed here. We know from the Bible that "the heavens and the earth, which are now, are reserved unto fire" (II. Pet. 3:7. See also Dan. 7:9, 10, and II. Thess. 1:8). We know also that there are combustible elements in abundance and heat enough to consume many worlds like ours, whenever the torch is applied. Here we are told, that the Earth will abide "the power by which it is quickened"; it will abide the fire and come out of the flames, quickened and purified, like gold out of the refiner's fire, or a beautiful vessel of potter's clay out of the fiery furnace (v. 26). In this sanctified state it will be the residence of celestial beings, resurrected and inhabiting "the same" bodies that they had here, quickened by celestial glory (v. 28). For each individual will receive the glory by which he is quickened (vv. 29-31).

"So far as we are concerned, we were taken from the earth, and we may expect to return to it again; and that portion of me which is pure after the dross of this mortality is separated from it, I expect will be Brother Heber. It is that which will be resurrected; but all that is not pure will remain; that is, it will not go back into my body again; and if there are ten parts out of the hundred which are dross and corruption they will remain in the earth; I do not expect to take that up again, but I expect to take up the purified element that will endure for ever; still the dross is beneficial in its place" (Heber C. Kimball, Jour. of Dis., Vol. III., p. 107).

"There is one class which will be different from all the rest. They shall be brought forth, the Lord says, but they will go back into their own place. They would not receive that which they might have had; they would not obey that which they might have obeyed. They received the light and the truth and then would not use it in the way that God had appointed. They would not go on unto perfection by keeping every word that proceeded from the mouth of God, but prostituted the power God had given them to rise to the highest heights, but sunk down to the lowest depths; denying the truth revealed to them; shedding innocent blood; consenting to the death of Christ; thus sinning against the Holy Ghost and becoming so corrupt and abominable that they cannot be redeemed. But they shall be brought forth from the grave and become subject to the devil and his angels in eternity. What is their end we do not know; nobody knows, the Lord says. Some people are inquiring about the end of those sons of perdition. The Lord says no man knows it, that the end thereof and the height and extent and the depth thereof no man knoweth, and if the Lord does reveal it to some, He shuts up the vision. What, then, is the 'second death'? Why, the Lord tells us what that is, in His Revelation in the twenty-ninth section of the Doctrine and Covenants. It is eternal banishment from His presence. He is the source of light and truth and power and glory and happiness and joy and dominion and increase forever, of which they will all be deprived. Being shut right out from the light, these shall go away into outer darkness, where no ray of light comes, spiritual or physical—no ray of light from sun or moon or twinkling star or even a comet, to be in outer darkness; and no wonder there is 'weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth,' to use the Scripture expression" (Address at Salt Lake City, October 4th, 1914).

On the other hand, those who refuse to be governed by law and are a law unto themselves cannot be sanctified. They are outside the pale of mercy and justice and judgment, as well as law, and must remain "filthy still" (v. 35). It is only when we try to obey God's laws that we have claim upon His mercy. Justice will take into account, in the judgment, every honest effort to do the will of God.

36-62. We are told here that every part of space is occupied by some "kingdom"; that each kingdom is governed by law, and that the laws are adapted to the conditions that prevail. Some laws are universal. Such is the law of gravitation, for instance; or the great fundamental moral law, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind; and thy neighbor as thyself." Other laws are limited; they vary as the conditions vary. By kingdoms we understand the planets and orbs that circle in space. God is capable of governing them all, because He "comprehendeth all things, and all things are before Him" (v. 41). God visits all these kingdoms in due time.

"The sun is making as wild an excursion into the spatial wilderness as the most lunatic comet could contrive. Wilder, indeed; for the comet sooner or later returns, whereas there is no evidence that the sun, with his attendant spheres, is moving otherwise than in the straightest of straight lines. In Popular Astronomy (Northfield, Minn.), Professor John Candee Dean tells us some of the things that are known about this solar motion. First suspected by the great astronomer Herschel, it was demonstrated seventy years ago by the Russian Struve, that this movement carries the sun and its system through space with inconceivable velocity in the direction of the constellation Hercules. Later, Mudler, of Dorpat, announced that the sun was moving around a central orb, in a period of 18,000,000 years, but modern astronomers find no evidence that the sun is deviating from a straight line.

"'It has been found that the sun is moving toward its apex with a velocity of about twelve miles a second. To realize what this means, consider that the muzzle velocity of a shot from a large modern cannon is only 1,500 feet per second, while the sun moves with a speed of 63,000 feet per second, or forty two times as fast. If a cannon-shot could be projected with the velocity of the sun, its energy and penetrating power would be increased 1,700 times, and if a shot could be made that would withstand the enormous pressure and heat generated, it would penetrate 1,500 feet of solid steel. * * * The star called 61 Cygni, in the constellation of the Swan, is the nearest star visible in our latitude. While the sun moves nearly 400,000,000 miles in a year, it would take 100,000 years for it to move over a space equal to the distance that separates us from the nearest star. In the sun's flight toward its apex, it will take over 500,000 years for it to pass the star Vega, but since Vega has a slow motion at right angles to the sun's motion, it follows that the sun will never pass very near that star.

"'While the sun moves at a uniform rate, and probably in a straight line, the earth, owing to its motion around the sun, describes a huge spiral in space.'

"A remarkable interesting phenomenon of two great drifts of stars, moving in opposite directions, has recently been discovered. About 10,000 stars were dealt with in this investigation. The fast-moving drift is flowing away from the constellation of the Serpent Bearer. The slow-moving drift is flowing from the constellation of the Lynx. The two streams of stars appear to be nearly equally divided, and are completely intermingled with each other.

"The phenomenon is explained on the theory that two great universes have been drawn together, probably by mutual attraction, and are now passing through each other."

Astronomers have since discovered that our sun with all its attendant planets is not traveling in a straight line, but is traveling in its orbit, as are all the stars of our universe around some common center of gravity. So great is this orbit that it will take the sun several billions of years to make one revolution. All of which is in perfect harmony with the revelation of the Lord to Abraham by Urim and Thummim.

Verily, here are many "kingdoms" in space, and they all are governed by law.

51-61. The Spirit of the Lord prompts the Prophet to compare these orbs to a field into which the Owner sends laborers, whom he visits in rotation. The question is sometimes discussed, whether any other globes than the Earth are inhabited. Prominent astronomers have claimed that they have actually seen irrigation canals on Mars, while others have refused to accept their statements as based on facts. Philosophers, too, have ranged themselves on opposite sides of that question. Some have surmised that many other worlds are inhabited; others, among whom can be mentioned the late Mr. Alfred Russell Wallace, have maintained that only on Earth are the conditions favorable to higher forms of life. This Revelation decides that question. God has sent laborers to each of His worlds, and He visits them, one after another. Parley P. Pratt says:

"I might enlarge the subject by connecting the family of Adam with other branches of Christ's kingdom, and of the celestial family in other planets and worlds, many of which are older and much larger than our Earth, but peopled by branches of the celestial family, who are of the same kindred and race that we are; viz., the sons and daughters of God. I might also tell you of the continued exertions of creative power by which millions of new worlds will yet be formed and peopled by King Adam and his descendants, in the name and by the authority of Jesus Christ" (From The Prophet, quoted in the Millennial Star, Vol. V., p. 191.)

Prayer is the most wonderful institution in the kingdom of God, and none was more familiar with it than the Prophet Joseph. But there are many who have no higher conception of it than to regard it as only a means whereby to obtain gifts from God, most often of a material character. Is the gift bestowed? Then the prayer is answered. Is it withheld? Then God did not hear. "Such theory," as one has said, "is obviously too simple and superficial to be true. Prayer is more subtle than this doctrine implies. It may be described as the soul speaking to God and hearing God speak to it. It is, therefore, the deepest and the most wonderful act of which a man is capable, for in it the whole universe is, as it were, concentrated."

63-5. "Whatsoever ye ask the Father in my name." That is the prayer that is acceptable to God. To pray in the name of the Lord is to ask as one belonging to Him—one accepted by Him. It is to pray according to the dictation of His Spirit. Such prayers God will hear and grant, if "expedient for you." There is quite a difference between the mechanical petition of a street beggar and the request of one who is a friend of the son in the house. The latter is treated as the son. What is good for him he will receive. Bishop Hall well says:

"What God requires and looks at, is neither the arithmetic of our prayers—how many they are; not the rhetoric of our prayers—how eloquent they be; nor the geometry of our prayers—how long they be; nor the music of our prayers—how sweet our voice may be; nor the logic, nor the method, nor even the orthodoxy of our prayers."

God looks to our welfare, even when He does not give us that for which we ask. If we were to pray for, and receive what is not good for us, it would be for our condemnation.

66-9. The Saints need wisdom and understanding. They need that light that comes from God. They need the Holy Spirit. How can they obtain the divine light? The answer to that question is given in these paragraphs: "If your eye be single to my glory." That is the condition. If we look to the glory of God alone, and not to our own honor and advantage; if we are saved from selfishness, which is the underlying motive of all sin, we shall be filled with divine light. The cause of darkness in the world and of error among the people of God is to be found in the fact that love of self, desire for honor, for wealth, ease, or pleasure, shut the light of heaven out of the soul.

70-85. Our Lord in this Section, teaches His servants how to prepare themselves for their high and holy calling. They were to be His witnesses (v. 81), and they were commissioned to warn the world to escape the wrath of God (v. 85). Some preparation was needed to do that acceptably; what kind of preparation for the ministry does God require? The answer to this question is twofold: First, call a solemn assembly and purify yourselves from the sins of the world, in order that you may be clean (v. 75); fast and pray (v. 76). Secondly, form a school and teach each other all useful knowledge (vv. 77-9). This is the preparation the Lord requires.

Fasting has in all ages been an outward sign of sorrow and mourning. When the heart is full of grief, the body does not crave for food as usual. When calamities sweep over a country, or when sinners are awakened to a realization of their condition abstinence from all pleasures, including those of the table, is natural to all who take things seriously. The Elders, however, are not required to fast as a sign of mourning alone, but as one of rejoicing. This is just as natural. For when the heart is filled with joy, the craving for food is forgotten for long periods, as they know who have attended meetings, lasting for many hours, where the Holy Spirit has been poured out upon the assembly. Our Lord warns His people against making a display of their fasting: "When thou fastest, anoint thine head, and wash thy face" (Matt. 6:16-18).

Systematic theology may be divided into (1) Theology proper, which includes all that has been revealed concerning the being and attributes of the Godhead, and the relation of God to the world, in the creation and in providence. (2) Anthropology, which includes the origin and nature of man; the fall, and the effects of the fall upon the human race. (3) Soteriology, which includes the plan of salvation, the work of the Redeemer, and the application of His work for the regeneration, justification, and sanctification of man, (4) Eschatology, which includes the doctrines concerning the last things; the state of the human spirit between death and resurrection, the Millennium, the judgment, heaven and hell. (5) Ecclesiology, which includes the doctrine, regarding the Church; its organization and attributes, and the Priesthood.

Theology is the most important of all sciences. "There are," says President Brigham Young, "a great many branches of education. Some go to college to learn languages, some to study law, some to study physics, and some to study astronomy and various other branches of science. We want every branch of science taught in this place that is taught in the world. But our favorite study is that branch which particularly belongs to the Elders of Israel, namely, theology. Every Elder should become a profound theologian—should understand this branch better than all the world" (Jour. of Dis., Vol. VI., p. 317).

But theology is not the only subject the Elders should be interested in. They should study:

And in the earth] Everything pertaining to the cultivation of the soil.

And under the earth] Mineralogy, geology, etc.

Things which have been] History, in all its branches.

Things which are] Current events.

Things which must shortly come to pass] Prophecies.

Things which are at home * * * abroad] Domestic and foreign

policies.

Wars * * * perplexities * * * judgments] The "signs of the times," by which the observer may know that "the day of the Lord" is at hand.

A knowledge of countries * * * kingdoms] Physical and political geography, languages, etc.

These studies, the Lord considers necessary, "That ye may be prepared in all things when I shall send you again to magnify the calling whereunto I have called you (v 80). God does not require all His servants to become doctors, or professors, or even profound students of these subjects, but He expects them to know enough of these things to be able to magnify their calling as His ambassadors to the world. The Latter-day Saints have, as George A. Smith remarks (Jour. of Dis., Vol. VI., p. 84), "been constantly and continually, upon new ground"; they have had to shift for themselves, and it is only because the Elders have tried to live up to this Revelation that they have been able to find a home in a desert and make a Paradise in waste places. It is by the light of this Revelation that the Saints have been able to reach a place in the world of politics, arts, and sciences, second to none. We may say that in the school organized according to this Revelation, the seeds of the future greatness of the Church were sown.

"When you are endowed and prepared to preach the gospel to all nations, kindred, and tongues, in your own languages, you must faithfully warn all, and bind up the testimony, and seal up the law, and the destroying angel will follow close at your heels, and exercise his tremendous mission upon the children of disobedience; and destroy the workers of iniquity, while the Saints will be gathered out from among them, and stand in holy places ready to meet the Bridegroom when He comes" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. II., p. 309).

86-116. The Revelation, having set forth the necessity of proper preparation for the ministry, lifts a portion of the curtain that veils the future and permits God's servants to view the events that signalize the end of the present dispensation and the establishing of the new, known as the Millennium.

(a) All things in Commotion.

"Robert Speer says that all mankind falls into three classes—the slaves who do the will of another; the knaves who do only their own will; and the freemen who do the will of God. Singularly enough those who do only their own will and defy all law and order seem to think that they are the only free men. President Jordan, of Leland Stanford university, once said that so far as he could see, the life which declared itself free to live laxly, or to live with a low standard was in the most degraded sort of bondage which he could imagine" (Quoted by the Rev. Stephen Paulson in an essay on "The Lord's Prayer").

(b) Angels Executing the Decrees of God.

"Notwithstanding Mr. Redding may have seen a wonderful appearance in the clouds one morning about sunrise (which is not very uncommon in the winter season), he has not seen the sign of the Son of Man, as foretold by Jesus; neither has any man, nor will any man, until after the sun shall have been darkened and the moon bathed in blood; for the Lord hath not shown me any such sign; and as the Prophet saith, so it must be—'Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets" (Amos 3:7). Therefore, hear this, O Earth! The Lord will not come to reign over the righteous, in this world, in 1843, nor until everything for the Bridegroom is ready" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. V., p. 291).

It may be gathered from this that when the sign appears, God will make its meaning known to the Prophet, Seer and Revelator who at that time may be at the head of the Church, and through him to His people and the world in general.

94-8. Another angel shall sound his trump] Here begins a series of world events, each signalized by the sounding of a trump by an angel—a divine messenger. There is some analogy between this vision and that recorded in Revelation 8:7-9:21, although they do not appear to cover the same events.

When the first angel sounds his trump, the doom upon the apostate church is pronounced. "She is ready to be burned." Then there is silence in heaven for half an hour. The heavenly hosts are waiting, awestruck, for the execution of this judgment.

"Whether the half hour here spoken of is according to our reckoning—thirty minutes, or whether it be according to the reckoning of the Lord, we do not know * * * During the period of silence all things are perfectly still; no angels flying during that half hour; no trumpets sounding; no noise in the heaven above; but immediately after this great silence the curtain of heaven shall be unfolded as a scroll is unfolded * * * The face of the Lord will be unveiled, and those who are alive will be quickened, and they will be caught up; and the Saints who are in their graves will come forth and be caught up, together with those who are quickened, and they will be taken into the heavens into the midst of those celestial beings who will make their appearance at that time. These are the ones who are the first fruits at the time of His coming" (Orson Pratt, Jour. of Dis., Vol. XVI., p. 328).

103-4. When the fifth angel sounds his trump, those who are in heaven as well as on Earth will be summoned to fall down and worship, and give glory to God, who reigns supreme for ever and ever, because the hour of His judgment has come. This call will come to every soul both in heaven and on earth, the spirits of the wicked as well as the spirits of the righteous, even sons of perdition will not be exempt.

106-7. Another angel shall sound his trump] When the seventh angel sounds his trump, the triumphant cry will ascend to heaven and reverberate through the universe, "It is finished!" The plan of redemption as proposed by the Wonderful Counselor in the Council of Heaven, has been carried out in its every detail. "The Lamb of God hath overcome." Then shall the angels be crowned with glory, and the Saints shall receive their celestial inheritance "and be made equal with Him." The seventh angel is Michael, our glorious ancestor (See v. 112).

(c) God's Plans Made Known.

108-10. "By and by the whole seven will have sounded, and then they commence to sound a second time. According to the Revelation from which I have read, the second sounding of the trumpets is not to produce destruction among the nations, but the sound of the first one will reveal the secret acts of God, His purposes and doings on the Earth during the first thousand years; the sounding of the second will reveal the doings and purposes of the great Jehovah during the second thousand years, and so on, until the seventh shall sound the second time, and pronounce the work of God finished, so far as the great preparation needful for His second coming is concerned.

Notice now, that it is the first sounding of the first of these seven, when the first resurrection takes place; and all these great works are to be performed on the Earth, and years elapse before Jesus descends with all His Saints; that is, if we understand these things correctly, by what little is revealed upon the subject" (Orson Pratt, Jour. of Dis., Vol. XVI, p. 329).

The seventh angel, our Father Adam, is represented as standing upon "the land and the sea," and solemnly affirming that "there shall be time no longer." A similar expression is applied to the angel with the "little book" in his hand, in Rev. 10:2. The Revelation of John closely follows Daniel, and the prophecies in the Doctrine and Covenants as closely follow John.

(d) The Last Battle.

"When the period called the Millennium has passed away, Satan will again be loosed. Now the query arises, Will Satan have power to deceive those who have lived on the Earth and have fallen asleep for a moment, and have received their immortal bodies? No, he will not. When they have passed through their probation, and have received their immortal bodies, Satan will have no power over them. Thus generation after generation will pass away, during the Millennium, but by and by, at the end of that period, unnumbered millions of the posterity of those who lived during the Millennium will be scattered in the four quarters of the Earth, and Satan will be loosed, and will go forth and tempt them, and overcome some of them, so that they will rebel against God; not rebel in ignorance or dwindle in unbelief, as the Lamanites did; but they will sin wilfully against the law of heaven, and so great will the power of Satan be over them, that he will gather them together against the Saints and against the beloved City, and fire will come down out of heaven and consume them" (Orson Pratt, Jour. of Dis., Vol. XVI., p. 322).

This is the last battle between the forces of good and evil, on this Earth, and it will end with the complete overthrow of the adversary.

117-126. In this previous section (vv. 86-116) the Lord gave His servants some instruction concerning the future. This was necessary as part of their schooling as His ministers. In these paragraphs He gives them further instructions on a variety of subjects. All are important. They should be studied one by one.

"Who does not know that fifteen minutes' study would acquaint persons with discovered and recorded laws which would otherwise take a series of years to become acquainted with? By reasoning and trying to generalize our ideas, we may gain much useful information, but shall we therefore consider books of no use? Is there no wisdom in availing ourselves of the labors of those who have developed truths? It is still knowledge, notwithstanding it has been discovered by others. Truth is truth, and take it wherever you may find it, or from whatever source it comes; it was truth from all eternity, and it will be truth to all eternity. There is a great fund of useful information laid down in books" (Jour. of Dis., Vol. III., p. 294).

125-6. Note the closing injunctions, Clothe yourselves with charity "as with a mantle;" not as a scanty piece of clothing, but as a generous covering; for charity is "the bond of perfectness and peace." Charity—which means brotherly affection—makes for perfection and peace. Pray always. Prayer is necessary, if we shall remain faithful till the coming of the Lord.

127-41. In this section, rules are given for the conduct of the School of the Prophets. This school was to be established for the benefit of all who were called to the ministry in the Church (v. 127). Note the order and etiquette to be observed in everything pertaining to the school. It was to be a house of God and to be respected as such.

General Notes

The School of the Prophets was organized, according to the instructions in this Revelation, during the month of February, 1833, and was continued throughout the winter. At this time the Elders and the Saints had many manifestations of the presence of the Spirit of the Lord. The Prophet spoke to a Conference, held in January, that year, in a foreign tongue, and others followed. Says Brigham Young:

"The members of that school were but few at first, and the Prophet commenced to teach them in doctrine to prepare them to go out into the world to preach the gospel unto all people, and gather the select from the four quarters of the Earth, as the prophets anciently have spoken. While this instruction prepared the Elders to administer in word and doctrine, it did not supply the teachings necessary to govern their private, or temporal, lives; it did not say whether they should be merchants, farmers, mechanics, or money-changers. The Prophet began to instruct them how to live, that they might be better prepared to perform the great work they were called to accomplish."

A School of the Prophets was also established in Zion. The Lord approved of this institution, although contention had arisen in it (See Sec. 95:10; 97:3), which called forth severe rebuke. A School of Elders—an extension of the School of the Prophets—was held in the early days of Utah, with President Brigham Young at its head. This was, practically a theological department of the University of Utah, while that seat of learning was in its infancy.

Some of the leading events in the history of the Church during this year, 1832, may be referred to here.

Early in January, the Prophet Joseph and Sidney Rigdon took a missionary journey to Shalersville, Ravenna, and other places, warning the inhabitants of the wrath to come, and preaching the gospel to them. Through the falsehoods published by apostates, there was great excitement among the people, and a storm of persecution threatened to burst over the Saints. The Prophet and his companion met with some success in allaying the prejudices, but the fire was again fanned into flames by the apostates, and on the 25th of March the two servants of the Lord were seized by a mob at Hiram and barely escaped with their lives. No enemies are so bitter as apostates. None are so unscrupulous, or so dead to the demands of honor and truth.

On the 25th of January, the Seventh General Conference of the Church was held at Amherst, O., on which occasion many Elders were called to go on a mission to various parts of the country (Sec. 75), and as a result of their labors, many Branches of the Church were established in the United States and Canada.

On the 2nd of April, the Prophet, as instructed by a Revelation (Sec. 78:9), left Hiram in order to pay a second visit to the Saints in Missouri. Some difficulties between leading brethren, particularly Edward Partridge and Sidney Rigdon, were settled at a general council of the Church, held at Independence, April 26th. At a meeting on May 1st, it was decided to print 3,000 copies of the Book of Commandments; also that other revelations should be prepared for the press, as they might be given from time to time. It was, further, decided that Wm. W. Phelps should publish the hymns selected by Emma Smith for the use of the Saints. Arrangements were also made for the establishment of stores in Missouri and Ohio.

In the month of June, the first number of the Evening and Morning Star, published by Wm. W. Phelps & Co., appeared at Independence. This was the first paper published in the interest of the Church.

Some of the most important Revelations were received during this year. Among these were Sec. 76, that grand Vision which shines as a star of the first magnitude among all the Revelations vouchsafed by God to man; Sec. 77, which is a Key to the Revelation by John, with which Bible students should become familiar; Sec. 82, showing the Order of Enoch; Sec. 87, the Prophecy on War, and Sec. 88, the "Olive Leaf."

During this year hundreds of farms were bought in Jackson County, and the Saints gathered there. But they did not keep the laws of God faithfully, notwithstanding the promise given (Sec. 84) that the City of the New Jerusalem should be built in Jackson County "in this generation," provided, of course, that the Saints would be faithful and united.

During the month of November, this year, Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball came to Kirtland, where they met the Prophet Joseph for the first time. God was already preparing for the future guidance and preservation of the Church, by associating these highly gifted young men with the Prophet, and giving them an opportunity to learn his views, understand his aspirations and become imbued with his spirit. God foresaw that the Church would, before many years, need men schooled in the same school as the Prophet, to take his place and the place of his devoted brother. These were the men. Brigham Young stands forth with prominence on the pages of Church history. But it is difficult to mention his name without remembering that of Heber C. Kimball, too. Brigham and Heber were as inseparable as Joseph and Hyrum.
