Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Fourth Period, 1833, Sections 89-101.

Section 89.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Kirtland, Ohio, February 27, 1833, known as the Word of Wisdom.—Abstinence from wine, strong drink, tobacco and hot drinks enjoined—Moderation in the eating of meat—Wholesome foods—Promises to those who live according to these precepts.

A WORD of Wisdom, for the benefit of the council of high priests, assembled in Kirtland, and the church, and also the saints in Zion—

There is, possibly, no Revelation in this volume that has been more frequently commented upon by the Elders in their discourses, or more fully explained. There certainly is none that has received stronger confirmation by scientists. It is a Revelation that deals mainly with the proper mode of living, and the rules given, far in advance of anything suggested by scientists, have been amply sanctioned by undisputed authority on hygienic laws, as soon as these have become known through research. Here, the Prophet deals with a subject that belongs properly to the domain of science, and scientists, therefore, without intention on their part, become witnesses to the fact that Joseph Smith spoke by divine inspiration, when they confirm the truths set forth.

It is the first Revelation given after the organization of the School of the Prophets. The Elders who were instructed in that school, as a preparation for the ministry, were to be clean. Brigham Young relates the circumstances that occasioned this Revelation. The first school was held in a small room situated over the Prophet Joseph's kitchen, in a house which belonged to Bishop Whitney. The brethren came to that little room, from near and far, to receive instructions. As was customary at that time, some of them smoked and used tobacco in other forms. Often, when the Prophet entered the room, he would find himself in a cloud of tobacco smoke, and the floor was soiled. The Prophet earnestly sought the Lord for guidance in this difficulty, and received this Revelation.

"If we would observe this law or commandment of the Lord—first given not as a commandment nor by constraint but afterwards declared by the mouthpiece of the Lord to be in force as a commandment thereafter to the Latter-day Saints—if, I say, the people would observe the principles of the revelation, there could not exist * * * that most obnoxious institution known as a saloon." (Pres. Joseph F. Smith, Oct. 4, 1908.)

"I said to the Saints at our last annual Conference, The Spirit whispers to me to call upon the Latter-day Saints to observe the Word of Wisdom, to let tea, coffee, and tobacco alone, and to abstain from drinking spirituous drinks" (Brigham Young, Jour. of Dis., Vol. 12, p. 118).

"In the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, command the Elders of Israel * * * to cease drinking strong drink from this time henceforth." (Brigham Young, Jour. of Dis., Vol. 7, p. 337.)

"In all ages of the world that we have any knowledge of, when there was a people on the Earth whom God acknowledged as His people, He has invariably dictated them in spiritual, as in temporal things. This question was agitated year after year in the days of Joseph. The first two Bishops in the Church—Edward Partridge was the first; I was well acquainted with him; and Newel K. Whitney was the second—questioned the propriety of Joseph having anything to do with temporal things. Joseph would argue the case with them a little, and tell them how things were, and bring up Scripture to show them that it could not be otherwise—that it was impossible for the Lord to dictate people, unless He dictated them in temporal affairs * * * There were William E. McLellin, John F. Boynton, and Lyman Johnson, who belonged to the Twelve; Frederick G. Williams, second counselor to Joseph, and two-thirds of the High Council, all talking about this, and I went into the Temple and just challenged them to show wherein the Lord ever conferred upon any man in the world the power to dictate in spiritual affairs, that he did not in temporal affairs. They could not do it" (Jour. of Dis., Vol. XVIII., p. 243).

"On the blood, making it poor and thin. On the stomach, weakening the power of digestion, causing loss of appetite, and giving rise to sickness. On the heart, causing weakness and irregular action. On the organs of sense—on the eye by causing confusion and even loss of sight; on the ear, by causing whistling or ringing sounds, and making people unable to hear distinctly. On the brain, by first stimulating and then depressing its action. On the nerves, lessening their power and sensitiveness. On the inside of the mouth, causing enlargement of the tonsils (smoker's throat), redness, dryness, and sometimes peeling, with unnatural firmness, shrinking, or sponginess of the gums; and, worst of all, cancer of the lips, tongue, etc. On the lungs, when they are in an irritable state, by keeping up the irritation and increasing the cough."

It is, as the Revelation says, not for the body.

"'Hot drinks are not for the body, or belly.' There are many who wonder what this can mean; whether it refers to tea or coffee, or not. I say it does refer to tea and coffee. Why is it that we are so dull and languid? It is because we break the Word of Wisdom. Disease preys upon our system, our understandings are darkened, and we do not comprehend the things of God. The devil takes advantage of us, and we fall into temptation. Not only are they injurious in their tendency, and baneful in their effects, but importation of foreign products might be the means of thousands of people being poisoned at a future time, through the advantage that an enemy might take of us, if we made use of these things that are thus spoken of as being evil; and be it remembered, that this instruction is given in consequence of evils that do exist in the hearts of conspiring men'" (Hyrum Smith, Times and Seasons, Vol. III., p. 799).

10-13. Wholesome herbs and fruit are good for man; also meat.

"Nevertheless, they [the meats] should be used sparingly; and it is pleasing unto me, that they should not be used only in times of winter, or of cold, or famine. * * * And why to be used in time of famine? Because all domesticated animals would naturally die, and might as well be made use of by man as not" (Hyrum Smith, Ibid.).

14-17. Grain, fruit, and edible roots are here said to be ordained for the use of man. Undoubtedly man was first taught by God Himself to select and cultivate plants for food. And this was done so far back that there is no record of the first experiments. Tubalcain is mentioned in Genesis (4:22) as a fine worker in metals; Jabal was a cattle king, Jubal a musician, and Lamech somewhat of a poet.

18-21. In these paragraphs, the Lord offers rewards for the faithful observance of the precepts contained in this Revelation. They should be studied closely. Health, wisdom, knowledge, strength, are the rewards promised.

"Let these things be adhered to; let the Saints be wise; let us lay aside our folly and abide by the commandments of God; so shall we be blessed of the great Jehovah in time and in eternity. We shall be healthy, strong, and vigorous; we shall be enabled to resist disease; and wisdom will crown our councils, and our bodies shall become strong and powerful, our progeny will be mighty, and will rise up and call us blessed; the daughters will be beautiful, and the sons the joy of the whole earth; we shall prepare the purposes of Jehovah, for the kingdom of God, for the appearance of Jesus in His glory; out of Zion the perfection of beauty. God will shine, Zion will be exalted, and become the praise of the whole earth." (From the Times and Seasons, Vol. III., p. 799.)

General Notes

An American physician, Dr. Richard Hoyner, has published a book on The Art to Grow Old and Keep Young. From a masterly literary notice in a Stockholm paper, written by Dr. Henrick Berg, it appears that Dr. Hoyner is of the opinion that men and women might reach the age of from 125 to 175 years, if they would live in accordance with the laws of nature. How can they attain that ripe age? The author, first of all, calls attention to the influence of the mind upon the functions of the body. These are normal only when the soul is filled with faith, hope, and charity. Then he takes up the question of diet. Simplicity and temperance are the foundations of his system. He recommends bran and tells how to make bread and pancakes of that part of the grain. He condemns the use of intoxicants, coffee, tea, tobacco, and even chocolate. To tobacco he ascribes many cases of heart failure and anemia. And, finally, he recommends exercise at regular hours. Here we have a scientific endorsement of the Word of Wisdom.

"Man requires food to build up his body. He requires food that is adapted to the development of bone, muscle, and sinew; but this is not all; he requires food that is suitable to feed his brain and to supply the waste sustained in consequence of the use of his mental faculties. There is a necessity, therefore, to take these things into consideration. My opinion is that it will be most difficult for fathers of families to induce their wives and children to refrain from the use of tea and coffee, if they do not supply their tables with other articles in their place, and unless food, suitable to the requirements of the human system, is provided, our wives and children will be exposed to constant temptation to transgress the counsels that are given in regard to our diet" (George Q. Cannon, Jour. of Dis., Vol. XII., p. 222).

"If you observe faithfully the Word of Wisdom, you will have your dollar, your five dollars, your hundred dollars, yea, you will have your hundreds of dollars to spend for that which will be useful and profitable to you" (Brigham Young, Jour. of Dis., Vol. XII., p. 118).
