Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 90.

REVELATION to Joseph Smith the Prophet, given at Kirtland, Ohio, March 8, 1833. Position of Joseph as President of the Church reaffirmed.—Accountability of those who receive the oracles of God—The Gospel to be preached throughout the world—Worthy servants commended and offenders reproved.

THUS saith the Lord, verily, verily I say unto you my son, thy sins are forgiven thee, according to thy petition, for thy prayers and the prayers of thy brethren have come up into my ears.

In the Revelation given on the 27th of December, 1832, the Lord instructed His servants that no one was to be received in the School of the Prophets, that was not "clean from the blood of this generation," and that members should be received by the ordinance of washing of feet, which was instituted as a testimony that the recipient was clean in this respect (See Sec. 88:138-9). On January 23rd, when the Elders were assembled in Conference, the Prophet performed that ordinance, and pronounced them "clean from the blood of this generation." He warned them not to sin wilfully after they were thus cleansed, lest they should be given over to the buffetings of Satan. The meeting closed with the administration of the Sacrament. The Elders were now prepared for the ministry.

This Revelation concerning the keys of the kingdom may be considered as a continuation of the glorious manifestations of the beginning of the year. In it the Lord (1) constitutes the Prophet Joseph a guardian of the keys of the kingdom for ever (1-5); (2) defines the position of Sidney Rigdon and Fred G. Williams (6-11); (3) explains the duties of the Prophet and his counselors (12-18); (4) gives instructions on various subjects (19-33); and (5) warns Zion (34-37).

1-5. The central thought in these paragraphs is this that the Prophet Joseph would hold the keys of the kingdom for ever, and that, through him, others might also be appointed to receive revelations.

Neither the Prophet Joseph, nor his brethren, had any great transgressions, as measured by worldly standards, on their consciences, but no mortal is entirely free from sin. The fact is that, the nearer a man draws to the presence of God, the more keenly he feels his imperfections and shortcomings, and the more natural it is to exclaim with Peter, "Depart from me; for I am a sinful man, O Lord!" (Luke 5:8). It is not surprising, therefore, to learn that the Prophet and his brethren, coming, as it were, from the very presence of the Lord, engaged in prayers for the forgiveness of their sins and received the assurance quoted.

If our minds are open to see and understand things spiritual, we realize that we sin frequently. God has given us beautiful bodies, formed in His own likeness, each part adapted to its own purpose. He has also given us rules for the proper care of this wonderful machinery; how do we follow these rules? How do we honor His laws relating to the preservation of health and the propagation of the race? And how do we keep the great law of God with regard to loving Him more than anything else, and our neighbor as ourselves? We owe even enemies a debt of love; how do we pay it? Truly, there is none without sin, and the assurance, "Thy sins are forgiven thee," is, therefore, sweet to every child of the Eternal Father.

Be given to another, yea, even unto the Church] In a revelation given in February 1831, the Lord declared that Joseph Smith was the only one appointed to receive revelation and commandments for the Church "until he be taken, if he abide in me," but should the Prophet fail this gift would be taken from him and given to another. (Doc. & Cov. 43:3-4.) Now in March 1833, after the Prophet had been tried and proved, the Lord said that the keys, through which direction, commandment and revelation come, "shall never be taken from you, while thou art in the world, neither in the world to come." Yet when the Prophet should be taken the "oracles" would be given to another, "even to the Church." Therefore after the martyrdom the keys remained and were in possession of the Church and exercised through the presiding council, which at that time was the council of the Twelve Apostles, and in the Church the oracles are found and will continue unto the end of time.

"Elder Rigdon expressed a desire that himself and Frederick G. Williams should be ordained to the office to which they had been called, viz., those of Presidents of the High Priesthood, and to be equal in holding the keys of the Kingdom with Brother Joseph Smith, Jun., according to the Revelation given on the 8th of March, 1833. Accordingly, I laid my hands on Brothers Sidney and Frederick, and ordained them to take part with me in holding the keys of this last kingdom, and to assist in the Presidency of the High Priesthood, as my counselors; after which I exhorted the brethren to faithfulness and diligence in keeping the commandments of God" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. I., p. 334).

12-18. Some of the duties of the Prophet Joseph are defined in these paragraphs. Although his two Counselors were accounted equal with him, he was to continue in the ministry and Presidency (v. 12) of the Church and the School (v. 13). He was to receive Revelations concerning the mysteries of the kingdom (v. 14); set the Churches, or Branches, in order, and study (v. 15). In these duties the Counselors were to assist him.

The Church and the School] This is the second time in this Revelation that the two are mentioned together.

"If I had charge of such a society as this to which I refer, I would not allow novel-reading; yet it is in my house, in the houses of my Counselors, in the houses of these Apostles, these Seventies and High Priests, in the houses of the High Council in this City, and in other cities, and in the houses of the Bishops, and we permit it; yet it is ten thousand times worse than it is for men [^1] to come here to teach our children the A B C's, good morals, and how to behave themselves—ten thousand times worse! You let your children read novels until they run away, until they get so that they do not care; they are reckless, and their mothers are reckless, and some of their fathers are reckless, and if you do not break their backs and tie them up, they will go to hell. That is rough, is it not? Well, it is a comparison. You have got to check them some way or other, or they will go to destruction. They are perfectly crazy * * * I would not like to get into a society where there were no trials; but I would like to see a society organized to show the Latter-day Saints how to build up the kingdom of God" (Jour. of Dis., Vol. XV., p. 224).

19-33. In this section the Lord gives instruction on many subjects, most of them of a temporal character. The Saints were to provide a place of residence for Frederick G. Williams (v. 19). Sidney Rigdon was to remain where he resided, as was the Prophet's father (vv. 20-1). Bishop Whitney was to find a brother who could act as his agent (vv. 22-3. See also Sects. 51:8, 58:49; 84:113). They were to keep down the expense of their households (vv. 25-7); Vienna Jaques was to go to Zion (28-31); and they were to advise the Saints in Zion that the jurisdiction of the First Presidency extended over Jackson County and the West as well as over Kirtland and the East (v. 32). Thus the First Presidency was to be a means of preservation of the unity of the Church.

The primitive church, after the departure of the Apostles, disintegrated and was divided into many groups, each with a head of its own, and, finally, the great division into the Roman and Greek churches occurred, the bishop of Rome and the patriarch of Constantinople, each claiming supreme authority. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints might have been cleft in the same way, into a Western and an Eastern division, with several smaller groups between, but for the Revelation instituting the First Presidency, which is both the symbol of the unity of the Church and the connecting link by which this unity is effected.

Some of the commandments in this Section relate to temporal affairs. Does God care for such matters? Does He notice where His children live, and how? He certainly does, for the Master taught His disciples to make daily bread, as well as the advent of His kingdom, the subject of prayer. God regards the bodily needs of His children. He does not want them to live the unnatural life of hermits and ascetics. He not only teaches us to pray for bread, but guides us through revelation in our wise and honest efforts to obtain it.

34-7. The Revelation closes with a warning and a promise regarding Zion. All the brethren in Zion were not keeping the commandments of God faithfully. Some of them were jealous of the position and influence of the Prophet Joseph, and denied his authority to direct the temporal affairs of the Church. Among them were the men mentioned in Verse 35. In a letter written on behalf of the Church, by Orson Hyde and Hyrum Smith, Jan. 14th, 1833, and addressed to the Bishopric and Saints in Zion, it is pointed out that Sidney Gilbert, in a communication received from him, used "low, dark, and blind insinuations," which were not received "as from the fountain of light." In the same letter Wm. W. Phelps is kindly rebuked for a "lightness of spirit that ill becomes a man placed in the important and responsible station that he is placed in." Furthermore, the Saints in Zion failed to keep the laws of God concerning consecration. Hence the warning: The Lord would contend with Zion, plead with her strong ones, and chasten her "until she overcomes and is clean before me." That is the warning. The promise is: "She shall not be removed out of her place."

General Notes

"The Lord saw that we were so covetous and filled with the selfish principle instilled into our minds by our forefathers, that we could not give heed to the law which He gave concerning the consecrations that were to be made in Jackson County, Mo., and He determined in His own mind that that should not be a land of Zion unto the present generation of people, take them as a people; and He made this decree, after giving them Revelation upon Revelation, warning them by the mouth of His servant Joseph, who went in person and warned them, and sent up his Revelations a thousand miles from Kirtland and warned them. After they had been sufficiently warned, for some two years and upwards, after the commencement of their settlement of Jackson County, Mo., the Lord fulfilled that which He had spoken concerning them—that they should be driven out of the land of Zion. This was literally fulfilled" (Orson Pratt, Jour. of Dis., Vol. XV., p. 358).

But Zion has not been removed out of her place.

"We shall in due time walk forth into Jackson County and build up the waste places of Zion. We shall erect in that county a beautiful city after the order and pattern that the Lord shall reveal, part of which has already been revealed. God intends to have a city built up that will never be destroyed nor overcome, but that will exist, while eternity shall endure." (Ibid., p. 365).

——— Note

---
Notas:
[^1] The Prophet a Keeper of the Keys for Ever. Thy sins are forgiven] After the great manifestations of the divine Presence during the January Conference, and the sacred ordinance of the washing of feet, the assurance here quoted, and which occurs in v. 6, again, might seem superfluous. For the Prophet had pronounced his brethren "clean" of the blood of this generation, and without question, his status was the same as theirs. But this is a divine recognition of the ordinance they had performed. The power of the Priesthood is such that the acts performed under it are recognized by our Lord Himself and his assurance is His ratification of the ordinance observed according to His word. Referring to unprincipled men, or men without moral standards.
