Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 91.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Kirtland, Ohio, March 9, 1833. The Prophet was at this time engaged in the study of the ancient writings regarded by some as Scripture and known distinctively as the Apocrypha.—These writings not to be accepted as Scripture—Enlightenment of the Spirit requisite to discernment of the truth contained in these books.

VERILY, thus saith the Lord unto you concerning the Apocrypha—There are many things contained therein that are true, and it is mostly translated correctly;

When the Prophet, in the course of his Bible revision, came to the writings known as the Apocrypha, the question arose as to whether they were to be incorporated in his work. To decide that question, this Revelation was given.

The word "Apocrypha" means "Hidden," and it is applied to certain ancient writings which some regard as part of the Bible, while others consider them as without divine authority. Some of these books illustrate the progress of knowledge among the Jews, their religious character, and their government during the time between the Prophet Malachi and John the Baptist. In some of them, we see the fulfilment of prophecy, and in most of them there are found exalted sentiments and principles. I. and II. Esdras, Tobit, Judith, Esther, Susanna, and The Idol Bel and the Dragon are regarded as of least value. The first book of the Maccabees, gives the history of the deliverance of the Jews through that noble family. The second illustrates the belief of the Jews in a future life. The Wisdom of Solomon is an attempt to imitate the style of that illustrious king. Ecclesiasticus shows how the Jews expounded the Law.

The Church of Rome, by the Council of Trent, A.D. 1546, declared that the Apocrypha were authentic, although Augustine, in the 5th century, had said, "This reverence have I learnt to give to those books of Scripture only which are called canonical. Others I so read that l think not anything to be true because they so thought it, but because they were able to persuade me either by those canonical authors, or by some probable reason, that it did not swerve from truth."

"As he tells us in Grace Abounding, there was a time when John Bunyan was, in his spiritual strivings, driven to his wit's end and quite giving up the ghost of all hopes of attaining life. Then it was that a sentence fell with weight upon his spirit, 'Look at the generations of old, and see; did ever any trust in God and were confounded?' So fresh and upholding was the saying; it seemed to Bunyan as if it talked with him; but on going to his Bible to find the exact setting, the inspiring words refused to disclose themselves. 'Thus I continued above a year, and could not find the place; but at last, casting my eye upon the Apocryphal hooks, I found it in Ecclesiasticus, 'Look at the generations of old and see, did ever any trust in the Lord and was confounded; or did any abide in his fear and was forsaken; or whom did he ever despise that called upon him?' This, at first, did somewhat daunt me; but because by this time I had got more experience of the love and kindness of God, it troubled me the less, especially when I considered though it was not in those texts that we call holy and canonical; yet, for as much as this sentence was the sum and substance of many of the promises, it was my duty to take the comfort of it; and I bless God for that word, for it was of good to me: that word doth still ofttimes shine before my face' " (From a Review of Dr. Osterley's Apocrypha, in the Christian Work).
