Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 93.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Kirtland, Ohio, May 6, 1833.—The Lord defines the relation between himself and the Father—The record of John, the Apostle and Revelator—Jesus Christ the Firstborn—Man was in the beginning with God—The elements are eternal—The glory of God is intelligence—Man innocent in the beginning—Erring ones, even though in high authority in the Church, reproved.

VERILY, thus saith the Lord: It shall come to pass that every soul who forsaketh his sins and cometh unto me, and calleth on my name, and obeyeth my voice, and keepeth my commandments, shall see my face and know that I am;

On the 4th of May, 1833, a meeting of High Priests was held at Kirtland, for the purpose of considering ways and means for the building of a house in which to accommodate the School of the Prophets (Sec. 90:6-9). Hyrum Smith, Jared Carter, and Reynolds Cahoon were appointed a committee to obtain subscriptions for that purpose. The Saints were few and far from wealthy, and an undertaking of that kind must have seemed stupendous to them, but the leaders of the Church were men of God, and their faith was of the practical kind, by which mountains are removed. When this important step had been taken, two instructive Revelations were given on the same date.

In this Section our Lord (1) assures the Saints that obedience is the road to glory (1-4); (2) refers to John's testimony of Him (5-18); (3) instructs them concerning true worship (19-20); (4) teaches pre-existence (21-29); (5) the eternity of truth (30-32) and (6) of the elements (33-37); (7) gives admonitions concerning children (38-50); and (8) closes with special instructions (51-53).

1-4. The building committee mentioned above had a great work before them, for the success of which they were dependent on the willingness of the Saints to make liberal sacrifices of a temporal character. An appeal was about to be made to their faith and generosity, and the Lord gave them the assurance, as a father his children, that, if they were obedient, they would have the privilege of seeing His face (v. 1), and of receiving knowledge for themselves concerning His divine nature (2-4).

"On the first day of the dedication, President Frederick G. Williams, one of the counselors of the Prophet, and who occupied the upper pulpit, bore testimony that the Savior, dressed in His vesture without seam, came into the stand and accepted of the dedication of the house that he saw Him, and he gave a description of His clothing and all things pertaining to it" (George A. Smith, Jour. of Dis., Vol. XI., p. 10).

But the promise is of a general character, as that in I. John 3:2, "Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be; but we know that when He shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see Him as he is." The conditions under which we can obtain a fulfilment of this promise are stated thus: "Every soul who forsaketh his sins and cometh unto me, and calleth on my name, and obeyeth my voice, and keepeth my commandments." Repentance, acceptance of Christ as the Master, prayer, obedience—these are the conditions; this is the road to the glorious presence of the Son of God.

That I am] This is the first great truth God will reveal to those who are obedient to Him—that Jesus Christ is "I am," that is to say, Jehovah.

Jesus Christ is the "Father," as the Creator and rightful owner of the heavens and the Earth. He was the Executive of the Father in that work, and stood in His stead. He is the Father of those who are born again through acceptance or His gospel (Doc. and Cov. 34:1-3). He is the Father because a Father's authority is vested in Him. He is the second Adam (I. Cor. 15:45), the head of the human race.

"Jesus Christ is not the Father of the spirits who have taken or yet shall take bodies upon this earth, for He is one of them. He is The Son, as they are sons or daughters of Elohim. So far as the stages of eternal progression and attainment have been made known through divine revelation, we are to understand that only resurrected and glorified beings can become parents of spirit offspring. Only such exalted souls have reached maturity in the appointed course of eternal life; and the spirits born to them in the eternal worlds will pass in due sequence through the several stages or estates by which the glorified parents have attained exaltation (From an article by the First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve Apostles of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Improvement Era, August, 1916). See also a discourse by President Joseph F. Smith quoted in Mormon Doctrine of Deity, pp. 289-94.

Received of my Father] While in the world, our Lord was dependent on His Father for wisdom and strength to do the work that was before Him.

The work of Him * * * manifest] The works our Lord did were, therefore, the works of the Father. And they were plainly manifest as God's works (John 3:2).

The messenger of salvation] Isaiah calls Jesus Christ the "Wonderful Counselor"* (Isa. 9:6). He was a Wonderful Counselor when, in the grand council in heaven, He proposed to save man without depriving him of his free agency, and to give the honor and glory to God (Pearl of Great Price, Book of Moses 4:1, 2). But he was not only a Wonderful Counselor; He was also the Messenger of the great council—the "messenger of salvation" to the world (See Introduction p. XIV; p. 450.)

Redeemer of the world] Sometimes a "redeemer" is merely a deliverer from peril; but our Lord, as the Redeemer, delivers us by means of the sacrifice of Himself, which act is sometimes called the payment of a ransom. It is thought of as a deliverance of slaves from bondage by the purchase of their liberty.

The Spirit of Truth] He was full of grace and truth (John 1:14), and He was, and is, the truth (14:6), being in the form of God, and His representative. He is the truth, and must, therefore, be worshiped in truth, and not in hypocrisy, or falsehood.

The life of Men] The Scriptures trace human life to our Lord as its source; not lower animals. Adam was the son of God (Luke 3:38).

Grace for grace] This expression is, in Verse 13, correctly rendered "from grace to grace," for the meaning is that, in His life, one grace was bestowed upon Him after another, until His measure was full.

—————

*The comma which appears in the English version between these two words should be eliminated.

—————

"The sign of the dove was instituted before the creation of the world, a witness for the Holy Ghost, and the devil can not come in the sign of a dove. The Holy Ghost is a personage, and is in the form of a personage. It does not confine itself to the form of a dove, but in sign of the dove. The Holy Ghost cannot be transformed into a dove; but the sign of a dove was given to John to signify the truth of the deed, as the dove is an emblem, or token, of truth and innocence" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. V., p. 261).

(a) Of Christ.

(b) Of Man.

23-9. In this section the pre-existence of man is clearly taught. Man was in the beginning "with the Father," as was the Son.

There are three theories concerning the origin of the spirit of man, viz., Creation, Traduction, and Pre-existence. The Creation-theory holds that each spirit is created by God, and not generated or derived from the parents. It is the commonly accepted theory. The Traduction-theory is that the spirits are derived from the parents, as truly as are the bodies. The theory of Pre-existence holds that the spirits of men had a separate, conscious, and personal existence before this world was created. Origen held this view but he distorted it by explaining that the spirits sinned in a previous state and were, therefore, doomed to pass through a state of mortality in tabernacles of flesh. The Revelations given in this dispensation tell us of our pre-existence, and of our entrance into this world as a reward for faithfulness in a former state; not as a punishment.

"The spirit of man is not a created being; it existed from eternity, and will exist to eternity. Anything created cannot be eternal: earth, water, etc., had their existence in an elementary state from eternity. Our Savior speaks of children and says, 'Their angels always stand before my Father.' The Father called all spirits before Him at the creation of man, and organized them. He (Adam) is the head, and was told to multiply. The keys were first given to him, and by him to others. He will have to give an account of his stewardship, and they to him" (Joseph Smith, Jour. of Dis., Vol. VI., p. 238).

30-2. The doctrine here taught that truth and intelligence have independent spheres in which to act for themselves, seems to have been before Plato, who taught that ideas are eternal in the divine mind, and that they are living entities, the only true realities, of which material forms are mere shadows.

33-7. The subject is continued and the additional truth is added, that the elements, too, are eternal. Matter, in its elementary forms, is eternal, and it is only when spirit and matter are inseparably united that there can be perfect happiness.

It is a remarkable fact that the philosophies of the ancient world, notwithstanding the gigantic intellects that originated them, led to materialism, pantheism, fatalism, atheism, and pride, while the philosophy of this wonderful volume, the Doctrine and Covenants, leads men to trust in God, as in the Maker of the worlds and the Father of the spirits. Whence the wisdom possessed by Joseph Smith, which neither ancient nor modern philosophers have found?

Man is the tabernacle of God] Speaking to members of the Church in Corinth, Paul said: "Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you? If any man defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy; for the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are." (I. Cor. 3:16-17.) Evidently this verse has reference to those who have become members of the Church with the gift of the Holy Ghost. It is a serious thing to receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, and then defile the body, and those who do so shall be destroyed. Destruction here spoken of does not mean that the individual will be annihilated and cease to exist. Destruction means that the individual shall be banished from the presence of God which is destruction. The body cannot be destroyed permanently because through the atonement of Jesus Christ every spirit and body shall receive the resurrection that they can die no more.

(a) Children Are Innocent but Need Instruction.

38-40. The orthodox view of the status of children is that they are totally depraved, from the first moment of their existence; that they are contaminated by sin, and that, if they die before they are baptized, they go to destruction as the property of the prince of the lower regions. As soon as a child is capable of moral action, they say, it gives evidence of perverted moral character, in manifestations of anger, malice, selfishness, envy, pride, etc. In short, they are born in sin and begin life as sinners.

Against this gloomy conception of the status of an infant, this Revelation sets forth that the spirit of man comes into the world innocent, redeemed from the fall through the atonement of the Savior. True, there are certain consequences of the fall which remain, and will remain, until Paradise is restored to its first glory, but the infant comes into the world as innocent and pure as our first parents came. As soon, however, as the child begins to awaken to consciousness of its own existence and the existence of the world, the adversary endeavors to take away light and truth from it, by planting within it the spirit of disobedience. That is how sin comes into the life of every human being, as, at first, in the Garden of Eden. Parents should, therefore, take up the combat with the adversary from the first, for the mastery of the child, by bringing it up in "light and truth."

"I would now say to parents that their own salvation, as well as that of their children, depends to a certain extent on the bringing up of their children, and educating them in the truth, that their traditions and early impressions may be correct.

"My heart is often pained when I enter a house of the Saints, and find the walls ornamented, and the tables, shelves, and book-cases still groaning as it were with the weight of sectarian paintings, books, and trash. Brethren, I would either sell them at auction to those who wish to purchase, or else I would heap them up and have one good fire; and then I would be to some expense to furnish my family with useful works, such as maps, charts, works of science, and, above all, a good supply of religious information from the true source" (Parley P. Pratt in the Prophet, quoted in the Millennial Star, Vol. V., pp. 192-3).

(b) Neglect of Children.

41-50. How general the neglect of the children is among the Latter-day Saints may be inferred from these paragraphs, in which the Lord severely rebukes Frederick G. Williams (vv. 41-3), Sidney Rigdon (v. 44), Joseph Smith (vv. 45-9), and Newel K. Whitney (v. 50), for delinquency in this respect. The Prophet Joseph and Bishop Whitney were plainly told that their families would be removed out of their place. Both held positions of immense importance in the Church, but unless the children proved themselves worthy, these could not expect to obtain similar positions.

51-3. Sidney Rigdon, the Prophet Joseph, and Frederick G. Williams are here instructed to go on missions, and the Prophet is, further, directed to finish his work on the Bible, and then take up the study of history, geography, politics, and law. Compare Section 88:79.

General Notes

The study of history is very important to the Latter-day Saints, for it teaches lessons that should be imprinted on the minds of every one who belongs to a free and sovereign people. It teaches us, for instance, that men, who, like some of the Roman consuls, acquire positions by means of military power, are likely to be stricken down any moment. It teaches us that the Constitution of the United States only provides for the enlargement of the freedom enjoyed under the British Government. Of equal importance is the study of politics and law, for the Saints must be familiar with those subjects, as rulers with Christ in His kingdom.

"When the Prophet proceeded with the deliverance of his message to the world, he * * * proceeded to proclaim him [man] to be a son of God, not only through some means of adoption, but by the very nature of him. He proclaimed him to be an eternal intelligence as to his spirit, and that after the experience of the resurrection from the dead, he would be an immortal personage, a prince of heaven, an heir to all that God possesses, and a joint heir with Jesus Christ, capable of infinite progress and amazing possibilities" (B. H. Roberts, Improvement Era, Vol. XIII., p. 434).
