Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 95.

REVELATION given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Kirtland, Ohio, June 1,1833.—The people are chastened for their neglect in failing to build the house according to prior command—They are yet promised power to build it if they will abide by the Lord's commandments—Provision to be made for the School of the Apostles.

VERILY, thus saith the Lord unto you whom I love, and whom I love I also chasten that their sins may be forgiven, for with the chastisement I prepare a way for their deliverance in all things out of temptation, and I have loved you—

1-12. In a Revelation dated December 27th, 1832, the Lord instructed the assembled Elders to effect an organization and prepare every thing needful for the building of a house of God (Sec. 88:119-20). The Saints were few, and most of them were poor, and the preparations did not proceed satisfactorily. Hence they are severely rebuked, in this Revelation, for tardiness. Even poverty is no excuse for neglecting to obey a divine command, for when God directs His people to do something, He opens the way for them and provides the means, if He finds that they are willing to do what He requires.

On the 1st of June, 1833, Hyrum Smith, Reynolds Cahoon, and Jared Carter, the building committee (Sec. 94:14, 15), issued a circular to the Saints in which they urged them to exert themselves" to bring about the fulfilment of the command of the Lord concerning the establishing, or preparing of a house, wherein the Elders who have been commanded of the Lord so to do, may gather themselves together, and prepare all things, and call a solemn assembly, and treasure up words of wisdom, that they may go forth to the Gentiles for the last time" (Hist. of the Church, Vol. 1., p. 349). This, then, was the object for which this Temple was to be built.

Great interest in this undertaking was now aroused among the Saints, and this Revelation was received, in which the Lord (1) reproves His people for their neglect to begin building the temple (1-12); (2) commands them again to go to work (13-17).

1-12. The Lord characterizes the failure of the Saints to begin work on the Temple without delay, as a "grievous sin." The command was given in December. Six months had passed, and no preparations had as yet been made. They had, so far, failed to do what they ought to have done.

The expression quoted is from the Prophet Isaiah (28:21), where it refers to the fact that God would fight against His own people, because of their apostate condition. "Shall I not, as I have done to Samaria and her idols, so do to Jerusalem and her idols (Is. 10:11)? That was, in the estimation of the Jews, who did not realize their apostate condition, "strange." But in this dispensation our Lord was to perform an equally strange act, in revealing His marvelous plan of salvation and making war upon an apostate church which is boasting of its intimate relations with Deity. He was now waiting for the Saints to build that house, in which His messengers were to be prepared for that strange war and endowed with power from on High (v. 8). No wonder that He rebuked them for their tardiness!

13-17. The plan of the Temple was to be revealed (v. 14), and the dimensions are stated 55 by 65 feet, inside measurement. There were to be two stories, or "courts"; the lower for Sacrament meetings, preachings, fasting, and praying, and the upper one for the school of the Apostles (v. 17).

Alphus * * * Omegus] The same as Alpha and Omega in Rev. 1:8 and 22:13; the first and the last letters of the Greek alphabet, meaning, "the first and the last." Our Savior is so called, to denote that He is the beginning and the ending: the author, preserver, and upholder of all things, and His glory the end of them. "Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and honor and power, for thou hast created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created" (Rev. 4:11).

General Notes

On the 3rd of June, 1833, at a conference of High Priests, assembled in the Translating Room, the dimensions of the Temple were discussed. That was an important question to a community with very limited financial resources. The Prophet, however, had a Revelation on that point, and that was sufficient for the brethren. It was to be fifty-five by sixty-five feet. It should not be built smaller. By the same Conference, the Prophet Joseph, Sidney Rigdon, and Frederick G. Williams were authorized to obtain the first drawings for the building (Hist. of the Church, Vol. I., p. 352).
