Hyrum M. Smith, Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary ( 1923)

Section 96.

REVELATION given to Enoch [Joseph Smith the Prophet], showing the order of the City or Stake of Zion, Shinehah [Kirtland], at Kirtland, Ohio, June 4, 1833. Given as an ensample to the Saints in Kirtland. For explanation of unusual names see heading to Section 78. The occasion was a conference of High Priests; and the chief subject of consideration was that of certain lands possessed by the Church.—The Kirtland Stake of Zion to be made strong—Admission to the United Order.

BEHOLD, I say unto you, here is wisdom, whereby ye may know how to act concerning this matter, for it is expedient in me that this stake that I have set for that strength of Zion should be made strong.

On the 4th of June, 1833, the High Priests met in Conference, in the Translating Room, to consider what disposition to make of the French farm, which, together with other real estate, had been bought for the Church. The Conference was not able to agree on a manager, but all were willing to submit the question to the Lord, in prayer. In answer to their petitions, they received this Revelation, in which the Lord directed them (1) to give Bishop Newel K. Whitney charge of the farm (1-5); and (2) to accept John Johnson as a member of the United Order (6-9).

Take charge] It was eminently proper to give the Bishop charge of this matter, for it is the special calling of a Bishop to manage the temporal affairs of the kingdom of God. When, in the Church in Jerusalem, the impartiality of the distribution of the funds of the Saints was questioned, the Apostles moved that seven men be appointed to take charge (Acts 6:3). This was done. These seven men were Bishops, in the true meaning of that word—"overseer,"* not Deacons, as generally supposed.

For the purpose of bringing forth my word] That was the purpose of the United Order, and of every institution of the Church. Everything else is, to the Church, of secondary importance. The Church itself exists only for the glory of God and the salvation of the children of men.

—————

*Bishop is from the Greek Episcopos, which means "overseer," "superintendent," "inspector."

—————

6-9. The Lord instructs the brethren to receive John Johnson as a member of the United Order, as He had instructed them to receive Frederick G. Williams (Sec. 92:1), and others (Sec. 82:11). His special duty would be to find means whereby to lift the indebtedness on a certain property, perhaps the French farm (v. 1).

General Notes

John Johnson was one of the highly favored men in the early days of this dispensation, who did not remain faithful to the end, though at one time he was valiant in the cause.

He had seen his wife miraculously healed by the Prophet Joseph. He opened his home at Hiram to Joseph and his family, while the Prophet was engaged in his great Biblical work. He defended Joseph against a murderous mob, risking his own life. In fact, his collar bone was broken, in the conflict, but he was instantly healed under the hands of David Whitmer. He became a member of the first High Council, and he saw two of his sons, Luke S. and Lyman E., rise to the exalted position of members of the Council of the Twelve Apostles. And yet, when the spirit of apostasy possessed so many Church members in Kirtland, in 1837 and 1838, he, as well as his sons, were affected by it. He died in Kirtland, July 30th, 1843, at the age of 64 years.
