The following are additional ideas Primary leaders may use with the Sharing Time printed in the July 2005 Liahona. For the lesson, instructions, and activity that correspond with these ideas, see “I Can Repent and Be Baptized” on pages F4 and F5 of the children’s section in this issue.

1. Ask the children what it means to make a promise. (Answer: You will do what you say you will do.) Have them name some things they have promised to do at home (for example, pick up their toys, use good language). Then have them name some ways that you show someone that you have made a promise (shake hands, sign your name, and so on). Teach that baptism shows that we are making a promise, or covenant, with Heavenly Father. When we are baptized, what do we promise and what does Heavenly Father promise in return? Post the following pictures from the Primary packet on the board: 1-11 (Boy Being Baptized) and 1-3 (The Savior). Using red and blue paper, cut out a frame for each picture. Cut each frame into six puzzle pieces. Divide the children into three groups. Give each group one of the following scripture references and two puzzle pieces from each frame: Mosiah 18:8–10; Moro. 6:1–4; D&C 20:37. Invite each group to look up and read the scripture reference. On the back of the blue puzzle pieces, write down the promises we make to the Lord found in the scripture references. On the back of the red pieces, write the promises the Lord makes to us found in the references. Invite children from each group to come up and put together the blue frame around picture 1-11 (Boy Being Baptized). Turn the puzzle pieces over one at a time, and read the promises we make to the Lord. Take time to ask the children what the promises mean and how we can apply them in our lives. Sing a song or hymn about obedience. Now invite the children to put together the red frame around the picture of the Savior. Turn over each puzzle piece to reveal the Lord’s promises to us. Sing a song or hymn about the Savior.

2. My Gospel Standards (see Faith in God guidebook, back cover) help us live our baptismal covenant by reminding us to keep the commandments. Pick five or six of My Gospel Standards, and write each one on a separate piece of paper. Choose pictures from the Gospel Art Picture Kit or Primary picture packets that illustrate each of the selected standards. Place the pictures and My Gospel Standards papers facedown on the floor, or tape them facedown on the chalkboard. Choose children to come up one at a time and turn over any two papers. When a standard matches the picture that illustrates it, remove the two papers from the board. The person who makes the match must tell one way to live that gospel standard. He or she may then pick another child to choose a song or hymn to sing that also teaches the gospel standard. Repeat until all the standards are matched.

3. Song Presentation: Begin teaching “When I Am Baptized” (Children’s Songbook, 103; Tambuli, June 1994, F12) by helping the children become familiar with the melody. Sing the song for the children. Invite the children to watch as you draw the melody line on the chalkboard as you sing it again. The melody of the verse goes up and then comes back down—like a rainbow. Draw two rainbow lines as you sing the first verse. Sing the song again, and invite the children to stand and draw rainbows in the air as they hum the verse. Next have the children close their eyes and visualize falling rain as you sing the up and down melody of the chorus. Help them pitch-lead (raise their hand higher or lower for each note, according to its pitch) “the falling rain” with you as they hum the chorus. Teach the message of the song by directing the children’s listening and asking questions about the message. For example, “What makes the earth clean?” or “What makes me clean?” Ask a question before you sing. Then sing, take responses, and have the children sing with you. Repeat. Have the children stand as they sing all the words that have to do with water or becoming clean. Bear testimony that the Savior and the Atonement make us clean.
