July 8, 1775: Lucy Mack Smith, the mother of Joseph Smith, was born in Gilsum, New Hampshire.

July 10, 1804: Emma Hale Smith, wife of the Prophet Joseph and first president of the Relief Society, was born in Harmony, Pennsylvania.

July 8, 1912: The first Latter-day Saint to win an Olympic medal, Alma Richards, won a gold medal in the high jump.

July 31, 1920: President James E. Faust, Second Counselor in the First Presidency, was born in Delta, Utah.

Ammon Arvidson and Brooke Noble of the Maitland Ward, Newcastle Australia Stake, were chosen to represent Port Stephens, Australia, at the first World Child Summit, held in Kushiro, Japan, last summer. The theme was “The Natural Environment and Our Future.”

Speaking of the presentations he made at the summit, Ammon, 12, said, “It makes me very aware of the beautiful world our Lord has created for us to enjoy.” Then thinking about all the people, languages, and cultures created by the Lord, Ammon added, “It makes me look forward to serving a mission wherever Heavenly Father sends me.”

Brooke, 15, added that being so far away from home also strengthened her testimony of the gospel: “It really helped me to know that the gospel goes with you wherever you go. It was such a comfort to be able to kneel down and pray to my Father in Heaven.”

Try to see beyond the tasks you do in your quorums or classes and remember the people you are serving. “The Savior’s leadership was selfless,” said President Spencer W. Kimball (1895–1985). “He put himself and his own needs second and ministered to others beyond the call of duty, tirelessly, lovingly, effectively. So many of the problems in the world today spring from selfishness and self-centeredness in which too many make harsh demands of life and others in order to meet their demands. This is a direct reversal of the principles and practices pursued so perfectly by that perfect example of leadership, Jesus of Nazareth” (“Jesus: The Perfect Leader,” Ensign, Aug. 1979, 6; see Tambuli, Aug. 1983, 8).

“Integrity, inclusion, cooperation, unity, unselfishness, sacrifice, and obedience … are as vital today as when they guided the actions of our pioneer forebears, early and modern. To honor those pioneers, we must honor and act upon the eternal principles that guided their actions. As President Hinckley [has] reminded us, … ‘We honor best those who have gone before when we serve well in the cause of truth.’ That cause of truth is the cause of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, whose servants they were, and whose servants we should strive to be. I testify of this and pray that we, too, may be ‘true to the faith that our parents have cherished.’”
Elder Dallin H. Oaks of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, “Following the Pioneers,” Ensign, Nov. 1997, 74.
