Truman G. Madsen, Reflections on Mormonism: Judaeo-Christian Parallels ( 1978)

7

Messianism in the Pseudepigrapha and the Book of Mormon

James H. Charlesworth

Is all inspired writing contained in the canon? Is everything inside and outside the Bible where it belongs? In recent decades a flow of rediscovered documents known as the pseudepigrapha — books written in the name of classic biblical personalities and dating between 200 and A.D. 200 — have forced reexamination of the whole process of canonization and biblical authority, not so much in its inclusions as in its exclusions. It is clear that though the Romans deliberately destroyed many important writings — scriptural and pseudo-scriptural — for political reasons, and some theologians disparaged or destroyed them for theological reasons, Jewish and Christian scribes preserved them because they considered them very precious. In the Dead Sea Scrolls it is clear that the "Teacher of Righteousness" received a revelation which was demonstrably prophetic. Is it any more or less scripture than is the Gospel of John? In the New Testament book of Jude there is an approving reference to a book called the book of Enoch which was not included in the Bible. Now that book has been recovered. Should it not be given scriptural status?

Some fifty pseudepigraphal books are soon to be translated into English and published with commentary in a new collection at Duke University, under the general editorship of Dr. James Charlesworth, who is also head of the Pseudepigrapha Institute there.

In his essay Professor Charlesworth sifts through the entire corpus of pseudepigraphal writing focusing on messianism. Having discerned three elements of Christology which are unique to Mormonism (or so Christian interpreters have often claimed) he shows that they are held in common with some of these early writers — the doctrine that the Messiah, the Lord, the Christ manifested himself to the primal parent of the human race, Adam; the expectation that Christ would minister not just to lost sheep but to "other sheep," including those others who were lost in a group or body — the Ten Tribes; and the notion (which Mormons feel is implicit in the promises of John 10) that Christ ever manifests himself to the faithful.

T.G.M.

At the outset, I must confess sharing the bewilderment of Dorothy in the Wizard of Oz before she found the yellow brick road. [^1] How do I proceed? What is the most viable and representative way through the veritable maze of conflicting and confusing documentary evidence? The issue is relatively clear: How is the Messiah perceived in the pseudepigrapha and to what extent do these views help us understand the Christological sections in the Book of Mormon? [^2]

One way to proceed might be to review the major books published before 1950 and to clarify the advances that have been made since then. [^3] This procedure has been used in the past, and we are familiar with publications bearing as titles the names of scholars, such as From Reimarus to Wrede, and From Schweitzer to Scholem. But by juxtaposing old and new publications, we would become mired in many issues far too complex for a paper as necessarily delimited as this one. There are at least three things that separate our work from the brilliant, perceptive, and ingenious publications of our predecessors. These are the vast increase in primary sources, the heightened understanding of intertestamental Judaism, and the development of a refined methodology.

Increase in Sources

Today, more than ever, the intertestamental scholar is both plagued and pleased by a veritable treasury of sources: the rabbinic material that is early; the New Testament, especially those passages that are pre-Christian Jewish in thought and tone; the Dead Sea Scrolls; the Apocrypha; the Hermetica; and the well-known Jewish authors Philo and Josephus. For the sake of clarity, the present discussion will be limited to the fifty writings called the Pseudepigrapha. [^4] The books designated pseudepigrapha were written by Jews and Jewish Christians and were usually redacted by later Christians. They were composed, for the most part, during the period 200 B.C to A.D 200. This is the period that separates the Old Testament, ending with the book of Daniel in 165 B.C., from the New Testament, beginning with the First Letter of Paul to the Thessalonians in A.D. 50. These pseudepigrapha usually bear the names of Old Testament heroes and carry such titles as the Apocalypse of Abraham, the Apocalypse of Elijah, the Testament of Job, the Psalms of Solomon, and the Abode of the Rechabites. These and other similar writings were part of the large group of documents from which first the Old Testament, and then the New Testament, were eventually collected and canonized. However, they made their way neither into the Hebrew Old Testament nor into the larger collection of the Greek Old Testament, called the Septuagint. It is misleading to state that the documents are falsely attributed to Abraham, Elijah, Job, or Solomon; they were written under the inspiration of these figures and there seems to be little question that many of these authors thought that they were writing as Abraham, Elijah, Job, or Solomon. The principle of solidarity in the Semitic world linked the son with the father and the father with his father and he with his fathers. Therefore, the Jew living in the intertestamental period believed that he was indeed part of Abraham.

One of the major thoughts contained in these writings is the claim that God is about to bring an end to all normal history and all normal time, bring in the promised day, and inaugurate the fulness of times. The perception of the present is, therefore, often very pessimistic in the sense that God is no longer seen as working through history as he did in the past to redeem his people. His acts of salvation are in the past or in the future, not in the pres

---
Notas:
[^1] See Thomas F. O'Dea, The Mormons (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1957, 1975).
[^2] The significance of the adoption of Mormons into the people of Israel over against what he regards as our overemphasis on the genealogical or physical relationship between Mormons and Israelites was urged on me by Professor Louis Midgley. But in the current concordances to the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants there is no item under the term adoption. According to D&C 84:34 the members of the two Mormon priesthoods become the seed of Moses and of Abraham, but in D&C 103:17 the Mormons as a whole are "the children of Israel and of the seed of Abraham." To Brigham Young, Mormons were "my people Israel," D&C 136:22. But here the word adoption is missing.
[^3] This theme cannot be carefully considered here. See W. D. Davies, "Paul and the People of Israel," New Testament Studies 24 (1977): 4-39.
[^4] See W. D. Davies, The Gospel and the Land: Early Christianity and Jewish Territorial Doctrine (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1974), pp. 400-401.
