Reading the Liahona (Spanish), I have learned about Church members from former Communist countries serving missions after years of patient waiting; I have learned about President Hinckley’s visit to Mexico; I have learned the importance of the historical events of the Restoration; and I am helped to understand the wisdom of the Old and New Testaments and the revelations of modern prophets. Above all, I have learned that the Liahona continues to guide and teach as the Liahona did in Lehi’s day: according to our faith (see 1 Ne. 16:28–29; Alma 37:38–40).

Sergio Trejo Reyes,
Ameca Branch, Guadalajara México Unión Stake

I am 16 years old and have been a member of the Church for two years. From the moment I decided to follow the example of the Savior, I have been happy. The gospel has brought peace and love to my home.

Christ’s example has often helped me to choose the right. I ask myself, “What would Jesus have me do?” I put my trust in him, knowing that he has given me great blessings, even touching my parents’ hearts so that they accepted the gospel.

Antonia Capcha Atahuamán,
San Luís Branch, Huanuco Perú Stake

I have found that accepting the gospel of Jesus Christ can make a big difference in one’s life. It can change a rebellious heart and bring more zest to living.

Knowing the purpose of life gives me a new sense of direction, a new hope, and a new beginning in my life. I have never regretted my decision to become a member of this Church.

Mary Lee Joy Sigayo,
Biñan Second Branch, Las Piñas Philippines Stake

In addition to the scriptures, L’Étoile (French) is my spiritual guide. I find my own strength in the spiritual experiences shared by my brothers and sisters from other countries around the world. The magazine strengthens my testimony of the truthfulness of the gospel and helps me to know myself better.

Sister Yobo Dorcas,
Ivory Coast Abidjan Mission

We know that our Father in Heaven and Jesus Christ live. We receive strength from the atonement of Jesus Christ, and it encourages us to endure to the end. Jesus Christ is our Savior. We love him, and we are happy to obey his commandments and belong to his church, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Young Women of the Aeropuerto Ward,
Ciudad Obregón México Yaqui Stake
