Nauvoo, Illinois

Sunday, February 8

At the office all day packing public goods, evening at Farr's writing out a letter of instruction to trustees.

Monday, February 9

At the office packing. At 3:30 the temple was seen on fire. Women carrying water.

Tuesday, February 10

At the temple packing, also Wednesday 11th.

Thursday, February 12

At home preparing to move.

Friday, February 13

Sent four loads of goods over the river. Loading and packing.

Saturday, February 14

Packing and seeking letters.

Sunday, February 15

Riding around to get teams and things together. Sent two teams over the river.

Monday, February 16

Still loading teams, also Tuesday 17th.

Wednesday, February 18

Got about ready to go over the river. Evening President Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, J. M. Grant and some of the pioneers came to hurry us over. N. K. Whitney also came in. We conversed together some. They state the brethren have made a perfect waste of food and property in the camp.

Thursday, February 19

This morning the ground is covered with snow. It is so windy they cannot cross the river. Continued to snow all day. Evening went to Elder Babbit's to supper with Elder Kimball. President Young was there, Backenstos, J. M. Grant and some others.

Friday, February 20

The weather is very cold and windy. Impossible to cross the river. Spent the day running after things to get ready, fixing wagons and chopping fire wood.

Friday, February 27

We have spent the past week waiting for crossing over the [Mississippi] river. It has been hard frost and much snow. This morning I concluded to start over the river and began early to send my teams. About noon I crossed with my family and then rested the teams and soon after went on to the camp where we arrived a little before four o'clock. Bishop Whitney concluded to stay at the river until morning because some of his teams could not get over. When we got to the camp we were received with joy and formed in the company of the band. The weather is still very cold especially during the night. The distance from Nauvoo to this place is called seven and a half miles.

Saturday, February 28

A.M. arranging my tents, etc. At twelve was sent for to council and about two the band was requested to go and meet bishop Whitney and his teams. We went and met him five miles from the camp. We played some time and then returned to the camp. President Young, Heber C. Kimball, P. P. Pratt, Orson Pratt and others accompanied us. At night played with the band.
