Wednesday, April 1

President Young also sent me two yoke of oxen, wagon, and Brother Jones, the owner, to assist me. We divided the load out of the spare wagons putting a yoke of oxen to each and about 11:00 started on our journey. Mother was very sick, and could not bear to ride. She walked all the way. I felt very unwell myself, having much pain in my limbs. The roads were bad, but we arrived in camp about 2:00 and got on good ground. After getting our tents fixed, fires made, etc., I went to wrestling, jumping etc., to try to get well. I over-exerted myself without any symptoms of perspiration and was so sick after I had to go to bed.

Thursday, April 2

I was very sick all day and unable to write the letters or meet with the council. O. P. Rockwell started back to Nauvoo with letters. One of the Brother Hales arrived to say to his brother who drives team for Pitt that his family is very sick and wants him to go back but we cannot spare the team and he says it is no use for him to go back without it. At night I wrote again to Diantha and sent it by Brother Hale who returns tomorrow.

Friday, April 3

This morning it was decided to start early so as to get over the bad roads and also travel about fifteen miles. We had to send a wagon and team to fetch the eight bushels of corn which some of the band earned by playing last night. We started, however, about eight o'clock. The roads were very bad and when we had traveled about three miles it began to thunder and rain. The clouds gathered fast and it soon showed signs for heavy rain the whole day. We reached Bishop Whitney's camp about noon and rested our teams while the rest came up. We then started again in the heavy rain and bad roads and traveled about three miles to Bishop Miller's camp. We had a very bad bluff to rise and had to double teams to get up. On the top I met Heber camped. He selected a camping ground for us and advised us to go no farther. President Young has gone on six or seven miles. It was about 5:00 before all our teams got up and it rained heavily all the time. Mother walked all day again in the rain. I was very sick myself and unable to do anything. Yesterday the portion of the guard detailed to our company joined in with us, being Orvil M. Allen and eight men. They reported themselves destitute of everything and said they had lived a week on corn meal gruel, Stout and Hunter having made them serve as their body guard and used them very hard. I dealt out some of my own flour and bacon to them, determined to comfort them some if I could and not being willing to see anyone in our company suffer while I have anything left. It continued to rain all night very hard.

Saturday, April 4

This morning all our clothing, beds and bed clothing were drenched and it has continued to rain all day. I have been sick again all day especially towards night. I was so distressed with pain it seemed as though I could not live. I went to bed and put a bag of hot salt on my chest which seemed to give me some ease but I suffered much through the night, and it continued to rain until after midnight. We put an extra cover on our sleeping wagon, which kept out the rain. We have only slept in the wagon three nights but have slept under a tent on the wet ground. Haws' company are now formed with us, making our 50 nearly complete. A number of the company feel unwell on account of the rain and wet.

Sunday, April 5

This morning I feel a little better and the day is fine and pleasant. I have spent the day writing in this journal, having written from memory all since the date of March 9th. Some of the dates may not be correct but the matters recorded are true. It is now 1:00 p.m. There is a meeting at Elder Kimball's camp but I am sent here in this wagon to fetch up this record. My health is somewhat better for which I feel thankful. Elder Kimball says we had better not attempt to move tomorrow. We can get corn within ten miles from here and he will help us to means. We have now to lay in corn to last till we get to Grand River about fifty miles farther, there being no farms on the road. On Friday evening I appointed Charles Terry captain of my ten and Henry A. Terry clerk and my brother James to attend on my family agreeable with the orders of the President that I may be able to spend my time writing for the council and camp and attend councils. Elder Kimball instructed the captains of tens to call their companies together at 4:00. Agreeable with this, the band assembled in front of my tent and administered the sacrament. Wm. F. Cahoon and Charles A. Terry officiated. I spoke about three quarters of an hour on various subjects touching on our journey and the policy we ought to use, etc. After I had done Elder Haws spoke on some subjects and the meeting adjourned. The captains then went over to Elder Kimball's camp about sending for corn. We concluded to send four teams for our 50, Captain Egan and Haws then went through the camp to see if they could obtain some money. Haws obtained $31.45 and Egan $9.00. I sent $14.00 by Egan for some. Wrote to Diantha.

Monday, April 6

It has rained again the last night and continued to rain all day very heavily. The camp is very disagreeable and muddy. I spent the day reading. About 5:00 the clouds began to break and it looks more likely for being fair. In the evening Elder Kimball came over and the band met opposite Hutchinson's wagon and played some. After that the quadrille band met in my tent and played on the violins. All the time we were playing the lightning occasionally broke forth from the northwest and at 8:00 we dispersed just as the storm approached. Before I got to my tent the wind arrived and soon blew a perfect gale with heavy rain, hail, lightning and thunder. It continued for an hour and then abated some. All the tents in our company except mine and Pack's were blown down. The rain beat through the wagon covers and drenched the families and effects. It was the most severe storm we have experienced and with such wind it seems impossible to preserve our little clothing and provisions from being spoiled. But in the midst of all, the camp seems cheerful and happy and there are but few sick.

Tuesday, April 7

This morning it is fair but cold and windy. The ground is frozen stiff and considerable ice. Many of the tents are still lying flat and everything around shows that the storm was very severe. A number of the band have no meat and some no flour nor in fact scarcely any provisions and several have had little, only what I have given them out of the stock I laid in for my family. I have this morning given the guard the bag of flour Miller left and a piece of pork and also a piece to Redding. The day continued fine but roads almost impassable. Evening the band played some.

Wednesday, April 8

This morning the ground was hard again. But the weather looks more for rain. I went out with Captain Cahoon and President Haws to look out a better camp ground and we concluded to move on a little farther west about a quarter of a mile. It took the company all day to move, it being almost impossible to move the loads even with tripling teams. About five o'clock Egan and the teams came back with fifty-seven bushels of corn. He had to give 21c a bushel for nearly all of it. Elder Kimball came over soon after to see if he could not get some of it. While we were talking President Pratt and his company arrived and reported that their teams have had no corn since yesterday morning neither could they get any. Heber remarked that he would say no more about us letting him have any although we had only enough to feed five ears a feed every three days, and a journey of about fifty miles before we can get any more with bad roads. We let Parley have one load. Heber came with me to our camp and handed me a letter from President Young requesting us all to go on which I read to the company. I felt very unwell again and went to bed early.

Thursday, April 9

This morning we concluded to pursue our journey, President Kimball and his company started out about seven o'clock. President Pratt started out with his company. Our company waited for the latter to start in its place till after eight o'clock and then we went on. The roads were very bad indeed. About noon it commenced raining heavily which made the roads still worse. We had calculated to go about eight miles to timber but after toiling till about four o'clock and having traveled only about five miles and our teams being entirely worn down we turned out of the road to a little branch of water to camp. Several of my teams stuck and we had to work till dark to get part of them to camp and two wagons we were compelled to leave over night. Quite a number were obliged to stay back on the prairie and Charles Hale did not come more than a quarter of a mile from where we started this morning. Elder Kimball has camped one and a half miles farther on the open prairie and many of his teams are yet behind. P. P. Pratt's company are here with us as well as George Miller's company except those behind on the prairie. It continued to rain very heavily until night. We could not make a fire and had little for supper, our provisions being in one of the wagons back. This is the most severe time we have had but yet the camp seems in good spirits.

Friday, April 10

The weather is yet very wet and gloomy. I spent the morning talking to Margaret. At seven o'clock a gale struck up and blew our tents over. We then concluded to move a few rods lower out of the wind. Before we got moved the wind moved to the west and it grew very cold. Our teams are gone back to fetch some of the wagons left last night. It rains and blows very badly and is very severe on our women and teams. Margaret and Lidia are out all the time and continually wetting both feet and all over. We expect Robert Burton's, one of Peck's, Peart's and my wagons in tonight. One of mine was fetched early in the morning. Our teams fare hard with wet and cold, having very little corn.

Saturday, April 11

This morning rode with Egan to help to get Brother Peart's wagon out of the slough. It took five yoke of oxen and twelve men to draw it out. The roads are yet very bad but it is fair and very cold. We sent twelve yoke of oxen to bring up Peck's and Charles Hale's wagon. They got in late at night.

Sunday, April 12

This morning before I got up, P. P. Pratt called and said that President Young wants the council to meet at Heber's camp at ten o'clock. I started out with Captain Egan on foot and arrived in season. Had some conversation with Ellen Sanders Kimball and then went to council. It was decided to change our route and take a more northern one to avoid the settlements. We will go to Grand River and there enclose a space of land about two miles square and put up some twenty log houses for a resting place for the companies. A company starts out in a day or two to seek out the location amongst whom are the President, Heber and others of the twelve. A company will also be sent west to Judge Miller's to go to work for feed, etc. After council I took dinner with Heber, the President being with us. I then wrote a letter to the trustees and returned with Captain Egan to our camp and soon after went to bed. The day has been fine but cold.

Monday, April 13

Finished my letter to Diantha and then went over to Peck's blacksmith shop. We had concluded not to leave till morning. While there a message arrived saying that Haws has sent eight yoke of cattle to help us on. We then concluded to start forthwith, being noon. But although we had so many extra teams, we had to leave three wagons in camp over night. Four of my folks walked all the way but still it was hard for me to get along. Keller had to stay back over night. I arrived at Locust Creek, being about four miles journey, about six o'clock and sent the cattle back for Peck and Steven Hales but they did not return till morning. In the evening the band played some. James broke his wagon tongue. We camped a little north of President Heber's camp.

Tuesday, April 14

The weather is again very fine. Because some of the wagons did not come, Egan and I concluded to go and meet them and not start farther until tomorrow. We met the teams close by and then took a northern course a hunting. We saw only squirrels and I got five of them. About noon we returned and found the camp mostly gone. Orders had come from the President for the whole to move to his camp today. Charles Terry and Henry were gone a hunting which detained me till about three o'clock. James and I then started with the four wagons. They overtook us when we had got about one half mile. We found the road very bad and had to double teams, our horses being so badly worn down. Charles Terry broke a wagon tongue.

Wednesday, April 15

Last night I got up to watch, there being no guard. The cattle and horses breaking into the tents and wagons. I tarried up then called S. Hales and Kimball. This morning Ellen Kimball came to me and wishes me much joy. She said Diantha has a son. I told her I was afraid it was not so, but she said Brother Pond had received a letter. I went over to Pond's and he read that she had a fine fat boy on the 30th ult., but she was very sick with ague and mumps. Truly I feel to rejoice at this intelligence but feel sorry to hear of her sickness. Spent the day chiefly reading. In the afternoon President Young came over and found some fault about our wagons, etc. In the evening the band played and after we dismissed the following persons retired to my tent to have a social christening, viz. William Pitt, Hutchinson, Smithies, Kay, Egan, Duzett, Redding, William Cahoon, James Clayton and Charles A. Terry and myself. We had a very pleasant time playing and singing until about twelve o'clock and drank health to my son. We named him William Adriel Benoni Clayton. The weather has been fine but rains a little tonight. Henry Terry's horses are missing and have been hunted today but not found. This morning I composed a new song--"All is well." I feel to thank my heavenly father for my boy and pray that he will spare and preserve his life and that of his mother and so order it so that we may soon meet again. O Lord bless thine handmaid and fill her with thy spirit, make her healthy that her life may be prolonged and that we may live upon the earth and honor the cause of truth. In the evening I asked the President if he would not suffer me to send for Diantha. He consented and said we would send when we got to Grand River.

Thursday, April 16

This morning prepared to proceed on our journey but a span of horses in our company in care of Henry Terry being missing we concluded not to start. I sent out three men to hunt them. Soon after they were brought into camp by another person. I then sent Henry Terry to hunt for the men but it was after two o'clock before they returned. We fed a little corn and then started. The company is far ahead of us. We traveled very slowly our teams were so weak. However, we soon came into sight of the camp but it was six o'clock before we got there, having traveled about seven miles. The camp was formed on a beautiful prairie, President Young's camp being on a little eminence. President Kimball's about three quarters of a mile north of his and ours about a quarter of a mile east. There is some little grass for our cattle here, but little. We sent those of our company about a mile southeast and had a guard over them through the night. President Haws, Captains Egan and Kay and Jackson Redding went out a hunting. George Hale's cattle were so worn down that they could not get along and when within about a mile of camp about fifteen of the brethren went to help. They took a rope and fixed it on the wagon, loosed the cattle and brought it in themselves, singing all the way. At night the band played and then I retired to bed.

Friday, April 17

This morning very fine. Some of the camp started very early on the way. I was ready about eight o'clock but was detained on account of Captain Haws, Egan and others having gone hunting. I left Margaret to drive my team and sent them on and I drove the cattle on foot. We formed our encampment on a high dry place.

Sunday, April 19

While the rest are gone to meeting I turned to unpacking and took an inventory of church property. It took till about four o'clock to get through. Daniel Spencer's company had arrived about five o'clock. Porter Rockwell and Edwin Cutler arrived with the mail. Received a letter from Diantha confirming the birth of my son, also a letter from A. W. Babbit on some business. Went to see the President to show him the inventory but could not find him. About dark he sent for me and I went again but he was gone and I did not see him. My mare got in a mud hole last night and is very badly strained. Evening went to council and read many letters and wrote one to Elder Hyde.

Monday, April 20

At nine o'clock went to council. Had to read some letters and several pieces from papers. A report was read of all those who are able to fit themselves for the mountains. A law was made on motion of President Young that any person who interrupts the council hereafter by talking or otherwise, shall be deprived the privilege of the council till the council see proper to admit him. The public teams being brought together, the bishops took a list of them to be disposed of at Grand River. After council I went to work to assort the articles to be sold, etc. Wrote to Diantha.

Tuesday, April 21

This morning the main body of the camp are gone, but I am obliged to tarry and pack up the public goods again and re-load my wagons. I weighed most of our loads and it took until night to get through. Charles Terry's horse and one of mine are unable to drag any.

Wednesday, April 22

I had intended to start early this morning but our horses were away which detained us till nearly nine o'clock. About that time we started and traveled slowly about four and a half miles. We then stopped at 11:30 and thought we would rest our teams and get them cooled off. The sun was very warm and they sweat considerably. Word came that O. P. Rockwell was on his way and would call for letters. We intended to wait until he came. I wrote a short letter to A. W. Babbit and one to father but Porter failed to call, and at two o'clock we started again. We traveled until about three o'clock when we passed Orson Pratt who had concluded to stay a piece east of where the camp had tarried last night. He said all the grass was eaten up for several miles around. We concluded to go beyond the timber where the main camp stayed last night but tried to find grass for our teams. We started onward. At the creek watered our teams and rested awhile. We then went on about a mile and a half and found good grass and much of it. We at once concluded to tarry there. We had put a little wood into our wagons to cook with. We arrived on the ground about six o'clock and then got the best camp ground we have had for some time.

Three of our teams were behind when we arrived. Horlick got in about a half an hour after us and then afterwards Swap and Jones arrived at 7:30. We are all comfortable but very tired, having traveled about ten miles. My wife Ruth walked all the way and myself also. The rest walked by turns. We have seen many rattlesnakes today. The weather is very fine.

Thursday, April 23

This last night has been very stormy with heavy thunder, hail, rain and wind. The thunder and lightning was very loud and the rain fell in torrents. The weather continues cold and cloudy with some fine showers. There appears some heavy rain in the east and north. Grass looks green and the cattle have filled themselves well. We started about ten o'clock and soon found that last night's rain had made the roads much worse. After traveling about four miles we stopped to graze our teams, being one o'clock. While resting Elders Taylor and Orson Pratt passed on horseback. At three o'clock we started again and about four came to the President's camp. He was just returning from an exploring tour to find out better roads. His camp was on the east of a piece of timber. He gave orders to move to the other side of the timber about a mile from where he then was. We concluded to move on and finally camped on the next ridge southwest of his. Our teams are tired and there is not much grass. A number of the horses have been bitten by rattlesnakes and one is dead. There are a great number of these snakes on these prairies. The President says the road to the next timber is all ridges and hollows and will be hard on teams. We got camped about 5:30 p.m., and before we got fixed a thunder storm came on with heavy rain but it was soon over and the evening afterwards was fine.

Friday, April 24

This morning the President's company made a bridge over a creek and started again on their journey. Four of my horses were missing and I sent men to hunt them and went myself. They were found about ten o'clock. We tarried until about twelve to rest and then started. We went about two miles and stayed until four o'clock to graze our teams and then went on again and about six o'clock got to timber. I went to hunt a camping spot with Egan. We saw some women who told us Grand River was only a mile ahead and that the other companies were required to go down there. We started and soon arrived at the main body of the camp. We formed on the south side of the camp. The ground here is rich, timber good, and the prospects good for heavy crops. Here we calculated to tarry a while, fence in a piece of land and those who are not prepared to go through to tarry and raise crops. Wild onions grow in abundance. The weather has been fine today. Evening those of the band who are here went to Bishop Miller's tent and played for the President and a Mr. Bryant who lives about thirty miles from here. Pitt, George, Charles and Steven Hales and William F. Cahoon are way back as yet as well as Heber's company.

Saturday, April 25

This morning started by daybreak fishing. About 7:30 the President sent for me. I came back but he was gone. President Haws is regulating the company to watch our teams and also go to making rails, etc. The morning is fine. About nine o'clock Kendall, one of my teamsters, brought one of the horses he drives into camp which had been bitten by a rattlesnake. His nose had begun to swell badly. We got some spirits of turpentine and bathed the wound, washed his face in salt and water and gave him some snakes master root boiled in milk. He yet seems very sick. Our men have made a pen for the cattle at night. I feel quite unwell today. Spent the day chiefly reading. Evening Kennedy came to look at our horse and says they have given sufficient of the master root to kill four well horses. The horse looks very sick and is already scarcely able to stand. The band played a few tunes at night. About nine o'clock it rained somewhat and continued to shower through the night. Pitt arrived in camp this afternoon.

Sunday, April 26

The first news I heard this morning was that the horse was dead. This is a very unlucky circumstance for me for I am already very deficient in teams. Moreover, three of my teams leave me here, viz. Horlick, Chas. A. Terry and Jones with their wagons and teams. I shall then have about quarter teams enough to draw the loads. I have about three thousand pounds of church property besides my own goods. I see little chance of my moving from here at present. The morning was wet but it cleared off and continued so all day. I spent the day reading and writing while the rest went to meeting. Evening was sent for to go to council. Read a letter from O. Hyde stating that they had had an offer of two hundred thousand dollars for the temple. He writes of hard times in Nauvoo. The council selected one hundred men to make rails, forty-eight to build houses; twelve to dig wells; ten to build a bridge and the rest to go to farming.

Steven Markham, C. C. Rich, L. C. Wilson, James Pace to oversee the rail cutting. Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, P. P. Pratt and Geo. A. Smith the house building. A. P. Rockwood to boss bridge building. President Young to boss him and the whole camp and Jacob Peart to boss well digging. The council decided to wait until morning to decide relative to selling the temple. After we adjourned I went into my wagon. I wrote a long letter to Diantha. It was about ten o'clock when I got through.

Monday, April 27

Rained all day. At 6:00 a.m., went to meeting. The men were divided out to work and commenced operations and had to quit on account of rain. After breakfast went to council, when it was voted to sell the temple, signifying as to the reason, it will be more likely to be preserved. It is as lawful to sell it to help the poor saints as to sell our inheritance. We do it because we are compelled to do it. I was ordered to write an answer to Elder Hyde's letter which I did, saying finally, if the temple was sold, $25,000 must be sent for the benefit of the camp. The balance to be left at the disposal of elder Hyde, Woodruff and the trustees and to be appropriated to help away those who have labored hard to build the temple and the faithful poor of the saints. Spent the balance of the day packing up china and crockery to be sent by Egan.

Tuesday, April 28

Weather very wet. Moved up on higher ground. Spent the morning unpacking chests for files and supplies. Afternoon unloading wagon to send a-trading. The weather very wet until night. President Young called over and said we had better not send Egan until the weather settles. The quadrille band have gone to give concerts in the Platte. They had to draw their wagons across the river by ropes the water was so high.

Wednesday, April 29

It still continues to rain and the ground is getting quite soft and muddy. Spent the day setting men to fixing yokes and bows. Walked out about a mile to the bluff west of us. It ceased raining about eleven o'clock and continued fair through the day.

Thursday, April 30

Unpacking and re-packing chests all the day. It continues to rain more or less and the weather looks bad. Ruth is quite unwell.
