Friday, May 1

This month brings the damp wet weather. Chas. Shumway and George Langley start for George Herring this morning being instructed to bring him on to Council Bluffs. Spent the day preparing for Egan to start trading. He has gone with Jackson Redding and has taken $288.00 of church property besides two span of horses and harness and near $60.00 of mine. Afternoon packing chests, etc. The weather finer and fairer.

Saturday, May 2

The day is fine. Preparing some for Horlick's return to Nauvoo on Monday. Wrote to Diantha. Selling shoes.

Sunday, May 3

The morning fair, windy and cloudy, southeast wind. Spent the morning making a list of all the company who have made their reports, also fixing tents. At ten o'clock went to meeting. O. Spencer talked a while and was followed by President Young who exhorted the camp to diligence in getting in crops for that will be our salvation the next winter. He said no company should start from here until the south field was made and some houses built. It commenced raining as the meeting closed and about three o'clock a thunder storm came on which lasted till near five o'clock. I spent the afternoon reading. Soon after five it cleared off some and the sun shone again. While at supper President Young called and stated that he wished that I should go to council with him. I started and the council met opposite his tent. It was decided that his fifty build the bridge tomorrow and all the rest to make rails and also that Sherwood and Orson Pratt go about twenty-five or thirty miles southwest to seek out another section.

Monday, May 4

Finished my letter to Diantha and sent it by John Richards. Horlick has concluded to tarry till my wagons are fixed. I spent the day examining my flour and crackers and helping to fix the tent as considerable of my crackers and flour are damaged on account of having poor wagons. I dreamed last night that I saw Diantha and her babe. Her babe was dressed in white and appeared to be lying down with its eyes closed. She was bent over it apparently in sorrow. When I went to her she flew to me earnestly but the babe seemed to be kept still and asleep, and I awoke. This dream has troubled me considerably. Evening met the clerks of 50's in my tent and instructed them how to make their reports, etc.

Tuesday, May 5

The weather very fine. I spent the day preparing to enter the reports on the record. Went over to J. D. Lee's and learned that some of the clerks had been to the President and told him that I had ordered that they should include in their reports each wife a man has. I did not do any such thing, only requested each name should be in full according to the order of a previous council. The President said it did not matter about the names being in full but I think in after days it will prove it does. Dr. Richards thinks as I do. The President, I understand, appeared quite angry. Many of the band are entirely destitute of provisions and my flour is so nearly down I have concluded to eat biscuit. I have given the band considerable of my biscuit already. At nine o'clock fixing my wagons. Expected a storm which soon afterwards commenced, raining and thundering very hard. Raining most of the night.

Wednesday, May 6

Writing in the camp record. In the afternoon a storm arose emitting very violent wind, thunder, lightning, rain and hail. Many tents blew over. One of mine blew over and most of our articles were wet and some nearly spoiled. I have been informed that Esther Kay has been offering bitter complaints because they do not fare as well as some others. The hint was thrown at Margaret and she understood that it was for me. I have today let Miss Kay a pair of shoes and took down a large bag of biscuits and divided it amongst those who are needy. I have all the time let them have flour, sugar, bacon and other things as I had them and to hear of dissatisfaction because I will not let them have the last I have grieves me. I have given to the band as near as I can estimate, twelve hundred pounds of flour, about four or five hundred pounds of bacon besides much of other things. Towards evening it did not rain so much but continued hard after we went to bed. The wind was very severe, almost as bad as I ever saw it for about a half an hour.

Thursday, May 7

This morning it is dull, cloudy and cold. About nine o'clock commenced raining again. I have again given Sister Kay a quart cup full of sugar. I have spent the day entering reports on record.

Friday, May 8

The weather fine and pleasant. Spent the day fixing wagon covers and wagons. Andrew Cahoon arrived from Nauvoo with the mail but no letter from Diantha or father. He says the troops arrested O. P. Rockwell last Thursday evening and took him to Carthage and thence to Quincy jail. It is doubtful whether he will now escape their cruel vengeance. This morning the mare had a colt. I have felt quite unwell all day. Evening went to President Young's to get records to look for a deed from Hiram Kimball to Ira S. Miles. Searched till near ten o'clock but the deed is not on record. Kimball seems disposed to take all the advantages he can from everyone.

Saturday, May 9

Morning fixing wagon cover, counseling with Wm. Cahoon and then was called aside by the President to read two letters from Sister Harris and her son. Dr. Richards, John Smith and Heber were present. Afternoon went fishing. The weather fine and no wind.

Sunday, May 10

Wrote a letter to Diantha, one to trustees, one to father, one to Brother Burdick, one to Thos. Moore and one to John Everett. Keller returned with thirteen bushels of meal and 250 pounds of bacon from the guard, having been gone twelve days. Evening went to council to Heber's tent. Samuel Bent having been appointed at today's meeting to preside over those left on his arm, he chose David Fullmer and Ezra T. Benson for counselors. P. P. Pratt was advised to start as soon as possible for Platte River to take all who were prepared to go.

Monday, May 11

Morning distributing meal and bacon to the band. Afterwards the President, Heber, and Dr. Richards came and took some cordage. Afternoon weighing and loading.

Tuesday, May 12

Sent Keller and Corbite to the mills to try and get flour, meal and two cows. Weighing and packing. About nine was sent for to go to council. I waited about two hours before anything was done. The vote for Ezra T. Benson to stay as counselor for father Bent was rescinded and it was voted to take Aron Johnson in his place. A letter of authority was written for father Bent by Dr. Richards but he made me copy it, and afterwards when the President spoke to him to write to O. P. Rockwell he favored me to do that although I left three men waiting to weigh my loading and load my wagon. The fact is I can scarcely ever go to council but Dr. Richards wants me to do his writing, although I have more writing to do as clerk of the camp than I can possibly do. Moreover I have to unpack the chest and wait on all of them with the public goods in my charge which keeps me busy all the time. President Young, Heber, Dr. Richards and Bishop Whitney have all made out to get lumber sawed to make their wagons comfortable but I can't get enough to make a hind board for one of my wagons, which has none. They are tolerably well prepared with wagons and teams but I am here with about five tons of stuff and only six wagons and five yoke of oxen to take it. I have dealt out nearly all of my provisions and have to get more before I can go on. It looks as if I had to be a slave and take slave's fare all the journey for it has worked that way so far. After council I was weighing and loading, etc., until night. We had some rain at night.

Wednesday, May 13

The morning fair, but cloudy. Still loading my wagons and preparing to move. President Young and Heber's companies have gone and left me. I asked Jones and Terry what provisions I should have to leave them while they put in the crops. They concluded that 25 lbs. of corn meal each, and from 25 to 50 lbs. of bacon for three of them would be enough for twenty days. I think so, for we do not use as much meat in the same time in my whole family and as to 25 lbs. of corn meal each for so long a time, it is far more than my family can have. I have also to supply Horlick with provisions to take him back to Nauvoo and have kept four of them since they came here while they are to work for themselves. All this continues to weaken my hands for the journey. I have to get three new teamsters and also feed them while the others are living on my food. Markham came in the evening and said the President had sent word to father Bent to raise cattle enough to take my load to the new place tomorrow morning but I cannot go because my horses have gone to the mill for meal. Evening it commenced raining again and rained nearly all night.

Thursday, May 14

This morning is fair, but cloudy and like for more rain. Jones has concluded to leave for Nauvoo this morning and leave his son to plant for him. I have given him and Charles A. Terry a letter of recommendation. Jones asked me and said I would have to leave him some provisions while he put in his crops but I do not feel to do it for I think it is far more reasonable that the company for whom he has been working should supply him instead of me doing it out of the little provisions I have. I have left Charles and Henry Terry 50 lbs. of meal and 14 lbs. of bacon besides boarding them two weeks while they have been working on their farm. I went to see Brother Bent about the teams and from him learned that he could only raise three yoke of oxen and no wagon. I went to see Crisman who had promised two yoke and told him I should start in the morning then went and spent the day fixing the loads, etc.

Friday, May 15

This morning Crisman called and said he should not let his cattle go until Brother Miller returned. I then concluded to take what teams I had and take my wagons and go on a few miles. I borrowed two yoke of oxen from Sister Kay and started. We got the wagons over the river and on the bluff about a mile and then stopped to let the teams feed. I walked on and met Brothers Miller, Pitt, Kay, and Hutchinson with a large drove of cows and cattle. I told Brother Miller my situation and the request of the President but I could get no satisfaction. We moved on with half of the wagons and I selected a spot over a quarter of a mile from timber. They then went back for the other wagons and got them all up about six o'clock. Reddings have come here also, and Sister Egan with one or two others.

Saturday, May 16

This morning is fine but the weather doesn't look like being fair long. I have concluded to send two wagons through and wait until the teams return before I can move farther. Swap and Conrad are gone with all the teams I have and I have sent A. Johnson's cattle back because they were useless unless I could have more. The day was very warm. I spent the day mostly reading. Afternoon Duzett, Hutchinson and Pitt arrived with their wagons.

Sunday, May 17

Spent the day mostly reading. Weather very warm. Afternoon Bishop Miller's company passed but he did not leave me any cattle although he has plenty and many cows. This agrees with his course, for from about two months before we left Nauvoo to the present, he has done nothing but for himself.

Monday, May 18

Morning went on the road about two miles to see if I could meet Keller and Corbitt. It rained and thundered some and continued cloudy through the day.

Tuesday, May 19

Spent the morning reading, afterwards went fishing. Some teams returned from camp and said that some from Nauvoo had arrived there which started two weeks ago last Saturday and that Elder Hyde had advised all the saints to move over the river as fast as possible from Nauvoo, and they have their ferry boats constantly employed. A number are already on their way here.

Wednesday, May 20

This morning is very rainy and cold. Spun twenty yards of fish line and tied on eleven hooks. Swap and Conrad returned soon after eleven o'clock. They say the camp is about thirty miles ahead. They confirm the report of some having arrived from Nauvoo and say they were told that my father is on his way here. The roads are lined with teams, etc., on the other road north of this. Horlick came this afternoon for more victuals. Although he is a good wagon maker and carpenter, he is either unwilling to work or the camp at the farms is unwilling to board him for his work which I hardly believe. It seems as though teamsters are resolved to live on me till they eat all I have and I now lack about three thousand lbs. of provisions to proceed with. I can learn of no one who has fed his teamsters as long as I have after they stopped teaming and moreover, the teamsters started with church property but I have sustained them out of my own provisions. Towards evening it was fair but still threatens to rain again. I cannot yet learn a word from Diantha but think she must be on her way. My family is yet in good health except Margaret who looks sick but doesn't complain.

Thursday, May 21

Continued raining this morning but about noon it began to be fine. About five o'clock a heavy thunder storm came up and it started raining heavily. Storm after storm kept coming far into the night. Wilham F. Gaboon called on his way up between the two companies. He wanted some salt but I had none for him.

Friday, May 22

This morning fine but cloudy, ground wet and soft. Wrote some in the camp record. About nine o'clock started on the road to look for a good camp ground. James started at the same time on horseback to see if he could meet Keller. I went about three miles and waited till he returned but no news from Keller. I concluded to move my camp about three miles and sent James back to load up and come on. I waited until they came. It was after five o'clock before they came up, the loads being heavy and the teams weak, the loads being too heavy for them. We are now camped on a very pleasant spot not far from timber. We have camped near the summit of a ridge where we can see a long way on both the roads leading to Miller's mill and to the next camp. Soon after we arrived Horace Whitney passed. I sent word to the President to send me more teams. I told Horlick we could not board him any longer and gave him a line to father asking him to board him until he returns. Have borrowed some meal from Edward Martin to get along. If Keller doesn't come soon we shall have to obtain something to eat somewhere or go short. We have nothing left to eat but some corn, and being short of milk we can not cook it to our advantage. James and I were consulting just at dusk as to the wisdom of one of us starting out to try and meet Keller and Corbitt or see if we could learn something of them. We both felt positive they had lost their horses. While we were talking we saw Keller and Horlick riding up from the first farm. From Keller we learned they had got horses and loads and were coming on the other road and would wait till we came up to meet them if we thought best. He said the guard had all returned and were with the wagons. This was joyful news to us and I felt my heart much relieved.

Saturday, May 23

James started out early to meet the wagons. After breakfast we started on the road and while standing Keller came up and said it was about four and a half miles to where the other road joins the main road. I started ahead on foot and after traveling about three miles came up to the teams where they had waited on the road. When I got up the guard seemed pleased to see me. Captain Allen had bought about thirty-six bushels of meal and 200 lbs. of bacon. They would not receive any pay for it. They have been faithful and diligent and have done much. There is yet $12.00 due them from the meal and they are determined I shall have that too. When my teams came up we put the meal in the wagons and started on. We went about a mile farther to Peter's Bridge where we concluded to camp for the night. We arranged our loading and I concluded to let Brother Allen have the wagon and team in his hands which is church property to send back to Nauvoo for his family. The guard made out a list of provisions which they wished me to leave them which was indeed very little. I gave them four pairs of shoes and probably three bushels of meal which is all the remuneration they would accept for all they had brought. They seemed well satisfied.

Sunday, May 24

This morning I gave certificates of discharge to A. Keller, John Horlick, Orville Allen, M. A. Dodge, Tollman, Starks, Mecham, Bartlet and P. R. Wright. Keller and Horlick started immediately for Nauvoo and Wright and Dodge soon after. I concluded to move on about two miles to where Hutchinson and Duzett were in camp. I started out on foot and most of my family soon after. It soon began to rain and rained till I was wet through. I traveled on about four and a half miles but could see no camp near timber. I stopped to rest at a post put up by Stewart where the Raccoon fork led off. While there Josiah Arnold passed on his way to Miller's. From him I learned that there was a camp ground about a half a mile farther. I went on and waited. Before any of the wagons arrived James came up. Soon after news arrived that Swap had broke his wagon tongue. I sent James to help bring on the loads. We only started with three wagons and left three back with Corbitt and Martin. The teams worked hard all day and at half past nine the last team arrived having taken all day to travel about five miles.

Monday, May 25

This morning I sent James and Corbitt to go and trade three horses and some harness for cows. About noon I started out with two wagons and left one and about three loads of stuff in care of two of the guard. After we had traveled about three miles I met a messenger from the camp who handed me two letters, one was from Diantha and one from Brother Whitaker concerning a piece of land. We went on about a mile and crossed a creek where we waited to rest our teams. When I read Diantha's letter it gave me painful feelings to hear of her situation. After resting about an hour we went on about four miles farther and camped near Father Baker's camp on a creek. It was night before we got supper over. I found several men going back to Nauvoo for their families.

Tuesday, May 26

Wrote an answer to Whitaker's letter and also one to Diantha. We started on about eight o'clock and found the road bad and many bad creeks where the bridges had been washed away. After traveling two miles one of my wagons loaded with corn meal was upset in a hole. But after about an hour's labor we got the loading in. The wagon was not much damaged. We proceeded about three miles farther and met two men with six yoke of oxen which President Young had sent to meet us. This was a great relief to us for we saw that we could not get to camp today because of our teams being so worn down. We rested our teams about an hour and then started on at a good pace. We found several more very bad creeks to pass but we did not have much difficulty. Duzett and myself drove the cows. Edward Martin drove his horses. About sundown we arrived in camp, having traveled about thirteen miles. This place is called Mt. Pisgah and is a very beautiful situation, the prairie rolling and rich, skirted with beautiful groves of timber on the main fork of the Grand river. Soon after we arrived Elder Kimball came to welcome us to camp and then came Elder Richards and family and President Young who all seemed glad to see us in camp.

Wednesday, May 27

This morning my horses and one cow and several of the oxen are missing. I went to see Bishop Whitney about getting teams to send back for the loads remaining but could get no satisfaction from him. I went back and unloaded two wagons on the ground and about the same time saw the President who said he would send for them. Elder Kimball sent one wagon and the President sent two. President Young said they intended to take the church property in their wagons and take it on to Council Bluffs but I must go with them and leave James and Corbitt and Egan to bring on the wagons they have, etc. I cannot think they understand my situation in regard to the teams or they would make some definite move about it. They intend to start in a day or two and I tried to fix the wagons in good order but had no chance to get even one fixed. Spent the day fixing up my tent and had to get a new pole. Heber took my other one. Afternoon it commenced gathering for a storm and we had barely time to get the tent up and the things under it before it began to rain and continued till I went to sleep. George Herring and Shumway arrived here last night. I spoke with them today.

Thursday, May 28

The morning dull and foggy, ground wet, etc. Went fishing some. Evening played with Hutchinson and Pitt. All my oxen, horses and the cow were found. I went out this morning hunting for them on foot. Evening raining.

Friday, May 29

The weather fine, cool, and windy. Talked with Heber some. He says I shall have teams. One of my wagons came in this morning.

Saturday, May 30

Went and borrowed a robe and ornaments from Aaron Farr then rode with Dr. Richards about three miles on the prairie. There were five others and among them President Young. Two tents were brought and we fixed them up and then met and clothed. There were President Young, P. P. Pratt, J. Taylor, Geo. A. Smith, A. Lyman, John Smith, N. K. Whitney, D. Spencer, O. Spencer, C. C. Rich, E. T. Benson, Wm. Huntington and myself. Clothed and having offered up the signs, offered up prayer, Heber C. Kimball being mouth. We then conversed awhile and appeared again, Geo. A. Smith being mouth--A. P. Rockwood and Wm. Kimball were guarding the tent. Prayers were offered that we might be delivered from our enemies and have teams to go on our journey, etc. About two o'clock we returned to camp. Many of the teams were coming in and among the rest, the teams sent back for my loading which all arrived tonight.

Sunday, May 31

Having heard that Egan was near I started out to meet him. The morning was fine but about eleven o'clock it began to thunder. I went about two miles and before I got back without seeing Egan it rained heavily. I was wet through. I called at the meeting while President Young was speaking. It rained nearly all the afternoon. Noal Richards died.
