Monday, June 1

Was wet in the morning and windy all day. The council got me four wagons and seven yoke of oxen to take church property.

Tuesday, June 2

Still windy but fair. President Young has again stated I lack some cattle yet. Fixing my wagon, etc. Have about teams enough but lack teamsters.

Wednesday, June 3

Fixing my wagons. Concluded to start on. My teams were scattered but we started with what we had. We got over the river at three o'clock, one yoke of cattle still missing. I sent the men hunting for them but they were not found.

Thursday, June 4

Again sent the men hunting cattle. The day was very cold and windy, almost as cold as winter. I spent the day fixing a wagon for Diantha expecting her on in about two weeks. Lucy Walker called in this afternoon and expressed sorrow on account of the treatment of Heber's family toward her. Amos Fielding called on his way to the President's camp. Towards evening it rained and there was one of the most beautiful rainbows I ever saw in my life. We could see its brilliant reflection within a few rods of us. In the evening Douzett came for his cow which had tarried with ours. He concluded to stay over night. My teamsters returned without finding the cattle.

Friday, June 5

Sent all the men except James Douglas to hunt the cattle. About nine o'clock my adopted son Thomas Corbich returned with them. I then waited till two o'clock for the men to return, three of them being still absent. I have now eleven wagons, sixteen yoke of oxen, six cows, five horses, and six teamsters, besides my brother James, whose names are Conrad Neil, Levi N. Kendall, James Douglas, Milton F. Bartlett, Willard Smith, and A. E. Hinkel, four of the latter are new to me and do not seem to know much about teaming. At two o'clock I concluded to start on and after about an hour's preparation we started. The men took two teams each. I drove the cows on foot. The roads are a great deal better. We traveled about six miles and camped on a hill beyond nice timber. Pitt is here and Brother Taylor's camp. Amos called on his way back to England. He stayed and conversed a while. I will here say that the oxen put in by Brothers Olive and Rich to take church property are very poor and some of them scarcely of any use. We arrived here about half past six o'clock. The day has been cold, fine and fair.

Saturday, June 6

The morning very fine. We started out at eight o'clock; Pitt joined with us. I went on foot to drive the cows. About ten o'clock we had a little rain. After traveling about seven miles we arrived at a piece of timber where the patriarch John Smith was resting. We concluded to rest our teams here and stopped at half past eleven. At one o'clock we started again and soon after had a heavy thunder shower. I was about a mile ahead of the wagons and having no shelter was soon completely drenched with rain. It got very cold while raining. As soon as the wagons came up we stopped till the shower was over which did not last long. We then pursued our journey and at six o'clock camped on the open prairie a long way from timber, having traveled about sixteen miles. After the shower the day was fine. I was very tired and wet and after eating a little went to bed. Vilate Ruth is weaning from the breast today which makes her cry.

Sunday, June 7

Inasmuch as we were not near timber we concluded to travel on till we found some. We started at eight o'clock and traveled till two, being about nine miles, when we came to a little grove of timber and just beyond a bad bottom of prairies. I concluded to pass this and camp on the adjoining ridge. I drove the cows all day on foot. My feet were sore and blistered. The day was very fine. Sometime after we arrived Father John Smith came and camped just below us.

Monday, June 8

The weather fine. Traveled about ten miles, the roads being very hilly and uneven. We camped on a bottom near timber. I went fishing and had good success. I drove the cows till noon then rode with family.

Tuesday, June 9

Weather fine and hot. Went fishing at daybreak with James and had good luck. At nine we went on. I rode again. Afternoon three Indians overtook us and begged some bread. We camped on a bottom beside Coleman and others, having traveled about twelve miles. Two Indians are here and we have learned their camp is only three miles from us. President Young left word to go in companies from here to avoid being plundered by the Indians. We had our cattle tied up and a guard over them through the night.

Wednesday, June 10

Went fishing at daybreak and caught thirty-six. Weather hot. We started about nine o'clock and found the roads good but over hills and ravines all the day. At six o'clock we camped in sight of the Pottawattamie Indian village. When about two miles from it they discovered us coming and we soon saw a number of them riding towards us. Some had bells on their horses which frightened our horses and cattle. James and I took the horses and let the others take the oxen the best way they could. Some of the Indians followed our wagons and inquired often for whiskey. We had to pass some timber and a river before we arrived at their village which is situated on a very beautiful ridge skirted by timber and beautiful rolling prairie. Before we arrived at the timber it seemed that the whole village had turned out, men, women, and children, some on horses and many on foot. Their musicians came and played while we passed them. They seemed to escort our wagons and asked if we were Mormons. When we told them we were they seemed highly pleased. It took us some time to cross the bridge over the river and then we were perfectly surrounded by Indians apparently from curiosity and friendship. They watched us cross the bridge and others followed on with us. The boys seemed to learn the words our teamsters used to drive the cattle and would run and in their way help to drive. They manifested every feeling of friendship and nothing unkind or unfriendly transpired. Soon after we passed the bridge we were met by Jas. W. Cummings and the brethren from Shariton Ford with John L. Butler to bring Emmet's company to meet us. The cattle have been with Emmet's company from the time they left Nauvoo. The road leads within about two hundred yards of the Indians and I wanted to go about two miles farther to save the necessity of having a guard but soon after we left the village we had to ford a stream which was deep and bad to cross. I then concluded to camp on the ridge above the ford and in sight of the village, being about a half or three quarters of a mile from them. Many of them followed us, men, women and children and watched all our movements but about dark all departed in peace. They seemed well pleased with their visit. They certainly showed every mark of friendship and kindness imaginable and treated us as brothers. We learned that the chief's daughter was buried today. We have traveled about fifteen miles. From Cummings we learned that Emmet had left his things belonging to the company with him. Part of the company has crossed at St. Louis and are now on the line here. The agent of the U. S. refuses to let them pass. The other part of the company are thirty miles below the bluffs expecting us to cross there.

Thursday, June 11

Many of the Indians again came to the camp with the same friendly feeling. Some squaws came to trade. We started soon after nine, the weather being very hot. We traveled over about five miles of very uneven road. The rest was good. We had to travel till late before we came to water. We camped on a small creek where Coleman and Tanner were camped, having traveled about fourteen miles.

Friday, June 12

Traveled about three miles, the weather being very hot. We camped on a beautiful ridge where the main body had evidently left but little before, beside a large rapid stream. I concluded to stay here until Monday to rest our teams and give their shoulders a chance to heal, several of which were very sore.

Saturday, June 13

Fixing a wagon, etc. The weather very hot. Evening killed one of our cows. The mosquitoes here began to be very troublesome, there being so many of them and so bloodthirsty.

Sunday, June 14

The weather very hot and the mosquitoes tremendously bad. This morning I weighed bread for each man at the rate of a half a pound a day. They seem very much dissatisfied and growl to each other very much. I weighed for my family of ten as much as I weighed for six teamsters. They were dissatisfied but we had some left. They have hitherto had all they wanted three times a day and above this have eaten up a bag of crackers unknown to me which I had reserved for the mountains. The mosquitoes being so bad, I concluded to go on a little piece. We started at 1:00 p.m. and traveled until four when we arrived at a small clear stream having traveled about six miles. I camped here and in the evening told the men a part of what I thought of their conduct.

Monday, June 15

The morning cooler but mosquitoes bad. Our horses were missing and we were detained till ten o'clock before we could start. The horses had gone back to where we left yesterday. We traveled till sundown before we came to water, being about twelve miles. We camped near to
C. L. Whitney.

Tuesday, June 16

Started at 7:30 and traveled about twelve miles when we came in sight of the Missouri river and the main camp about five miles farther. We soon learned that some of the camp were coming back to find water. There being no water where we were, we moved back about two miles to a spring and there camped expecting to stay until we should learn what to do.

Wednesday, June 17

This morning Kay and Duzett rode up and said they were anxiously expecting us at the camp and wanted us to go immediately. I went to the camp with them to look out a place while my men yoked up and brought the wagons. When I arrived I saw Heber. He seemed pleased to see me and went with me to look out a place to camp. I fixed a spot between President Young's camp and Bishop Miller's. Heber said the twelve had an invitation to go to the village to the agent's to dinner and they wanted the band to go with them. I went back to meet the wagons which had been detained on account of some of the cattle being missing. As soon as my wagons arrived I got ready and started in Heber s carriage with Heber, Bishop Whitney, and Smithies. Edward Martin, Pitt, Hutchinsoo, Kay and Duzett rode in the other carriage. When we arrived at Mr. Mitchell's, the agent's place, we were introduced to him one by one. We then played and Kay sang until about five o'clock when we returned. This village is situated but a little distance from the river, probably fifty rods. It is composed of twelve or fifteen blocks, houses without glass in the windows, and is the noted place where the Lamanites for years held their council. The inhabitants are composed of Lamanites, half breeds and a few white folks. I had an introduction to Sarrapee an Indian trader. We arrived home just at dusk.

Thursday, June 18

Fixing a wagon all day. Evening went fishing. Spoke to Bishop Whitney about some more teams.

Friday, June 19

Fixing wagons and preparing to send off some things to trade. Evening went fishing. Went with the band to hold a concert at the village. Many went from the camp. The Indians and half breeds collected $10.10 and gave it to us and the agent Mr. Mitchel gave a dinner to all that came.

Sunday, June 21

At home until evening. At 5:00 met with the brethren of the camp and acted as clerk while they selected men to build the boat.

Monday, June 22

Fixing my wagons. The day was windy and cold. I was informed yesterday that Diantha is twenty miles back from Mt. Pisgah with her father still farther back. They have sent her chest on to Pisgah and she is with Loren. I partly made up my mind to start in the morning and bring her.

Tuesday, June 23

This morning I got my food ready to start after Diantha but Vilate Ruth seemed quite sick and I concluded not to start. We took the teams and went to the village to pick gooseberries but it rained nearly all the time we were gone. I bought a scythe and some other things and tried to trade a watch for a yoke of cattle. Major Mitchel offered me three yoke for the gold watch. We got home about 3:00. I then went and told the President about Mitchel's offer and he told me to sell it. It was so cold and wet and windy we went to bed early and soon after we got to bed, Heber and Dr. Richards came to my wagon with two letters from Diantha, one dated Nauvoo, May 17, 1846, the other Big Prairie, June 18th. She tells that she is sent on by her father and is with Loren and is very anxious that I should bring her or send for her. I made up my mind to start tomorrow. The night was very stormy with strong winds and heavy rains.

Wednesday, June 24

The morning wet and cold. I went over to President Young and told him where I was going and what for. He said he would get the cattle for me. I also spoke to Heber and he said: "Go and prosper." At 11:00 I went to council and President Young, Kimball and Taylor concluded also to go to Pisgah after the cannon. I started at two o'clock it then being fair. At five o'clock I passed Father Knowlton's company thirteen miles from camp and at seven passed Laharpe's company and inquired of Brother Burgham and Freeman about Diantha but could not learn much from them. Brother Ezra Bickford was here on his way back to Nauvoo. He said he was tired from riding on horseback and asked if I would let him go with me to Pisgah and use his horse in the wagon. I told him to come on. I soon found it made a difference in the load. We went on about two miles and stopped at dark on the middle of the prairie near no water. After feeding we lay down to rest. We had several heavy showers through the night.

Thursday, June 25

This morning arose at four o'clock and moved our wagon a little to fresh grass to let the horses feed, they being tied to it. It is fair, but cloudy. We started again at 5:30 a.m., traveled till 10:00 then rested till 2:00 and then traveled until dark, making thirty-one miles. We camped just beyond the Indian village in the midst of a severe thunder storm. It rained most of the day and the roads were bad.

Friday, June 26

Did not start until after seven. Morning fair, roads bad. After traveling about six miles we found Horace Clark and others camped on one side of a small stream and Orson Spencer on the other side. The creek was full of water to the bank and in the deepest place about six feet over the bridge and a part of the bridge washed away. We tarried until 3:00 and then concluded to try to get over. Walter L. Davis and Wm. D. Huntington volunteered to help us over. We unloaded the wagon box for a boat, taking a few of our things over at a time. When we got them all over we swam the horses over, loaded up, and at 5:00 started again and went till near nine having traveled about sixteen miles.

Saturday, June 27

The day was fine and we traveled about thirty-eight miles and camped on the prairie about eight miles from Pisgah. During the day we passed some U. S. officers on their way to see President Young and the council. We afterwards learned that they professed to be going to the authorities of the church by order of the President of the United States to raise five hundred volunteer Mormons to defend Santa Fe, etc.

Sunday, June 28

At daybreak it rained again. We started at four o'clock and arrived at Pisgah at eight. Had some conversation with Father Huntington and
C. C. Rich. We fed and at nine o'clock started again. We soon
saw Brother Woodruff. He was glad to see me and we conversed together some time. From him I learned that Missouri had sent up a committee to Pisgah to search for forts and cannon, etc. He says the Missourians are terrified and many are moving from the back to the interior settlements. He also stated that we have a friend in the British Parliament and the British had held a private council in relation to the treatment of the U. S. towards us. Britain is making great preparations for war. They have sent ten thousand troops to Canada and a fleet around Cape Horn to Oregon. They are intending to arm the slaves of the south and have their agents in the Indian country trying to bring them in war to fight the U. S. After we left Elder Woodruff we passed on and soon met Sister Durpee and Brother Lott and his company. He said Diantha was back about four miles. Soon after we met Orville Allen and from him learned that Diantha was back at least twelve miles. We continued on and at two o'clock fed. We arrived at Father Chase's between four and five o'clock. Diantha was very glad to see me and burst into tears. My little boy is far beyond all my expectations. He is very fat and well formed and has a noble countenance. They are both well and I feel to thank my heavenly Father for his mercies to them and Father Chase and to his family and may the Lord bless them for it, and oh Lord, bless my family and preserve them forever. Bless my Diantha and my boy and preserve their lives on the earth to bring honor to Thy name and give us a prosperous journey back again is the prayer of thy servant William. Amen. At night we had a heavy thunder storm. It rained very heavily.

Monday, June 29

The morning is cool and cloudy, the ground very wet. Brother Bickford is gone to Nauvoo. Left Father Chase's company about 10:30 a.m. They kindly furnished us with bread stuffs sufficient to last us to camp. We arrived at Mt. Pisgah and stayed near Father Huntington's.

Tuesday, June 30

This morning in council with President Huntington, Rich and Benson until nine o'clock a.m. Took breakfast with Elder Rich and then started on. We passed Brothers Woodruff, and Lott and their companies about twelve miles from Pisgah. After traveling about twenty-six miles we turned onto the big prairie for the night. The weather fine and roads good.
