Wednesday, July 1

P. P. Pratt passed about six o'clock. We afterwards learned that he was going on express to Pisgah to raise the 500 volunteers to go to Santa Fee. After traveling about seven miles we rested with Brother Weeks and ate breakfast, then went on till two o'clock and stopped to feed. We continued on till dark, having traveled about seventeen miles.

Thursday, July 2

Having lost the horses during the night I went back four miles to hunt them. I met someone and enquired about them, asking if he had not seen them. Went back to camp and ate a little and afterwards found them about a mile west. We started about ten o'clock and at sundown passed the Indian village and the stream at which we previously camped. We camped about two miles west of the Indian village.

Friday, July 3

Started early and went about four miles to a creek where we ate breakfast. The day very hot but we traveled about twenty-five miles. We met President Young, Heber Kimball, and Dr. Richards going back to raise volunteers. They feel that this is a good prospect for our deliverance and if we do not do it we are downed. We went on and camped near Hiram Clark and took supper with him.

Saturday, July 4

This morning my horses were missing and five from Clark's company were missing. I found them a little west of the camp and started on. Diantha having eaten nothing this morning I tried to buy some bread but could not get it till I got home. I arrived at three o'clock and found my little Vilate sick, the rest all well. I went over to Council at Captain Allen's tent.

Sunday, July 5

At home all day. Conrad has left and gone to Elder Hyde's. The weather is very hot. My traders have got back and brought twenty bushels of corn, but only one of wheat.

Monday, July 6

Spent the day fixing wagons. Day very hot. Bishop Whitney called to see us. They are getting over the river as fast as possible but it is slow work.

Thursday, July 9

Spent the two previous days fixing wagons and today went down to the river to see about crossing, etc. Took my family with me.

Friday, July 10

Fixing my wagons, also Saturday unpacked the dry goods wagon and repacked it.

Sunday, July 12

Went to the meeting at Elder Taylor's camp. In the evening President Young, Kimball and Richards returned. They requested me to go to Taylor's to council. I went and tarried till dark, wrote a letter to the Quadrille band to meet tomorrow also wrote orders for all the men in camp to meet.

Monday, July 13

Went to the general meeting and played with the band and then kept minutes. They got three companies of 43 each and half of a fourth company. All my teamsters have enlisted. I am now destitute of help. Edward Martin is advised to go and leave his family in my charge. I have still four yoke of oxen missing and I do not know where to find them. Last night James was seized with a fit and is quite unwell today, mostly insensible. Vilate Ruth is quite sick and on the whole my situation is rather gloomy. The meeting adjourned at five till tomorrow at eight, after which the company danced till dark.

Tuesday, July 14

I went over to meeting this morning and told the President my situation. He consented for me to go back to my camp to see to things. I came back but feel very unwell. Martin's youngest child died at 1:30 p.m.

Wednesday, July 15

Went with Edward Martin to bury his child on a high bluff south of the camp. We buried it between two small oak trees, a little east of them, the babe's head to the east. After returning Heber sent word for us to cross the creek to the other bluff where Elder Taylor is camped. We got some of the cattle together and took part of the wagons over and then returned for the remainder. As soon as we got there a message came that the President wished the band to go to the village. We accordingly started but when we got there we found nobody there and after a little trading we returned home.

Thursday, July 16

Hunting my horses to take Diantha to see her father's folks who arrived yesterday. In the afternoon we started out and went about three miles from here. They appeared very glad to see us. We got home again at dark.

Friday, July 17

Went fishing.

Saturday, July 18

Went to the village to play with the band for the volunteers. They danced till near sundown when we returned home.

Sunday, July 19

In the wagon till evening. Sister Farr came to see us. Diantha and I went home with her in the evening.

Monday, July 20

In the morning fixing for our concert. Afternoon the band came with their wives and we played and danced till dark. President Young made some appropriate remarks exhorting the saints to prayer, etc.

Tuesday, July 21

This morning it rained very heavily. Went to council at Elder Pratt's camp. The council appointed a council of twelve to preside here, viz. Isaac Morley, Geo. W. Harris, James Allred, Thos. Grover, Phineas Richards, Herman Hyde, Wm. Peck, Andrew H. Perkins, Henry W. Miller, Daniel Spencer, J. H. Hales and John Murdock. I wrote a letter informing them of their appointment also instructing them not to let any pass over the river unless they could be in time to go to Grand Island and cut hay, to watch over the church, establish schools for the winter, etc. I spent the remainder of the day at the creek. I asked the President what I should do but could get no answer. I have not been able to get any satisfaction from any of the council as to what I should do and am totally at a loss to know whether to tarry here or go on. My provisions are nearly out and my teamsters all gone and nearly all the cattle strayed away, and no one to hunt them except James and Corbitt and they are sick.

Wednesday, July 22

Fixing a wagon for Margaret and re-loading some wagons.

Thursday, July 23

Unpacking church property. Found considerable of it very much damaged with wet. I put it out and dried it well and repacked it. Evening went with Diantha to see her folks.

Friday, July 24

Regulating the loading, etc.

Saturday, July 25

Bought 357 pounds of flour at $2.50 per hundred and carried it about three hundred yards to my wagons then spent the day fixing wagon covers. Evening went to Brother Farr's. About 11:00 a storm arose and it soon began to rain heavily and a while after blew a perfect hurricane. The thunder was awful and the rain poured in torrents for about a half an hour.

Sunday, July 26

This morning the tent is down, wagons drenched and everything looks gloomy enough. Scarcely a tent in the camp was left standing and many wagon covers torn. A report is circulated that a cow was killed by lightning. Much damage is done to wagons, provisions, etc. The cow was killed about 200 yards west of my wagons. There was a tent struck also but no persons hurt. I went to meeting and heard Benson and Taylor preach. Afternoon at my wagons. Evening Bishop Whitney, President Young and Kimball called. I made out a bill of goods for them to send east by Robert Pierce. They ordered me to go down to the river tomorrow.

Monday, July 27

Loading wagons, packing, etc., preparing to start. Last night I engaged Pelatiah Brown as a teamster. We started soon after noon. I drove the cows and James, Corbitt and Brown the teams with twelve wagons. We had to leave one cow four yoke of oxen and two horses on the ridge, being missing. We got down about six o'clock. Bishop Whitney passed and said I should not get over the river tomorrow and I suppose we shall have to wait some days. James and Corbitt are both sick and discouraged on account of having so little help and so many cattle, etc., to look after. They have a hard time of it but I can see no prospects of its being better.

Tuesday, July 28

James and Corbitt started back to hunt the cattle. I went to the village and received $12.00 of Larpey for the cordage I sold to Allen, $3.50 is yet my due. I then went and bought some flour of Tanner. While we were weighing it a storm arose and it rained and thundered and lightninged throughout the day and nearly all night. I have not seen more rain fall in a long time.

Wednesday, July 29

Got the balance of the flour making 889 lbs., most of it at $2.50 and 200 lbs. at $2.00. Afternoon went to the village with Alice, Diantha, and Margaret. There saw President Young and Heber. They have just bought a pony and some cloth, etc., and seem to have money enough but there is none to buy me flour. I yet lack about a ton.

Thursday, July 30

At home all day. Unpacked mother's wagon and found many things wet and damaged.

Friday, July 31

Attending to wagons, cattle, etc., all day.
