Saturday, August 1

This morning I went to the river to see how soon we could cross and learned there was a prospect of our crossing this evening or tomorrow morning. I then went back to my camp and we started with the wagons a few at a time. My brother James is lame in bed. Pitt is lame. Brown is lame and Corbitt nearly spent. About noon we got all the wagons to the river and Corbitt returned to take the cattle to grass. I went to Larpey's and got the balance of the money then went to Mitchel's to try to trade my music box for a cow but did not succeed.

Sunday, August 2

Preparing to cross the river. Pelatiah Brown went swimming all the forenoon and when Corbitt asked him to help with the teams he swore he would not if Jesus Christ would ask him. I told him if he did not feel like helping us he could go somewhere else, I did not want him. He went and I am again left without a teamster. I will here say that Brown will not work only when he has a mind to and during the last week when James and Corbitt and Pitt were all gone he would go to the river swimming instead of attending to the cattle and I may as well be without a teamster as have a man who will go away in a cramp. About noon we crossed three wagons over and kept to work until we had got them all over which took us till dark. We had to crowd our wagons together in the road just above the river on account of its being stopped up by other wagons. We could not get our cattle to grass and they have had none since last night, but having a few bushels of corn we gave them five ears a piece. After supper I went fishing with Wm. F. Cahoon and others until two o'clock but had very poor luck.

Monday, August 3

Started this morning to get our wagons on the prairie. The road is very narrow and bad, up steep bluffs and very muddy. It took four yoke of oxen to take a very light load. When we had got four of the wagons up eight yoke of Bishop Whitney's cattle came to help us and afterwards nine yoke of President Young's and Kimball's. We got to the prairie about noon and stopped to feed our cattle. I sent on five wagons with the teams sent to help us and after feeding about an hour started with the remainder. I drove the spare cattle and horses. We got the wagons to camp about six o'clock. One of President Young's oxen killed himself when going to drink, being so eager he pitched into the creek and broke his neck. When we got to camp we were all completely tired. My feet were sore and my limbs ached and had to go to bed. We camped on the north end of Heber's company. We have left nine head of cattle over the river yet and there is little prospect of being able to find some of them.

Tuesday, August 4

This morning Heber's company have moved on about two days journey and again left me here alone. I loaned C. L. Whitney three yoke of oxen to help him through. They are gone to find a place within thirty miles of here to winter. I spent the day doing little, being so unwell.

Wednesday, August 5

Moved down a little nearer water. There spent the day fixing Ruth's wagon. Corbitt has gone over the river to hunt cattle and in the evening returned with one yoke.

Thursday, August 6

Putting covers on Margaret's and mother's wagons, etc. Afternoon writing copy of the returns of companies.

Friday, August 7

Spent the forenoon writing copy of return of companies of the U. S. army. About noon two of Heber's teamsters came with some cattle to help me to the main camp. I left off writing and went to putting the wagons in order. While fixing a chicken coop I struck my forehead with a hammer which disabled me from work the remainder of the day.

Saturday, August 8

This morning we arose about three o'clock and while some took the cattle to graze the rest got the wagons loaded, etc., ready to start. We got away soon after sunrise. I rode a mule and drove the cows. We traveled about nine miles before we came to any water. Here we took the teams from the wagons to a spring about a quarter of a mile from the road. The cattle seemed tired but one of the teamsters said it was only about three miles farther and should soon be there. We concluded to go on without stopping to feed. But before we had proceeded far some of the cattle gave out, the day being very hot, and before we got to camp several yoke gave up entirely and were left on the road and brought afterwards. One of the cattle died almost as soon as they took him from the wagon, being about a mile from camp. Two or three others were not expected to live. When we arrived Heber wanted us to form on his north line but we could only get half of our wagons into the space left for the whole of them. I then moved over to the south side and formed next to D. Russell. We got our tent up but can have no fire until Monday. The cattle are so tired we will not use them. I feel about sick myself. Heber's camp is formed in a kind of parallelogram, each wagon camped in a perfect line with the others. The square in the center is about twenty-five rods long and fifteen rods wide.

Sunday, August 9

Writing copy of return of companies of U. S. army all day.

Monday, August 10

Attending to various business about the wagons all day.

Tuesday, August 11

Last night I had a severe chill and felt sick all day mostly with high fever. Quite unable to work.

Wednesday, August 12

Quite sick, very bad fever all day.

Sunday, August 16

Since Wednesday have scarcely even been out of bed, but kept with raging fever all the time. Twice Heber has rebuked my fever but it has returned. Through fear and persuasion of my family I have taken some pills and medicine given by Dr. Sprague, but seem to grow worse all the time. Today I have been very sick. Towards evening my folks concluded to get me out of the wagon into the tent where they had prepared a bed. Soon after I got into the tent President Young, Dr. Richards, G. A. Smith, Orson Pratt, Lorenzo Young and others called to see me. When they had been in a few moments President Young called O. P. Rockwell into the tent and the feelings we had on seeing him cannot be described. He has been in prison some time but when his trial came on there was no one to accuse him and the judge discharged him. The brethren all laid hands on me and rebuked my disease in the name of the Lord, President Young being mouth. I immediately felt easier and slept well all night being the first sleep I had had of any account for three days and nights.

Sunday, August 23

During the past week I have gained slowly and have been able to walk about some. I, however, feel very weak and broken down.

Monday, August 24

Reading some and fixing a little at my violin. Feel very little better but have a better appetite.

Tuesday, August 25

We had a thunder storm last night. I do not feel so well this morning but took a walk into the woods. I had a very sick day all day.

Wednesday, August 26

The morning very cool and cloudy. Let T. Corbitt have a pair of shoes.

Thursday, August 27

Diantha was taken very sick and continued for four or five days.

Saturday, August 29

At night I was seized with fever again and very sick.

Sunday, August 30

Had chill and fever, the chill held me four or five days.
