Thursday, September 10

I still continue very weak and troubled with pain in stomach, etc. President Young and Dr. Richards called and brought me a letter from David; also said they had got me employment writing at a dollar a day or 3c on every hundred words copying.

Saturday, September 12

Still quite unwell. President Young brought me $8.00 in money, one half dollar bogus and soon after Dr. Richards sent me some letters to copy which I did.

Tuesday, September 15

This evening I copied a letter to Joseph F. Herring and having no one to send it by I took it to council myself. Before I got half way there my knees failed me and it was with great difficulty I got there and home again. When I got back to Pitt's shanty my spirit failed me for I was not aware of my weakness.

Saturday, September 19

Since Tuesday I have scarcely been out of bed, but today I feel somewhat better again.

Sunday, September 20

A little better. I have been told that President Young has virtually cursed all who have gone to Missouri or those who shall go hereafter.

Monday, September 21

This evening about ten o'clock all the men of the camp were ordered up armed to meet in this square forthwith. I got up and after a very little while quite a company of the brethren got together. President Hales informed them that the President had received a letter from Mr. Sarpey informing him that two gentlemen from Missouri had informed him confidentially that the Missourians had got out writs for the twelve and others and were coming with a large force on the west side of the river to attack the camp by surprise, etc. He advised the brethren to have their arms clean and their ammunition ready at a moment's warning, to pray with their families, keep dogs tied up at nights, etc., etc. The company was then dismissed except a guard for the camp.

Tuesday, September 22

This morning the brethren were ordered to meet at the springs below here at nine o'clock. At the sound of the drum the brethren met and here organized into four battalions, one of artillery, and three of infantry. There were about three hundred brethren present. The President then stated that he had received a letter from Sarpey informing him that two gentlemen, confidentially, from Missouri had informed him that the Missourians were collecting with the sheriff of Missouri, their head designing to attack the saints, that they had writs, etc., for the twelve and others. He had ordered out the brethren that they might be ready in case of necessity and advised them to organize and be prepared. Markham was elected Colonel over the battalions. Hosea Stout, Lieutenant Colonel over the battalions and over the first battalions and over the first battalions of infantry. John Scott was elected 1st major and major over the artillery. Henry Herriman 2nd major to take command of the 2nd battalion of infantry and John S. Gleason 3rd major over the 3rd battalion of infantry. After organizing the President addressed the companies and then dismissed them. It was advised to quit leaving and move the encampment to the fort on the river. A number of teams moved this afternoon.

Wednesday, September 23

This morning President Young and many others have moved down to the river. Heber told me to wait till the lots were selected and he would let me know when to move. My health is improving.

Thursday, September 24

Very cold all day. I did not feel so well. I have been told that Daniel H. Wells and William Cutler have arrived in camp and brought a report that there has been a battle fought in Nauvoo and some of the brethren killed.

Friday, September 25

I learned today that the mob had made it known that they were coming to drive out the "Mormons." The Governor sent an officer to raise volunteers to disperse the mob, but the mob learning this they came sooner than they had calculated. The brethren being apprised of the intentions of the mob prepared to meet them as well as their circumstances would permit. Some of the new citizens also made preparations to join the brethren. They made five cannon shot of an old steam boat shaft. They also filled some barrels with powder, old iron, etc., which were buried in the pass to the city which could be fired by a slow match but this was of no avail as some traitors informed the mob of it, hence they did not come into the settled part of the city. On Saturday the 12th inst., the mob made their appearance being about twelve hundred in number. The brethren and some of the new citizens in the whole about one hundred and sixty went to give them battle, but many of the new citizens and some of the brethren when they saw the numbers of the mob fled and left about one hundred, nearly all brethren, to fight the enemy. The mob had pieces of cannon. They met near Boscow's store on Winchester street. The cannon of the mob were two blocks from the brethren and the other part of rifle men one block from them. The mob fired a number of times into Barlow's old barn expecting many of the brethren were concealed there but in this they were disappointed, the brethren chiefly lying down on the ground behind some shelter and fired in that position. They fought one hour and twenty minutes when the mob offered terms of compromise which were these, that all the "Mormons" should leave the city within five days leaving ten families to finish the unsettled business. The brethren consented to this inasmuch as they had been well informed that 1,500 more were coming to join the mob and they had nothing to expect from the authorities of the state. Lyman Johnson, one of the twelve, headed a party of the mob from Keokuk, Iowa territory. Three of the brethren were killed, viz. William Anderson, his son, and Norris, a blacksmith. Three others wounded. The mob would not own to any of their party being killed but one person saw them put sixteen men into one wagon and handled them more like dead persons than wounded. The ground where they stood was pretty much covered with blood, so that there is no doubt they had many slain or wounded. They had 150 baggage wagons. Esquire Wells took command of the brethren and rode to and fro during the whole battle without receiving injury, although the balls whistled by him on every side. Amos Davis fought bravely. While running across a plowed field he stumbled and fell on his left arm which formed a triangle with his head. As he fell a cannon ball passed through the angle of his arm between that and his head. Hiram Kimball received a slight wound with a musket ball on the forehead. The mob fired sixty-two shots with the cannon and ten rounds with the muskets making 12,000 musket balls only killing three and wounding three. The brethren did not fire so much in proportion but did much more execution. Truly, the Lord fights the battles of his saints. The cannon of the brethren was not of much service, they would not carry more than a quarter of a mile, whereas those of the mob would hold well a half a mile. They shot nine balls through a small smith shop, one through Wells' barn and one at his house but the ball struck the ground in front of his house and glanced through the well curb. The mayor of Quincy watched the battle from the tower of the temple and owned that history never afforded a parallel. The brethren then began to get their families and effects over the river where they remain in a suffering and destitute condition until wagons and means are sent from the saints to their relief. On the Thursday following, the mob, 1,200 strong, entered the city. 'Tis said from good authority that such is the distress and sufferings of the saints as actually to draw tears from this mob.

Saturday, September 26

Russell told me that he had selected three lots for us and we could go as soon as we had a mind to. He saw Heber on the subject. I made up my mind to start on Monday for Winter Quarters.

Sunday, September 27

This morning Brother Smithies came with six yoke of Heber's cattle and said we must be ready to start in five minutes while he went to water his cattle and although we had everything unprepared we were ready before he got back. I felt well enough to drive a team. We took six wagons down and camped on the same block with Heber in Cape Disappointment. James and Pitt went back to wait for Corbitt who was herding cows and in the evening returned with three more wagons.

Monday, September 28

Got the balance of the wagons and poles, etc., down. I copied three letters for Dr. Richards.

Tuesday, September 29

Corbitt has started down into the country to fetch potatoes, etc.
