Winter Quarters

Friday, January 1

Morning at the store. At 2:00 p.m. went with Diantha to her father's and partook of a roast turkey for dinner. At 4:00 met the band at the Basket Shop and played about an hour and a half. The basket makers made each of us a present of a new basket and showed their gratitude various ways. At 6:00 met with the band at Father Kimball's and played for a party till after one o'clock. President Young and Kimball danced considerable and all seemed to feel well.

Saturday, January 2

At the store regulating the books and making out Whitney and Woolley's account current, etc. About 2:00 p.m. Sarah came and said her mother wanted me. Moroni had fallen into the fire and burned himself very badly. I went home and found as she said. All over the left side of his head burned, his face very badly burned, large blisters round his left eye. I immediately applied some consecrated oil and ordered them to keep it on all the time. I then returned to the store. Evening President Young came and took his hardware bill, domestic drilling, etc. About 8:00 p.m. I went home.

Sunday, January 3

Moroni's face seems much better, all except around his left eye which looks very bad. I was at the store all day working at Whitney's account current which seems very bad to regulate. Evening Heber, his wife Ellen, Sarah Ann and Sister Whitney came in to trade and remained till about ten o'clock.

Monday, January 4

At the store all day. Evening waiting on Orson Pratt and Amasa Lyman. Paid my tax today, $2.17½ to I. C. Wright.

Tuesday, January 5

At the store all day. Evening the band met at my house.

Wednesday, January 6

At the store all day, the weather extremely cold.

Thursday, January 7

At the store, the weather still colder than yesterday. Evening went to Sister Buel's and took supper of turkey. Afterwards went to Leonard's and played for them with Hutchinson and Smithies till 12:00.

Friday, January 8

At the store again, the weather still colder. Evening the band met at my house and played some.

Saturday, January 9

At the store all day. Quite unwell till 9:00 p.m.

Sunday, January 10

At home mostly all day. About 2:00 p.m. went to Hutchinson's to dinner.

Monday, January 11

At the store all day, the weather more moderate. Margaret and her boy doing well. Last night Pitt returned from Missouri.

Tuesday, January 12

This morning Ruth began to feel unwell. I went to the store and continued settlements as usual. Brothers Lee and Russell returned from Missouri, having obtained change for the checks. About 4:00 p.m. President Young and J. D. Lee came to Bishop Whitney's and I received in gold $496.17, and in silver $1,080.52 out of three checks which Lee took value $2,447.32, the balance to be accounted for hereafter. Soon as I was through receiving the money, I was informed that my folks had sent for me and I went home soon after, found that Ruth had brought forth a son twenty minutes after 5:00 p.m. She had a pretty hard time, but feels comfortable as can be expected. The boy is named Newel Horace. Evening I met with the band at Johnson's and played till about 11:00 p.m. The house was very much crowded and not much room to dance, but they kept it up freely.

Wednesday, January 13

This morning Ruth feels more comfortable. At the store all day waiting for Lee and Russel to settle. Evening Russel came and I received from him in gold $177.50, and in silver $363.19. He also accounted for $150.00 paid to Heber and $30.00 to Daniel Russel out of a check value $732.53 leaving him deficit $11.84. Spent the evening at home.

Thursday, January 14

At the store paying out a pair of the money, expecting before I made final payments to settle with Lee and Egan.

Friday, January 15

Spent an hour with Lee and Egan at my house but did not accomplish much towards a settlement. Afterwards at the store paying out money, settling, etc., filled bills for Pisgah & Garden Grove.

Saturday, January 16

At the store again paying, settling, etc., all day. The weather very cold. My folks doing well.

Sunday, January 17

At home mostly all day.

Monday, January 18

At the store all day, mostly paying money to the soldiers' wives.

Tuesday, January 19

At the store paying money, etc.

Wednesday, January 20

At the store paying money, etc.

Thursday, January 21

At the store paying money, etc.

Friday, January 22

At the store paying money, etc. Evening went with Hutchinson to Packer's party and played for the party in the smoke till near midnight.

Saturday, January 23

At the store all day paying money, etc. Evening met with Pitt and Hutchinson at the council house.

Sunday, January 24

Headache all day having taken cold last evening. Mostly at home. A few hours at the store over the river and back. Night played with Pitt awhile.

Monday, January 25

At the store, very busy paying money, etc. Snowed some and is cold. Whitney let me have some goods. Evening walked alone.

Tuesday, January 26

At the store till 2:00 p.m. Afterward went with the Quadrille Band to the Council House agreeably to previous notice and played for a party of men (70's) and their families who had assisted in building the house. They danced till about midnight. We had plenty to eat and drink through the interview and a very pleasant party.

Wednesday, January 27

At the store again till noon. At 2:00 p.m. at the Council House with the Quadrille Band and played for another company of those who had assisted in building the house. We had plenty of refreshments and a very sociable party as on yesterday. Broke up again about midnight.

Thursday, January 28

At the store till noon, and then at the Council House with the Quadrille Band playing for the third party of those who had assisted in building the house, together with the poor basket makers.

Friday, January 29

At home and the store. Felt quite unwell.

Saturday, January 30

At the store all day settling and paying money to soldiers' wives.

Sunday, January 31

At home all day. Dined with Diantha, Ruth, Margaret and mother Farr on a turkey.
