Sunday, August 1

We have had another cool windy night. At ten o'clock in the morning the brethren assembled for meeting under the bower on the temple lot, all the members of the quorum of the Twelve being present except President Young who is quite sick again. After the meeting had been opened by singing and prayer by Elder G. A. Smith, Elder Kimball arose and made some remarks to the following effect, as reported by Brother Bullock: "I would enquire whether there is a guard out around our cattle; if not, let one be placed immediately. The Indians left here very suddenly this morning and we don't know their object. If we don't take good care of what we have, we will not have any more. It is all in the world we shall ever have, for 'to him that receiveth I will give more.' We are the sons of God and He will do with us as we would do to our children, and inasmuch as I am faithful in taking care of my neighbors' goods, I shall be entitled to the same from them, for we are commanded to do unto others as we want others to do to us. Every penurious man who takes advantage of others will come down to poverty. If we have to follow the steps of our Savior we have to follow and experience the same things; you will have to feel for men so as to know how to sympathize with them and then you can feel for them. I feel for this people and grow more feeling for them every day. Our Father in Heaven is more tender to us than any mother to her little child. If I am faithful to serve others, others will be willing to serve me."

Orson Pratt requested the prayers of the Saints in his behalf: "It is with peculiar feelings that I arise before so many of the Saints in this uncultivated region inhabited by savages. My mind is full of reflection on the scenes through which we have passed and being brought through the deserts of sage to this distant region. God's ways are not as our ways. It is not wisdom that the Saints should always foresee the difficulties they have to encounter for then they would not be trials. We expected some revelations to take place and behold they are revealed in the Book of Mormon and Doctrine and Covenants, for we are to congregate among the remnants of Joseph. We did think our wives and children would be built up among the strongholds of the gentiles, we thought we should be as Missourians to them. Jehovah had different purposes. He designed that this people should be brought out almost as an entire people. The Book of Mormon never would have been fulfilled if the Saints had not left the gentiles as a people, for when the gentiles rejected the Gospel it was to be taken among the Lamanites. So long as the Gospel, the Priesthood and the main body of the people remained with them, the fullness of the Gospel was not taken away from the gentiles. This movement is one of the greatest that has taken place among this people. I feel thankful as one of the Twelve for the privilege of coming out as one of the pioneers to this glorious valley where we can build up a city to the Lord. For many years I have not read that good old book, but I remember the predictions in it and some that are now very nearly fulfilled by us. Isaiah says, (Chapter 62) speaking of the City of Zion, it shall be 'Sought out, a city not forsaken,' etc. Many in this congregation know what is meant by the garments of salvation and the robe of righteousness. Righteousness and praise shall spring forth before all the nations of the earth and they will not hold their peace. There are many of you that feel you can cry day and night to the people in the cause of righteousness until it shall triumph. 'For as a young man marrieth a virgin,' etc.--this belongs and refers to us. 'I will no longer give thy corn to be meat for thine enemy.' This has not been fulfilled heretofore but will be. The corn that we toil to raise from the earth, it shall not be given to our enemies, they that gather it shall eat it, and they shall drink in the courts of His holiness. This wine is also to be drunk in the courts of the Lord's house. We have gathered out the stones out of the road and thousands will yet fulfil this prophecy. It has reference to the latter times that were to dawn upon the world in the last dispensation. 'Thou shalt be called, Sought out, A city not forsaken.' If ever there was a place sought out it is this, we have enquired diligently and have found it. This cannot refer to Jerusalem, but to this very place, point and spot that the pioneers have found where a city shall be built unto the Lord, where righteousness will reign and iniquity not be allowed. Isaiah and Joel both spake very plainly on this subject. 'It shall come to pass in the last days that the house of the Lord shall be established,' etc. In what part of the earth could it be established more than in this place where this congregation is gathered. In the midst of the spires of the mountains we have found a place large enough to gather a few thousand of the Saints. You may travel Europe, Asia, Africa and America but you cannot find a place much higher where any people can raise crops and sustain themselves. The house of the Lord will be established on the tops of the mountains when we shall have once reared here. The experience of the Saints proves that there was no house of the Lord, and we can say: travel over this earth but you cannot find the house of the Lord. The Lord must give the pattern of the building and order it, and give directions to His servants. The Lord wants His house built precisely to the pattern that He gives and He is bound to speak to and bless and make them His own children in that house and I verily believe I shall see it and see thousands come flocking to the house to learn the way of salvation. And I want to see the time that I shall see thousands raising their voices on this consecrated land. There are many testimonies in the prophets all bearing upon this subject. Joseph, in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants speaks of this very subject and it appears there will be some sinners in Zion who will be afraid and a devouring fire will rest upon every dwelling place in Zion. 'He that walketh righteously' etc., 'He shall dwell on high, bread shall be given him, his water shall be sure.' Isaiah was on the eastern continent when he spoke this and was speaking of a very distant place. It will be pretty difficult to get a ship of war up to this place. When we get used to this healthy climate, the people will not say, I am sick, but will be able to smite the gentiles. They will grow up strong and will not be in jeopardy from sickness. The wilderness shall become as a fruitful field and a fruitful field as a forest. We know the time will come that the great Jehovah will cause springs of water to gush out of the desert lands and we shall see the lands survive that the gentiles have defiled. Isaiah speaks of the heritage of Jacob being in a high place. This is about four thousand feet above the level of the sea and the high mountains will still catch the hail and we shall be in a low place. We will not feel discouraged but will feel full of vigor and circumscribe all things to the very heavens, for this is what we desire above all things. Let us endeavor to covenant in our hearts, that we will serve the Lord; that we will keep His commandments and obey His counsel. I wish that all of us should be faithful and as President Young said the other evening, every man is expected to do his duty. The Lord will be with us still; He will shield, guard and defend us by day and be our refuge by night, and our salvation. I feel to say in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, you shall be blest if you keep the commandments of God. Amen."

Elder Kimball hopes the brethren will be attentive to what they hear for if you bring an evil upon this people you will bring destruction upon yourself. If you do things according to counsel and they are wrong, the consequences will fall on the heads of those who counseled you, so don't be troubled. I do not want to be wrapt in the skins of some men who have taken a course that has brought destruction upon themselves and others, and they will have to answer for it. I am a man that would not speak to a man's daughter to marry her until I have first spoken to her father and mother also, and then it is done by common consent. But I preach the truth, every word of it. President Young instructed the Battalion last evening and counseled them for their comfort and the counsel is for the brethren to keep their guns and their powder and their balls and lead and not let the Indians have it for they will shoot down our cattle. They stole guns yesterday and had them under their blankets and if you don't attend to this you are heating a kettle of boiling water to scald your own feet. If you listen to counsel you will let them alone and let them eat the crickets, there's a plenty of them. I understand they offered to sell the land and we were to buy it of them, the Utahs would want to pay for it too. The land belongs to our Father in Heaven and we calculate to plow and plant it and no man will have power to sell his inheritance for he cannot remove it; it belongs to the Lord. I am glad I have come to a place where I feel free. I am satisfied and we are in a goodly land. My family is back, my teams are helping on several families and leaving ours. If my family were here I would not go over that road again. I believe in Brother Joseph's religion which he said was a key that would save every man or woman, and that it is for every man to mind his own business and let other people's business alone. We will all have farms and cultivate them and plant vineyards, and if we are faithful, five years will not pass away before we are better off than we ever were in Nauvoo. If we had brought our families along everybody else would have come; and we must lose another year. We could not bring all the soldiers' families for the same reason that we did not bring our own families. I thank the Lord that there are so many of the soldiers here. If they had tarried in Winter Quarters there would have been many more deaths among them. We brought many of these pioneers to save their lives, many of them were very sick and were carried out of their beds and put into the wagons. They have mostly recovered their health and we have been prosperous and have been permitted to arrive here alive. There has not one died on the journey, nor an ox nor horse nor anything except one of Brother Crow's oxen which was poisoned. We lost several horses by accident and we shall be prosperous on our journey back again if we are faithful, those of us who go, and we shall see and enjoy the society of our families again. We will one day have a house built here and have the forts and go into the house and administer for our dead. Elder Richards then read an order from Lieut. Cooke of the Mormon Battalion on the Pacific, after which Elder Bullock read a letter from Jefferson Hunt to James Brown, dated July 6, 1847, after which and a few other remarks, the meeting was dismissed.

At 2:25 the congregation assembled and opened by singing and prayer by Elder Woodruff. Bread and water were then administered by the bishops after which Elder Richards, after a few preliminary remarks, read the "Word and will of the Lord," as given in Winter Quarters. Elder Kimball made some remarks and the brethren manifested that they received and would obey the revelations by uplifted hand. He was followed by remarks by Elder Amasa Lyman, mostly sustaining the positions taken by the previous speakers. Elder Kimball again rose to lay before the brethren some items of business, whereupon it was decided that the three companies form into one camp and labor together that the officers be a committee to form the corral, and that the corral be formed tomorrow. That horses and mules be tied near the camp at nights; that we build houses instead of living in wagons this winter; that we go to work immediately putting up houses; that we work unitedly; that the houses form a stockade or fort to keep out the Indians; that our women and children be not abused and that we let the Indians alone.

Colonel Rockwood remarked that a log house 16 by 15 would cost forty dollars and one of adobes half as much. Captain Brown was in favor of setting men to work building both log and adobe houses to hasten the work. Captain Lewis said that inasmuch as timber is scarce and we have spades and shovels and tools enough, as many as can be used, he is in favor of building adobe houses and saving the timber. Lieutenant Willis said you can put up an adobe house before a man could get the logs for a log house. Adobe houses are healthy and are the best for equinoxial gales. Elder Brannan has a man in California who will take three men, make adobes for a thirty foot house, build the house and put a family in it in a week. His printing office was put up in fourteen days and a paper printed. Elder Richards said we want brick made and lime burned. If wood is put into houses it will be a waste of it. We want all the timber to make floors and roofs. We want the walls up and we are men enough to put them up in a few days and have the women protected. It was voted to put up a stockade of adobe houses. Samuel Gould and James Drum reported themselves as lime burners. Sylvester H. Earl, Joel J. Terrill, Ralph Douglas and Joseph Hancock reported themselves as brick makers. Elder Kimball then remarked that those who intend to send ox teams back to Winter Quarters must be ready a week from tomorrow morning. If the cattle's feet are too tender, have them shod, or have new shoes in the wagons. Those oxen to rest and be released from plowing, etc. Do not get the Indians around here. I want you to have nothing to do with them. After a few remarks on general items, the meeting dismissed.

Monday, August 2

We have had another cool night, but morning fine. The other companies commenced moving their wagons up and we also moved a little farther east. During the day the whole camp was formed in an oblong circle. About noon Ezra T. Benson and several others started back to meet the next company. They carried a letter, the following being a copy of the same:

"Pioneer camp. Valley of the Great Salt Lake, August 2, 1847. To General Chas. C. Rich and the Presidents and Officers of the emigrating company. Beloved Brethren: We have delegated our beloved Brother Ezra T. Benson and escort to communicate to you by express the cheering intelligence that we have arrived in the most beautiful valley of the Great Salt Lake, that every soul who left Winter Quarters with us is alive and almost everyone enjoying good health. That portion of the battalion that was at Pueblo is here with us together with the Mississippi company that accompanied them and they are generally well. We number about 450 souls and we know of no one but who is pleased with our situation. We have commenced the survey of a city this morning. We feel that the time is fast approaching when those teams that are going to Winter Quarters this fall should be on the way. Every individual here would be glad to tarry if his friends were here, but as many of the battalion, as well as the pioneers, have not their families here and do not expect that they are in your camp, we wish to learn by express from you, the situation of your camp as speedily as possible that we may be prepared to counsel and act in the whole matter. We want you to send us the names of every individual in your camp, or in other words, a copy of your camp roll, including the names, number of wagons, horses, mules, oxen, cows, etc., and the health of your camp, your location, prospects, etc. If your teams are worn out, if your camp is sick and not able to take care of themselves, if you are short of teamsters or any other circumstance impeding your progress. We want to know it immediately for we have help for you, and if your teams are in good plight and will be able to return to Winter Quarters this season or any portion of them, we want to know it. We also want the mail, which will include all letters and papers, and packages belonging to our camp, general and particular. Should circumstances permit, we would gladly meet you some distance from this, but our time is very much occupied. Notwithstanding, we think you will see us before you see our valley. Let all the brethren and sisters cheer up their hearts and know assuredly that God has heard and answered their prayers and ours and led us to a goodly land, and our souls are satisfied therewith. Brother Benson can give you many particulars that will be gratifying and cheering to you which we have not time to write, and we feel to bless all the Saints. In behalf of the council. Willard Richards, Clerk. Brigham Young, President.

This morning, Elders Pratt and Sherwood commenced surveying the city to lay it off in lots but finally concluded to wait until the chain could be tested by a standard pole which will have to be gotten from the mountains. Some of the brethren are preparing to make moulds for adobes. In the evening, Elder Kimball's teams returned from the mountains with some good house logs and poles for measuring, etc. The day has been very warm but the nights begin to be very cool. The northeast winds seem to prevail here at this season and coming from the mountains of snow are cold when the sun is down. After dark President Young sent for me to come to his wagon and told his calculations about our starting back. He wants me to start with the ox teams next Monday so as to have a better privilege of taking the distances, etc. He calculates the horse teams to start two weeks later, and if the first company arrives at Grand Island before the other comes up to wait for them there, kill and dry buffalo, etc. He wants the roadometer fixed this week and Elder Kimball has selected William King to do the work.

Tuesday, August 3

Morning fine, but cool. Elder Carrington starts for the mountains to look for limestone. During the day I went and bathed at Bullock's bathing place in one of the warm sulphur springs. I found the effects very refreshing and beneficial. Spent most of the day making a table of distances, etc. The day very hot.

Wednesday, August 4

This morning William A. King has commenced making a new roadometer. The day very hot and close.

Thursday, August 5

Again at the roadometer, day very warm. J. C. Little and others have returned and report that they have been at the Utah Lake. As they went up they saw bodies of two dead Indians lying on the ground proving that there was one of each tribe killed the other day. They consider it to be about forty miles to the Utah Lake and on the east side is a handsome valley about six or eight miles wide. They are now convinced that the stream which runs a few miles below here is the Utah outlet, they having followed it to its junction with the lake.

Friday, August 6

The day very warm.

Saturday, August 7

Today William A. King has finished the roadometer which will now tell the distance for one thousand miles without keeping any account. About noon a very large whirlwind struck the south side of the camp forming a cloud of dust about twenty feet in diameter and making a loud roar. It carried a chicken up some distance, tore up the bowers, and shook the wagons violently in its course. It passed off to the northeast and seemed to break at the mountains. This morning fifteen of the brethren commenced building a dam a little above the camp so as to bring the water around and inside the camp. They finished early in the afternoon and we have now a pleasant little stream of cold water running on each side the wagons all around the camp. Where the water runs off or overflows the gutters, it soon becomes miry and cattle will sink a half a yard in mud. This is owing to the lightness of the soil, it being very light and rich. In the evening, many of the brethren went and were baptized in the dam by Elder Kimball for the remission of sins, Elders Pratt, Woodruff, and Smith attending to confirmation. I went and was baptized amongst the rest. It has been recommended for all the camp to be baptized and this evening they have commenced it.

Sunday, August 8

Morning cloudy with strong northeast wind. The brethren have resumed baptizing and a number have obeyed the ordinance both male and female. At ten o'clock, a meeting was held in the bowery and instructions given to the brethren. At two o'clock, sacrament was administered and 110 of the brethren selected to make adobes. Wrote a letter for Heber to Elder Martin and others.

Monday, August 9

At eleven o'clock, Brannan, Captain James Brown and several others started for San Francisco. Elder J. C. Little accompanies them to Fort Hall. I spent three hours taking observations with the barometer with Elder Pratt to ascertain the height of the land on the creek above the city. Ensign Peak, etc. The twelve had decided on a name for this place and a caption for all letters and documents issued from this place, which is as follows: Salt Lake City, Great Basin, North America.

Tuesday, August 10

This morning, President Young and Kimball have gone to the adobe yard to commence building some houses in that region. They have already got many good logs on the ground. Colonel Markham reports that in addition to the plowing done week before last, they have plowed about thirty acres which is mostly planted, making a total of about eighty acres. The plowing ceased last week and the brethren are now making adobes, hauling logs, etc. Elder Sherwood continues surveying the city. Tanner and Frost are setting wagon tires and have set fifty-two today. The brethren who went to the lake on Monday to boil down salt have returned this evening and report that they have found a bed of beautiful salt ready to load into wagons. It lies between two sand bars and is about six inches thick. They suppose they can easily load ten wagons without boiling. I have received from Elder Kimball a pair of buckskin pants, as a present I suppose, but as I have on similar occasions been branded with the idea of receiving a great many kindnesses without consideration, I will for this once state a little particular on the other side the question. I acknowledge that I have had the privilege of riding in a wagon and sleeping in it, of having my victuals cooked and some meat and milk, and occasionally a little tea or coffee furnished. My flour I furnished myself. I have had no team to take care of. Howard Egan has done most of my washing until a month ago in consideration of the privilege of copying from my journal, using my desk, ink, etc. The balance of my washing I have hired. Now what have I done for Brother Kimball? Am I justly indebted on this journey? Answer: I have written in his journal 124 pages of close matter on an average of 600 words to a page, which if paid at the price of recording deeds in Illinois would amount to over $110.00. I have collected the matter myself, besides writing letters, etc. This has been for his special benefit. I have kept an account of the distance we have traveled for over 800 miles of the journey, attended to the measurement of the road, kept the distances from creek to creek and from one encampment to another; put up a guide board every ten miles from Fort John to this place with the assistance of Philo Johnson. I have mapped some for Dr. Richards and keeping my own journal forms the whole benefit to be derived by my family by this mission. I have yet considerable to write in Elder Kimball's journal before I return. I am expected to keep a table of distances of the whole route returning from here to Winter Quarters and make a map when I get through, and this for public benefit. Now how much am I considered to be in debt, and how often will it be said that I was furnished by others with victuals, clothing, etc., that I might enjoy this journey as a mission of pleasure. I have spent most of this day calculating the height of this spot above the level of the sea for Elder Pratt.

Wednesday, August 11

Early this morning, a large company of the Utah Indians came to visit the camp and it was with difficulty they could be kept outside the wagons. There are few of them who have any clothing on except the breech clout and are mostly of low stature. They have scarcely anything to trade and not many women and children with them. They are camped about three miles north of west and supposed to be going north hunting. One of them was detected stealing some clothing which lay on the bushes to dry, but was made to leave it. When they found they were not permitted inside the circle, they soon moved off to their camp. The brethren have commenced laying the adobe wall today which will be twenty-seven inches thick and nine feet high. The adobes are 18 inches long, 9 inches broad and 4½ inches thick. The brethren in camp have finished the skiff and launched her in the creek to soak. About five o'clock, a child of Therlkill's was found in the creek south of the camp drowned. Various efforts were made to restore it but unsuccessfully. The child was about three years old and its parents mourn the accident bitterly. The day has been very hot, but as usual, at sundown we have a strong, cool wind from the northeast.

Thursday, August 12

Spent the forenoon with Elder Pratt in taking observations to ascertain the height of the temple block above the Utah outlet which he found to be sixty-five feet. The altitude one mile up the creek above the temple block is 214 feet and the altitude of the temple block above the level of the sea is 4,300 feet. The latitude 40° 45' 50". The blacksmiths are very busy shoeing oxen and there is prospect that the ox teams will start back on Monday or Tuesday. The soldiers are getting dissatisfied at being kept here so long from their families and yesterday several of them left the camp secretly to go to Winter Quarters and this morning others are gone, but it is probable that President Young knows nothing of it yet although about a dozen are already gone and others are preparing to follow them. On Tuesday President Young laid a foundation for four houses; Elder Kimball four, Colonel Markham one, Dr. Richards one, and Lorenzo Young two, and today Dr. Richards has laid the foundation of another, George A. Smith two and Wilford Woodruff two, making a total of seventeen houses mostly fourteen feet wide and from twelve to seventeen long. Elder Kimball has his house four logs high.

Friday, August 13

Spent the day mostly writing. The brethren have got 130 bushels of salt with twenty-four hours labor.

Saturday, August 14

Started at 8:40 in company with a number of others for the Salt Lake. We arrived at three o'clock and estimated the distance twenty-two miles. We all bathed in it and found the reports of those who had previously bathed in no ways exaggerated. We returned back to the river where we arrived at eleven o'clock at the beginning of a light thunder shower. There is no pure fresh water between the river and the lake.

Sunday, August 15

President Young preached on the death of little children, etc. Evening the company composing those who are returning with the ox teams met and voted that Shadrach Roundy and Tunis Rappleyee be captains. They received instructions to start tomorrow and travel leisurely to Grand Island and there wait for the last company of horse teams. J. C. Little and company returned yesterday from Utah Lake, and this morning the exploring company returned.

Monday, August 16

Spent most of the day fixing the roadometer, also finished marking the distances, camping places,, etc., on Dr. Richards' map from Devil's gate to Little Sandy. Evening took the wagon in company with Jackson Redding and Howard Egan to the warm spring to try the roadometer. We found the distance to be one and a half miles. Most of the company of ox teams have started today for Winter Quarters. They will go to the canyon and wait there till morning. After dark, Elder Kimball called a number of us together in the tent and each one present selected a lot for himself and family. I had previously selected lots 1, 7 and 8 on block 95, but President Young broke into our arrangements and wished 7 and 8 reserved, consequently I made choice of lots 1, 2 and 3 on block 95.

Tuesday, August 17

Started out at 8:10 and found the distance to the mouth of the canyon five miles, the difference arising from making a road across instead of following the first one. One and three quarters of a mile farther arrived at where the company had camped for the night and found them all ready to start, only waiting for President Young to arrive and give some instructions, but he sent word he should not come and we started forward. Elders Kimball and Richards soon overtook the company, gave some instructions, then returned and the company moved on. On arriving at Birch Spring, we encamped for the night, having traveled thirteen and a half miles. There is considerable danger of cattle miring near the spring and several have already had to be pulled out. This company consists of seventy-one men with thirty-three wagons. After camping, the brethren were called together by Captain Roundy for the purpose of organizing. He briefly stated the manner of the organization of the camp when we left Winter Quarters and it was unanimously voted to organize after the same pattern which was done as follows:

1st Division

  1st Ten

  Joseph Skeen, Captain
  Wm. Burt
  Artemas Johnson
  James Dunn
  James Cazier
  Joseph Shipley
  Geo. Cummings
  Samuel Badham
  Thos. Richardson
  Roswell Stevens

  2nd Ten

  Zebedee Coltrin, Captain
  Wm. Bird
  Chester Loveland
  Josiah Curtis
  Lorenzo Babcock
  John S. Eldridge
  Samuel H. Marble
  Horace Thornton
  Geo. Scholes

  3rd Ten

  Francis Boggs, Captain
  Geo. Wardle
  Sylvester H. Earl
  Seeley Owens
  Almon M. Williams
  Clark Stillman

Tunis Rappleyee, Captain of 1st Division. James Cazier Captain of Guard in 1st Division.

2nd Division

  1st Ten

  Jackson Redding, Captain
  Robert Biard
  Wm. Carpenter
  Benj. W. Rolfe
  Henry W. Sanderson
  Thos. Cloward
  Bailey Jacobs
  Lisbon Lamb
  John Pack
  Wm. Clayton

  2nd Ten

  John H. Tippets, Captain
  Lyman Stevens
  Francis T. Whitney
  Lyman Curtis
  James Stewart
  John S. Gleason
  Chas. A. Burke
  Myron Tanner
  Wm. McLellan
  Rufus Allen
  Norman Taylor

  3rd Ten

  Allen Cumpton, Captain
  Franklin Allen
  John Bybee
  David Garner
  J. Averett
  Harmon D. Persons
  John G. Smith
  Solomon Tindal
  Philip Garner
  Chas. Hopkins
  Barnabas Lake

  4th Ten

  Andrew J. Shoop, Captain
  Albert Clark
  Francillo Durfee
  James Hendrickson
  Erastus Bingham
  John Calvert
  Loren Kenney
  Daniel Miller
  Benj. Roberts
  Luther W. Glazier
  Jarvis Johnson
  Thos. Bingham

Shadrack Roundy, Captain of 2nd Division. John Gleason, Captain of Guard.

The soldiers were numbered with the 2nd Division, 3rd and 4th tens.

Those who have horses to ride were then numbered and their duty pointed out, which is to lead the way and fix the road where it needs it; look out camping places; drive the loose cattle and hunt for the camp. Their names are as follows: John Pack, Captain, Samuel Badham, Francillo Durfee, Benj. Roberts, Thomas Bingham, James Hendrickson, John Eldridge, R. I. Redding, Seeley Owens, Barnabas Lake, Wm. Bird, Daniel Miller, James Cazier.

Wednesday, August 18

We had a little rain this morning and the air very cool. We started at 8:00 a.m. and found the road rough indeed. When ascending the mountain from Brown's Creek, most of the teams had to double, it generally requiring six yoke of oxen to bring up an empty wagon. The descent is also very rough and especially where the road crosses the dry creek which is a great many times. Canyon Creek appeared rougher than when we first went up it and it took till near night to get to the end of the creek, having traveled only fifteen and three quarters miles during the day.

Thursday, August 19

We got started again about 8:00 a.m., all except Chas. A. Burke. One of his oxen was missing. Before noon several of the loose cattle gave out through being over driven. We arrived and camped on Red Mountain Creek at six o'clock, having traveled sixteen and a quarter miles. The day has been very hot but nights are very cold.

Friday, August 20

Morning very cold. Started out at seven and traveled till 12:30, the day being cool, then rested and baited an hour. At 1:30 proceeded again and arrived at Cache or Reddings Cave at 5:00 p.m., having traveled twenty and a half miles, but it was nearly seven o'clock before the company arrived.

Saturday, August 21

Started at 7:30 a.m. and traveled till 12:00 then baited an hour. We found Bear River not over fifteen inches deep. We camped on Sulphur Creek at five o'clock having traveled sixteen and a half miles and after camping I went with the brethren to fill their tar buckets at the oil spring. We followed a wagon trail made by a part of Hasting's company last year about a mile and found the spring situated in a ravine a little to the left of the road just at the edge of a high bench of land. The ground is black over with the oil for several rods but it is baked hard by exposure to the sun. It is difficult to get the clear oil, most of it being filled with dust and gravel. It smells much like British oil and is said to do well for greasing wagons. John Gleason has found a coal bed in the edge of the mountain across the creek. The coal looks good and burns freely.

Sunday, August 22

Many of the cattle were missing this morning but after much search were found about four miles southwest from camp. We started at nine o'clock and traveled till one, then halted an hour at the copperas spring. Most of the wagons halted at the spring four miles back. The water of this spring is not bad, cattle drink it freely. At two o'clock we began to ascend the ridge and at five formed our camp near the Muddy fork having traveled seventeen and three quarters miles, the day cool and cloudy.

Monday, August 23

We started early this morning and arrived at Fort Bridger at one o'clock. We found the grass pretty much eaten off and only stayed an hour and a half while some of the brethren traded some, then went on eight miles farther and camped on a stream two rods wide, having traveled twenty-one and a half miles, the day very cool.

Tuesday, August 24

This morning many of the cattle had strayed several miles from camp which prevented our starting till eight o'clock. We traveled eight and a half miles, then halted an hour on Black's Fork. We proceeded again and had a pretty heavy thunder shower and arrived at Ham's Fork at 5:20, then camped for the night, having traveled twenty-three miles. Most of the wagons did not arrive till nearly night, but we had no place to camp short of this and here we have good range for cattle.

Wednesday, August 25

We traveled today twenty-three miles and camped on Green River. We found several places where the road is shortened some, but it is yet about sixteen miles from water to water.

Thursday, August 26

Started at eight o'clock and went on to the Big Sandy and before the majority of the company arrived, E. T. Benson and escort came up with letters from the companies. They say there are nine companies between here and the Platte with 566 wagons and about 5,000 head of stock. They report the companies well and getting along tolerably fast, some they expect we shall meet within three days. After eating they proceeded on. After sundown a large party of mounted Indians came up, and camped on the opposite side the river. They have been on the Sweet Water hunting and are said to be of the Shoshone tribe.

Friday, August 27

Many of the brethren traded sugar, powder, lead, etc., to the Indians for robes and skins and meat. We started soon after seven and traveled to the crossing of the Big Sandy. Then after halting an hour, continued to the Little Sandy, making twenty-five and a quarter miles today, but it was nine o'clock before some of the wagons arrived. The feed is mostly eaten up on the creeks near the road and there is none except on the banks of streams. Bailey Jacobs killed a large antelope which is a matter of rejoicing as we are nearly out of bread stuff and had little meat for several days. We started back from the valley with 8 lbs. of flour, 9 lbs. of meal and a few beans each, and we have to depend on getting meat on the road for the rest. I was told there were 25 lbs. of flour put up for me, but I find it is not so.

Saturday, August 28

Started at eight o'clock and traveled till half past three before halting when we arrived at the crossing of the Pacific creek and halted to camp for the night having traveled twenty-three miles. There is no grass from Little Sandy to this place except a very little on Dry Sandy but the water there has some taste of alkali and teams do not like it. Here there is considerable grass along the creek and very good water but no wood except wild sage. We had a heavy thunder shower about four o'clock and considerable hail. It was dark before the ox teams arrived. Some of the men had killed a buffalo a few miles back, but it is very poor.

Sunday, August 29

It was decided to remain here today to rest the teams, but our ten obtained leave to go on to Sweet Water, expecting to meet the company, and after reading the letter of instructions from the council to this camp, my wagon proceeded on slowly. At the Springs, we saw an aged Indian squaw near the road dwelling in a shelter composed merely of wild sage and apparently dependent on passing emigrants for subsistence. She is doubtless left to perish on account of age and infirmity, but it is likely she will live some time on what she receives from those who pass by. When we arrived near the summit of the dividing ridge or south pass, two Indians rode towards us and motioned for us to stop. Not seeing the other wagons coming after, we stopped to wait for the wagons and the Indians soon arrived. They made signs that a large party of them were over the mountain north and they wanted to "swap." While they were conversing a number more rode over the ridge and soon after a still larger number. About this time the wagons came in sight and when the brethren saw so many Indians they were alarmed. John Pack rode back to the main camp to get some of the brethren to come up, but J. R. said he would not budge a foot. The brethren behind were much alarmed, some expecting to be scalped and one W. Carr ran and hid himself in the sage bushes. No one returned with John Pack but Norman Taylor and the wagons proceeded towards us. In the meantime, after learning the object for which the Indians sought us, that none of them were armed except two, and by a certificate that the first visitor was a Shoshone chief, Brother Lamb and myself signified that we would trade with them and soon some of them returned with antelope, buck and elk skins and robes to trade. I traded some balls and a little powder for one robe, one elk skin, two buckskins and nine antelope skins and a pair of moccasins. Lamb bought five antelope skins. While we were trading, the other wagons arrived and also commenced trading. The Indians, about sixty in number, about twenty of them boys, all mounted, seemed highly pleased to trade with us which we did mostly through the chief. By request of the chief, I gave him a certificate stating that he appeared friendly and wanted to trade with the whites, etc. The chief gave us a very strong invitation to go to their camp to trade and made signs that they would feed us well and we should sleep with them. I answered him by signs that we should camp when we arrived where the road crossed the Sweet Water but they were very anxious to have us then turn off the road and camp. After we started, the chief came up and wanted to swap a good mule for my spy glass but I refused. I had let him look through it and he seemed very wishful to try it. When they saw we were determined to go on, they left us and returned to their camp while we pursued our journey to the first crossing of Sweet Water where we arrived and camped at six o'clock, having traveled fourteen miles.

Monday, August 30

This morning the cattle belonging to the camp behind came to us early, having strayed away. John Pack and Bailey Jacobs went to drive them back and to trade some with the Indians. We calculated to go on about eleven miles but before we started, Father Eldridge came up with his wagon and said he expected Spencer's 1st 50 company up soon. We then concluded to stay here until they arrived and about three o'clock, their wagons began to cross the creek. I was glad to find Aaron and Loren Farr, and William Walker in this company with their families all well and in good spirits. From Sister Olivia, I received some articles sent by my family which were very acceptable indeed and made me feel grateful. This company all appear well and cheerful and are not much troubled on account of lack of teams. I spent the evening with Loren and their families. The balance of our camp arrived before dark.

Tuesday, August 31

Our camp except this ten has started on, but Brother Spencer has concluded to halt here today and I spent the day copying tables of distances for Loren and also gave him a plot of the city.
