Wednesday, September 1

We bid farewell to Brother Spencer's company and proceeded on. After traveling about a mile, we met P. P. Pratt going to see Brother Spencer and to get some cattle. He says some of the back companies have lost many head and can scarcely move. A few miles farther we met the 2nd 50 of Spencer's company. We traveled till nearly dark and camped with the returning pioneers at the cold spring, having traveled twenty-two and a quarter miles. The day fine and pleasant. We find the grass pretty much eaten off all the way. John G. Smith was appointed captain of the 2nd division in place of Shadrach Roundy who returns.

Thursday, September 2

Started about eight o'clock and after traveling two miles passed Russell's company of 50 and about five miles farther we passed Elder Rich's 50 and G. B. Wallace's 50. They all agree to the health and prosperity of their companies but have lost many cattle and have had hard work to get along. We passed Captains Foutz and Hone on this long drive with their companies all well, but complaining much for lack of teams. I conversed some with Edward Hunter and Elder Taylor. Brother Hunter will give cash for some cattle if he can buy them. We arrived on Sweet Water at six o'clock but the ox teams did not get in till eight o'clock, having traveled twenty-four and a half miles. The evening was very cold, windy and like for rain. Brother Roundy returned back to the valley this morning, having met his family.

Friday, September 3

We started on this morning following the new road at the north side of the Sweet Water, the road sandy in places but much better than the old road. After traveling about two miles, we saw a lone buffalo about two miles to the south. John Pack and Lisbon Lamb went to try to kill him and finally succeeded, on which our ten halted and sent back a wagon for the meat which detained us about three hours, after which we proceeded again. A little before the road fords the river the second time, there is an alkali lake a little north from the road. We joined the company and also met J. B. Noble's company where the road joins the old one again. Brother Noble's company are all well and not so bad off for teams as some of the other companies. We proceeded on a few miles farther and met J. M. Grant with Willard Snow's 50 which is the last company on the road. Brother Grant had a child die last night and his wife is yet very sick and not much expected to recover. This company have lost many cattle and are so bad off for teams as not to be able to travel more than ten miles a day which would make it some day in October before they get through. We went on nearly two miles farther, then camped for the night near Bitter Cottonwood creek, having traveled fifteen and three quarters miles. Most of the company camped back with Brother Snow's company.

Saturday, September 4

We started late this morning and traveled over a very sandy road till five o'clock, then camped on Ravine Creek, having traveled sixteen miles.

Sunday, September 5

There being alkali springs near, we concluded to go to Independence Rock at which place we arrived about three o'clock having traveled twelve and a half miles. Soon after we camped, Lamb and Jacob Cloward went to chase some buffalo and succeeded in killing one. I walked over the rock and had some solemn meditations and felt to humble myself and call upon the Lord for myself and family, for this company, the twelve and all the companies on the road. Experience has taught me many maxims of late and I intend to profit by them. Be not hasty to promise, lest thy promise be considered worthless. Make not many promises without reflection, lest thou fail to fulfill them and it dampen the confidence of thy friend. If thou promise many things and regard not to fulfill them and it damp the confidence of thy friend, then be assured that thy friends will despise thy promises and have no dependence in them. Seek not to speculate out of a good brother.

Monday, September 6

This morning the cattle were found down the Sweet Water about six miles from camp which made it late before we started. While passing the alkali lakes, a number of the brethren filled the bags with saleratus. We found the road very sandy to Greasewood Creek and after that it was somewhat better. About three o'clock the wind began to blow very strong and cold and we had heavy rain for about two hours.

We proceeded on and arrived at the Willow Spring a little before dark in the midst of a heavy shower of rain. Thomas Cloward left one of the old oxen sent back by Wallace on the road. It died before morning. All except our ten and William's stayed back at Greasewood Creek. We tried in vain to make a fire but finally went to bed wet and cold, having eaten nothing since morning. Some of the teamsters have only a light summer coat with them and they suffer considerably. We traveled twenty-one and a half miles today.

Tuesday, September 7

This morning our cattle were all missing and it still rains and snows very heavily. Pack and T. Cloward started early on foot to hunt the cattle but after following them over seven miles in the storm and seeing that they had kept on the road towards the Platte river, they returned to camp. It rained and snowed heavily till eleven o'clock at which time the balance of the camp arrived. John Pack asked the company to let us have some of their loose cattle to bring on our wagons till we overtook ours again, but the captains both generously refused for some cause or other. However, some of the brethren took their cattle out of their teams and let us have them and we moved onward. After traveling about thirteen miles we saw our cattle about four miles to the left of the road at the foot of a mountain. We halted and Lamb took one of the mules to fetch the cattle to the road. Soon after Pack and Jackson Redding came up and learning that we had found the cattle, they started to them to drive them to camp and Lamb being relieved, returned to the wagon. We harnessed up and arrived at the mineral spring about six o'clock, having traveled sixteen and a quarter miles. This spring has been represented as poisonous but if it is so, it must be in consequence of minerals under the water. The water has no bad taste till the cattle trample in it. It then becomes almost black as ink and this is probably what makes it poisonous.

Wednesday, September 8

We started at eight o'clock and arrived at the Upper Platte ferry soon after twelve o'clock. We found N. Jacobs and company there hunting. We forded the river and found it about two feet deep in the channel. We halted on the banks about two hours at which time the whole camp arrived. We then proceeded on. The main company went about five miles but we went till we found a good camping place in a grove of timber on the banks of the river where the road runs through, then halted for night, having traveled nineteen miles.

Thursday, September 9

This morning Norton Jacob's company joined us at eight o'clock and we moved forward. Found the road rough, it being cut up by the other companies in wet weather. We arrived on Deer Creek about sundown and camped for the night, having traveled twenty-two and a quarter miles. The day fine and very pleasant. Joseph Hancock killed an elk which the brethren packed to camp on horseback about sixteen miles.

Friday, September 10

We have had a strong southwest wind all night and the morning is somewhat cool. We started a little before eight o'clock and had good traveling. We saw many herds of buffalo but the hunters did not get any while passing. We arrived at the river A La Perle at three o'clock and camped for the night having traveled seventeen and a half miles. A while before dark, some of the men came in with a part of a buffalo which they killed. Lewis Barney also killed a young one which was considerably fat. The meat was all packed in on horses. One of the men killed a wolf out of which we got considerable grease for the wagons. It was decided to have a guard each night the remainder of the journey, every man to stand in his turn, four each night.

Saturday, September 11

Got up at twelve o'clock and stood guard till daylight. The morning very fine and pleasant. Three of the brethren arrived from the camp back and said that during the night before last the Indians had stolen sixteen or seventeen of their horses and they were in pursuit of them. We were detained some on account of several of the horses having rambled off, but about nine o'clock we started on and traveled to the La Bonte River, distance nineteen and a half miles. There are many buffalo around here also and although we have plenty of meat, the brethren continue to kill them. We find the feed eaten off bare almost every place we come to and it is difficult to find grass to sustain our teams.

Sunday, September 12

We traveled this day seventeen and three quarters miles and camped by Heber's Spring on Horseshoe Creek. We found the spring had ceased running but there was water in the creek a little north. The roadometer has broken down today over the same ground it broke as we went west. Our bread stuff is now out and we have to live solely on meat the balance of the journey. John Pack has got flour enough to last him through. We have all messed together until ours was eaten, and now John Pack proposes for each man to mess by himself. He has concealed his flour and beans together with tea, coffee, sugar, etc., and cooks after the rest have gone to bed. Such things seem worthy of remembrance for a time to come.

Monday, September 13

We fixed the roadometer this morning, then traveled to Dead Timber Creek, distance fifteen miles. Here we find good feed and plenty of wood and water.

Tuesday, September 14

Started at nine o'clock and traveled till about five, then camped on the Platte River, having traveled twenty-four and a quarter miles. In consequence of some things which have passed and some which at present exist, I have concluded to go on as fast as circumstances will permit to Winter Quarters and I intend to start tomorrow. Some have opposed it, but not with a good grace. However, I have no fears that the council will censure me when they know the cause. If they do, I will bear the censure in preference to what I now bear. Before dark Luke Johnson, William A. Empey and Appleton Harmon came up from Laramie, having learned from an Indian that wagons were near. They say that a party of Sioux warriors have got the brethren's horses, seventeen in number, on the Raw Hide, about eighteen miles north. They say that about fifty armed men might go and probably get them, but not fewer. The Sioux are at war with the Crows and Pawnees and reports say that there is a large party of the Pawnees a little down the river.

Wednesday, September 15

We started a little after eight, forded the Platte without any difficulty and at three o'clock concluded to stop for the night, having traveled twenty-one and a quarter miles over very sandy road. The ox teams have kept nearly up with us and it is evident they intend to keep with us or kill their teams, and being aware that if the teams are injured we shall be blamed for it, we have given up going ahead to save the teams.

Thursday, September 16

Today we traveled nineteen and a half miles over good road and camped near the river amongst good grass.

Friday, September 17

This morning Thomas Brown, Ezra Beckstead, Mathew Welch, Benjamin Roberts, David Perkins and William Bird started to go through to Winter Quarters in consequence of having no bread. We traveled nineteen and three quarters miles and camped again on the Platte. The road very good.

Saturday, September 18

Last night John Pack's gray horse was stolen from his wagon. He lays it to the brethren ahead and with Norton Jacobs and Joseph Hancock has heaped a pretty long string of severe abusive language on them which I consider to be premature, unjustifiable and wicked. Two Frenchmen came to the camp and said they were camped below on a trading excursion among the Sioux. Inasmuch as some of the brethren wanted to trade with them, it was concluded to move down opposite to them. We accordingly traveled four and a quarter miles then again camped on the banks of the river and the brethren bought a number of buffalo robes, etc. Norton Jacobs bought five robes for seven common calico shirts.

Sunday, September 19

The traders say they will move down the river today to where there are plenty of buffalo. Our camp also traveled ten and three quarters miles and camped a little below Chimney Rock. There are many herds of buffalo around and Lewis Barney killed one which will give us a little fresh meat. The weather has been very fine and warm for some days past. This evening there are some signs of stormy weather.

Monday, September 20

Today we traveled seven and a quarter miles, the day very hot. We turned off the road to camp at Rubidoos' request while they killed some buffalo. They gave us some very nice meat.

Tuesday, September 21

We have concluded to wait here until the balance of the company arrives. Afternoon went over the river and had a good feast on buffalo ribs with the Frenchmen. The victuals were cooked by a squaw but looked much cleaner than our men cook it. Evening it became cloudy and soon followed by cold rain which continued till two o'clock.

Wednesday, September 22

At one o'clock, I got up to stand guard and found the night extremely cold and unpleasant on account of rain. The morning is cloudy and cold. The wagons have not yet come in sight which makes us think there is something the matter with them.

Thursday, September 23

Today Jackson Redding and Sanderson went back to see if they could see the other wagons. They returned at night and said the company were within a few miles having been detained at Laramie to recover their horses, most of which they got. They state that news has come to the fort by a Sioux Indian that the twelve and their company had all their horses stolen at the Pacific Springs during a snow storm. The Sioux stole them supposing them to belong to the Shoshones. The man that brought the news stole seventeen but lost eight in the mountains, the remainder he brought to Laramie and the brethren there knew some of them and demanded them. He gave them up, at least all they could prove and four of the brethren started with them to meet the twelve. The Indian says there were nine of them who stole the horses.

Friday, September 24

We resumed our journey this morning and traveled thirteen and a half miles, then camped where the road runs close to the river. The weather is again fine and hot in the day time but the nights are cold and frosty. Joseph Hancock killed a buffalo cow and John Norton an antelope which will supply the company with a little meat each, most of whom are without.

Saturday, September 25

The day cloudy and some like for a storm. We made an early start and traveled to Crab Creek, distance twenty and a quarter miles then camped for the night. The land on both sides the river is literally spotted with vast herds of buffalo, but our hunters are not very lucky as yet. From the fact of there being so many buffalo in this region, we are inclined to believe we shall see but few lower down and this is probably the best chance we will have to lay in a supply to last us home. During the afternoon, Joseph Hancock killed a buffalo cow and Captain Rappleyee sent a wagon to fetch the meat to camp. When it arrived John Pack took the hind quarters and the best meat off the rest of the cow, together with all the tallow, then sent for Rappleyee to take what he had left and divide it amongst the company. When Rappleyee saw what he had done, he felt angry and Pack and he had some high words on the subject. Brother Pack's conduct has caused many unpleasant feelings against him among the brethren. He takes all the tallow he can lay his hands on, and all the best meat and has now got more than will serve him home while many of the rest have scarcely any and that of the poorest pieces. He has plenty of flour, meal, beans, tea, coffee, sugar, etc., while most of the camp are destitute of everything but meat, and while he continues to take the tallow and best of the meat there will be hard feelings against him. He has disgraced himself in the estimation of many within the past few days. I do not think I can ever forget him for his treatment of me, but I cherish no malice nor feelings of revenge, but I hope and pray that I may forever have wisdom to keep from under his power. There have been six or eight buffalo killed by the camp and it is intended to stay here tomorrow and try to get meat to last us through as it is not likely we shall have another privilege as good as this. Most of the camp now begin to feel that it is necessary for us to make our way home as fast as possible to save our teams and escape the cold rain and snowstorms.

Sunday, September 26

Many of the brethren are gone out hunting. The weather continues fine and warm. In the afternoon we had a strong northwest wind. During the day the second division killed more than enough meat to last them home, but were totally unwilling to let the first division have any although they killed none, not having but two or three guns in the division. This also has tended to increase the feeling of envy and bitterness which already exists too much. Thomas Cloward has manifested feelings and conduct worse than the general run of gentiles and unworthy of a saint. He seems to have drunk into Pack's spirit for they act very much alike.

Monday, September 27

Those of the first division who have no meat have concluded to move on a few miles to where there are more buffalo as they have mostly left here, but the second division will not move till they have dried their meat some. We went on three miles and then camped where there are plenty of buffalo over the river. Lisbon Lamb, Lewis Barney and John Norton volunteered to go and kill what meat they can for those who have none. They have got enough to last them through. It is said that our coming down here has given feelings but it is plain and evident that there are several men who will find fault and deal out wholesale censure whatever is done, and for my part I shall remember John Pack, Thomas Cloward, Norton Jacobs and Joseph Hancock for some time to come. Such little, selfish, unmanly conduct as has been manifested by them, is rarely exhibited except by the meanest classes of society. A man who will openly and boldly steal is honorable when compared with some of their underhanded conduct. During the day the brethren killed five cows and one bull which are considered sufficient to last the first division home.

Tuesday, September 28

We waited till after nine o'clock for the second division to come up but not being yet in sight we moved onward, traveled seventeen and a half miles, then camped on Sand Hill Creek about a mile from the river. We have seen more buffalo today than I ever saw in one day, supposed to be not less than 200,000. We had some trouble to make a road through them safely. We also saw two horses with the herd. Jackson Redding went to try and catch them but found them perfectly wild.

Wednesday, September 29

We got an early start this morning and traveled till four o'clock, distance twenty and a quarter miles. We camped near the river in high grass. The road has run close to the river all day except a few miles beyond Castle Creek and although the ground is perfectly dry, it is very rough, it having been cut up in wet weather. Watch and Wolfe Creeks had abundance of water in them, as much as when we went up. Castle River was about a foot deep. We have not seen many buffalo today but after we camped, John Norton shot two at one shot. L. Barney also killed a young cow. The weather is yet fine and very warm.

Thursday, September 30

This day we traveled only sixteen and a quarter miles, then camped a quarter of a mile east of Rattlesnake Creek on the banks of the river. In this creek, there is still a very heavy current of water running. It appears that some of the brethren left their fires burning this morning and the prairie has caught fire and is still burning furiously.
