John Whitmer, Book of John Whitmer ( 1838)

Chapter 3

After the above law or revelation was received, the elders went forth to proclaim repentance according to commandment, and there were members added to the Church. The Bishop Edward Partridge visited the Church in its several branches, there were some that would not receive the law. The time has not yet come that the law can be fully established, for the disciples live scattered abroad and are not organized, our numbers are small and the disciples untaught, consequently they understand not the things of the kingdom. There were some of the disciples who were flattered into the Church because they thought that all things were to be common, therefore they thought to glut themselves upon the labors of others.

About these days there was a woman by the name of Hubble who professed to be a prophetess of the Lord and professed to have many revelations, and knew the Book of Mormon was true, and that she should become a teacher in the Church of Christ. She appeared very sanctimonious and deceived some who were not able to detect her in her hypocrisy: others however had the spirit of discernment, and her follies and abominations were made manifest. The Lord gave revelation that the Saints might not be deceived which reads as follows: (See D&C 43).

After this commandment was received, the saints came to understanding on this subject, and unity and harmony prevailed throughout the Church of God: and the Saints began to learn wisdom, and treasure up knowledge which they learned from the word of God, and by experience as they advanced in the way of eternal life.

And Joseph Smith the Seer continued the translation of the holy scriptures. And the word of the Lord came to Joseph Smith, Jr.: saying: (See D&C 44.)

The translations continued: And the elders were sent for according to preceding revelation.

March 4, 1831. This was a day appointed for a general conference, from whence the elders were sent forth to preach the gospel and many were added of such as were determined to be saved.

About this time some were sick of various diseases, and were healed by the power which was in them through Jesus Christ. There was a tradition among some of the disciples, that those who obeyed the covenant in the last days, would never die: but by experience, they have learned to the contrary.

In those days the Lord blessed his disciples greatly, and he gave revelation after revelation, which contained doctrine, instructions, and prophecies: The word of the Lord came to the seer as follows: (See D&C 45.)

Some of the elders returned from their missions to gain some rest and instructions. They rehearsed some of the wickedness which they had seen among the generations: while they were proclaiming the gospel and warning the people, some would cry false prophets, false christ, etc. Some would receive the word gladly until their priests would cry delusion! delusion!! for this generation abounds with priests, which they have heaped up unto themselves, and every one is teaching for hire: consequently everyone is looking for his gain from his quarter. They will persecute the disciples, and cause their followers to do likewise. Out of the mixed multitude some obey the gospel of peace and bring forth fruit some an hundredfold.

The Lord is pouring forth some of his judgments, in token of the last days. An earthquake in China destroyed about one million of souls. But judgments in these days as in former days seem to harden men, until it is too late to repent.
