John Whitmer, Book of John Whitmer ( 1838)

Chapter 9

There was much trouble and unbelief among those who call themselves disciples of Christ: some apostatized, and became enemies to the cause of God, and persecuted the Saints.

Now after the elders that were commanded to go to Missouri had arrived, they held a conference upon that land according to revelation given in a preceding commandment. And thus they rejoiced together upon the land of Zion. And offered their sacraments and oblations unto the Lord, for his mercy and goodness which endureth for ever.

When they had held their sacrament meetings, and the laying of the foundation of the City, and cornerstone of the temple, the Lord gave commandments to return.

I here give a copy of the proceedings of the laying of the first logs of the city of Zion. As written by Oliver Cowdery:

"After many struggles and afflictions, being persecuted by our enemies, we received intelligence by letter from our brethren; who were at the east. That Brother Joseph and Sidney, and many other elders, were commanded to take their journey to this land, the land of Missouri. Which was promised unto us should be the land of the inheritance of the Saints, and the place of the gathering in these last days. Which intelligence cheered our hearts, and caused us to rejoice exceedingly. And by the special protection of the Lord, Brother Joseph Smith, Jr., and Sidney Rigdon, in company with eight other elders, with the Church from Colesville, New York, consisting of about sixty souls, arrived in the month of July and by revelation the place was made known where the temple shall stand, and the city should commence. And by commandment twelve of us assembled ourselves together, viz., Elder Joseph Smith, Jr., the Seer, Oliver Cowdery, Sidney Rigdon, Newel Knight, William W. Phelps, and Ezra Booth who denied the faith.

"On the 2nd day of August 1831, Brother Sidney Rigdon stood up and asked saying: Do you receive this land for the land of your inheritance with thankful hearts from the Lord? answer from all, we do. Do you pledge yourselves to keep the laws of God on this land, which you never have kept in your own lands? we do. Do you pledge yourselves to see that others of your brethren who shall come hither do keep the laws of God? we do. After prayer he arose and said, I now pronounce this land consecrated and dedicated to the Lord for a possession and inheritance for the Saints (in the name of Jesus Christ having authority from him.) And for all the faithful servants of the Lord to the remotest ages of time. Amen. "The day following, eight elders, viz., Joseph Smith, Jr., Oliver Cowdery, Sidney Rigdon, Peter Whitmer, Jr., Frederick G. Williams, Wm. W. Phelps, Martin Harris, and Joseph Coe, assembled together where the Temple is to be erected. Sidney Rigdon dedicated the ground where the city is to stand: and Joseph Smith, Jr., laid a stone at the northeast corner of the contemplated temple in the name of the Lord Jesus of Nazareth. After all present had rendered thanks to the great ruler of the universe, Sidney Rigdon pronounced this spot of ground wholly dedicated unto the Lord forever: Amen."

Some of the elders who traveled to the land of Missouri and preached by the way, tarried here in this land, among whom is the Bishop E. Partridge, Isaac Morley and John Corrill. Some were sick on their way to the land, but all were restored to health. Among those who were sick were John Murdock, Parley P. Pratt and Thomas B. Marsh—They all tarried until after they attended a conference in this land. They have since all gone to preach the gospel and call sinners to repentance.

There were some Churches built by the way as they journeyed to this land (Missouri) and the people were warned of the danger they were in, if they did not repent.

And now when the elders had returned to their homes in Ohio, the churches needed much exhortation in the absence of the elders many apostatized: but many have returned again to the fold from whence they had strayed—And many mighty miracles were wrought by the elders—one in particular which I shall here notice—which was wrought by elders Emer Harris, Joseph Brackenberry and Wheeler Baldwin. Is an infirmity in an old lady who had been helpless for the space of eight years confined to her bed. She did not belong to this church, but sent her request to the elders—who immediately attended to her call, and after their arrival prayed for her, and laid their hands on her, and she was immediately made whole and magnified and praised God, and is now enjoying perfect health.

And thus the churches again prospered and the work of the Lord spread.

Shortly after Joseph Smith, Jr., Oliver Cowdery and Sidney Rigdon returned Sidney wrote a description and an epistle according to commandment. And Oliver Cowdery and Newel K. Whitney—were commanded to go and visit the Churches speedily—as you will see by reading the revelation given August thirty at Kirtland—The following is a copy of the epistle written by Rigdon's own hand:

"I, Sidney, a servant of Jesus Christ by the will of God the Father and through the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ unto the Saints who are scattered abroad in the last days, may grace, mercy and peace, rest upon you from God the Father and from our Lord Jesus Christ, who is greatly to be feared, among his Saints and to be had in reverence of all them who obey him.

"Beloved Brethren,—

"It has pleased God even the Father to make known unto us in these last days, the good pleasure of his will concerning his Saints; and to make known unto us, the things which he has decreed upon the nations even wasting and destruction. Until they are utterly destroyed, and the earth made desolate by reason of the wickedness of its inhabitants according as he has made known in times past by the prophets and apostles, that such calamities should befall the inhabitants of the earth in the last days, unless they should repent and turn to the living God. And as the time is now near at hand, for the accomplishment of his purposes and the fulfillment of his prophecies, which have been spoken by all the holy prophets ever since the world began, he has sent and signified, unto us by the mouths of his holy prophets, that he has raised up in these last days—the speedy accomplishment of his purposes which shall be accomplished, on the heads of the rebellious of this generation—among whom he has been pleased in much mercy and goodness to send forth the fullness of his gospel in order that they might repent and turn to the living God, and be made partakers of his Holy Spirit. But by reason of their wickedness and rebellion against him, and wicked and unbelieving hearts the Lord withdrew his spirit from them, and gives them up to work all uncleanliness with greediness, and to bring swift destruction on themselves—and through their wickedness to hasten the day of calamity, that they may be left without excuse in the day of vengeance.

"But it has pleased our Heavenly Father to make known some better things, concerning his Saints, and those who serve him in fear and rejoice in meekness before him, even things which pertain to life everlasting, for godliness has the promise of the life, that now is, and that which is to come; Even so it has pleased our Heavenly Father to make provisions for his Saints in these last days of tribulation that they through faith and patience, and by continuing in well-doing may preserve their lives; and attain unto rest and endless felicity—but by no other means, than that of a strict observance of his commandments and teachings in all things as there is and can be no ruler or lawgiver in the kingdom of God save it be God our Savior himself—and before him he requires that all his saints and those who have named the name of Jesus, should be careful to depart from iniquity—and serve him with fear, rejoicing and trembling, least he be angry and they perish from their way.

"According to the prediction of the ancient prophets that the Lord would send his messengers in the last days, and gather his elect (which is the elect according to the covenant, viz., those who like Abraham are faithful to God and the word of his grace) from the four winds even from one end of the earth to the other as testified of by the Savior himself—so in these last days, he has commenced to gather together, into a place provided before of God and had in reserve in days of old being kept by the power and providence of God, for this purpose and which he now holds in his own hands, that they through faith, and patience may inherit the promises—a land which God by his own commandment has consecrated to himself where he has said that his laws shall be kept, and where his saints can dwell in safety, through their perseverance in well-doing, and their unfeigned repentance of all their sins, our Heavenly Father has provided this land himself because it was the one which was the best adapted for his children, where Jew and Gentile might dwell together: for God has the same respect to all those who call upon him in truth and righteousness whether they be Jew and Gentile; for there is no respect of person with him.

"This land being situated in the center of the continent on which we dwell with an exceeding fertile soil and ready cleared for the hand of the cultivator bespeaks the goodness of our God, in providing so goodly a heritage, and its climate suited for persons from every quarter of this continent, either East, West, North and South. Yea I think I may say, for all constitutions from any portion the world, and its productions nearly all varieties of both grain and vegetables which are common in this country, together with all means, clothing: in addition to this it abounds with fountains of pure water, the soil climate at surface are all adapted, to health indeed I may say that the whole properties of the country invite the Saints to come, and partake of their blessings, but what more need I say about a country which our Heavenly Father holds in his hands, for if it were unhealthy he could make it healthy and if barren he could make it fruitful. Such is the land which the Lord has provided for us, in the last days for an inheritance, and truly it is a goodly land, and none other as well suited for all the Saints as this and all those who have faith and confidence in God who has ever seen this land will bear the same testimony. In order that you may understand the will of God respecting this land and the way and means of possessing it, I can only refer you to commandments which the Lord has delivered by the mouth of his prophets which will be read, to you, by our brethren Oliver Cowdery and Newel K. Whitney whom the Lord has appointed, to visit the Churches and obtain means for purchasing this our inheritance that we may escape in the day of tribulation which is coming on the earth. I conclude by exhorting you to hear the voice of the Lord your God who is speaking to you in much mercy and who is sending forth, his word and his revelation in these last days, in order that we may escape impending vengeance; and the judgments which await this generation, and which will speedily overtake them—brethren pray for me, that I may be counted worthy to obtain an inheritance in the land of Zion and to overcome, the World through faith, and dwell with the sanctified, forever, and ever Amen.

Written at Kirtland, Ohio August 31, 1831.
