John Whitmer, Book of John Whitmer ( 1838)

Chapter 10

Immediately after the commandment was given and the epistle written, Oliver Cowdery and N. K. Whitney went from place to place and from Church to Church preaching and expounding the scriptures and commandments, and obtaining moneys of the disciples for the purpose of buying lands for the Saints according to commandments; and the disciples truly opened their hearts, and thus there have been lands purchased for the inheritance of the Saints.

Soon after this, the time of holding the General Conference drew near; and Joseph the Seer, and Sidney the Scribe, moved from Kirtland, Ohio, to Hiram, Portage County, and continued the translation of the New Testament.

On the twenty-fifth day of October, 1831, the elders assembled together at Irenus Burnett's in the township of Orange and county of Cuyahoga, Ohio. Twelve high priests; seventeen elders; five priests; and three teachers. At which conference were ordained one elder and fourteen priests, the names of whom you will find recorded in the conference minute book.

About this time it was in contemplation for Oliver Cowdery to go to Zion and carry with him the revelations and commandments; and I also received a revelation to go with him. We left Ohio on the 20th of November, 1831, and arrived in Zion, Missouri, January 5, 1832.

When we arrived at Zion we found the Saints in as good situation as we could reasonably expect.

January 23, 1832, held a conference in Zion, attended to the business of the Church, and licensed ten elders to go and preach the gospel.

In March, 1832, the enemies held a council in Independence, Jackson County, Missouri, how they might destroy the Saints; but did not succeed at this time. But continued their broils until they had expelled us from the city, as you will hereafter see.

There are at this time [1832] four hundred and two disciples living in this land Zion.

And it came to pass that Joseph the Seer and Sidney the Scribe, and N. K. Whitney and one Jesse Gauss came to Zion to comfort the Saints and settle some little difficulties, and regulate the Church and affairs concerning it. We had a pleasant visit with them and they returned again in peace. I will here mention one circumstance and the return of these brethren. While they were riding in a stagecoach, the horses ran away and upset the coach and broke N. K. Whitney's ankle bone. But notwithstanding, through the providence of God he soon got home; but is now somewhat infirm in consequence of aforesaid accident.

About these days the Lord gave a commandment for Joseph the Seer and N. K. Whitney, the bishop, at Kirtland, to go and cry repentance to the cities of Boston, New York, and Albany; and bear testimony of their utter abolishment if they did not repent and receive the gospel.

Zion is prospering at present and high priests are stationed to watch over the several branches.

December 1, 1832. There are now five hundred and thirty-eight individuals in this land belonging to the Church.

And it came to pass that in the fall of the year, 1832, the disciples at Ohio received the gift of tongues; and in June, 1833, we received the gift of tongues in Zion.

About these days we received the following epistle:

We, the undersigned citizens of Jackson County, believing that an important crisis is at hand, as regards our civil society, in consequence of a pretended religious sect of people that have settled and are still settling in our county, styling themselves Mormons, and intending to rid ourselves, peaceably if we can and forcibly if we must, and believing as we do, that the arm of civil law does not afford us a guarantee, or at least not a sufficient one against the evils which are now inflicted upon us, and seem to be increasing by the said religious sect, deem it expedient and of the highest importance to form ourselves into a company for the better and easier accomplishment of our purpose, which we deem almost superfluous to say is justified as well by the law of nature as by the law of self-preservation. It is more than two years since the first of these fanatics or knaves, (for one or the other they undoubtedly are), made their first appearance among us; and pretending as they did, and now do, to hold personal communion and converse face to face with the Most High God, to receive communications and revelations direct from heaven; to heal the sick by the laying on of hands; and in short, to perform all the wonder-working miracles wrought by the inspired apostles and prophets. We believed them deluded fanatics, or weak and designing knaves, and that they and their pretensions would soon pass away; but in this we were deceived.

The arts of a few designing leaders among them have thus far succeeded in holding them together as a society, and since the arrival of the first of them they have daily increased; and if they had been respectable citizens in society, and thus deluded, they would have been entitled to our pity rather than to our comtempt and hatred. But from their appearance; from their manners; and from their conduct, since their coming among us, we have every reason to believe that with but a very few exceptions, they were of the very dregs of that society from which they came; lazy, idle and vicious.

This we conceive is not idle assertion, but a fact susceptible of proof. For with these few exceptions above named, they brought into our county little or no property with them, and left less behind them, and we infer that those only yoked themselves to the Mormon car who had nothing earthly or heavenly to lose by the change; and we fear that if some of the leaders among them had paid the forfeit due to crime instead of being chosen ambassadors of the Most High, they would have been inmates of solitary cells. But their conduct here stamps their characters in their true color. More than a year it has been ascertained that they have been tampering with our slaves, and endeavoring to sow dissension and raise sedition among them. Of this their Mormon leaders were informed, and they said they would deal with any of their members who should again in like case offend. But how spurious are appearances. In a late number of the Star printed in Independence by the leaders of the sect, there is an article inviting free negroes and mulattoes from other states to become Mormons and move and settle among us. This exhibits them in still more odious colors. It manifests a desire on the part of their society to inflict on our society an injury that they know would be to us entirely unsupportable, and one of the surest means of driving us from the country; for it would require none of the supernatural gifts that they pretend to, to see that the introduction of such a cast among us would corrupt our blacks and instigate them to bloodshed.

They openly blaspheme the Most High God and cast comtempt on his holy religion by pretending to receive revelations direct from heaven; by pretending to speak in unknown tongues by direct inspiration, and by divine pretentions derogatory of God and religion, and to the utter subversion of human reason.

They declare openly that God has given them this county of land; and that sooner or later they must and will have possession of our lands for an inheritance; and in fine, they have conducted themselves on many other occasions in such a manner that we believe it a duty we owe ourselves, to our wives and children, to the cause of public morals, to remove them from among us as we are not prepared to give up our possessions to them, or to receive into the bosom of our families as fit companions for our wives and daughters the degraded and corrupted free negroes and mulattoes that are now invited to settle among us.

Under such a state of things even our beautiful country would cease to be a desirable residence, and our situation intolerable.

We therefore agree that after timely warning, and upon receiving an adequate compensation for what little property they cannot take with them, they refuse to leave us in peace as they found us, we agree to use such means as will be sufficient to remove them; and to that end we pledge to each other our bodily powers, our lives, fortunes, and sacred honor.

We will meet at the court-house in the town of Independence on Saturday next, 20th inst., to consult of ulterior movements.

July 15, 1833

A committee was appointed at the foregoing meeting, and waited on us, Partridge, Corrill, Phelps, etc. The committee consisted of Lewis Franklin, Mr. Campbell, Judge Lucas, Judge Fristoe, Russel Hicks, Mr. Simpson, two of the Mr. Wilsons, Captain Tipits, and Mr. Cummings.

To answer them this question, "Will you leave this county or not?" Allowing us only fifteen minutes to answer the question. We did not make any reply at that time.

The committee further required of us to shut up our printing-office, store, mechanical shops, etc., immediately, and leave the county.

Those who waited on the committee were A. S. Gilbert, Edward Partridge, Isaac Morley, John Corrill, W. W. Phelps, and John Whitmer.

When they found that we were unwilling to comply with their requests they returned to the court-house and voted to raze the printing to the ground, which they immediately did; and at the same time took Edward Partridge and Charles Allen and tarred and feathered them, threatening to kill us if we did not leave the county immediately.

They were also determined to demolish the store. A. S. Gilbert prevailed on them to let it stand until Tuesday next, and have time to pack his goods himself.

Tuesday arrived and death and destruction stared us in the face. The whole county turned out and surrounded us; came to W. W. Phelps' and my house and took us upon the public square, as also Partridge, Corrill, Morley, and Gilbert, and were determined to massacre us unless we agreed to leave the county immediately. Finally we agreed to leave upon the following condition:

July 23, 1833. It is understood that the undersigned members of the said society do give their solemn pledge each for himself as follows: That Oliver Cowdery, W.W. Phelps, William E. McLellin, Edward Partridge, Lyman Wight, Simeon Carter, Peter and John Whitmer, and Harvey Whitlock shall remove with their families out of this county on or before the first day of January next; and that they as well as the two hereinafter named, use all their influence to induce all the brethren now here to move as soon as possible, one body say by the first of January next, and all by the first day of April next, and to advise and try all means in their power, to stop any more of their sect from moving to this county. As to those now on the road, and who have notice of this agreement, they will use their influence to prevent their settling permanently in the county, but that they shall only make arrangements for temporary shelter till a new location is fixed on by the society. John Corrill and A. S. Gilbert are allowed to remain as general agents to wind up the business of the society so long as necessity shall require; and said Gilbert may sell out his goods now on hand,but is to make no new importation. The Star is not again to be published nor a press set up by the society in this county. If the said E. Partridge and W. W. Phelps move their families by the first of January as aforesaid, that they themselves will be allowed to go and come in order to transact and wind up their business. The committee pledge themselves to use all their influence to prevent any violence being used so long as a compliance with the foregoing terms is observed by the parties concerned.

Signed, Samuel C. Owens, Llonidas Oldham, G. W.Simpson, W. L. Irvin, John Harris, Henry Childs, Harry H. Younger, Hugh L. Brazeale, N. K. Olmstead, William Bowers, Z. Waller, Harman Gregg, Aaron Overton, Samuel Weston.

The battle was fought on the evening of the fourth day of November, and only one of the brethren was killed, and two of the mob. David Whitmer headed the disciples.

INDEPENDENCE, October 30, 1833.

About these days we employed counselors to assist in prosecuting the law, which we had been advised by J. Smith, Junior, the Seer, to do. They employed Doniphan, Atchison, Rees, and Wood, of Liberty, Clay County, Missouri, who engaged to carry on our suits for $1,000, which was agreed to be paid by E. Partridge and W. W. Phelps, which came from the Church.

The Church was driven by the mob of Jackson County on the 4th of November, 1833; and on the night of the 13th of the same month the stars fell.
