John Whitmer, Book of John Whitmer ( 1838)

Chapter 11

The situation of our brethren after leaving their homes in Jackson in the most distressing circumstances, in the cold month of November, found it difficult to preserve life in many instances. Some fled with but few clothes, leaving their beds and bedding; others taking with them what they could carry and running for their lives; women losing some of their children while fleeing for their lives; and thus you may judge how the poor Saints have suffered, after having given only a few hints of the distress.

You will find in one of the numbers of the Star, printed at Kirtland, Ohio, a piece headed "The Mormons," which will serve to illustrate, dated February, 1834.

I would here remark that a full account of the proceedings of the Jackson mob is published in the Star at Kirtland, commencing at No. 15 to the end of the volume.

LIBERTY, Clay County, February 19, 1834.

To the Judge, John F. Ryland, of the Fifth Circuit of Missouri

Sir: Learning that a court of inquiry is to be held in Jackson County at the next regular term of the Circuit Court for the county; or that some kind of legal proceedings is to commence for the purpose of obtaining the facts, as far as can be, to the criminal transactions and riotous proceedings, or bringing to punishment the guilty in that county.

We therefore pray your honor to avail yourself of every means in your power to execute the law and make it honorable, and believing that the testimony of some of the members of our Church will be important, and deeming it unsafe to risk our persons in that county without a guard, we request that the order from the executive already transmitted may be put in force.

Respectfully,

EDWARD PARTRIDGE. W. W. PHELPS. JOHN WHITMER. A. S. GILBERT. JOHN CORRILL.

Clay County, April 9, 1834.

Dear Sir: Notwithstanding you may have become tired of receiving communications from us, yet we beg leave of your Excellency to pardon us of this as we have this week enclosed a petition to the President of the United States, (A. Jackson,) setting forth our distressed condition, together with your excellency's views of it, as well as the limited powers with which you are clothed to afford that protection which we need to enjoy our rights and lands in Jackson County. A few lines from the governor of this state, in connection with our humble entreaties for our possessions and privileges, we think would be of considerable consequence towards bringing about the desired object, and would be gratefully acknowledged by us, and our society, and we may add, by all honorable men.

We therefore, as humble petitioners, ask the favor of your excellency to write to the President (A. Jackson) of the United States of America, that he may assist us, or our society in obtaining our rights in Jackson County, and help protect us when there till we are safe; and in duty bound we will pray.

W. W.PHELPS. E. PARTRIDGE. J. WHITMER. JOHN CORRILL. A. S. GILBERT.

DANIEL DUNKLIN, Governor of Missouri.

LIBERTY, CLAY COUNTY, MISSOURI, April 10, 1834.

To the President of the United States of America:

We, the undersigned, your humble petitioners, citizens of the United States of America, being members of the Church of Christ reproachfully called Mormons, beg leave to refer the President to our former petition, dated October last, and also to lay before him the accompanying handbill, dated December 12, 1833, with assurance that the said handbill exhibits but a faint sketch of the suffering of your petitioners and their brethren up to the period of its publication.

The said handbill shows that at the time of dispersion part of our families fled into the new and unsettled county of Van Buren. Being unable to procure provisions in that county through the winter, many of them were compelled to return to their homes in Jackson County or perish with hunger. But they had no sooner set foot upon that soil, which a few months before we had purchased of the United States, than they were again met by the citizens of Jackson County and a renewal of savage barbarity inflicted upon them by beating with clubs and sticks, presenting knives and firearms, and threatening with death if they did not immediately flee from the county. The inhuman assaults upon these families were repeated two or three times through the last winter, till they were compelled at last to leave their possessions in Jackson County and flee with their mangled bodies into this county (Clay), here to mingle their tears and unite their supplications with hundreds of their brethren to our Heavenly Father and the chief ruler of our nation.

Between one and two thousand of the people called Mormons, have been driven by the force of arms from the county of Jackson, in this state, since the first of November last, being compelled to leave their highly cultivated fields, the greater part of which had been bought of the United States, and of all this of our belief in direct revelation from God to the children of men, according to the Holy Scriptures. We know that such illegal violence has not been inflicted upon any sect or community of people by the citizens of the United States since the Declaration of Independence.

That this is a religious persecution is notorious throughout our country. When accomplices in these unparalleled outrages, engaged in the destruction of the printing-office, dwelling-house, etc.; yet the records of the judicial tribunals of that county are not stained by a crime by our people. Our numbers being greatly inferior to the enemy, we were unable to stand in self-defense. And our lives at this day are continually threatened by that infuriated people, so that our personal safety forbids one of our members going into that county on business. We beg leave to state that no impartial investigation into this criminal matter can be made, because the offenders must be tried in the county in which the offense was committed, and the inhabitants of the county, both magistrates and people, being combined, with the exception of a few, justice cannot be expected. At this day your petitioners do not know of a solitary family belonging to our Church but what have been violently expelled from Jackson County by the inhabitants thereof. Your petitioners have not gone into detail with an account of their individual sufferings, from death and bruised bodies and the universal distress which prevails at this day in a greater or less degree, throughout our whole body, not only because those sacred rights are guaranteed to every religious sect have been publicly invaded in open hostility to the spirit and genius of our free government, but such of their houses as have not been burned their beds and most of their products of the labor of their hands for the last year have been wrested from them by a band of outlaws, congregated in Jackson County, on the western boundaries of the state of Missouri, within about thirty miles of the United States military post, at Fort Leavenworth on the Missouri River. Your petitioners say that they do not enter into a minute detail of their sufferings in this petition least they should weary the patience of their venerable chief, whose arduous duties they know are great, and daily accumulating.

We only hope to show to him that this is an unprecedented emergency in the history of our country—that the magistracy thereof is set at defiance, and justice checked in the open violation of its laws; and that we your petitioners, who are almost wholly native born citizens of these United States of America, of whom they purchased their land in Jackson County, Missouri, with intent to cultivate the same, as peaceable citizens, are now forced from them, and dwelling in the counties of Clay, Ray, and Lafayette, in the state of Missouri, without permanent homes, and suffering all the privations which must necessarily result from such inhuman treatment. Under these sufferings your petitioners petitioned the Governor of this state in December last, in answer to which they received the following letter:

"City of Jefferson, February 4, 1834.

Your communication of the 6th of December was regularly received and duly considered; and had I not expected to receive the evidence brought out on the inquiry ordered into the military conduct of Colonel Pitcher in a short time after I received your petition I should have replied long since.

Last evening I was informed that the further inquiry of the court was postponed until the 20th inst. Then before I can have anything from this court the court of civil jurisdiction will hold its session in Jackson County, consequently cannot receive anything from one preparatory to arragement from the other.

I am very sensible indeed of the injury your people complain of, and should consider myself very remiss in the discharge of my duties even were I not to do everything in my power consistent with the legal exercise of them, to afford your society redress to which they seem entitled. One of your requests needs no evidence to support the right to have it granted, it is that your people be put in possession of their homes from which they have been expelled. But what may be the duties of the executive after that, will depend upon contingencies. If upon inquiry it is found your people were wrongfully dispossessed of their arms of Colonel Pitcher, then an order will be issued to have them returned; and should your men organize according to law, which they have a right to do, (indeed it is their duty to do so unless exempted by religious scruples,) and apply for public arms, the executive could not distinguish between their rights to have them and the right of any other description of people similarly situated.

As the request for keeping up a military force to protect your people and prevent the commission of crimes, were I to comply it would transcend the powers with which the executive of this state is clothed.

The Federal Constitution has given to Congress the power to provide for calling forth the militia to execute the laws of the Union, suppress insurrections or repel invasions; and for these purposes the President of the United States is authorized to make the call upon the executive of the respective states. And the laws of the state empower 'the commander-in-chief in case of actual or threatened invasion, insurrection or war, or public danger, or other emergency, to call forth into actual service such portions of the militia as he may deem expedient.' These together with the general provisions in our state constitution that 'The Governor shall take care that the laws are faithfully executed,' and call upon his branch of executive power. None of these as I consider embrace this part of your request.

The 'Words, or other emergencies,' in our militia law, seem quite broad, but the emergency to come within the object of that provision should be of a public nature. Your case is certainly a very emergent one, and the consequences as important to your society as if the war had been waged against the whole state; yet the public has no other interest in it than that the laws be faithfully executed. This far, I presume the whole community feel a deep interest, for that which is the case of the Mormons of today, may be the case of the Catholics tomorrow, and after them any other sect that may become obnoxious to a majority of the people of any section of the state. So far as a faithful execution of the laws are concerned, the executive is disposed to do everything consistent with the means furnished him by the legislature, and I think I may safely say the same of the judiciary.

As now advised I am of opinion that a military guard will be necessary to protect the state witnesses and officers of the court, and to assist in the execution of its orders while sitting in Jackson County. By this mail I write to Mr. Reese enclosing him an order on the captain of the 'Liberty Blues,' requiring the captain to comply with the requisition of the Circuit Attorney in protecting the court and officers, and executing their precepts and orders, during the process of the trials. Under the protection of this guard, your people can if they think proper, return to their homes in Jackson County, and be protected in them during the progress of the trials in question, by which time facts will be developed upon which I can act more definitely. The attorney-general will be required to assist the circuit attorney if they latter deems it necessary.

On the subject of civil injuries I must refer you to the courts; such questions rest with them exclusively. The laws are sufficient to afford a remedy for every injury of this kind; and whenever you make out a case entitling you to damages there can be no doubt entertained of their ample reward.

Justice is sometimes slow in its progress, but it is not less sure on this account.

(Signed) Very Respectfully Your Obedient Servant,

DANIEL DUNKLIN."

"TO MESSRS. W. W. PHELPS, ISAAC MORLEY, JOHN WHITMER, EDWARD PARTRIDGE, JOHN CORRILL, and A. S. GILBERT."

By the foregoing letter from the Governor, the President will perceive a disposition manifested by him to enforce the laws as far as means have been furnished by the legislature of this state. But the powers vested in the executive of this state seem to be inadequate for relieving the distresses of your petitioners in this present emergency. He is willing to send a guard to conduct our families back to their possessions, but it not authorized to direct a military force to be staioned any length of time for the protection of your petitioners. This step would be laying (the foundation for) a more fatal tragedy than the first, as our numbers at present are too small to contend single-handed with the mob of said county; and as the Federal Constitution has given to Congress the power to provide for calling forth the militia to execute the laws of the Union, suppress insurrections, or repel invasions; "And for these purposes the President of the United States is authorized to make the call upon the executives of the respective states." Therefore we your petitioners in behalf of our society, which is so scattered and suffering, most humbly pray that we may be restored to our lands, homes, and property in Jackson County, and protected in them by an armed force till peace can be restored, and as in duty bound we will ever pray.

Signed by 51 leading members of the said Church.

LIBERTY, CLAY COUNTY, MISSOURI, April 10, 1834.

To the President of the United States of America:

We, the undersigned, whose names are subscribed to the accompanying petition, some of the leading members of The Church of Christ, beg leave to refer the President to the handbill and petition herewith. We are not insensible of the multiplicity of business and numerous petitions, by which care and perplexity of our chief ruler is daily increased; and it is with diffidence that we venture to lay before the executive at this emergent period these two documents, wherein is briefly portrayed, the most unparalleled persecution and flagrant outrage of law that has disgraced our country since the Declaration of Independence. But knowing the independent fortitude and vigorous energy for preserving the rights of the citizens of this republic which has hitherto marked course of our chief magistrate, we are encouraged to hope, that this communication will not pass unnoticed; but that the President will consider our locations on the extreme frontier of the United States, exposed to many ignorant and lawless ruffians, who are already congregated and determined to nullify all law that will procure to your petitioners the privilege of a peaceable possession of their lands in Jackson County.

We again repeat, that our society is wandering in adjoining counties at this day, bereft of their houses and lands, and threatened with death by the aforesaid outlaws of Jackson County. And lest the President should be deceived in regard to our true situation, by the misrepresentation of certain individuals, who are disposed to cover the gross outrages of the mob, from religious, political, and speculative motives, we beg leave to refer him to the Governor of Missouri, at the same time informing him that the number of men composing the mob of Jackson County may be estimated at from three to five hundred, most of them prepared with firearms.

After noting the statements here made if it should be the disposition of the President to grant aid, we must humbly entreat that early relief may be extended to suffering families, who are now expelled from their possessions by firearms. Our lands in Jackson County are about thirty miles distant from Fort Leavenworth, on the Missouri River.

With due respect we are, Sir, Your Obedient Servants,

A. S. Gilbert. W. W. Phelps. Edward Partridge. John Whitmer. John Corrill. P.S.—In February last a number of our people were marched under a guard furnished by the governor of the state into Jackson County for the purpose of prosecuting the mob criminally; but the attorney-general of the state, and the district attorney, knowing the force and power of the mob, advised us to relinquish all hopes of criminal prosecution to effect anything against the band of outlaws, and we returned under guard without the least prospect of our obtaining our rights and possessions in Jackson County with any other means than a few companies of the United States regular troops to guard and assist us until we are safely settled.

Signed by the same as the foregoing.

LIBERTY, Clay County, Missouri, April 24, 1834.

Dear Sir: In your last communication of the 9th inst., we omitted to make inquiry concerning the evidence brought out before the court of inquiry in the case of Colonel Pitcher. The court met pursuant to adjournment on 20th of February last and for some reason unknown to us we have not been able to ascertain information concerning the opinion or decision of the court. We had hoped that the testimony would have been transmitted to your Excellency before this, that an order might be issued for the return of our arms, of which we have been wrongfully dispossessed, as we believe will clearly appear to the Commander-in- Chief when the evidence is laid before him. As suggested in your communication of February 4, we had concluded to organize according to law and apply for public arms but we feared that such a step which must be attended with public ceremonies, might produce some excitement. We have thus far delayed any movement of that nature, hoping to regain our arms from Jackson County that we might independently equip ourselves and be prepared to assist in the maintenance of our constitutional rights and liberties as guaranteed to us by our country, and also to defend our persons and property from a lawless mob, when it shall please the executive, at some future day, to put us in possession of our homes, from which we have been most wickedly expelled.

We are happy to make an expression of thanks for the willingness manifested by the executive to enforce the laws as far as he can constitutionally, "with the means furnished him by the Legislature;" and we are firmly persuaded that a future day will verify to him, that whatever aid we receive from the executive, has not been lavished upon a band of traitors, but upon a people whose respect and veneration for the laws of our country, and its pure republican principles are as great as that of any other society in the United States.

As our Jackson foes and their correspondents are busy in circulating slanderous and wicked reports concerning our people, their views, etc., we have deemed it expedient to inform your Excellency that we have received communications from our (friends) at the East informing us that a number of brethren, perhaps two or three hundred, would come to Jackson County in the course of the ensuing season; and we are satisfied that when the Jackson mob get the intelligence that a large number of our people are about to remove into that county, they will raise a great hue and cry, and circulate many bugbears through the medium of their favorite press. But we think your Excellency is well aware that our object is purely to defend ourselves and possessions against another unparalleled attack from that mob, inasmuch as the executive of this state cannot keep a military force "to protect our people in that county without transcending his powers." We want therefore the privilege of defending ourselves, and the Constitution of our country while God is willing we should have a being on his footstool.

We do not know at what (time) our friends from the East will arrive; but expect more certain intelligence in a few weeks. Whenever they do arrive it would be the wish of our people in this county, to return to our homes in company with our friends, under guard, and when once more in legal possession of our homes in Jackson County we will endeavor to take care of them without further wearying the patience of our worthy chief magistrate. We will write hereafter or send an express—during the intermediate time we would be glad to hear of the prospect of securing our arms.

With due respect, we are Sir, Your Obedient Servants,

A. S. GILBERT. W. W. PHELPS. E. PARTRIDGE. JOHN CORRILL. JOHN WHITMER.
