John Whitmer, Book of John Whitmer ( 1838)

Chapter 12

I will here remark that the Saints are and were preparing to go back to Jackson County as soon as the way should open. We had hard struggling to obtain a living, as may well be understood, being driven, having no money or means to subsist upon, and being among strangers in a strange place; being despised, mocked at, and laughed to scorn by some, and pitied by others; thus we lived from November, 1833, till May 1834, and but little prospect yet to return to our homes in Jackson County in safety—the mob rages and the people's hearts are hardened, and the Saints are few in number, and poor, afflicted, cast out, and smitten by their enemies.

I will further state, because of the scattered situation and the many perplexities, I am not in possession of all the letters and information that I wish I was, and some that are in my possession are not arranged according to date because of the situation I am in, being poor, and write as I can obtain intelligence, and find time between sun and sun to write.

CITY OF JEFFERSON, April 20, 1834.

To Messrs. Phelps, Partridege, Corrill, Whitmer, and Gilbert:

Gentlemen: Yours of the ninth inst. was received yesterday, in which you request me, as executive of this state, to join you in an appeal to the President of the United States for protection in the enjoyment of your rights in Jackson County. It will readily occur to you no doubt, the possibility of having asked of the President in a way that he no more than the executive of this state could render. If you have petitioned for that which I would be of opinion he has power to grant I should have no objection to join in urging it upon him; but I could no more ask the President, however willing I am to see your society restored to and protected in their rights, to do that which I think he has no power to do, than I would do such an act myself. If you will send me a copy of your petition to the President, I will judge of his right to grant it; and if of the opinion he possesses the power I will write in favor of its exercise.

I am now in correspondence with the Federal Government, on the subject of deposits of munitions of war, on our Northern and Western boundaries, and have no doubt but shall succeed in procuring one, which (will) be located if left to me, (and the Secretary of War seems to be willing to be governed by the opinion of the Executive of the state,) somewhere near the state line either in Jackson or Clay County.

The establishment will be an (arsenal), and will probably be under the command of a lieutenant of the army. This will afford you the best means of military protection the nature of your case will admit.

Although I can see no direct impropriety in making the subject of this paragraph public, yet I should prefer it not to be so considered, for the present, as the erection of an arsenal is only in expectancy.

Permit me to suggest to you, that as you have now greatly the advantage over your enemies, in public estimation, that there is a great propriety in retaining that advantage, which you can easily do by keeping your adversaries in the wrong. The law both civil and military seems to be deficient in affording your society proper protection; nevertheless public sentiment is a powerful corrective of error, and you should make it your policy to continue to deserve it.

With much respect and great regard I am Your Obedient Servant,

DANIEL DUNKLIN.

CITY OF JEFFERSON, May 2, 1834.

TO MESSRS. W. W. PHELPS AND OTHERS.

Gentlemen: Yours of the 24th ult. is before me; in reply to which can inform you that becoming impatient at delay of the court of enquiry in making their report in the case of Lieutenant Colonel Pitcher, on the 11th ult. I wrote to General Thompson for the reason of such delay. Last night I received his reply, and with it the report of the court of enquiry, from the tenor of which I find no difficulty in deciding that the arms your people were required to surrender on the fifth of November should be returned; and have issued an order to Colonel Lucas to deliver them to you or to your order, which order is here enclosed.

Respectfully Your Obedient Servant,

(Signed) DANIEL DUNKLIN.

CITY OF JEFFERSON, May 2, 1834.

TO S. D. LUCAS, Colonel 33 Regiment.

Sir: The court ordered to enquire into the conduct of Lieutenant Colonel Pitcher in the movement he made on the 5th November last, report it as their unanimous opinion that there was no insurrection on that day; and that Lieutenant Colonel Pitcher was not authorized to call out his troops on the 5th November, 1833. It was unnecessary to require the Mormons to give up their arms. Therefore you will deliver to W. W. Phelps, Edward Partridge, John Corrill, John Whitmer and A. S. Gilbert or their order, the fifty-two guns and one pistol reported by Lieutenant Colonel Pitcher to you on the 5th December last, as having been received by him from the Mormons on the 5th of the preceding October.

Respectfully,

DANIEL DUNKLIN, Commander in Chief.

Liberty County, May 7, 1834.

Dear Sir: Your favor of the 20th ult. came to hand the first inst. which gives us a gleam of hope that the time will come when we may experience a partial mitigation of our sufferings. The salutary advice in the conclusion of your letter is received with great deference.

Since our last of the 24th ult. the mob of Jackson County have burned our dwellings. As near as we can ascertain between 100 and 150 were consumed by fire in about one week. Our arms were also taken from the depository (the jail) about ten days since, and distributed among the mob. Great efforts are now making by the mob to stir up the citizens of this county, and Lafayette to commit similar outrages against us; but we think they will fail in accomplishing their wicked designs in this county.

We here annex a copy of the petition to the president.

With Great Respect, Your Obedient Servants,

A. S. GILBERT. W. W. PHELPS.

COLONEL S. D. LUCAS. LIBERTY, May 15, 1834.

Sir: We have this day received a communication from the governor of this state covering the order herewith, and we hasten to forward the said order to you by the bearer Mr. Richardson, who is instructed to receive your reply.

We would further remark that under existing circumstances we hope to receive our arms on this side the river, and we would name a place near one of the ferries for your convenience. As the arms are few in number, we request that they may be delivered as soon as possible.

Respectfully yours,

A. S. GILBERT, W. W. PHELPS, J. CORRILL, E. PARTRIDGE, JOHN WHITMER.
