John Whitmer, Book of John Whitmer ( 1838)

Chapter 14

Joseph the Seer began to set in order the Church in this country. Commenced to organize a high council according to the pattern received in Kirtland, Ohio. After which Joseph Smith, Jr., F. G. Williams and others returned to Kirtland, and the Saints remained in their places of abode to wait the due time of the Lord to be redeemed from wicked mobbers.

We, the inhabitants of Zion, wrote an appeal signed by W. W. Phelps, David Whitmer, John Whitmer, E. Partridge, John Corrill, I. Morley, P. P. Pratt, Lyman Wight, Newel Knight, T. B. Marsh, Simeon Carter, and Calvin Beebe, Missouri, July, 1834, and published at Kirtland in an extra Star, August 1834.ill

The above appeal and the following petition was accompanied. The petition reads as follows:

TO HIS EXCELLENCY, DANIEL DUNKLIN, governor of the state of Missouri:

The undersigned respectfully show that a large number of the citizens of the United States, inhabitants of the state of Missouri, professing to be The Church of Latter Day Saints, wrongfully called Mormons, having been illegally and cruelly driven from their lands and homes in Jackson County, Missouri, by a lawless mob (as your Excellency has already been informed) should by some ample means be restored to their possessions and rights; but as the said mob of Jackson County has considerably spread itself, and organized into an independent branch of government, by appointing a "Commander-in-Chief," and by preparing to resist the said Church even to blood-shed and that, too, with not only the common weapons used for self-defense and military discipline, but with cannon. Therefore your petitioners humbly ask your Excellency while the said Church is preparing to return, to petition the President of the United States for a guard of troops to be stationed in Jackson County sufficient to protect this unfortunate people in their rights as well as imposing enough to quell the Jackson County mob, for the honor of the state of Missouri.

In asking this favor of the governor while such great mob as that of July last in the city of New York, and others in other states, have been promptly put down by military or other exertion, your petitioners feel confident, that he will use all honorable means to restore this suffering body of citizens to all their constitutional rights and enjoyments, for the good of society and the safety of freemen, at the same sparing no pains to bring mobbers to justice, and crush mobbing in a country which professes to be governed by wholesome laws; and your petitioners will ever pray.

While all the foregoing letters and petitions were circulating, the Saints were humbling themselves before the Lord. But some were making preparation to leave the land, others were doubting the truth of the Book of Mormon, others denying the faith, others growing in grace and in the knowledge of the truth.

April 28, 1835

This day myself and family in company with W. W. Phelps and his son Waterman, started for Kirtland, Ohio, in obedience to the direction of Joseph the Seer.

Pretty much all the first elders had left for Kirtland previous to our going; some went on a tour preaching in their several courses.

While we were in trouble in Missouri the Saints in Kirtland, Ohio, had trouble also; but God had decreed to keep a strong-hold in Kirtland for five years, therefore, the wicked did not prevail, and the house of the Lord was building and the Saints gathering and preparing for the great day when the Lord should condescend to endow his first elders according to his promises, that his work might roll forth and be established according to his decree in the last days, that he might gather together his elect from the four quarters of the earth and be prepared when the veil of the covering of all flesh shall be taken off or away, and Zion become the joy of all the earth.

Arrived at Kirtland the 17th of May. Found the brethren in good health and spirits and prospering. The House of the Lord was raised and the stone-work thereof completed; the rafters were just put up and the first story of the steeple raised.
