John Whitmer, Book of John Whitmer ( 1838)

Chapter 17

And it came to pass on the twenty-fourth day of September, 1835, on which day we met in counsel at the house of J. Smith, Jr., the Seer, where we according to a previous commandment given, appointed David Whitmer, captain of the Lord's Host, and Presidents F. G. Williams and Sidney Rigdon his assistants; and President W. W. Phelps, myself and John Corrill, as an assistant quorum, and Joseph Smith, Jr., the Seer, to stand at the head and be assisted by Hyrum Smith and Oliver Cowdery. This much for the war department, by revelation.

October 18, 1835, Sabbath.

This day assembled in the House of the Lord as usual, and the Spirit of the Lord descended upon J. Smith, Jr., the Seer, and he prophesied saying, "The Lord has showed to me this day by the spirit of revelation that the distress and sickness that has heretofore prevailed among the children of Zion will be mitigated from this time forth.

And it came to pass that some of the first elders or presidents of the Church received a prophetic blessing by revelation through the means prepared in the last days to receive the word of the Lord, J. Smith, Jr. Therefore Joseph dictated blessings for himself, Hyrum Smith, Sidney Rigdon, F. G. Williams, Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, W. W. Phelps, and myself, as you will find recorded in the Patriarchal blessing book in Kirtland, Ohio, Book A, pages—-.

On the sixth day of January, 1836, the elders from Zion who were at Kirtland, Ohio, met to fill vacancies which happened in the high council in Zion in consequence of filling other stations.

Therefore appointed: E. H. Graves instead of P. P. Pratt; Jesse Hitchcock instead of W. E. McLellin; G. M. Hinkle instead of Orson Pratt; Elias Higbee instead of T. B. Marsh.

The Hebrew School commenced January 4, 1836, taught by Seixas.

The first elders attended this school.

Now the time drew near when the Lord would endow his servants, and before he could do this we must perform all the ordinances that are instituted in his house. There was one ordinance, viz, the washing of feet, that we had not yet observed but did perform it according to revelation, which belongs only to ordained members and not the whole Church.

For particulars read the private history of Joseph the Seer.

After this washing of feet came the anointing with holy oil, which was performed by Joseph Smith Senior among the presidents, then the presidents of each quorum proceed to anoint the members thereof, in their proper time and place.

On the 11th of March, 1836, held a council in which Edward Partridge, I. Morley, John Corrill, and W. W. Phelps were appointed wise men and were sent to Missouri with some money to purchase land for the Saints, to seek a place for them.
