John Whitmer, Book of John Whitmer ( 1838)

Chapter 19

And it came to pass that E. Partridge, Isaac Morley, John Corrill, and W. W. Phelps left Kirtland to fill their mission in Missouri, where they had left their families.

They arrived in Missouri in safety. But as soon as these men arrived at home the devil roared in this land and stirred the old Jackson County mob up to great anger, and the people in Clay County. The aforementioned brethren went in search of a place where the Church could settle in peace and found a country north of Ray County that would answer the purpose, providing the few scattered inhabitants that resided there were willing for the brethren to move there and enjoy their religion and constitutional rights, as well as the counties round about.

This move gave great uneasiness and the people of Clay County convened and some were determined to drive the brethren from the state; others were opposed, and finally we succeeded to get the consent of the people of Clay County and a majority of Ray to move into this place now Caldwell County.

Therefore commenced settling this place, Far West, in the summer of 1836; in August the first building was erected.

Some difficulties arose in the land of Kirtland, and dissensions took place which is to be feared will end in the misery of some precious souls.

Some difficulties have taken place in this county, Caldwell, but are now all settled to the satisfaction of all parties as I believe.

T. B. Marsh and D. W. Patton have left for Kirtland, Ohio, to fill a mission in their apostolic capacity.

In the fall of 1838 (i.e., 1837) Joseph Smith, Jr., Sidney Rigdon came to Zion, on a visit to prepare a place for themselves and families.

The situation of the Church both here and in Kirtland is in an unpleasant situation in consequence of the reorganization of its authorities, which was not satisfactory to all concerned. And has terminated in the expulsion of some members, as also some temporal movements, have not proved satisfactory to all parties has also terminated in the expulsion of many members (lines have been drawn across the following words:) among whom is W. W. Phelps and myself. Therefore, I close the history of the Church of Latter-day Saints, hoping that I may be forgiven of my faults, and my sins be blotted out and in the last day be saved in the Kingdom of God, notwithstanding my private situation, which I hope will soon be bettered and I find favor in the eyes of God, all men and his Saints. Farewell. March 1838.
