John Whitmer, Book of John Whitmer ( 1838)

Chapter 20

In the fall of 1836, Joseph Smith, Jr., S. Rigdon and others of the leaders of the Church at Kirtland, Ohio, established a bank for the purpose of speculation, and the whole Church partook of the same spirit; they were lifted up in pride, and lusted after the forbidden things of God, such as covetousness, and in secret combinations, spiritual-wife doctrine, that is plurality of wives, and Gadianton bands, in which they were bound with oaths, etc., that brought division and mistrust among those who were pure in heart, and desired the upbuilding of the Kingdom of God.

Joseph Smith, Jr., S. Rigdon, and Hyrum Smith moved their families to this place, Far West, in the spring of 1838. As soon as they came here, they began to enforce their new organized plan, which caused dissensions and difficulties, threatenings and even murders. Smith called a council of the leaders together, in which council he stated that any person who said a word against the heads of the Church, should be driven over these prairies as a chased deer by a pack of hounds, having an illusion to the Gideonites, as they were termed, to justify themselves in their wicked designs. Thus on the 19th of June, 1838, they preached a sermon called the salt sermon, in which these Gideonites understood that they should drive the dissenters, as they termed those who believed not in their secret bands, in fornication, adultery or midnight machinations. Therefore they commenced suing at the law of the land by attachment for debts which they knew were paid, and justly paid, according to the laws of God and the land, and thus foreswore themselves in these things. Joseph Smith, Jr., S. Rigdon and Hyrum Smith were the instigators, and George W. Robinson, the prosecutor against David Whitmer, Lyman E. Johnson, Oliver Cowdery, F. G. Williams, W. W. Phelps and myself. They had threatened us, to kill us, if we did not make restitutions to them, by upholding them in their wicked purposes and designs. After they had instituted the foregoing suits Oliver Cowdery, D. Whitmer, L. E. Johnson and myself went to Clay County to obtain legal council, to prepare to overthrow these attachments which they had caused to be issued against us, which we were abundantly able to do by good and substantial witnesses.

But to our great astonishment, when we were on our way home from Liberty, Clay County, we met the families of Oliver Cowdery and L. E. Johnson, whom they had driven from their homes, and robbed them of all their goods, save clothing, bedding, etc.

While we were gone, Jo. and Rigdon and their band of Gadiantons kept up a guard, and watched our houses, and abused our families, and threatened them, if they were not gone by morning, they would be drove out, and threatened our lives, if they ever saw us in Far West.

After they had driven us and our families, they commenced a difficulty in Daviess County, adjoining this county, in which they began to rob and burn houses, etc. etc., took honey which they, (the Mormons) called sweet oil, and hogs which they called bear, and cattle which they called buffalo. Thus they would justify themselves by saying, "We are the people of God, and all things are God's; therefore, they are ours." The old inhabitants were not slack in paying them in their own coin. Thus war and bloodshed commenced and the result was the Church was driven from this land, the pure in heart and innocent, as well as the more wicked, save a few dissenters who were left here to fulfill some of the former commandments.

Now, before the Church left, Joseph Smith, Jr., Sidney Rigdon, H. Smith, P.P. Pratt, Lyman Wight and Amasa Lyman were delivered up to General Lucas and General Clark, and the rest of the officers of the government, and were ordered out by the governor of this state to stop the difficulties between the citizens and the Mormons. Smith and those others were tried by those officers for treason, etc., but found that they were not legally authorized to execute them after having found them guilty of many breaches of the law of the land, they put them in the hand of civil officers of the government, to be tried by the law of the land, and were committed to jail; but before the trial came on, which was named to some of the counties of this state, where the people were not so much prejudiced against them, as they were moved from Clay County to the county where they were to be tried, they hired the guard to let them go, etc., which they did and informed their brethren that an angel had delivered them from the guard; when in fact money hired those base and corrupt men, who let them go; and this through the wickedness of those to whom their safe-keeping were committed, these men escaped the justice of the law of the land which they had transgressed, and went unpunished at this time.
