John Whitmer, Book of John Whitmer ( 1838)

Chapter 21

Now after Smith and those who were with him were let go, they speedily went to Illinois to a place which Smith named Nauvoo, where they built a city which they called Nauvoo, and began to build up a broken and scattered people, sending forth many elders and priests, etc., to proclaim to the nations of the earth, the suffering of the saints and also the gospel in great haste. And many received the gospel, and gathered to Nauvoo, and built a city. Smith received a commandment to build a house unto the name of the Lord which they speedily commenced, but did not complete it before the wicked rose up and murdered Joseph and Hyrum Smith. Now, the Mormons (as they were called by those who did not believe in the Book of Mormon) found great favor in the eyes of the governor and congress of Illinois, so that the Mormons had a charter granted for the city of Nauvoo, in which they organized themselves according to their own desires.

Now, according to the best information I could get, they, the leaders, protested against spiritual wife system and Gadianton bands and their wickedness publicly, but I will show hereafter that they did not do as did the Lamanites in the days of the Nephites, when they were convinced of the incorrect traditions of their fathers, for when they were one converted, they remained so until the day of their death.

As soon as the Lord gave Smith and the Church favor in the eyes of the people among whom they lived, and began to prosper them and many began to gather to Nauvoo, Smith and the leaders began to exercise their hatred to those whom he called his enemies. He hired a man by the name of Porter Orin Rockwell (who was one of the Gadianton band of whom I heretofore spoke) to go and murder a man by the name of L. W. Boggs who had been elected governor by the people of the state of Missouri but was not governor at the time Smith sent him to commit this crime. Boggs resided at Independence, the place appointed for the land of Zion, yea, the new Jerusalem; so Rockwell went to Independence, and at night he went to the house of Boggs and shot him through the window; but he did not kill him, only wounded him severly, but he recovered. Rockwell was caught and put to jail, and I believe he was tried by a jury of inquest, but was not sufficient testimony to condemn him, though it is a well-known fact that he was hired by Smith to kill Boggs.

Now the foregoing I have given to show that the secret band did still exist among the leaders of the Church, even in Smith, the prophet and seer and revelator. Had it not been upheld by him, the Church would not have suffered in the way it did. For example, look at the children of Israel in the days of King Saul; for his transgression of the kingdom was rent from him and given to another more worthy; and the children of Israel suffered much in consequence thereof.

Now, as I said before, the Lord began to prosper them in Nauvoo and as soon as they began to prosper they began to be lifted up in pride, and behaved vilely towards the people in Hancock County, Illinois, in which county Nauvoo is situated, as also to the people in the counties round about, so that the people began to threaten them again and raised mobs to drive the Saints, (as they called themselves) from their homes. The Mormons at the same time would steal from them many things; and indeed the Mormons would justify themselves in this wicked way saying, "We are the Lord's, and the earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof; therefore these things are ours." Also, "God has said by the mouths of the prophets that he would consecrate the riches of the Gentiles to the house of Israel, and we are the house of Israel, etc. etc." "Now," say they, "when these things are placed before our eyes, go, and God is not intending to give it himself, but you are agents, and these things are before you, go and help yourselves," etc.

Now, these scriptures would they quote to excuse themselves that they might steal and rob their neighbors, according to their wicked desires, lusting after those things which were forbidden them in the scriptures.

After the Mormons had their city charted by the state legislature they had all their officers, and when any stole, they would flee to Nauvoo to seek protection; and behold they were protected and upheld, so that the guilty would not be punished according to the law of the land. Now, had the leaders been willing to bring the guilty to justice, they could not have escaped, but must have been punished; but here is the bad effect of secret combinations, such as have ever destroyed the Church of God, because those who were leaders in the Church were partakers of these Cain institutions, which were handed down by the devil.

In the meanwhile, the Twelve were preaching in England and elsewhere and built up many Churches; the gathering continued, and many who were born again and came to Nauvoo and beheld the things that were there conducted sickened in their hearts; others were pleased with the things, for in their hearts; others were pleased with the things, for they were pleasing to the carnal mind, especially where an assurance was held forth for their protection by the prophet of God. Others denied the faith, for they knew that these things were contrary to the words of God and withdrew themselves.

Now there has been much said and published by the mobbers of Illinois and Missouri that are without a shadow of truth as also by the people of Nauvoo.

Now, Smith wrote many revelations concerning himself, as you will see by reading the Book of Covenants printed at Kirtland, Ohio, in which we read that the keys of the kingdom of God should not be taken from him until Christ should come, on condition that he should not transgress. But if he should transgress, they should be taken, and another be appointed in his stead, and that this should be all the power that he should have to appoint another in his stead.

(Lines have been drawn across the following words:) God, knowing all things, prepared a man whom he visited by an angel of God and showed him where there were some ancient record hid, and also put in his heart to desire of faith to grant him power to establish a stake to Zion in Wisconsin Territory, whose name is James J. Strang. Now at first Smith was unfavorably disposed to grant him this request, but being troubled in spirit and knowing from the things that were staring him in the face that his days must soon be closed, therefore he enquired of the Lord and behold the Lord said Appoint James J. Strang a prophet, seer and revelator unto my Church, for thou shalt thereby do a mention thy cup is bitter etc. Shortly after the appointment of Strang, the mob gathered and took by stratagem Joseph and Hyrum Smith and conveyed them to Carthage, the seat of justice in and for the county of Hancock (Caldwell has been stricken out in favor of Hancock) as if to try them by the law of the land for their crimes, they murdered them and thus the Lord's anointed fell by the brutal hand of man and they are gone the way of all the earth and Strang reigns in the place of Smith, the author and proprietor of the Book of Mormon.

As I have before stated that Joseph Smith had left Kirtland, Ohio, with the camp of the saints so called to go to Jackson County to redeem Zion, and received a revelation that God would redeem it in his own time, etc. On his way to Missouri, or Zion, he was frequently heard to say that he had a duty to perform, and that was, he has to appoint another in his stead, to wit, David Whitmer.

After the camp dispersed at Fishing River, Smith and F. G. Williams came to Clay County together with many others who scattered in Clay County and elsewhere, Smith called a conference at the house of Lyman Wight, three miles west of Liberty, in which conference the most of the official members belonging to Zion were present, where Smith organized the high council of Zion, as I said in a former chapter, in which David Whitmer was ordained president of Zion, and John Whitmer and W. W. Phelps his counselors. Here at the same time, he ordained David Whitmer prophet, seer and revelator and translator.
