John Whitmer, Book of John Whitmer ( 1838)

Chapter 22

Now from this time forth, which was in July, 1834, Smith seemed to be in doubt whereinto this thing would grow, and began to upbraid D. Whitmer, and abuse him as his natural custom to do unto those whom he feared, lest they should become great in the sight of God or man; therefore, he harangued the conference and sought to destroy the confidence of the people present in David Whitmer, on whom he had bestowed all the gifts and power that he had himself received by inspiration, by the laying on his hand according to the order of heaven.

After Smith's return to Kirtland, Ohio, and after his ordering the first elders of the Church to go to Ohio, there to receive their endowments from on high, he hastened the finishing of the house at Kirtland which was commenced before he had gone to Zion to redeem her. He from this time began to be lifted up in the pride of his eyes, and began to seek riches and the glory of the world; also sought to establish the ancient order of things, as he and his counsellors, Rigdon and Hyrum Smith, pleased to call it. Therefore, they began to form themselves into a secret society which they termed the brother of Gideon, in the which society they took oaths that they would support a brother right or wrong, even to the shedding of blood. Thus those who belonged to this society were bound to keep it a profound secret, never to reveal, but ever to conceal these abominations from all and every person except those who were of the same craft. But these things could not be kept a secret, in consequence of betrayers who fell from their faith and revealed their secrets.

Thus things were carried on by secret plots and midnight machinations, which society was beginning to be established in Kirtland, Ohio, in the fall of 1836. The formation of these things together with adultery, wickedness and abominations which grew and multiplied in the heads and members of the Church of Christ of Latter-day Saints brought Joseph Smith and his brother, Hyrum, to an untimely end, as also the scattering of the Church, and the Twelve who assumed the authority of leading the Church, were scattered from Nauvoo and suffered great afflictions. As also James J. Strang who also professes to be appointed Seer, Revelator, Prophet and successor of him, Joseph; also Sidney Rigdon he drew a portion after him.
