Born 10 September 1924 in Brigham City, Utah, Boyd Kenneth Packer was the fifth son and tenth child in the family. When he was twelve his family moved into an apartment in the Packer Automobile Company building. His father, a skilled, industrious mechanic, struggled for many years building his automobile repair business, and later the motor company.

“Sometimes in my growing years I thought we were poor,” Elder Packer wrote in a short life history. “I later learned that that was not true. We just didn’t have any money. We were always rich in the things most significant in our lives.”

One of the bounties the young Boyd Packer enjoyed was the beauty of nature. He especially loved birds, a love that is still evident in his life. Opposite the Packers’ front door is an enclosure containing live birds ranging from peacocks to golden pheasants to pigeons. On display inside the house are Elder Packer’s carefully detailed carvings of birds, painted in natural colors. The carvings show not only a sensitivity to the creatures, but a reverence for the artistry of the Creator.

Each of the carvings takes about a year for Elder Packer to produce, using what little spare time he may have. Elder Packer also enjoys painting and sculpture. But there was little time for these activities until recent years, for being a father always came first. From his youth, it seems, he has kept eternal goals in view.

Young manhood came to Boyd Packer about the time World War II began. After graduation from high school, he worked for a time on construction of an army hospital in his hometown. Like many young LDS men of his generation, he was unable to serve a full-time mission because of the war. In the spring of 1943, he enlisted in the Army Air Force, graduating as a pilot the following year, a few days before his twentieth birthday. He was ordered to the Pacific, and was stationed in Japan for nearly a year after the end of the war.

While in the military, he found plenty of time to study the scriptures. He read the Book of Mormon several times; today he refers to the book as “the single most powerful influence in my life.” In the spirit of the book, he also found motivation to preach the gospel of peace to the Japanese. Among those who learned of the gospel from servicemen were Tatsui Sato and his wife Chio. When the time came for their baptism, it was Boyd Packer’s privilege to perform the ordinance for Sister Sato. C. Elliot Richards, now a physician in Salt Lake City baptized Brother Sato. Later, Brother Sato’s translation work would make it possible for many Japanese to enjoy the scriptures and the temple ceremonies in their own language.

Boyd Packer returned home in 1946 and enrolled at Weber (now Weber State) College, in nearby Ogden. It was there he met Donna Edith Smith, also from Brigham City. They were married 27 July 1947 in the Logan Temple.

They would become the parents of ten children: Allan, Kenneth, David, Laurel, Russell, Spencer, Gayle, Kathleen, Lawrence, and Eldon.

It was Brother Packer’s goal to be a teacher, and he pursued that dream. He received an associate degree from Weber Junior College in 1948 and a bachelor’s degree from Utah State University in Logan in 1949. He would later receive a master’s degree from Utah State University, in 1953, and a doctor of education degree from Brigham Young University, in 1962.

Those were busy years. In addition to holding local church callings—teacher, assistant stake clerk, high councilor—he began teaching seminary in 1949. An old army hospital in Brigham City which he had helped build was turned into a federal government school for Indian students, and from 1949 until mid-1955 he served as Coordinator of Indian Affairs in connection with the school for the Church Educational System. During this same period, he served a four-year term as a city councilman in Brigham City.

In 1955, Boyd Packer was appointed an assistant administrator of seminaries and institutes in the Church Educational System. He served in that position until October 1961, when he was called as an Assistant to the Twelve.

With a growing family, growing responsibilities, and continuing education, those early years of marriage were very full. How was he able to accomplish so much?

“All of that can be explained in two words: my wife,” Elder Packer says. “She’s perfect.”

She smiles at the description. “He says that so I’ll try to improve myself,” she explains.

It is obvious, however, that Donna Packer is a very accomplished woman—skilled homemaker, talented Church worker, genealogical researcher. A dynamic woman, she is currently writing a book on the Packer genealogy.

“She’s a great and powerful motivating influence,” Elder Packer comments.

On family matters, Elder and Sister Packer seem almost to speak as one mind. Elder Packer says this facility has developed as they have grown together through their marriage. His wife notes also that they agree because they have taken pains to plan unitedly, far in advance, to meet their children’s needs and help each one of them develop his or her talents with educational opportunities suited to the individual.

All but two of the Packers’ married children—and thirty of their thirty-seven grandchildren—live within an hour’s drive. The children visit their parents frequently. (At Elder and Sister Packer’s urging, their married children also try to participate often in activities with their spouses’ families.) Sister Packer takes the lead in planning an annual summer reunion for their family; she gives it a theme dealing with one or another of the Packer ancestors and that person’s occupation or activities.

While the children were growing up, their home life revolved in many ways around their mother. She had to help motivate them and had to speak for both parents when her husband was away in connection with Church service. But always the children have known that his support was with her—and with them.

“I have tried—I have earnestly tried—when I have been home with the children to be with the children,” Elder Packer says. That meant spending a little time with each one each day, whenever possible.

Allan Packer says his father took advantage of every opportunity to teach. Elder Packer’s children still turn to him for counsel.

“He is our patriarch,” Allan comments. “He’s still a father, and that’s his number-one priority.”

Laurel Packer Dillman says her father has always seemed very sensitive to the promptings of the Spirit. When she was a student at BYU, “I remember that he would always call me on the days when I was having the roughest times.” A word of counsel or encouragement would help her through it.

Kenneth reflects, “I try to live my life, and direct my family’s life, and raise my children so that Dad doesn’t have to worry about whether I’m living the gospel.”

A few years ago, Elder Packer spoke publicly in general conference to his children and grandchildren about the legacy he would like to leave them, expressing the hope that his talk “may help someone else” as well.

“We want our children and their children to know that the choice in life is not between fame and obscurity, nor is the choice between wealth and poverty. The choice is between good and evil. …

“When we finally understand this lesson, thereafter our happiness will not be determined by material things. We may be happy without them or successful in spite of them. …

“We now move into an uncertain future. But we are not uncertain. Children, bear testimony, build Zion. Then you will find true success, complete happiness.” (General Conference, October 1980.)

Elder Packer’s addresses cover a broad range of subjects. Allan comments that his father does his “homework” well, consulting with experts and blending his spiritual insights with the knowledge gained. “He’ll spend tens, dozens, of hours on his talks.”

But there are contributions Church members in general never see.

“Elder Packer is very much a teacher,” says Elder James E. Faust of the Council of the Twelve. “While all of the Twelve are teachers, he’s a teacher in the Twelve.” As a senior member of the Quorum, he offers instruction and approaches decisions with deep insight into their possible effects on the Church and its people, Elder Faust explains.

He adds that Elder Packer’s love of and use of the scriptures in his leadership role has influenced the direction of the entire Church.

Often, says Elder Russell M. Nelson of the Council of the Twelve, when the Quorum is weighing a problem, Elder Packer will search his mind for relevant teachings from the Book of Mormon and apply them to the discussion.

The Book of Mormon has had a profound effect on Boyd Packer’s life. “Without the Book of Mormon, Elder Packer couldn’t be the prophet he is,” Elder Nelson comments. “He is a gifted seer.”

His teaching from the scriptures is characterized by “deep comprehension,” Elder Nelson adds.

Some themes seem to be heard frequently in his teaching—the importance of listening to the voice of the Spirit, the plan of life and salvation, missionary work, supporting the Lord’s chosen leaders, obedience as the key to happiness. But there is one theme that is constant: the sure witness it is his calling, his privilege, to give.

In his April 1977 general conference talk titled “The Mediator,” he reviewed the pivotal role of Christ in the redemption of mankind, then added:

“I have carried with me a great desire to bear testimony of the Lord, Jesus Christ. I have yearned to tell you, in as simple terms as I can, what He did, and who He is.

“Although I know how poor mere words can be, I also know that such feelings are often carried by the Spirit, even without words.

“At times I struggle under the burden of imperfections. Nevertheless, because I know that He lives, there is a supreme recurring happiness and joy.”
