Think of people you love very much. Would you want them to know when something wonderful was going to happen? Would you warn about things that might hurt them?

Heavenly Father loves us very much. He wants us to know what we can do to be happy and to return to Him someday. For this reason, He calls prophets to speak for Him on earth.

In the scriptures we read about prophets who told people what the Lord wanted them to know and do. Some people listened, obeyed, and were blessed. Others didn’t, and their lives were not as happy.

Noah, an Old Testament prophet, warned the people to repent. Only his family listened and obeyed. Because they did, they were safe on the ark when the floods came.

Joseph, who was sold into Egypt by his brothers, told Pharaoh to save food for seven years because there would be a famine. Pharaoh listened, and the people of Egypt had food.

Abinadi, a Book of Mormon prophet, warned wicked King Noah and his people to repent. Alma listened and obeyed. He also taught the gospel to others. Their lives were happier because they followed the prophet. Those who didn’t listen were destroyed or captured.

Heavenly Father has sent President Gordon B. Hinckley to teach and guide us today. We can choose whether or not to listen to his words and do the things he counsels us to do. If we do, our lives will be happier, we will be safer, and one day we will return to live with Heavenly Father.

Glue page 13 onto heavy paper. Cut out the figures. In family home evening, use the figures to tell the story of Noah warning the people to repent, building the ark, and gathering his family and the animals into the ark. Explain that Noah’s family was safe because they followed the counsel of the prophet (see Gen. 6:9–7:10; Gen. 7:17–8:22; Moses 8:18, 23–24).

1.  Choose several scripture stories in which prophets prophesy or lead the people according to God’s will. Divide the children into groups, and have an adult tell each group a story and help the children draw pictures to use in retelling the story. Possible stories: Joseph tells Pharaoh to store grain (see Gen. 41); Moses leads the children of Israel out of bondage (see Ex. 14); Samuel the Lamanite prophesies about Jesus Christ (see Hel. 14; 3 Ne. 1:19–21); Brigham Young leads the Saints to the Salt Lake Valley (see D&C 136). Have the groups tell their stories. Sing a song or hymn that teaches a principle taught by each group’s prophet.

2.  Put objects or pictures of objects that tithing helps pay for in a box (for example: temples, hymnbooks, chalk and eraser, lesson manual, meetinghouse, and so on). Read Malachi 3:10. Explain that Malachi taught the people to pay their tithing and the Lord would pour out blessings upon them. Tell the story of President Lorenzo Snow teaching the people to pay tithing (see Primary 5 manual, lesson 45). Give 10 children an apple or another kind of fruit, and have them hold it up as if they were trees or bushes. Have another child “pick” the fruit. Ask how much of the fruit they should pay for tithing. Explain that tithing is generally paid with money, but in pioneer times, many paid tithing with products they grew. Show a tithing receipt and envelope. Explain that we fill out a receipt, put it and our tithing into the envelope, and give it to the bishop, branch president, or his counselors. They send it to Church headquarters, where it is used for many things. Have children choose objects or pictures from the box. Bear testimony of the blessings of paying tithing.
