Charles D. Tate, Monte S. Nyman, First Nephi: The Doctrinal Foundation ( 1988)

19

TEXTUAL EVIDENCES FOR THE BOOK OF MORMON

Paul Y. Hoskisson

In the past forty years Book of Mormon scholars have produced much textual evidence for a vorlage of ancient Near Eastern descent for the received text of the Book of Mormon. Yet most of this material has provided only necessary and not sufficient evidence for this vorlage. In order for material in the Book of Mormon to be sufficient evidence for an ancient Near Eastern vorlage, as I am using sufficient here, it must be demonstrated that the textual material is ancient Near Eastern and that it was not available to Joseph Smith.

Likewise, I maintain, if the material were available to the Prophet, if only in theory, and if it were found in the Book of Mormon, then it would become necessary evidence. By this definition we must expect to find at least some of this material in the Book of Mormon. Indeed, if some of it were not present we would have to question an ancient Near Eastern vorlage for the received text. That is why this material is necessary evidence.

These definitions are not intended to suggest that all sufficient evidence is superior to necessary evidence. Both sufficient and necessary evidences are highly subjective in quantity and quality. In fact, many pieces of necessary evidence are more compelling than material deemed sufficient. For instance, because chiasms abound in the King James Bible, chiasms in the Book of Mormon provide necessary evidence, by the definition used above. Yet, the complicated chiasm of Alma 36 can leave little doubt that a vorlage of ancient Near Eastern descent lies behind the English translation. [^1] The first example of sufficient evidence I provide below is far less compelling than this chiasm.

The difference between sufficient and necessary evidence however, should remain in focus. Therefore, we must ask the question, what was available to the Prophet Joseph Smith? Practically no epigraphic or other literary evidence from Egypt was even potentially available. The first great epigraphic discoveries in Mesopotamia began in the latter part of the 1840s and did not reach Europe until more than twenty years after the 1830 publication of the Book of Mormon, though the first primitive attempts at deciphering cuneiform were being made about the time Joseph first saw and then later translated the gold plates. [^2] The Levant did not yield its major epigraphic material until this century. [^3]

What authentic ancient Near Eastern epigraphic and/or literary material was potentially available to Joseph Smith? With possibly few exceptions, the only authentic ancient Near Eastern epigraphic material in any form potentially available to the Prophet was the King James Bible with its ancient Near Eastern vorlage. Therefore, any ancient Near Eastern material evident in the Bible becomes, by definition, necessary evidence. Material not in the bible, not potentially available otherwise, and not demonstrably part of the cultural milieu of Joseph Smith would be sufficient evidence.

It cannot be overemphasized here that when looking for such sufficient evidence, we must exercise extreme caution and consider all possibilities. It must also be emphasized again that the particulars of sufficient evidence are highly subjective. The following rather involved and lengthy example demonstrates this need for rigor.

Alma 5:9 reads in part, "their souls did expand." The context would call for a meaning such as "they became happy," to parallel the phrase in the same verse, "they did sing redeeming love" to celebrate their freedom from the "bands of death" and the "chains of hell." Nowhere in the King James Bible does soul occur in conjunction with the word expand; neither does it occur with the verbs enlarge and swell, each of which accompany soul once in the Book of Mormon (Alma 32:28 and 34 respectively). [^4] This phrase appears to be unusual. Why should a soul expand? If this phrase is unique in English to the Book of Mormon, could the phrase reflect an ancient Near Eastern vorlage rather than have its origin in English?

The Oxford English Dictionary (hereafter OED) under soul gives no evidence of the phrase "their souls did expand" occurring in English; neither are there usages of enlarge and swell with soul. [^5] This and other evidence appears to indicate that the phrase "expand the soul" does not have its origin in English. [^6] If it could be demonstrated that this phrase has an ancient Near Eastern Semitic analog that was not available to Joseph Smith, it might qualify as sufficient evidence of an ancient Near Eastern vorlage for the Book of Mormon.

Ugaritic, a language closely related to Hebrew and spoken down to about six hundred years before Lehi left Jerusalem, bears on the subject. [^7] A passage in the Anath epic [^8] reads, tgdd.kbdh.bshq. ymlu / lbh.bsmht.kbd. nt / tsyt. H. Ginsberg translates, "her liver swells with laughter, / Her heart fills up with joy, / Anath's liver exults." [^9] (The italics are Ginsberg's and indicate his uncertainty in translating the Ugaritic words gdd and syt.) All three syntagms, "liver swells with laughter," "heart fills with joy," and "liver exults" are of the same type as the Book of Mormon phrase "soul expands," and all four phrases denote happiness. [^10]

To establish that "soul expands" of the Book of Mormon and "liver swells" of Ugaritic not only connote but also denote the same thing, it remains to be demonstrated that "soul" is a possible translation of "liver."

In Akkadian, an East Semitic language related to Hebrew and Ugaritic, both libbu and kabattu (the Akkadian cognates for lb and kbd respectively in the Ugaritic passage quoted above) can be "the seat of feelings, emotions, thought." [^11] When libbu and kabattu are used with the verb napasu ("to enlarge" or "make wide" in the G-stem and "to let breathe again" in the D-stem) [^12] they denote secondarily "mind, soul, heart" [^13] (italics added). Thus here in Akkadian "the soul (that is, liver) expands with feeling" would seem to be at home.

Psalm 16:9 reads, "Therefore my heart is glad, and my glory rejoiceth." The Hebrew text, lakhen samah libbi wayyagel kabodi, translates more literally, "therefore my heart is happy and my liver rejoices." Here, just as with their Ugaritic and Akkadian cognates, leb and kabod are the seats of rejoicing. But the Hebrew text does not require the English rendering "soul expanding" with joy. It is Genesis 49:6 that forms the link with soul, biqehalam 'al tehad kevodi, "do not unite, my honor, with their assembly." The Hebrew word in this latter passage, translated in the King James Bible as "honor," is none other than kabod, the same word behind the King James Bible glory in Psalm 16:9 and the cognate of the Ugaritic and Akkadian words used with the verb "to enlarge" or "to swell." It usually means "weight," "honor," "glory," etc., but can also mean "soul." [^14] It is not translated as "soul" in Genesis 49:6, even though the context would seem to require it, because the more common word for "soul" in Hebrew, nephes, is the parallel to kabod in this verse, [^15] and good English style militates against repetition of the same word (just as does Hebrew).

In other words, one translation of the Semitic word for "liver," etc., is "soul." And therefore, even though the Hebrew Old Testament does not reflect it, in Semitic languages related to Hebrew (closely, Ugaritic; and more distantly, Akkadian) "the liver expands (with feeling)" can be translated "the soul expands (with feeling)."

In returning to the Book of Mormon, the phrase "their souls did expand" has an ancient Semitic vorlage and does not appear in any readily available English material. Because it would seem the Prophet could not have been familiar with the phrase (and this is partially confirmed by a glance at the 1828 Webster's dictionary where "the heart expands with joy" in English, but not the soul [^16]), it would be sufficient evidence for an ancient Near Eastern vorlage of the Book of Mormon.

Yet even with this confirmation by a dictionary contemporaneous with the translation of the Book of Mormon, doubt is sown. While the "soul" does not appear to "expand" in English, if the phrase "the heart expands" is an authentic English phrase, it is possible that in some obscure passage, not readily accessible, an English "soul" might also expand. Because English belongs to the Germanic language group and also is strongly influenced by the Romance languages, if either or both of these phrases should appear in one Germanic or Romance language, then we must conclude that potentially it is a pre-1830 English phrase and our data base is insufficient to document its appearance in English. This in turn would force us to admit that "their souls did expand" might not be sufficient evidence of an ancient Near Eastern vorlage.

A search of readily available German phrases revealed that "expand the soul" with joy does occur in German. For example, see Geibel (3, 35) "So schlagst du frech die hoffnung nieder, die kaum die seele mir geschwellt?" and from Holderlin (1,176), "Bis, erwacht vom angstigen Traum, die Seele dem Menschen aufgeht, jugendlich froh." [^17] Therefore, though the phrase "expand the soul" does not occur in any readily available pre-1830 English text, and though it is an authentic ancient Near Eastern Semitic phrase, because it is attested in German, we must conclude that the phrase "their souls did expand" is at best necessary evidence for an authentic Near Eastern Semitic Book of Mormon vorlage, but not sufficient evidence.

This, however, has not been an exercise in futility. It demonstrates the need for caution, rigor, and the test of time. Therefore, allow me to present three examples (given previously in another context) [^18] that as far as I am now aware have no analog in English or in any Indo-European language with which I am familiar, and therefore, were not available to the Prophet. I ask for assistance if it is possible to prove otherwise.

I have chosen a variety of examples that illustrate different approaches, (1) from the style, (2) from the onomasticon, and (3) from the context of the Book of Mormon. The examples also represent different levels of persuasion, that is uncompelling, quite convincing, and most interesting.

The first seemingly sufficient piece of evidence concerns style, the use of words and phrases beyond grammatical and logical considerations. First, by way of example, let me explain what is being considered. Those proficient in a language other than their native tongue know that other languages express ideas and concepts differently and that other languages allow constructions that are anathema in their native tongue. For instance, it is not correct to use a double negative in contemporary English. One should not say, at least in formal writing and speech, "I don't know nothing." However, there is no universal absolute prohibiting the use of a double negative. Not only do many languages allow it, but some even encourage it. It is simply a matter of proscription, that is, bad style, that contemporary English does not allow a double negative. Are there, then, examples in the Book of Mormon of poor English style that could be explained by an ancient Near Eastern vorlage?

For stylistic reasons English syntax frowns on constructions using a cognate accusative, that is, when the predicate is a substantive cognate of the verb. For example, it is not good English to say, "He built a building." Good English style requires rather, "He constructed a building," or, less likely, "He built a construction." We even go to the extreme in English to avoid a cognate accusative. We say, "I present you with this gift," rather than say, "I present you with this present." [^19]

Hebrew and other Semitic languages not only allow the use of a cognate accusative but even encourage it. For instance, Numbers 30:2 reads, "If a man vow a vow unto the Lord, or swear an oath [literally, swear a swearing] to bind his soul with a bond. . . ." [^20]

There are numerous examples of cognate accusatives in the Book of Mormon. [^21] The particular example given here is not found in the King James Bible, [^22] though it could easily have been used in ancient Hebrew. [^23] In 2 Nephi 5:15 and Mosiah 9:8; 11:13; 23:5, for instance, the phrase "to build buildings" occurs in finite or infinitive phrases. The OED does not attest a single instance of building used as the direct object of "to build." [^24] Therefore, in using the phrase "to build a building," the Book of Mormon adheres to a Hebrew and Semitic practice that is not common in English.

Second, the Book of Mormon onomasticon, that is, a list of proper names, provides another possible instance of sufficient evidence. The name Alma has provided much grist for anti-Book of Mormon critics. [^25] First of all, unlike many other names in the Book of Mormon, it is attested neither in the Bible nor in any other ancient Near Eastern Semitic source. It could have several Hebrew etymologies, none of which is satisfactory. [^26] Is it then possible that the Book of Mormon onomasticon does not reflect an ancient Near Eastern vorlage? Are some of the names in it simply unsophisticated borrowings from Spanish names for girls, as has been claimed?

It was not until 1971, 141 years after the publication of the Book of Mormon, that the name Alma turned up in an English translation of documents from Palestine. In that year Yigael Yadin described in the English version of his book Bar-Kokhba the discovery, careful excavation, and preliminary evaluation of objects found in caves west of the Dead Sea, particularly in the Nahal Hever area, from the period of the Bar-Kokhba revolt against the Romans about A.D. 130. Among the documents dealing with land transactions at nearby En-gedi the name Alma appears, written aleph, lamed, mem, aleph. [^27] Here, discovered in the Judean desert in 1961, is the confirmation that the Book of Mormon name Alma, at which critics of that sacred book have scoffed since its publication in 1830, is an authentic entry in the ancient Near Eastern Hebrew/Aramaic onomasticon. [^28]

Finally, in an unusual passage in the Book of Mormon, 1 Nephi 2:9, Lehi noted that the river which he named after his son Laman "emptied into the fountain of the Red Sea." Does a river empty into a fountain? Is it not the other way around? That the passage is problematical is indicated by the attempt to explain fountain in a footnote in the 1981 edition of the Book of Mormon. The problem fades, however, when ancient Near Eastern lexical and cosmological considerations are taken into account. In the ancient Near East there were two great bodies of water, the saltwater oceans and the subterranean sweet waters, both of which were thought by the ancients "to be the source of rivers and streams." [^29] These "fountains of the great deep" (a phrase used by the translators of the King James Bible in Genesis 7:11), as U. Cassuto explained in commenting on the Hebrew word thwm, refer "undoubtedly to the subterranean waters, which are the source of the springs that flow upon the ground." [^30] The Hebrews shared this Canaanite concept of the subterranean waters being the source of springs. [^31]

These subterranean and oceanic waters then are actually the source of all rivers, streams, and springs. The ancient Semites did not conceive of this, however, as we currently do, namely, through the chain of evaporation, cloud formation, condensation, and precipitation. (No doubt they also had some understanding of this process, but they did not limit their perceptions to this one process.) It was S. N. Kramer who, when first pointing out the remarkable and unusual ancient Near East perception that the source of rivers is the oceanic waters, said:

The Sumerian "mouth" of the rivers, while it coincides geographically with the actual mouth of the rivers as we understand it today, is nevertheless not to be understood in terms of our modern usage, as the place where the rivers "empty" their water (into the Persian Gulf) but rather as the place where they "drink" the waters (from the Persian Gulf). In the light of this conception, the "mouth" of the Tigris and Euphrates may well be designated as their source, but not the real source, i.e., in the mountains of Armenia, but the source as conceived by the Sumerians. [^32]

That is to say, the source of the rivers was the oceanic waters, not in an ultimate sense as we conceive it, but in a more immediate sense, in that the rivers drew directly either from the seas as springs, or from the oceans through their mouths, depending on whether the Canaanite concept or S. N. Kramer's Sumero-Akkadian example applies.

Returning now to 1 Nephi 2:9, it is the statement that the river flows into the fountain that is disturbing. As was just explained, in the ancient Near East the fountain of a river was conceived of as being the oceanic waters, the river actually drawing from the ocean or fountain in a sense that is not clear to our occidental and empirical understanding. Our Book of Mormon is in authentic ancient Near Eastern tradition on this point; and the Prophet Joseph Smith could not have known about it. This then seems to become sufficient evidence.

With these examples of extra-King James Bible and hopefully non-Germanic and non-Romance material in the Book of Mormon, I hope to have illustrated with original remarks what this more focused approach entails. It requires a knowledge of ancient Near Eastern languages and literatures and a thorough grounding in Germanic and Romance languages. I am the first to admit that I am deficient in both these areas and, therefore, appeal for other scholars to become involved. If these three examples can be demonstrated to exist in material potentially available to the Prophet Joseph Smith, I would welcome this information. But as it now stands, I must for the moment classify these examples as sufficient evidence.

The rewards warrant the effort. However, in calling for this more focused approach to Book of Mormon textual evidences, I have already admitted that it is not new. Yet, the idea of consciously pursuing this approach is new and should become more visible and more appealing to Book of Mormon scholars. If this book is an authentic document composed by peoples from the ancient Near East, as I testify that it is, then we must expect many more of these types of extra-King James Bible Semitisms (and Egyptianisms) than the three I have illustrated. Let us make an effort in this direction.

NOTES AND REFERENCES

Paul Y. Hoskisson is Assistant Professor of Ancient Scripture at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Its views of God, We suffer for our own sins, in the wake of, because of, and due to them. Being vs. Becoming Personal Scripture Notebook, B. H. Roberts, Church Archives.
[^2] Its views of man, We suffer because of the sins of others; for example, as parents for our children, and as children for our parents. Universal vs. Particular Truman G. Madsen, "The Truth, The Way, The Life," chapter 17, Defender of the Faith (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1980), pp. 338-45.
[^3] Its views of creation and the universe, We suffer with each other on account of sin "through common human sympathy." Transcendence vs. Immanence Madsen, "The Meaning of Christ: The Truth, The Way and The Life: An Analysis of B. H. Roberts's Unpublished Master Work," BYU Studies, 15 (Spring 1975), 259-92.
[^4] Its views of the purpose of life, We are willing to suffer for each other (TWL, 45). Spirit vs. Body See Foreword, Discourses of B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1948).
[^5] Its views of the atonement of the Christ, Spiritual vs. Temporal Letter of Elsa Cook, Roberts's secretary in his last years, to the author 10 February 1970.
[^6] Its views of the gospel as a means of man's salvation, Faith vs. Reason This title derives from John 14:6. Roberts's notebooks show he was first impressed to use the title when singing the last verse of a classical Mormon hymn, "Prayer Is the Soul's Sincere Desire." "O Thou by Whom We Come to God, the Life, the Truth, the Way!" (No. 145 in 1985 Hymnbook.)
[^7] The grandeur and consistency of its development as the dispensation of the fulness of times, the completion of the plans of God with reference to the redemption of the earth and the salvation of man, and finally, Grace vs. Merit From a letter to President Heber J. Grant. See Nels B. Lundwall papers, BYU Special Collections.
[^8] Its views of the physical resurrection and the Sacred vs. Secular Ibid.
[^9] future degrees of glory to which man will be assigned as the outcome of his earth life. [^1] Other-worldly vs. This Worldly B. H. Roberts to Heber J. Grant, 9 February 1931, Heber J. Grant Collection, Church Historical Department. In a letter to a missionary friend, he wrote on 3 March 1931, "I have been passing through the severest and mental and spiritual strain of my life during the last two months . . . concerning my manuscript, 'The Truth, The Way, and The Life.' . . . Matters, however, have not reached conclusions yet, and I still hope for a favorable decision."
[^10] Escape vs. Transformation From the handwritten title page of the preface to Discourses of B. H. Roberts, Elsa Cook's handwriting says, "These were President Roberts's exact words."
[^11] Symbolic vs. Literal Roberts to Heber J. Grant, 9 Feb. 1931.
[^12] Introduction to "The Truth, The Way, The Life." (Hereafter cited in the text as TWL, chapter number.)
[^13] See Seventy's Course in Theology, Fourth Year, The Atonement (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1908).
[^14] TWL, 43. 2 Nephi 2:11-14; 10:23. Roberts quotes Nephi: "The first judgment which came upon man [the judgment of death, spiritual and physical] must needs have remained to an endless duration. And if so, this flesh must have laid down to rot . . . to rise no more." (2 Nephi 9:7). Again, because of the fall of Adam "all mankind were fallen, and they were in the grasp of justice; yea, the justice of law, God, which consigned them forever to be cut off from his presence" (Alma 42:14).
[^15] Roberts writes, "Not only must there be made satisfaction to eternal justice, but there must be the power of Deity exercised if man is to be saved from death; there must be a power of life so that that which was lost may be restored, both as to the spiritual life of man and the physical life" (TWL, 43).
[^16] George McDonald in C. S. Lewis, The Problem of Pain (New York: Macmillan, 1962), preface.
[^17] This is a central thesis of the philosophical theology of Augustine, Anselm, and Thomas Aquinas. It remains uncontested in official Catholic, Greek Orthodox, and Protestant thought. Roberts contemplates the cost (TWL, 43).
[^18] The word universe suggests a "block-universe," but Roberts was a particularist. There is no one thing, one plenum. There are many selves, many lives, many goods, many evils (TWL, 9).
[^19] Roberts's section on "limitations on these powers" is in his Treatment of the "Omnis." God's eternity is without qualification. But God's omni-presence must be qualified—his Spirit permeates space but his personal presence is in some place. His omnipotence must be qualified—he has all the power that it is possible to have in a universe of laws and free intelligences but he has not the power to create or destroy element. He is also limited and delimited by the exercise of human freedom. God's power does not extend to the creation of freedom. Freedom is an ineluctable fact (TWL, 20 and 42).
[^20] In chapter 20, "Departure of the Church from the True Doctrine of God," Roberts presents the formuli and creeds, the apostle creed, the patristic view, the doctrine of trinities, the Nicene creed, the Athanasian creed, all of which "stray from the plain anthropomorphism of the New Testament revelation of God through Jesus Christ." This has pagan origin and Roberts cites scholars who acknowledge that the notion that the conception of God is "pure being," "immaterial," "without form" "or parts or passion" has its origin in philosophy, not in Jewish or Christian revelation."
[^21] S. Kierkegaard in Concluding Unscientific Postscript, trans. by David F. Swenson (Princeton: Princeton University Press for American Scandinavian Foundation).
[^22] Conference Report, October 1926, p. 127.
[^23] Ibid., p. 124.
[^24] Ibid., pp. 124-25.
[^25] Roberts's Personal Scripture Notebook, under "Views of Life and Character," Church Archives.
[^26] See New Witnesses, 3:489.
[^27] See "The sacrament of the Lord's supper" (TWL, 39). "In the Book of Mormon is given a most dramatic and soul-thrilling testimony to the resurrection of the Christ by the appearance of the risen Redeemer to a multitude of people in America, shortly after the resurrection of the Christ; thus to the people of America no less than to the people of the Eastern Hemisphere, did God give assurances through their ancient prophets from time to time of the existence of his gospel and of power unto salvation; and lastly the risen Christ came to them to assure them of the verities of the Plan of Salvation and especially of this feature of it, the Resurrection from the dead, by his own glorious appearance among them, and his quite extended ministry among them. (For all which, see Book of 3 Nephi, the whole book, but especially chapter 11.)" See also his stake conference addresses of January, March, and April 1931 and April and August 1932. In each he occasionally discoursed on these "prayers perfect."
[^28] TWL, 39. "Eternal Father" for example means to Roberts not first cause as in the classical view, but eternal continuing cause and eternal sustaining power; not the Aristotelian unmoved mover, but the "most moved mover," the most touched, the most impressed, the most compassionate.
[^29] This means to Roberts that the gospel cannot be reduced to an ethic only. It is a religion of transformation.
[^30] See his "Economics of the New Age" in Discourses of B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1948), p. 7.
[^31] Commentary on the Book of Genesis, Vol. II: From Noah to Abraham, trans. I. Abrahams (Jerusalem: Magnes Press, 1974), p. 84. Note also Psalm 18:16-17; 2 Samuel 22:16-17; Job 6:15; and Proverbs 8:24, 27-28.
[^32] See the preceding note and also the succinctly discussed and conveniently illustrated article by L. Jacobs, "Jewish Cosmology," in Ancient Cosmologies, Carmen Blacker and Michael Loewe, eds. (London: George Allen & Unwin, 1975), pp. 69-70.
