A series of video clips in which Elder M. Russell Ballard of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles addresses some of the questions most frequently asked by the news media has been posted on LDS.org.

Elder Ballard covers topics such as whether Latter-day Saints are Christian and whether or not the Church supports political candidates.

The video clips, available only in English, were produced to help better define the Church in the public mind—especially among journalists—because of increasing visibility in the United States. A series of national opinion polls has shown that a large segment of the population knows little or nothing about the Church.

Responding to one of the most common questions—Are Mormons Christians?—Elder Ballard said: “[Jesus Christ] is the center of all that we do, all that we hope to be. All of our dreams and future aspirations are centered in our belief in Jesus Christ and our willingness to know what His teachings are and to strive to keep His commandments.”

The unscripted interviews were conducted by members of the Church’s Public Affairs staff and announced during an online news conference with the religion writers of several newspapers around the country.

Church spokespersons said that the posting of an interview with a senior Church leader was one of several steps being taken to more clearly define Latter-day Saint beliefs and practices. It is expected that other interviews will follow on a range of topics, and will include other Apostles. Elder Ballard is presently chairman of the Church’s Public Affairs Committee.

Elder Ballard responded to the following questions: Are you Christian? What is the role of Jesus Christ in your faith? Do you worship Jesus Christ in your Sunday services? Why do some people say you are a cult? In what ways are you similar to other Christians? In what ways do you differ from other Christians? Was Joseph Smith a prophet? Are prophets necessary today? Is there scientific proof authenticating the Book of Mormon? Does the Church support political candidates?

To access the video clips, visit LDS.org, click on Newsroom in the lower right corner, and then enter the term “Elder Ballard interview” in the Search box.
