Nephi, a Book of Mormon prophet, loved the scriptures. He spent time reading them, thinking about them, and teaching them. Nephi knew that the scriptures would bring happiness.

Alma, another Book of Mormon prophet, learned that the Zoramites were not keeping the commandments. This made Alma sad. He wanted to help. He went on a mission and taught them the gospel. Because of the power of the word of God, many Zoramites repented and began to live the commandments.

Just like Nephi and Alma, you can have the power of the word of God each day by reading the scriptures.

Scripture power keeps me safe from sin.

Scripture power is the power to win.

Scripture power! Ev’ry day I need

The power that I get each time I read.

(“Scripture Power,” 2006 Outline for Sharing Time and the Children’s Sacrament Meeting Presentation, 10–11)

You are blessed to have the scriptures. As you read them, you will learn what the commandments are and how to keep them. You will be reminded that you are a child of God and He loves you.

Remove page F4, and mount it on heavy paper. Cut out the bookmark on the solid black lines. Fold on the dotted line, and glue the back sides of the bookmark together. Use the bookmark to help you keep your place as you read the scriptures. Mark the chart each day when you read the scriptures.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="127025200" id="aside1_p1"><strong>Note:</strong> If you do not wish to remove pages from the magazine, this activity may be copied or printed from the Internet at <a href="https://www.lds.org">www.lds.org</a>. For English, click on “Gospel Library.” For other languages, click on “Languages.”</p> [/SIDEBAR]

1.  Show a journal, and ask the children what it is. A journal is a record of the thoughts, feelings, and events we want to remember. Show Gospel Art Picture Kit 122 (Jacob Blessing His Sons), and briefly tell the story of Jacob, including the names of his 12 sons. Ask the children to listen for two of those names as you read Ezekiel 37:16. Explain to the children that Judah and Joseph and their descendants were told to keep records of important events that occurred. Read Ezekiel 37:15–17. Show Gospel Art Picture Kit 326 (The Bible and Book of Mormon: Two Witnesses), and explain that the Bible is the stick of Judah and the Book of Mormon is the stick of Joseph. Help the children memorize Ezekiel 37:17. Ask them to think of ways to become more familiar with the scriptures (marking the scriptures, memorizing scriptures, having personal and family scripture study, and so on). Testify of the blessing of having the Bible and the Book of Mormon “become one” as they testify of Christ (see also 2 Nephi 3:12).

2.  Prepare a matching activity using My Gospel Standards and scriptures from the Doctrine and Covenants. (Examples: “I will honor my parents and do my part to strengthen my family” and D&C 88:123; “I will seek good friends and treat others kindly” and D&C 4:6.) Write the words Doctrine and Covenant on the chalkboard, and discuss the meaning of both words. Turn to the Explanatory Introduction of the Doctrine and Covenants, and read the first sentence together. Talk about the unique characteristics of the Doctrine and Covenants (for example, it is divided into sections, not chapters, and it consists of revelations given in this dispensation). Write the scripture references for the activity on the chalkboard, and display My Gospel Standards. Assign children to look up the scriptures and match them to one of the standards. Invite several children to read a scripture and standard of their choice and share an example of how they can live that standard.
