Hyrum L. Andrus, War and Saints ( 1969)

God's Kingdom Founded Upon Peace

"The government of the Almighty has always been very dissimilar to the governments of men, whether we refer to his religious government, or to the government of nations," Joseph Smith observed. "The government of God has always tended to promote peace, unity, harmony, strength, and happiness; while that of man has been productive of confusion, disorder, weakness, and misery." Continuing, the Prophet explained:

The greatest acts of the mighty men have been to depopulate nations and to overthrow kingdoms; and whilst they have exalted themselves and become glorious, it has been at the expense of the lives of the innocent, the blood of the oppressed, the moans of the widow, and the tears of the orphan. ...

The designs of God, on the other hand, have been to promote the universal good of the universal world; to establish peace and good will among men; to promote the principles of eternal truth; to bring about a state of things that shall unite man to his fellow man; cause the world to "beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning hooks," make the nations of the earth dwell in peace, and to bring about the millennial glory, when "the earth shall yield its increase, resume its paradisean glory, and become as the garden of the Lord." [^1]

With such a foundation upon which to build, it should be apparent that Latter-day Saints are dedicated to the development of peaceful relations among men. In a revelation to the saints, the Lord instructed: "Therefore, renounce war and proclaim peace, and seek diligently to turn the hearts of the children to their fathers, and the hearts of the fathers to the children." (D&C 98:16.) Again the Lord has declared:

I say unto you, sue for peace, not only to the people that have smitten you, but also to all people;

And life up an ensign of peace, and make a proclamation of peace unto the ends of the earth;

And make proposals for peace unto those who have smitten you, according to the voice of the Spirit which is in you, and all things shall work together for your good. (D&C 105:38-40.)

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. Documentary History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 14.
