Hyrum L. Andrus, War and Saints ( 1969)

God's Policy on Conflict and War

Though the Kingdom of God is founded upon peace and is designed to promote peace and good will among men, there are times when the saints are justified in engaging in conflict and war. The position they should take in relation to such matters has been set forth in modern revelation. Concerning individuals and their families in cases of aggression, the Lord said:

Now, I speak unto you concerning your families—if men will smite you, or your families, once, and ye bear it patiently and revile not against them, neither seek revenge, ye shall be rewarded;

But if ye bear it not patiently, it shall be accounted unto you as being meted out as a just measure unto you.

And again, if your enemy shall smite you the second time, and you revile not against your enemy, and bear it patiently, your reward shall be an hundred-fold.

And again, if he shall smite you the third time, and ye bear it patiently, your reward shall be doubled unto you four-fold;

And these three testimonies shall stand against your enemy if he repent not, and shall not be blotted out.

And now, verily I say unto you, if that enemy shall escape my vengeance, that he be not brought into judgment before me, then ye shall see to it that ye warn him in my name, that he come no more upon you, neither upon your family, even your children's children unto the third and fourth generation.

And then, if he shall come upon you or your children, or your children's children unto the third and fourth generation, I have delivered thine enemy into thine hands;

And then if thou wilt spare him, thou shalt be rewarded for thy righteousness; and also thy children and thy children's children unto the third and fourth generation.

Nevertheless, thine enemy is in thine hands; and if thou rewardest him according to his works thou art justified; if he has sought thy life, and thy life is endangered by him, thine enemy is in thine hands and thou art justified. (D&C 98:23-31.)

This policy has its basis in the Lord's instructions to ancient prophets, apostles, and saints. "Behold, this is the law I gave unto my servant Nephi," the Lord explained, "and thy fathers, Joseph, and Jacob, and Isaac, and Abraham, and all mine ancient prophets and apostles." (D&C 98:32.)

The above law should not be confused with the requirement that the saints should forgive those who trespass against them seventy times seven. Here forgiveness is based upon the repentance of the transgressor. But when there is no repentance and restitution the above-stated law may be enforced. It is when the offender repents and makes restitution for his deed that the saints are required to forgive seventy times seven. On this point the Lord said:

And again, verily I say unto you, if after thine enemy has come upon thee the first time, he repent and come unto thee praying thy forgiveness, thou shalt forgive him, and shalt hold it no more as a testimony against thine enemy—

And so on unto the second and third time; and as oft as thine enemy repenteth of the trespass wherewith he has trespassed against thee, thou shalt forgive him, until seventy times seven. (D&C 98:39-40.)

That there might be no misunderstanding, the Lord, having explained the law of forgiveness, then stressed the circumstances under which the saints may obtain justice and retribution, stating:

If he [an enemy] trespass against thee and repent not the first time, nevertheless thou shalt forgive him.

And if he trespass against thee the second time, and repent not, nevertheless thou shalt forgive him.

And if he trespass against thee the third time, and repent not, thou shalt also forgive him.

But if he trespass against thee the fourth time thou shalt not forgive him, but shalt bring these testimonies before the Lord; and they shall not be blotted out until he repent and reward thee four-fold in all things wherewith he has trespassed against thee.

And if he do this, thou shalt forgive him with all thine heart; and if he do not this, I the Lord, will avenge thee of thine enemy an hundred-fold;

And upon his children, and upon his children's children of them that hate me, unto the third and fourth generation.

But if the children shall repent, or the children's children, and turn to the Lord their God, with all their hearts and with all their might, mind, and strength, and restore four-fold for all their trespasses wherewith they have trespassed, or wherewith their fathers have trespassed, or their father's fathers, then thine indignation shall be turned away;

And vengeance shall no more come upon them, saith the Lord thy God, and their trespasses shall never be brought any more as a testimony before the Lord against them. (D&C 98:41-48.)

Under the law of God, the principles expressed above apply also to belligerent nations. Here the revelation explained:

And again, this is the law that I give unto mine ancients, that they should not go out unto battle against any nation, kindred, tongue, or people, save I, the Lord, commanded them.

And if any nation, tongue, or people should proclaim war against them, they should first lift a standard of peace unto that people, nation, or tongue;

And if that people did not accept that offering of peace, neither the second nor the third time, they should bring these testimonies before the Lord;

Then I, the Lord, would give unto them a commandment, and justify them in going to battle against that nation, tongue, or people.

And I, the Lord, would fight their battles, and their children's battles, and their children's children's, until they had avenged themselves on all their enemies, to the third and fourth generation.

Behold, this is an example unto all people, saith the Lord your God, for justification before me. (D&C 98:33-38.)

The statements above are expressions of true Christian principles. It is not God's desire that truth, virtue, and justice be trampled in the dust to rise no more. He is a God of truth and of justice, and it is his desire that these and related principles triumph in the earth. But under the law of God, man is not justified in aggression, even for the cause of truth. Nevertheless, man may be justified in defending himself against aggressors in the way prescribed in the above revelation. Elder John A. Widtsoe, a former member of the Council of the Twelve, wrote:

At times men are justly engaged in war. The eternal battle has been between right and wrong. Whenever evil has girded itself for war, it may be necessary to use the same weapons to secure defeat of evil. Contrary as it may be to righteous feeling, in the fight for the right, cannon must often be used to meet cannon. Certainly, every means must be used to protect truth from the domination of untruth.

The injunction of the Saviour to turn "the other cheek," does not mean surrender to untruth, but patience, long suffering, before entering into controversy with one's fellow man. This doctrine is clearly taught in modern revelation. ...

There is no suggestion here that evil shall be allowed to range unhindered in the world, to the injury of humanity. There comes a time when patience is no longer required.

But the righteous will show forebearance as long as it is possible or proper to do so. [^1]

President David O. McKay, at the time a counselor in the First Presidency, has also written his opinion on the subject of war and when it is justifiable under the law of God:

There are conditions when entrance into war is justifiable, and when a Christian nation may, without violation of principles, take up arms against an opposing force.

Such a condition, however, is not a real or fancied insult given by one nation to another. When this occurs proper reparations may be made by mutual understanding, apology, or by arbitration.

Neither is there justifiable cause found in a desire or even a need for territorial expansion. The taking of territory implies the subjugation of the weak by the strong—the application of the jungle law.

Nor is war justifiable in an attempt to enforce a new order of government, or even to impel others to a particular form of worship, however better the government or eternally true the principles of the enforced religion may be.

There are, however, two conditions which may justify a truly Christian man to enter—mind you, I say enter, not begin—a war: (1) An attempt to dominate and to deprive another of his free agency, and (2) Loyalty to his country. Possibly there is a third, viz., Defense of a weak nation that is being unjustly crushed by a strong, ruthless one. [^2]

Although God never justifies a man or a nation in being an aggressor, he expects the righteous to defend their lives and liberties against those who would destroy them, according to the principles that have been set forth above. For this reason, a Christian people whose national policy is non-aggression should keep themselves militarily strong. In his "Views of the Powers and Policy of the Government of the United States," Joseph Smith wrote:

The great Washington ... advised Congress that "among the many interesting objects which will engage your attention, that of providing for the common defense will merit particular regard. To be prepared for war is one of the most effectual means of preserving peace." [^3]

There are some principles God expects the saints to give their lives to maintain, if the need requires them to do so. They should ever be willing to give their lives for the cause of God. "Let no man be afraid to lay down his life for my sake; for whoso layeth down his life for my sake shall find it again," the Lord declared. "And whoso is not willing to lay down his life for my sake is not my disciple." (D&C 103:27-28.)

The cause of God is the cause of human freedom and dignity. Because he viewed man's responsibility to give his life, if necessary, for the cause of God, Joseph Smith declared:

The Saints can testify whether I am willing to lay down my life for my brethren. If it has been demonstrated that I have been willing to die for a "Mormon," I am bold to declare before heaven that I am just as ready to die in defending the rights of a Presbyterian, a Baptist, or a good man of any other denomination; for the same principle which would trample upon the rights of the Latter-day Saints would trample upon the rights of the Roman Catholics, or of any other denomination who may be unpopular and too weak to defend themselves.

It is a love of liberty which inspires my soul—civil and religious liberty to the whole human race. [^4]

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. Documentary History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 14.
[^2] 2. Odin is the god of war, chief of the gods of Norse mythology.
