Hyrum L. Andrus, War and Saints ( 1969)

Killing in Defense of Government Not Murder

When a nation becomes involved in war, many serious questions inevitably confront the individual, particularly young men of military age. Immediately they begin to ponder the questions, What should be one's attitude toward the enemy? toward his government? toward military service? If one is brought in the course of military duty before the enemy, should he shoot to kill? And if he kills an enemy, has he committed murder?

These questions are as old as mortal time, but they confront each new generation that is forced by circumstances to face the problem of war. In our day, the Lord has said that he justifies members of the Church "in befriending that law which is the constitutional law of the land." (D&C 98:6.) In an official statement to the Church in 1942, the First Presidency explained what it means for one to sustain the political system under which he lives during a period of war and how such support relates to murder:

We have not forgotten that on Sinai, God commanded "Thou shalt not kill;" nor that in this dispensation the Lord has repeatedly reiterated that command. ...

But all these commands, from Sinai down, run in very specific terms against individuals as members of society, as well as members of the Church, for one man must not kill another as Cain killed Abel. ...

But the Church membership are citizens or subjects of sovereignties over which the Church has no control. The Lord himself has told us to "befriend that law which is the constitutional law of the land." ...

While by its terms this revealed word related more especially to this land of America, nevertheless the principles announced are world-wide in their application. ... When, therefore, constitutional law, obedient to these principles, calls the manhood of the Church into the armed service of any country to which they owe allegiance, their highest civic duty requires that they meet that call. If, hearkening to that call and obeying those in command over them, they shall take the lives of those who fight against them, that will not make of them murderers, nor subject them to the penalty that God has prescribed for those who kill. ... For it would be a cruel God that would punish his children as moral sinners for acts done by them as the innocent instrumentalities of a sovereign whom he had told them to obey and whose will they were powerless to resist. [^1]

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. Documentary History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 14.
