Hyrum L. Andrus, War and Saints ( 1969)

Nephite Policy on War

As a people, the Nephites were under the law of God and acted according to that law in their military engagements. In abridging their history, Mormon declared: "They were ... taught never to give an offense, yea, and never to raise the sword ... except it were to preserve their lives." Nevertheless, he observed that they "were taught to defend themselves against their enemies, even to the shedding of blood if it were necessary." (Alma 48:14.) Continuing, the Nephite historian and general wrote:

And this was their faith, that by so doing God would prosper them in the land, or in other words, if they were faithful in keeping the commandments of God that he would prosper them in the land; yea, warn them to flee, or to prepare for war, according to their danger;

And also, that God would make it known unto them whither they should go to defend themselves against their enemies, and by so doing, the Lord would deliver them; and this was the faith of [General] Moroni, and his heart did glory in it; not in the shedding of blood but in doing good, in preserving his people, yea, in keeping the commandments of God, yea, and resisting iniquity. (Alma 48:15-16.)

Like the early Israelites from whom they descended, the Nephites gave the command of their armies to prophets who sought inspiration from God in directing their military efforts. Mormon explained: "Now it was the custom among all the Nephites to appoint for their chief captains, (save it were in their times of wickedness) some one that had the spirit of revelation and also prophecy. ..." (3 Nephi 3:19.) Their prophets, knowing the law of God, acted with intelligence and restraint in their responsibilities under that law. For instance, when the Gadianton robbers became a problem to the Nephites, the people said to their prophet-leader. Gidgiddoni: "Pray unto the Lord, and let us go upon the mountains and into the wilderness, that we may fall upon the robbers and destroy them in their own lands." But asserting the Nephite policy of non-aggression, Gidgiddoni said:

The Lord forbid; for if we should go up against them the Lord would deliver us into their hands; therefore we will prepare ourselves in the center of our lands, and we will gather all our armies together, and we will not go against them, but we will wait till they shall come against us; therefore as the Lord liveth, if we do this he will deliver them into our hands. (3 Nephi 3:20-21.)

Mormon also acted on these principles during his military career. When the Nephites, who were then in a state of apostasy, began "to boast in their own strength" and swear that they "would avenge themselves" upon their enemies, the Lamanites, he wrote: "I, Mormon, did utterly refuse from this time forth to be a commander and a leader of this people, because of their wickedness and abominations." (Mormon 3:9-11.) Continuing, he explained:

When they had sworn by all that had been forbidden them by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, that they would go up unto their enemies to battle, and avenge themselves of the blood of their brethren, behold the voice of the Lord came unto me saying:

Vengeance is mine, and I will repay; and because this people repented not after I had delivered them, behold, they shall be cut off from the face of the earth.

And it came to pass that I utterly refused to go up against mine enemies; and I did even as the Lord had commanded me; and I did stand as an idle witness to manifest unto the world the things which I saw and heard, according to the manifestations of the Spirit which had testified of things to come. (Mormon 3:14-16.)

When the Nephites continued to depart from their traditional policy of defense, rather than aggression, Mormon again recorded: "... it was because the armies of the Nephites went up unto the Lamanites that they began to be smitten; for were it not for that, the Lamanites could have had no power over them." (Mormon 4:4.)

Nephite military policy was based upon living faith in God and the application of the Christian law of love and forebearance. When, at an earlier time in Nephite history, the Lamanites came to battle and the Nephites were "reluctantly compelled to contend" with them, Mormon wrote: "Now, they were sorry to take up arms against the Lamanites, because they did not delight in the shedding of blood; yea, and this was not all—they were sorry to be the means of sending so many of their brethren out of this world into an eternal world, unprepared to meet their God." (Alma 48:23.)

In accepting this view of things, there was no other policy the Nephites could adopt in their military engagements but that of defending themselves against their enemies. This, however, they did, even if it meant that they were required to kill their antagonists. Early in their history, Nephi wrote: "I, Nephi, did take the sword of Laban, and after the manner of it did make many swords, lest by any means the people who were now called Lamanites should come unto us and destroy us; for I knew their hatred towards me and my children and those who were called my people." (2 Nephi 5:14.) Nephi not only made weapons for his people, but he also "wielded the sword of Laban in their defense." (Jacob 1:10.) Of the Nephite policy of defense in early times, Jarom wrote:

We multiplied exceedingly, and spread upon the face of the land, and became exceeding rich in gold, and in silver, and in precious things, and in fine workmanship of wood, in buildings, and in machinery, and also in iron and copper, and brass and steel, making all manner of tools of every kind to till the ground, and weapons of war—yea, the sharp pointed arrow, and the quiver, and the dart, and the javelin, and all preparations for war.

And thus being prepared to meet the Lamanites, they did not prosper against us. But the word of the Lord was verified, which he spake unto our fathers, saying that: Inasmuch as ye will keep my commandments ye shall prosper in the land. (Jarom 8-9.)
