Hyrum L. Andrus, War and Saints ( 1969)

Military Philosophy of General Moroni

General Moroni, one of the most colorful and dramatic military figures among the Nephites, exemplified to perfection their philosophy of war. He was given command over all the Nephite forces at a time of prolonged conflict with the Lamanites. When an enemy force of superior numbers began to move against his people, General Moroni learned of their plan of attack, by revelation through the prophet Alma, and prepared to meet them. In reporting his preparations in light of Nephite military policy, Mormon said:

Moroni placed spies round about, that he might know when the camp of the Lamanites should come.

And now, as Moroni knew the intention of the Lamanites, that it was their intention to destroy their brethren, or to subject them and bring them into bondage that they might establish a kingdom unto themselves over all the land;

And he also knowing that it was the only desire of the Nephites to preserve their lands, and their liberty, and their church, therefore he thought it no sin that he should defend them by strategem. (Alma 43:28-30.)

In a fair and open contest such as one that tests an opponent's strength and skill in a given sport, the use of strategy such as Moroni devised would have been unfair and therefore unchristian. But this was no game. The intention of the Lamanites was to kill and subjugate, while that of the Nephites was only to preserve their lives, their religion, and their freedom. The Nephites were not going up to battle as aggressors against the Lamanites, and the Lamanites had been guilty of the initial offenses. Mormon gave special attention to these points of military policy as he related the details of the battle that followed. Having reported that during the struggle General Moroni and his men met with fierce and terrible opposition born of hatred and desperation, the Nephite historian wrote:

Nevertheless, the Nephites were inspired by a better cause, for they were not fighting for monarchy nor power but they were fighting for their homes and their liberties, their wives and their children, and their all, yea, for their rites of worship and their church.

And they were doing that which they felt was the duty which they owed to their God; for the Lord had said unto them, and also unto their fathers, that: Inasmuch as ye are not guilty of the first offense, neither the second, ye shall not suffer yourselves to be slain by the hands of your enemies.

And again, the Lord has said that: Ye shall defend your families even unto bloodshed. Therefore for this cause were the Nephites contending with the Lamanites, to defend themselves, and their families, and their lands, their country, and their rights, and their religion. (Alma 43:45-47.)

When, by strategy and superior armor, the Nephites finally gained the advantage over their opponents who outnumbered them more than two to one, the Lamanites were struck with terror. At this point, General Moroni, with true Christian forebearance, "commanded his men that they should stop shedding their blood." (Alma 43:54.) Having withdrawn his army a short distance, Moroni then spoke to the Lamanites, explaining the Nephite policy of non-aggression, and commanded them to surrender, promising that if they would do so and covenant to come not again to battle they might go free. At this, Zarahemnah, the Lamanite leader, delivered up his sword, but refused to take the oath of peace; whereupon Moroni returned his sword and declared: "Behold, we will end the conflict." (Alma 44:10.)

As Moroni spoke, Zarahemnah raised his sword and rushed upon the Nephite general. But an alert attendant struck the upraised weapon and broke it at the hilt. The next blow removed the Lamanite leader's scalp. As it fell to the earth and as the Lamanite leader retreated into the ranks of his men, the Nephite soldier picked up the scalp and, placing it upon the tip of his sword, cried: "Even as this scalp has fallen to the earth, which is the scalp of your chief, so shall ye fall to the earth except ye will deliver up your weapons of war and depart with a covenant of peace." (Alma 44:14.)

Many Lamanites then surrendered with a covenant of peace. But Zarahemnah stirred up the remainder of his men to greater anger, and again the battle commenced. But when it became obvious that the naked Lamanites could not withstand the Nephites with their superior armor. Zarahemnah called for mercy and took the oath of peace; and the battle ceased.
