Hyrum L. Andrus, War and Saints ( 1969)

The Title of Liberty

Notwithstanding this great victory and the promise of the Lamanite soldiers to keep the peace, a major and prolonged war soon took place between the Nephites and the Lamanites. Mormon wrote: "Their wars never did cease for the space of many years with the Lamanites, notwithstanding their much reluctance." Again the Nephites were forced to take up arms. "They could not suffer to lay down their lives," Mormon explained, "that their wives and their children should be massacred, ... so long as there were any who should keep the commandments of God, for the promise of the Lord was, if they should keep his commandments they should prosper in the land." (Alma 48:22-25.)

During this period of conflict, the Nephite republic was challenged with dissent from within and opposition from without. The policy they followed in meeting these dual problems should be studied thoughtfully by all freedom-loving people today. Freedom is a privilege equal with life; and the establishment and maintenance of freedom are serious matters for which men may justifiably give their lives. According to the law of God, men may also take up arms against their fellow men in the defense of freedom. This is not only their right but their responsibility. These facts were ably demonstrated by the Nephite patriots during this critical and prolonged struggle.

The trouble began when a group of dissenters repudiated the free institutions upon which the Nephite government was established; and Amalickiah, their leader, sought to make himself king. But when General Moroni heard of this insurrection, "he rent his coat; and he took a piece thereof, and wrote upon it—In memory of our God, our religion, and freedom, and our peace, our wives, and our children—and he fastened it upon the end of a pole." Having put on his military gear, he then "prayed mightily unto his God for the blessings of liberty to rest upon his brethren, so long as there should be a band of Christians remain to possess the land." Declaring the land upon which the Nephites dwelt to be a "chosen land" and a "land of liberty," he went forth among the people waving the title of liberty and proclaiming: "Behold whosoever will maintain this title upon the land, let them come forth in the strength of the Lord, and enter into a covenant that they will maintain their rights, and their religion, that the Lord God may bless them." (Alma 46:1-20.)

When many people rallied to the title of liberty, Amalickiah and his followers grew fearful and fled toward the land of the Lamanites. But Moroni cut off their retreat and, except for Amalickiah and a few of his men who escaped, brought the dissenters back.

The destruction of their institutions of freedom was considered by the Nephites to be serious business. Of the judgment that was executed upon the dissenters for their treasonous acts and of the way Moroni again established freedom in the land, the record states:

Now, Moroni being a man who was appointed by the chief judges and the voice of the people, therefore he had power according to his will with the armies of the Nephites, to establish and to exercise authority over them.

And it came to pass that whomsoever of the Amalickiahites that would not enter into a covenant to support the cause of freedom, that they might maintain a free government, he caused to be put to death; and there were but few who denied the covenant of freedom.

And it came to pass also, that he caused the title of liberty to be hoisted upon every tower which was in all the land, which was possessed by the Nephites; and thus Moroni planted the standard of liberty among the Nephites. (Alma 46:34-36.)

Meanwhile, by murder and intrigue, Amalickiah established himself as king of the Lamanites and prepared them for war with the Nephites.

To meet the new threat, Moroni fortified the Nephite cities with a system of fortresses, timbers, and pickets that would have repelled the Lamanite invasion. But even as the Nephites prepared their defenses, contention again broke out in their midst. Again a group of dissenters sought to do away with their system of free government and establish a king over the land. When the issue was brought before the people, they gave their decision in favor of "the cause of freedom." (Alma 51:2-7.)

But the dissenters, consisting of those of "high birth" and "supported by those who sought power and authority over the people," were not satisfied. When they "heard that the Lamanites were coming to battle against them, they were glad in their hearts; and they refused to take up arms, for they were so wroth with the chief judge, and also with the people of liberty, that they would not take up arms to defend their country." Again Moroni was forced to take drastic action. "He sent a petition, with the voice of the people, unto the governor of the land, desiring that he should read it, and give him (Moroni) power to compel those dissenters to defend their country or to put them to death." Permission was given, and Moroni and the Nephite army went against the "kingmen." The record states: "There were four thousand of those dissenters who were hewn down by the sword; and those of their leaders who were not slain in battle were taken and cast into prison, for there was no time for their trials at this period." (Alma 51:8-19.)

The Lamanites had entered the land and, taking advantage of the Nephite disunion, had taken several of their fortified cities. A long and tedious war followed. During the conflict, Teancum, a loyal military leader under Moroni, did not hesitate to steal into Amalickiah's tent at night and "put a javelin to his heart." (Alma 51:34.) And when Ammoron, the new Lamanite leader, wrote an epistle to Moroni asserting that the Lamanites were justified in their aggression, the Nephite leader vowed: "I will seek death among them until they shall sue for peace." (Alma 54:13; 55:3.)

Nevertheless, the Nephite general stood by his principles. When he and his men got the Lamanites drunk in one of their captured cities and surrounded them in the night, he could have destroyed them. "But behold," the record states, "this was not the desire of Moroni; he did not delight in murder or bloodshed, but he delighted in the saving of his people from destruction; and for this cause he might not bring upon him injustice, he would not fall upon the Lamanites and destroy them in their drunkenness." (Alma 55:19.) Moroni subdued them, however, and repossessed the captured city.

During these critical times, dissension again broke out among the Nephite people, and the situation became so desperate that replacements and supplies were not sent to the army in the field. Not knowing what was the matter and feeling that Pahoran the chief judge might be at fault, Moroni wrote him a patriotic epistle demanding support for their military efforts, stating:

Except ye do repent of that which ye have done, and begin to be up and doing, and send forth food and men unto us, and also unto Helaman, that he may support those parts of our country which he has regained, and that we may also recover the remainder of our possessions in these parts, behold it will be expedient that we contend no more with the Lamanites until we have first cleansed our inward vessel, yea, even the great head of our government.

And except ye grant mine epistle, and come out and show unto me a true spirit of freedom, and strive to strengthen and fortify our armies, and grant unto them food for their support, behold, I will leave a part of my freemen to maintain this part of our land, and I will leave the strength and the blessings of God upon them, that none other power can operate against them—

And this because of their exceeding faith, and their patience in their tribulations—

And I will come unto you, and if there be any among you that has a desire for freedom, yea, if there be even a spark of freedom remaining, behold I will stir up insurrections among you, even until those who have desires to usurp power and authority shall become extinct.

Behold, I wait for assistance from you; and, except ye do administer unto our relief, behold, I come unto you, even in the land of Zarahemla, and smite you with the sword, insomuch that ye can have no more power to impede the progress of this people in the cause of our freedom.

Behold, I am Moroni, your chief captain. I seek not for power, but to pull it down. I seek not for honor of the world, but for the glory of my God, and the freedom and welfare of my country. And thus I close mine epistle. (Alma 60:24-27, 30, 36.)

Pahoran was not at fault, for the dissenters had deposed him. But he fled to a place of safety and sent forth a proclamation throughout the land; and many people flocked to him "in defence of their country and their freedom." (Alma 61:6.)

When Pahoran received Moroni's epistle, he wrote in reply:

You have censured me, but it mattereth not; I am not angry, but do rejoice in the greatness of your heart. 'I, Pahoran, do not seek for power, save only to retain my judgment-seat that I may preserve the rights and the liberty of my people. My soul standeth fast in that liberty in which God hath made us free.

And now, behold, we will resist wickedness even unto bloodshed. We would not shed the blood of the Lamanites if they would stay in their own land.

We would not shed the blood of our brethren if they would not rise in rebellion and take the sword against us.

We would subject ourselves to the yoke of bondage if it were requisite with the justice of God, or if he should command us so to do.

But behold he doth not command us that we should subject ourselves to our enemies, but that we should put our trust in him, and he will deliver us.

Therefore, my beloved brother, Moroni, let us resist evil, and whatsoever evil we cannot resist with our words, yea, such as rebellions and dissensions, let us resist them with our swords, that we may retain our freedom, that we may rejoice in the great privilege of our church, and in the cause of our Redeemer and our God. (Alma 61:9-14.)

In Moroni's patriotic letter to Pahoran and in Pahoran's reply may be found the Nephite philosophy of war. It was not the will of God that they should permit their freedoms to be trampled upon and destroyed. They understood that there was a higher law than the law of man; and when men commenced to destroy their freedom, Moroni felt justified in threatening to stir up insurrections against tyranny and misrule. Christians cannot be aggressors; otherwise they are not Christians. But true Christians should resist infringement upon their freedom, even if they have to take up arms against the oppressors. And in their resistance to oppression, men of Christian faith should seek for the strength and blessings of God to accompany their cause.

The Nephite situation was made more difficult by the fact that Pachus, the leader of the insurrection, had joined in an alliance with the king of the Lamanites. The Nephite dissenter agreed to maintain the Nephite capital, Zarahemla, and thereby enable the Lamanites to conquer the remainder of the land. In return for his part in the plan, Pachus was to be made king over the Nephites, under the rule of the Lamanites.

To thwart this plan, Pahoran asked Moroni to leave Lehi and Teancum, his subordinates, in charge of their defenses and come with the remainder of his men to aid in restoring the government. This General Moroni did; and as he went, he raised "the standard of liberty in whatsoever place he did enter." The record states: "And it came to pass that thousands did flock unto his standard, and did take up their swords in the defence of their freedom, that they might not come into bondage." (Alma 62:4-5.)

Pahoran and Moroni then met Pachus in battle and defeated him. During the struggle, Pachus was killed and his men taken prisoners. The surviving dissenters were then tried according to law, along with the king-men who had caused the earlier insurrection; and "whosoever would not take up arms in defence of their country, but would fight against it, were put to death." (Alma 62:9.)

With their forces united, the Nephites soon conquered the invading Lamanites. Because of the Nephite policy of permitting their prisoners to go free, providing they took the covenant of non-aggression, many Lamanite soldiers desired to live under Nephite law after the war had ceased. These were allowed to join other Lamanites who lived as free people within Nephite territory. The Christian principles which the Nephites espoused brought their rewards by converting others to their program of freedom and peace.
