Ed J. Pinegar, Especially for Missionaries, vol. 4 ( 1997)

Disciples and Ambassadors of Christ

As missionaries and missionary leaders, we talk of Christ, we preach of Christ, we testify of Christ. All of us who are serving the Lord in the mission field are disciples, hoping to be pure ambassadors of our Savior, Jesus Christ.

As ambassadors of Christ, we must remember that everything connected with God's plan exists through and by his beloved Son, Jesus Christ. The foundation of the Church is his gospel, and central to the gospel is the Atonement of Christ. When we live the gospel of Jesus Christ, when we believe in the principles and ordinances of faith, repentance, covenant making and the gift of the Holy Ghost, we believe in those things because of Jesus Christ. We are his disciples and ambassadors. The light that we hold (see 3 Ne. 18:24) is the Lord Jesus Christ. As Elder Hans B. Ringger so eloquently explains,

The foundation and guiding light for all our decisions is the gospel of Jesus Christ and His message to the world. The teachings of Christ must be embedded in our desire to choose the right and in our wish to find happiness. His righteous life must be reflected in our own actions. The Lord not only teaches love, He is love. He not only preached the importance of faith, repentance, baptism, and the gift of the Holy Ghost, He lived accordingly. His life reflected the gospel that He preached. There was and is total harmony between His thoughts and His actions. (Ensign, May 1990, p. 25)

We cannot bear testimony of this Church and this kingdom without knowing Jesus Christ, the Savior of the world. When we know Christ, we can hold up his light; he is the light and the life of the world (see John 8:12). And when we hold up that light, then we truly become his disciples.

In 3 Ne. 15:12, Jesus Christ tells his disciples that "ye are a light unto this people," and he explains that they will bless all of Heavenly Father's children. Earlier, Christ had instructed the Nephites not to put their light under a bushel, but to put it "on a candlestick, and it giveth light to all that are in the house" (3 Ne. 12:15). That same instruction applies to each of us: when we possess the light of Jesus Christ, we must not put it under a bushel. That light must be held up, and then--and only then--will we be true and worthy representatives of our Savior, Jesus Christ.

We must not be manipulative salespeople. We must be disciples of Christ. All the knowledge and skills we learn must be magnified by the power of God, by the attributes of Christ, by the Spirit of the Lord, by the mind and will of the Lord.
