Ed J. Pinegar, Especially for Missionaries, vol. 4 ( 1997)

The Power of the Holy Ghost

If I would pray for anything for the missionaries scattered all over the world, I would pray that the Spirit of the Lord would come upon them with such power that they would never, ever want to do anything wrong again. When we're filled with the power of the Holy Ghost, we simply cannot sin. That's why the Nephite nation in 3 Ne. 19:9 prayed "for that which they most desired; and they desired that the Holy Ghost should be given unto them."

Why would the Nephites desire the Holy Ghost so fervently? Elder Parley P. Pratt answered this question when he described the extraordinary characteristics of this remarkable power:

The gift of the Holy Ghost . . . quickens all the intellectual faculties, increases, enlarges, expands, and purifies all the natural passions and affections, and adapts them by the gift of wisdom to their lawful use. It inspires virtue, kindness, goodness, tenderness, gentleness, and charity. It develops beauty of person, form and features. It tends to health, vigor, animation, and social feeling. It develops and invigorates all the faculties of the physical and intellectual man. It strengthens, invigorates, and gives tone to the nerves. In short, it is, as it were, marrow to the bone, joy to the heart, light to the eyes, music to the ears, and life to the whole being. (Key to Theology, Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1978, pp. 101-2)

Can you imagine how your mission will be enhanced as you invite this sacred power into your life and use it to bless those you teach and work with?

I'll never forget the time when Nephi was preaching on a tower, and he told the people that the chief judge, Cezoram, was dead (see Hel. 8 and 9).

"How do you know?" the people ask.

"Because the Spirit of the Lord has told me," he replies.

Five men run to check out the report, and they find the chief judge dead. Unfortunately, the guards find the five men with the chief judge and accuse them of murder. The five men are thrown in jail, even as they protest: "Hey, we didn't do it. Nephi told us about this."

"Aha, he framed you," the guards then decide, so they return to Nephi and accuse him of the murder. Nephi denies the wrongdoing. "But," he says, "you go to Chief Cezoram's brother and accuse him. He'll deny it, but ask him about the blood on his cloak. Then he'll confess."

The guards follow the instructions to the letter, and the chief judge's brother confesses to the terrible deed.

However, back in prison, something marvelous is happening to the five men who were first accused of the murder. The Spirit of the Lord comes upon them and they are converted. And then in Hel. 9:39 it says: "There were some of the Nephites who believed on the words of Nephi; and there were some also, who believed because of the testimony of the five, for they had been converted while they were in prison."

Now, don't ever think your testimony isn't strong, because it is. Every testimony that's born is not born of man, but born of God by the power of the Holy Ghost. When you bear testimony, it's not you. It's not me. It's the Spirit of God, and that's powerful.

Just the other day I got a letter. "Dear President Pinegar," it started. "We didn't know what we were doing. We didn't know which way was up, but we took ten copies of the Book of Mormon, we placed ten copies, and we have nine referrals. Is that pretty good?"

Pretty good? This elder didn't know all the dialogues. He didn't know every word to say. But he loved the Lord and loved the person he was talking to, and when he bore testimony of the Book of Mormon, that testimony went into the other person's heart. "For when a man speaketh by the power of the Holy Ghost the power of the Holy Ghost carrieth it unto the hearts of the children of men" (2 Ne. 33:1).

Each missionary has been called of God. Do you understand the magnitude of that? You've taken upon yourself sacred covenants. You've been empowered from on high. In my eyes, you're wonderful. If you abhor sin, and you are like Nephi of old--any of the Nephis spoken of in the scriptures--you will with "unwearyingness" want to be obedient. With unwearyingness you will want to be kind to your companion, even when he or she doesn't deserve it. With unwearyingness you'll say your prayers; you'll do every needful thing. With unwearyingness and perseverance you'll do those things you've covenanted to do.

As missionaries, you must teach the Lord's word from his book, for these are the scriptures of the Restoration. You can Bible-bash until you die. I know, because I've done it and I died! It does not work. But when you look into the eyes of your investigators and testify, "It's true, I beg of you to read it. I testify," then they will believe. You will be blessed if you follow President Ezra Taft Benson's admonition to "root them to the book and you root them to Christ." If they discover the Book of Mormon is true, then the Prophet Joseph Smith has to be the prophet of the Restoration, and this Church has to be the true church, and it follows reasonably that they must be baptized. Don't you like that logic? I love it.

You enter the mission field to find, teach, and baptize. There is no hope for anyone on this earth unless they receive the covenants of the priesthood of God through baptism and the holy temple. You can be friendly and kind and loving, and that is good. But you must testify with power to bring people to Christ.
