Ed J. Pinegar, Especially for Missionaries, vol. 4 ( 1997)

Giving Yourself to the Lord

Oh, you missionaries are so good! You'll increase in your faith because you have a vision of who you are. You'll possess the pure love of Christ because you know who you are. You'll choose to be exactly obedient because you love your God.

The cure for every ill on this earth is righteousness by the power of the Spirit in the strength of Christ. You won't need the help of mortals when you have the Savior and the Spirit with you. You don't need to talk to me or anybody else. You'll go straight to your Father in prayer, knowing that sometimes the Lord uses a variety of instruments.

I think of two missionaries, a companionship I worked with when I was mission president. These two elders were my assistants. "President," they said, "we've only got a month left. We're training the new assistants, and they're doing really well. President, please let us go teach and baptize." In other words, they didn't want the honor of being assistants to the president or any other honors of men. "Let us just go find and teach," they said. "President, we feel the power of God is upon us." And with that commitment and their strong desire, they went out and joyfully baptized twenty-three people in one month.

How was that possible? Simple: It happened because of the goodness of two missionaries who gave themselves to the Lord and asked every day, "Father, what would thou have us do?" And then they went out and did it. They were perfect examples of the qualities described by President Gordon B. Hinckley when he observed:

In this work there must be commitment. There must be devotion. We are engaged in a great eternal struggle that concerns the very souls of the sons and daughters of God. We are not losing. We are winning. We will continue to win if we will be faithful and true. We can do it. We must do it. We will do it. There is nothing the Lord has asked of us that in faith we cannot accomplish. (Ensign, November 1986, p. 44)

Each one of you needs help, and so do I. Sister Pinegar's my keeper, and she works hard to help me do what's right. I pray that each of you would be your brothers' and sisters' keeper, and as you work to help each other, remember Matt. 25:40: "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me."

Each day I pray that you'll take a moment to look in the mirror (maybe the mirror could even have a picture of Christ taped to it) and evaluate your life. Then go and do as Jesus would do. Every day, let us be as the Savior Jesus Christ would have us be.

And what manner of men and women ought we to be? The Savior answered: "Therefore I would that ye should be perfect even as I, or your Father who is in heaven is perfect" (3 Ne. 12:48).
