Ed J. Pinegar, Especially for Missionaries, vol. 4 ( 1997)

Humility and Spiritual Growth

As part of the perfection process, the Book of Mormon instructs us that we must be humble or we will not learn (see 2 Ne. 9:42). And in Ether 12:25-28, we are told that becoming humble is part of the process of learning, recognizing our weaknesses, and becoming strong and great in the Lord's hands. Humility is essential to that process:

And if men come unto me I will show unto them their weakness. I give unto men weakness that they may be humble; and my grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them. (Ether 12:27)

Certainly the people in the Book of Mormon had a hard time with humility, and we have a hard time, too. But we are told that when God loves a people, he chastens them (see Heb. 12:6). Chastening often results in humility, and we cannot grow without humility.

Humility is the beginning virtue or the precursor of all spiritual growth. Until we are humble, we cannot grow. Elder Richard G. Scott describes this virtue in even greater detail:

Humility is the precious, fertile soil of righteous character. It germinates the seeds of personal growth. When cultivated through the exercise of faith, pruned by repentance, and fortified by obedience and good works, such seeds produce the cherished fruit of spirituality. (See Alma 26:22.) Divine inspiration and power then result. Inspiration is to know the will of the Lord. Power is the capability to accomplish that inspired will. (See D&C 43:15-16.) Such power comes from God after we have done "all we can do" (2 Ne. 25:23). (Ensign, May 1986, p. 7)

You recall that when Alma was teaching the Zoramites, many were humbled because they were cast out of the synagogue. And it was those cast out of the synagogue who listened to Alma and his message (see Alma 31-32). The wealthy and haughty Zoramites, those climbing up on the Rameumpton and praying, did not hear the word of God or feel the Spirit of the Lord. Our humility is key to our ability.

As missionaries, your hearts will resonate to President Lorenzo Snow's observation that

The Lord has not chosen the great and learned of the world to perform his work on the earth. . . . but humble men [and women] devoted to His cause . . . who are willing to be led and guided by the Holy Spirit and who will of necessity give the glory unto Him, knowing that of themselves they can do nothing. (Deseret Weekly, 57:513)

Humility leads to righteousness and goodness. That's why I just love to be around missionaries, teaching them, because missionaries are so willing to accept the teachings of the Lord. I tingle when I think what a great honor and joy it is to work among the missionaries; their righteousness and willingness is inspiring and touching.

Of course, that doesn't mean we don't need to change. None of us is perfect. But it does mean that we are willing and are submitting to the Lord, giving him the gift of our hearts.

Whenever the people in the Book of Mormon were prideful or disobedient, the Lord would work with them to bring about humility so they could grow. Sometimes the people would change, and sometimes they wouldn't. Our challenge is to learn from their experiences and always be willing to change. Sometimes if the people were doing well, the Lord would send prophets who would exhort them to be better. Sometimes they became wicked, sinking into sinful behavior, and the Lord would still exhort them.

The Lord exhorts us today. In that great tenth chapter of Moroni, where Moroni knows he is speaking to the people of our day, he exhorts us to "come unto Christ, and be perfected in him" (verse 32). Moroni knew his time was short, and the space on the plates was limited. With those restrictions, the most important thing he could think of was reminding us to come unto Christ.

All the prophets have exhorted their followers to be good. Alma taught his sons that the words of Christ have a greater power to change men's minds than any other thing (Alma 31:5). That's why reading and studying the scriptures every day is so important. When we become rooted to the words, we'll become rooted to Christ; for the scriptures are his words.
