Ed J. Pinegar, Especially for Missionaries, vol. 4 ( 1997)

Evaluating Our Lives and Becoming like Christ

We grow and become like Christ through recognizing where we are and what we need to do. Once we evaluate our lives, we set goals and make plans to keep the commandments and the covenants we have made. Unfortunately, some of us never recognize where we are because we never take the time to evaluate our lives. Every day should be an evaluating day, a goal-setting and plan-making day, and a living day.

In Alma 5, Alma the Younger asks the people who are gathered to listen to him at least forty-three questions. Can you imagine the scene?

Alma tells us at the beginning that he is speaking to members of the Church (Alma 5:6) at the end he reminds them that "I speak by way of command unto you that belong to the church; and unto those who do not belong to the church I speak by way of invitation" (Alma 5:62).

Alma was speaking by way of commandment to Church members, reminding them of the goodness of God in their lives. He also asked the people (and I'm paraphrasing), "Has a remembrance of the captivity of your fathers brought you to remember the mercy and long-suffering of God towards you? Do you realize he delivered your soul from hell?" Alma 5 is the great evaluation chapter--a great example of the questions we can ask ourselves as we're evaluating our own lives.

Alma continues, reminding the people that God "changed their hearts; yea, he awakened them out of their deep sleep, and they awoke unto God. Behold, they were in the midst of darkness, nevertheless, their souls were illuminated by the light of the everlasting word" (verse 7). Our souls, too, are illuminated by the everlasting word.

"Yea," Alma says, "they were encircled about by the bands of death, and the chains of hell, and an everlasting destruction did await them" (verse 7 continued).

And then Alma talked about the mighty change of heart the people had experienced, and he asked those in the congregation if they had been spiritually born of God (see verse 14).

Can you imagine that? He's talking to Church members, asking them if they realize what they must do. It's not enough to just be baptized and receive the Holy Ghost; he's saying that we must be spiritually born of God.

In verse 13 Alma observes: "And behold, he preached the word unto your fathers, and a mighty change was also wrought in their hearts [and now notice what happened] and they humbled themselves and put their trust in the true and living God. And behold, they were faithful until the end; therefore they were saved." You can see it is humility, being meek and lowly, that creates a place for the word in our hearts, and the word then brings a willingness to change.

There are more treasures in Alma 5. Through the Spirit and revelation, Alma asks the people if they've been stripped of envy and pride. He asks who mocks (makes fun of, upbraids, teases, or belittles) or persecutes others. Listen to the fate of someone who belittles another one of Heavenly Father's children: "Wo unto such an one, for he is not prepared, and the time is at hand that he must repent or he cannot be saved!" (verse 31).

On and on he goes about pride and humility. Alma was pleading with all of his heart, and I plead with my heart, that we all might listen to the words of Christ and do these things.

In the last verse of Alma 5, as I mentioned, Alma tells the people he was speaking by command. He had been instructed by the Lord to teach those words.

I also speak by way of command to you, the disciples of Christ. We must honestly look at ourselves and evaluate our lives and actions. Each day we can say, "I am a divine child of God, and I can be better each day, a step at a time." Don't overwhelm yourself, but whether you're 19 or 99, each day strive to be better than you were the day before.
