Have you ever looked around your ward or branch and noticed a wide variety of talents, backgrounds, and interests? Elder D. Todd Christofferson of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles explained that congregations in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are unique for being based on geography. He said: “We don’t choose a congregation based on who we like or want to be with. Wards are chosen for us … , and we learn to live with, serve, and love people who might well be different in background, preferences, and opinions.” These differences often make us stronger.

The Savior commanded us to “be one” (Doctrine and Covenants 38:27), even with all our differences. So what does it look like to “be one” in our wards and branches? Here are three principles to help us work toward greater unity.

After the resurrected Savior appeared to the Nephites, they lived in peace and harmony for 200 years. There was no crime, the people worked miracles, and “there could not be a happier people” (4 Nephi 1:16). How could anyone achieve such a harmonious society? The scriptures say that “there was no contention in the land, because of the love of God which did dwell in the hearts of the people” (4 Nephi 1:15).

If you’re striving for more unity with those around you, a great place to start is by evaluating your relationship with God. Elder Quentin L. Cook of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles counseled: “We are united by our love of and faith in Jesus Christ and as children of a loving Heavenly Father. The essence of truly belonging is to be one with Christ.”

How do we obtain a oneness with God? Elder David A. Bednar of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles said, “We are connected securely to and with the Savior as we worthily receive ordinances and enter into covenants, faithfully remember and honor those sacred commitments, and do our best to live in accordance with the obligations we have accepted.” Making and keeping covenants is one of the first steps to becoming one with God and our neighbors.

In the Book of Mormon, different groups of people are distinguished by different names, including the Nephites, Lamanites, Zoramites, Ishmaelites, Ammonites, and others. However, after the resurrected Savior’s ministry to the people, there was no “manner of -ites; but they were in one, the children of Christ” (4 Nephi 1:17).

We should be careful not to create labels or divisions among ourselves. President Russell M. Nelson advised us not to forget our most important identities: “I am not saying that other designations and identifiers are not significant. I am simply saying that no identifier should displace, replace, or take priority over these three enduring designations: ‘child of God,’ ‘child of the covenant,’ and ‘disciple of Jesus Christ.’”

Jesus set the example of looking past worldly labels or divisions when He taught the Samaritan woman at the well. He testified to her of His divinity, and she was able to teach others about Him (see John 4:9–29). As we strive to see ourselves and our neighbors as children of God, all part of the same family, differences can give way to love and unity.

Comparing ourselves to others can stop us from becoming one with them. The good news for all of us is that God uses all kinds of talents and personalities to build His kingdom.

When Paul wrote to the Saints in Corinth, he likened Christ’s Church to a body (see 1 Corinthians 12:12–17). He told them that each body part plays a crucial role for the body to function properly, even though each part is unique. He asked, “If the whole body were an eye, where were the hearing?” (1 Corinthians 12:17).

Similarly, we each have an important role to play—one that will likely be different from our neighbors’. Elder Dieter F. Uchtdorf of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles said: “You may feel that there are others who are more capable or more experienced who could fulfill your callings and assignments better than you can, but the Lord gave you your responsibilities for a reason. There may be people and hearts only you can reach and touch.” When we each embrace and fulfill our unique roles, our wards, branches, and families can become unified and function like a healthy body.

Elder Gerrit W. Gong of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles taught: “The Lord’s restored Church can be an incubator for a Zion community. As we worship, serve, enjoy, and learn His love together, we anchor each other in His gospel.” The Lord will bless you as you strive to keep His commandments and become one in Him—and you might find that you have more in common with your ward and branch members than you think!
