Thomas S. Monson, Favorite Quotations from the Collection of Thomas S. Monson ( 1985)

Home and Family

Some parents are fortunate and have their children born to them. Others, similarly blessed, have their children born for them.

Every boy, in his heart, would rather steal second base than an automobile.

Midwest City Bulletin

Building boys is better than mending men.

"And Jesus called a little child unto him, and set him in the midst of them, and said, Verily I say unto you, Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child, the same is greatest in the kingdom of heaven."

Matthew 18:2-4

Once we thought that if we built enough playgrounds and other recreational facilities, juvenile delinquency would disappear. This turned out to be not so.

Robert F. Wagner

The most powerful combination of emotions in the world is not called out by any grand cosmic event, nor is it found in novels or history books; merely, it is found by a parent gazing down upon a sleeping child.

The baby that comes to your home is a sweet new blossom of humanity, fresh fallen from God's own home to flower on earth.

SHINE ON My light is but a little one, My light of faith and prayer; But lo! it glows like God's great sun, For it was lighted there. Shine on, shine on, Shine on bright and clear; Shine on, shine on, The day is here. I may not hide my little light, The Lord has told me so; 'Tis given me to keep in sight, That all may see it glow. Joseph Ballantyne

If you mothers will live your religion, then in the love and fear of God teach your children constantly and thoroughly in the way of life and salvation, training them up in the way they should go, when they are old they will not depart from it.

Brigham Young

"Train up a child in the way he should go: and when he is old, he will not depart from it."

Proverbs 22:6

The proper training of childhood is man's most sacred obligation. Children at birth are the most dependent and helpless of all creatures, yet they are the sweetest and the greatest of all things in the world. They come, or should come, from the Father pure and undefiled, their souls like stainless white paper on which is to be written the aspirations and achievements of a lifetime. Whether that scroll shall become the biography of a noble Christ-like life, or a series of blots and blurs depends largely, if not entirely, upon the guiding influence of parents, playmates and teachers.

David O. McKay

There are three fundamental things to which every child is entitled: first, a respected name; second, a sense of security; third, opportunities for development.

David O. McKay

"Honour thy father and thy mother, as the Lord thy God hath commanded thee; that thy days may be prolonged, and that it may go well with thee, in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee."

Deuteronomy 5:16

Three influences in home life awaken reverence in children and contribute to its development in their souls. These are gentle guidance, courtesy by parents to each other and to children, and prayer in which children participate.

David O. McKay

NIGHT BLESSING Good night, Sleep tight; Wake up bright In the morning light To do what's right With all your might.

A recent survey of more than two thousand adolescents revealed some surprising things about today's kids. A majority of the kids believe in God and feel that more religion is needed in family life. The youngsters also expressed the wish that families could spend more time together as a family. The kids also said they wanted to communicate better with their parents.

An independent nine-year-old boy announced to his mother and father at the breakfast table, "I am running away from home tomorrow. Who is going to drive me?"

What gift has Providence bestowed on man that is so dear to him as his children?

Marcus Tullius Cicero

STRANGE LANDS Where do you come from, Mr. Jay? "From the land of Play, from the land of Play." And where can that be, Mr. Jay? "Far away—far away." Where do you come from, Mrs. Dove? "From the land of Love, from the land of Love." And how do you get there, Mrs. Dove? "Look above—look above." Where do you come from, Baby Miss? "From the land of Bliss, from the land of Bliss." And what is the way there, Baby Miss? "Mother's kiss—Mother's kiss." Laurence Alma Tadema

Next to eternal life, the most precious gift that our Father in Heaven can bestow upon man is his children.

David O. McKay

While in New Delhi, we received a telephone call saying there was a woman in a trash bin. When we arrived, we could hear her crying beneath the rubbish. She was covered with sores, her hair matted with filth. She continued to cry. She cried all the way to the home. She cried even after we had washed her and put her to bed. Finally she said, "I am not crying because I am dying. It's something else. It's because my son did it."

Curtis Pepper

Do your best to make certain you are the sort of person you want your children to become.

Of all lessons, the living lesson is the best. Children are surprisingly shrewd in detecting inconsistencies between the instructions and habits of their instructors. Besides, the teacher who seeks to live up to his own advice not only benefits his scholars, but his teachings exert a salutary influence upon himself, and he profits by his own lessons.

John Taylor

It is one of the greatest blessings that God ever bestowed upon children that they have had parents who were in possession of true principles in relation to their Heavenly Father, salvation, eternal life and were qualified and capable of teaching and traditioning their children in the same, that they may be qualified to fulfill the object of their creation.

Wilford Woodruff

Fatherhood is leadership—the most important kind of leadership. It has always been so; it always will be so. Father, with the assistance and counsel and encouragement of your eternal companion, you preside in the home. It is not a matter of whether you are the most worthy or best qualified, but it is a matter of law and appointment. You preside at the meal table, at family prayer. You preside at family home evening. And, as guided by the Spirit of the Lord, you see that your children are taught correct principles. It is your place to give direction relating to all of family life. You give fathers' blessings. You take an active part in establishing family rules and discipline. As a leader in your home, you plan and sacrifice to achieve the blessing of a unified and happy family. To do all of this requires that you live a family-centered life.

Spencer W. Kimball

We can make our houses homes and our homes heavens.

Spencer W. Kimball

At the age of ninety-two, Chauncey Depew was asked the question: "What is the most beautiful word in the English language?" He quickly replied: "Home."

Despite all new inventions and modern designs, fads, and fetishes, no one has yet invented, or will ever invent, a satisfying substitute for one's own family.

Stuart E. Rosenberg

I THINK WHEN I READ THAT SWEET STORY OF OLD I think when I read that sweet story of old, When Jesus was here among men, How he called little children like lambs to his fold, I should like to have been with him then. I wish that his hands had been placed on my head, That his arms had been thrown around me, That I might have seen his kind look when he said, "Let the little ones come unto me." Yet still to his footstool in prayer I may go, And ask for a share in his love; And if I thus earnestly seek him below, I shall see him and hear him above. Jemima Luke

A newborn child is almost the exact duplicate of an empty electronic computer, although superior to one in almost every way. What is placed in the child's brain during the first eight years of his life is probably there to stay. If you put misinformation into his brain during this period, it is extremely difficult to erase it. The most receptive age in human life is that of two or three years.

Glenn Doman

We say that children should be loyal to their parents. It is equally necessary that parents be loyal to their children.

Royal Bank of Canada Newsletter

We must spend more time with the children and less in clubs, bowling alleys, banquet and social gatherings. Fathers and mothers, we must come back home. We must sacrifice some of our other interests and organize our Church programs better so that both parents and youth will not be away from the home so much of the time. We must get more people to work in the Church so that the burden will not fall so heavily on the few. Then we must organize and do the maximum possible in the minimum amount of time, so that there can be more proper home life.

Spencer W. Kimball

A telephone survey was conducted to determine if parents knew where their children were at night. The telephone calls were made at 9:30 P.M. One interviewer was shocked when, on his first five calls, instead of the parents answering, the children answered—and they didn't know where their parents were!

I FOLLOW A FAMOUS FATHER I follow a famous father, His honor is mine to wear; He gave me a name that was free from shame, A name he was proud to bear. I follow a famous father, And him I must keep in mind; Though his form is gone, I must carry on The name that he left behind. Edgar A. Guest

If we, as parents, will so order our lives that our children will know and realize in their hearts that we are in very deed Latter-day Saints, that we actually know what we are talking about, they, by seeking after the Lord, will get that same testimony.

Heber J. Grant

No matter what they may be without, are your homes pure within? Are morning prayers offered there regularly? Or do the things of this world take you away from your homes and make you deprive yourself of morning prayers with the children? Woe to that home where the mother abandons her holy mission or neglects the divine instruction, influence, and example—while she bows a devotee at the shrine of social pleasure; or neglects the essential duties in her own household, in her enthusiasm to promote public reform.

David O. McKay

Sign in front of a church in Sydney, Australia: Your home is the laboratory where your religion is tested.

The good parent says to his child, "You can become anything you want very much to become. My job is to help you become it." It's so important that we see our children as they really are. A true picture always has more lasting beauty.

The home is the basis of a righteous life, and no other instrumentality can take its place nor fulfill its essential functions. The utmost the auxiliaries can do is to aid the home in its problems, giving special aid and succor where such is necessary.

Harold B. Lee

There is no substitute for the home. Its foundation is as ancient as the world, and its mission has been ordained of God from the earliest times.

Joseph F. Smith

You hear it said that fathers want their sons to be what they feel they cannot themselves be, but I tell you it also works the other way. A boy wants something very special from his father.

Sherwood Anderson

Our children need our help—not our recriminations.

Sir John Hart

The greatest trust that can come to a man and woman is to have placed in their keeping the life of a little child.

David O. McKay

We have been so anxious to give our children what we did not have that we have failed to give them what we should.

I love these little people, and it is not a slight thing when they who are so fresh from God love us.

Charles Dickens

Teaching is the noblest profession in the world. Upon the proper education of youth depend the permanency and purity of home and the safety and perpetuity of the nation. The parent gives the child an opportunity to live; the teacher enables the child to live well.

David O. McKay

The Lord has given us a commandment that we shall teach our children the principles of the Gospel and have them baptized when they are eight years of age. If we fail to keep this commandment, the blessings that are promised to us by the Lord will be revoked, and we will have mourning and sorrow in seeing our children grow up without a desire to serve God. And in after years, when we endeavor to instill into their minds the principles of the Gospel, we will make a failure of it.

Heber J. Grant

Your home is the most important school your child will ever attend, and you are his greatest teacher.

Robert Frost said: "Home is the place where, when you get there, they have to let you in." To paraphrase Mr. Frost: "Home is the place where, when you get there, they want to take you in."

The most important work you will do within the Church will be within the walls of your own home.

Harold B. Lee

Marriage is the school of love.

Martin Luther

According to a study conducted by a professor at the University of Michigan, marriage is an aid to career advancement. Professor John E. Tropman surveyed six thousand men who were between the ages of forty-five and fifty-four. The men who were still married to their first wife had advanced the furthest, followed by those who had remarried. Men who were divorced, separated or widowed had advanced least.

Capsuled Comments

One generation of children, one entire generation of all the world of children, understood as they should be, loved as they ask to be, and so developed as they might be, would more than begin the millennium.

Francis Hodgson

Spoken of a mother who had been called from this mortal existence: "Mother is more than a memory; she is a living presence."

Temple Bailey

The most effectual way to establish the religion of Heaven is to live it.

Brigham Young

CHILDREN LEARN WHAT THEY LIVE

If a child lives with criticism, he learns to condemn.

If a child lives with hostility, he learns to fight.

If a child lives with fear, he learns to be apprehensive.

If a child lives with pity, he learns to feel sorry for himself.

If a child lives with jealousy, he learns to hate.

If a child lives with encouragement, he learns to be confident.

If a child lives with tolerance, he learns to be patient.

If a child lives with praise, he learns to be appreciative.

If a child lives with acceptance, he learns to love.

If a child lives with approval, he learns to like himself.

If a child lives with recognition, he learns to have a goal.

If a child lives with fairness, he learns justice.

If a child lives with security, he learns to have faith in himself and in those about him.

If a child lives with honesty, he learns what truth is.

And if a child lives with friendliness, he learns that the world is a nice place in which to live.

Dorothy L. Nolte

In an essay on Quakers, an eight-year-old wrote: "Quakers are very meek, quiet people who never fight or answer back. My father is a Quaker, but my mother is not."

Leaning on your family tree will never get you out of the woods.

In a class in a Denver high school, the students were asked to prepare a letter to be written to a great man. Many of them addressed their letters to Mickey Mantle, President Kennedy, and others; but the daughter of President E.E. Drury of the Denver Stake wrote her letter to her father. In her letter she said: "I have decided to write this letter to you, Dad, because you are the greatest man that I have ever known. The overwhelming desire of my heart is that I might so live that I might have the privilege of sitting beside you and Mother and other members of the family in the celestial kingdom."

Nothing is more beautiful than a mother who is proud of her husband and teaches her children to be like him.

Henry D. Moyle

The greatest deterrent to juvenile delinquency would be for parents to show more love one for another.

Judge Phillip Gillian

Juvenile Court Judge

Youth needs fewer critics and more models.

Today's children are caught in the whirlpool of status seeking. While fathers drive stately cars and mothers offer their homes to admiring inspection, they lose their sons and daughters. Children learn to judge by the symbols people display and not by people's individual worth.

There seems to be a power which the mother possesses in shaping the life of the child that is far superior, in my judgment, to the power of the father, and this almost without exception. . . . A mother's love seems to be the most perfect and the most sincere, the strongest of any love we know anything about.

Heber J. Grant

A worldwide survey of nearly one hundred thousand boys and girls resulted in the following list of do's and don'ts that every mother and father should memorize:

Young people need rules to guide them and standards by which to judge themselves. The home takes its rightful and eminent place in preparing children for life when basic principles are quietly and firmly announced and lived up to. The final test is not how amenable young people are to compulsion of the law, but how far they can be trusted to obey self-imposed law.

Speaking to the 24th World Conference on Scouting held in Nairobi, Kenya, 17 July 1973, William C. Carter, president of Rotary International, said: "One of our chief challenges today in coping with youth and their world is the absence of the four restraining principles of earlier generations—namely: (1) fear of the Lord, (2) fear of parents, (3) fear of the schoolmaster, and (4) fear of the law."

Let the husband and father learn to bend his will to the will of his God, and then instruct his wife and children in this lesson of self-government by his example as well as by precept.

Brigham Young

If parents will continually set before their children examples worthy of their imitation and the approval of our Father in Heaven, they will turn the current and the tide of feelings of their children, and they, eventually, will desire righteousness more than evil.

Brigham Young

The motives of the twenty-four-year-old Lee Harvey Oswald, who pumped three shots into the young president from the sixth floor of a Dallas office building, are obscure; but they appear linked to a broken home, an indifferent mother, and an unsatisfactory marriage.

Warren Commission Report

Permanent homes in which sweet contentment abides are the strength of any nation. As contented individuals living in unselfish and loving communion make the happy homes, so contented, peaceful homes make the progressive, peaceful community; and groups of such communities constitute a peaceful, progressive nation. The perpetuity of our modern civilization depends upon well-ordered, well-governed homes.

David O. McKay

It is the duty of Latter-day Saints to teach their children the truth, to bring them up in the way they should go, to teach them the first principles of the Gospel, the necessity of baptism for the remission of sins and for membership in the Church of Christ; teaching them the necessity of receiving the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands, which will lead them into all truth, and which will reveal to them things that have passed and things which are present with them, that they may comprehend the truth, and that they may walk in the light as Christ is in the light; that they may have fellowship with Him and that His blood may cleanse them from all sin.

Joseph F. Smith

The National Crime Commission, in its report to the President, declares that a major factor in the rapid rise in crime, particularly among persons under 21, is the failure of parents to train and discipline in the home.

What appears to be happening throughout the country, in the cities and in the suburbs, among the poor and among the well-to-do, is that parental, and especially paternal, authority over young people is becoming weaker.

The essential fact is that, according to the National Crime Commission, "America's best hope for reducing crime is to reduce juvenile delinquency and youth crime."

U.S. News and World Report

The mother has a greater influence over her posterity than any other person can have. And the question has arisen sometimes, "When does this education begin?" Our prophets have said, "When the spirit life from God enters into the tabernacle." The condition of the mother at the time will have its effect upon the fruit of her womb; and from the birth of the child, and all through life, the teachings and the example of the mother govern and control, in a great measure, that child, and her influence is felt by it through time and eternity.

Wilford Woodruff

Let the father and mother, who are members of this Church and Kingdom, take a righteous course and strive with all their might never to do a wrong, but to do good all their lives.

Brigham Young

A visitor from out of town dropped into a home to visit the husband and wife of the house. After being met at the door by a small boy and being escorted to the living room, the young boy asked the visitor, "Are you related to us?"

The visitor replied, "Yes, I am a cousin on your father's side."

The boy replied, "In this house, Mister, you are on the wrong side!"

LONDON (Reuters)—An American who wanted to trace his long-lost relatives in Britain has succeeded—for the price of one airmail letter to London.

Mike Archdale, 25, Miles City, Montana, knew only that his grandfather, Lionel Dawson Archdale, had emigrated to the United States from Northern Ireland at the end of the 19th Century. So Mike wrote to the only address he knew in London—the British Tourist Authority—and asked for help in finding his relatives.

The letter was opened at the tourist authority by a public relations officer—named Gilbert Archdale.

Gilbert Archdale did a little research and replied to Mike: "Hello. I'm your cousin!"

The Sunday School teacher was describing how Lot's wife looked back and turned into a pillar of salt. Little Johnny was much interested. "My mother looked back once while she was driving," he explained, "and she turned into a telephone pole!"

Daddy had a little boy; His soul was white as snow. He never went to Sunday School 'Cause Daddy didn't go. He never heard the tales of Christ That thrill a young child's mind; While other children went to class This child was left behind. And so he grew from babe to youth; Dad saw, to his dismay, A soul that once was snowy white Become a dingy grey. Dad realized he'd soon be lost; He tried to win him back Before the soul that once was white Became an ugly black. So, not to lose his little boy, (The fault be his, he knew), He turned to God and humbly begged: "Please tell me what to do." Daddy had a little boy; His soul was white as snow. He never went to Sunday School, 'Cause Daddy didn't go.

There is too little religious devotion, love and fear of God in the home; too much worldliness, selfishness, indifference, and lack of reverence in the family.

Joseph F. Smith

He will call our sleeping dust to life, and they will still be joined together not only in spirit and body, but as happy parents they will come together again, standing at the head of their posterity as Adam and Eve will stand at the head of the multitude that are quickened and raised from the dead.

Charles W. Penrose

I pray you, my brethren and sisters, who have children in Zion, and upon whom rests the greater responsibility, teach them the principles of the Gospel, teach them to have faith in the Lord Jesus Christ and in baptism for the remission of sins when they shall reach the age of eight years. They must be taught in the principles of the Gospel of Jesus Christ by their parents, or the blood of the children will be upon the skirts of those parents.

Joseph F. Smith

Let us be worthy to be honored. Set your homes in order and have therein a spirit of joy with your companions, friends, and neighbors, that wherever you go the world will be brighter and happier because of your lives.

George A. Smith

Church activity should be led, not directed, by parents.

David O. McKay

Try today, and tomorrow, to make a change in your home by praying twice a day with your family. Call on your children and your wife to pray with you. Ask a blessing upon every meal you eat. Spend ten minutes in reading a chapter from the words of the Lord in the Bible, the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, before you retire, or before you go to your daily toil. Feed your spiritual selves at home, as well as in public places. Let love, and peace, and the Spirit of the Lord, kindness, charity, sacrifice for others, abound in your families. Banish harsh words, envyings, hatreds, evil speaking, obscene language, and innuendo, blasphemy, and let the Spirit of God take possession of your hearts. Teach to your children these things, in spirit and power, sustained and strengthened by personal practice. Let them see that you are earnest, and practice what you preach. Do not let your children out to specialists in these things, but teach them by your own precept and example, by your own fireside. Be a specialist yourself in the truth. Let our meetings, schools and organizations, instead of being our only or leading teachers, be supplements to our teachings and training in the home. Not one child in a hundred would go astray if the home environment, example and training were in harmony with the truth of the Gospel of Christ, as revealed and taught to the Latter-day Saints.

Joseph F. Smith

Do we want our homes to be happy? If we do, let them be the abiding place of prayer, thanksgiving, and gratitude.

George Albert Smith

THERE IS BEAUTY ALL AROUND There is beauty all around When there's love at home; There is joy in every sound When there's love at home. Peace and plenty here abide, Smiling sweet on every side. Time doth softly, sweetly glide When there's love at home. In the cottage there is joy When there's love at home; Hate and envy ne'er annoy When there's love at home. Roses bloom beneath our feet; All the earth's garden sweet, Making life a bliss complete When there's love at home. Kindly heaven smiles above When there's love at home; All the world is filled with love When there's love at home. Sweeter sings the brooklet by; Brighter beams the azure sky; Oh, there's one who smiles on high When there's love at home. John Hugh McNaughton

There can be no genuine happiness separate and apart from the home, and every effort made to sanctify and preserve its influence is uplifting to those who toil and sacrifice for its establishment.

Joseph F. Smith

I look upon the home as the basis from which radiate all good influences, and sometimes, I am sorry to say, bad influences which affect society. If, in every home in the United States, there were a competent mother and a helpful father, our officers of the law would have much less to do in protecting society from the lawless. In the art of home building, there should be manifest the work and skill of two artists—the father and the mother. If these two work at cross-purposes, the result of their efforts is frequently failure. If they work harmoniously, each supplying what the other needs as they daily work upon their living creations, the result will likely be boys and girls who will be a credit and an adornment—not a blight or a curse to humanity.

David O. McKay

LIKE MOTHER, LIKE SON Do you know that your soul is of my soul such a part, That you seem to be fibre and core of my heart? None other can pain me as you, dear, can do, None other can please me or praise me as you. Remember the world will be quick with its blame If shadow or stain ever darken your name. "Like mother, like son" is a saying so true. The world will judge largely the "mother" by you. Be yours then the task, if task it shall be, To force the proud world to do homage to me. Be sure it will say, when its verdict you've won, "She reaped as she sowed. Lo! this is her son." Margaret Johnston Grafflin

Sign which appears in the Relief Society room of the Olympus Stake Center located in Salt Lake City, Utah: Happiness is Homemade.

WHAT I WANT MY CHILDREN TO REMEMBER ABOUT HOME

That their father and mother loved each other.

That our home was a happy one because we all worked to keep it so.

That each child was given every possible opportunity to develop his own personality.

That the books in the house were to be read if handled rightly, and there were no shelves under lock and key because of questionable contents.

That absolute truth abided there; no earnest questioner, however young, was put off with subterfuge or evasion.

That we believed in hospitality, in spite of any extra labor involved, and that our friends loved to come to visit us.

That Sunday was the happiest day of the week, and that we all looked forward to its coming because it was the day when we went to church together and then came home for an afternoon with Father in the midst.

That though Father and Mother worked hard and long at their respective jobs, they found time every day to keep informed on current events, to read good books, to think through to logical conclusions, and to pray.

The weight of evidence points to early family life of the child as the primary factor leading to emotional disorders.

Dr. Rodnick, President, American Orthopsychiatric Association

Reverence, as charity, begins at home.

David O. McKay

Next to loyalty as contributive to a happy home, I should like to urge continued courtship and apply this to grown people. Too many couples have come to the altar of marriage looking upon the marriage ceremony as the end of courtship instead of the beginning of an eternal courtship.

Let us not forget that during the burdens of home life—and they come—tender words of appreciation and courteous acts are even more appreciated than during those sweet days and months of courtship. It is after the ceremony and during the trials that daily arise in the home that a word of "thank-you," or "pardon me," or "if you please" on the part of the husband or wife contributes to that love which brought you to the altar.

It is well to keep in mind that love can be starved to death as literally as the body that receives no sustenance. Love feeds upon kindness and courtesy. It is significant that the first sentence of what is now known throughout the Christian world as the Psalm of Love is, "Love suffereth long, and is kind." The wedding ring gives no man the right to be cruel or inconsiderate.

David O. McKay

One of the questions after a study of magnets at Olympus Junior High located in Salt Lake City, Utah, was: What begins with M and picks things up? More than one-third of the students answered "Mother."

DAD, I LOVE YOU Dad, I love you, and do you know why? Because of that special gleam in your eye That tells me something important and true: That I'm an important part of you. I love you because I know there's no other That you love more than the one I call mother. I love you because you're always there, Extending a hand to show that you care. I love you because you're honest and strong; You're courageous and steady when things go wrong. I love you because in your steps I can trod. Because I know you're a man of God. Dad, I love you, and do you know why? Because as a father you're quite a guy. And because on earth you're what a father should be. I know I'll be yours through eternity. F. Craig Sudbury

God has in reserve a time, or period appointed in His own bosom, when He will bring all His subjects, who have obeyed His voice and kept His commandments, into His celestial rest. This rest is of such perfection and glory, that man has need of a preparation before he can, according to the laws of that kingdom, enter it and enjoy its blessings. This being the fact, God has given certain laws to the human family, which, if observed, are sufficient to prepare them to inherit this rest.

Joseph Smith

All that I am and all that I hope to be I owe to my angel mother. Blessings on her memory.

Abraham Lincoln

Keep religion in home life. We should make it obvious, both by our actions and our conversation, that we are seriously interested in religious things and believe in them ourselves: faith in God, in the divine mission of Jesus Christ, and in the restoration of the Gospel. Our religion should also take the form of honesty in our dealings with our family, our neighbors, and all with whom we come in contact. To give young people the right start in life, we must discuss with our children and friends questions of motive and subjects like birth, love, marriage, death, and destiny. Babson says, "One of the best things that could happen to America today would be a return to family prayers; the getting together after breakfast or in the evening for five or ten minutes for simple family worship! The saying of grace before meals would be a step in this direction." I am glad that that practice is general, I hope, throughout the Latter-day Saint homes.

David O. McKay

Endeavor to make your homes a little heaven, and try to cherish the good Spirit of God. Then let us as parents train up our children in the fear of God and teach them the laws of life. If you do, we will have peace in our bosoms, and peace in our families, and peace in our surroundings.

John Taylor

TELL ME THE STORIES OF JESUS Tell me the stories of Jesus, I love to hear; Things I would ask him to tell me, If he were here; Scenes by the wayside, Tales of the sea, Stories of Jesus, Tell them to me. First let me hear how the children, Stood round his knee; And I shall fancy his blessing, Resting on me; Words full of kindness, Deeds full of grace, All in the lovelight Of Jesus' face. W. H. Parker

Let us all look at home and each one try to govern his own family and set his own house in order and do that which is required of us, realizing that each one is held responsible before the Lord for his or her individual actions only.

Wilford Woodruff

HOME, SWEET HOME 'Mid pleasures and palaces though we may roam, Be it ever so humble, there's no place like home. John Howard Payne

Woman was made of a rib out of the side of Adam; not out of his feet to be trampled upon by him, but out of his side to be equal with him, under his arm to be protected, and near his heart to be loved.

Matthew Henry

The primary responsibility and fundamentally so, is upon the parents to teach their children in light and truth. This commandment does not preclude or deny the Church the privilege of taking the children and aiding in their training. For this reason we have in the Church the auxiliary organizations, given by inspiration and commandment of the Lord.

Joseph F. Smith

AT SUNRISE They pushed him straight against the wall; The firing squad dropped in a row; And why he stood on tiptoes, Those men shall never know. He wore a smile across his face As he stood primly there, The guns straight aiming at his heart, The sun upon his hair; For he remembered, in a flash, Those days beyond recall, When his proud mother took his height Against the bedroom wall. Rose Zagnoni Marinoni

DEAREST CHILDREN, GOD IS NEAR YOU Dearest children, God is near you Watching o'er you day and night, And delights to own and bless you, If you strive to do what's right. He will bless you, He will bless you, If you put your trust in him. Dearest children, holy angels Watch your actions night and day; And they keep a faithful record Of the good and bad you say. Cherish virtue! Cherish virtue! God will bless the pure in heart. Children, God delights to teach you By His Holy Spirit's voice; Quickly heed its holy promptings, Day by day you'll then rejoice. O prove faithful, O prove faithful To your God and Zion's cause. Charles L. Walker

The holiest words my tongue can frame, The noblest thoughts my soul can claim, Unworthy are to praise the name More precious than all others. An infant, when her love first came, A man, I find it still the same; Reverently I breathe her name, The blessed name of mother. George Griffith Fether

God could not be everywhere; therefore, he made mothers.

Jewish Proverb

I HAVE TWO LITTLE HANDS I have two little hands folded snugly and tight, They are tiny and weak yet they know what is right. During all the long hours till daylight is through, There is plenty in deed for my two hands to do. Kind Father I thank thee for two little hands, And ask thee to bless them till each understands That children can only be happy all day, When two little hands have learned how to obey. Bertha A. Kleinmann

[A] great and important duty devolving upon this people is to teach their children, from their cradle until they become men and women, every principle of the Gospel, and endeavor, as far as it lies in the power of the parents, to instill into their hearts a love for God, the truth, virtue, honesty, honor and integrity to everything that is good. That is important for all men and women who stand at the head of a family in the household of faith. Teach your children the love of God; teach them to love the principles of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Teach them to love their fellowmen, and especially to love their fellowship with the people of God. Teach them to honor the priesthood, to honor the authority that God has bestowed upon His Church for the proper government of His Church.

Joseph F. Smith

A PARENT'S PRAYER O God, make me a better parent. Help me to understand my children, to listen patiently to what they have to say and to answer all their questions kindly. Keep me from interrupting them, talking back to them, and contradicting them. Make me as courteous to them as I would have them be to me. Give me the courage to confess my sins against my children and to ask of them forgiveness when I know that I have done them wrong. May I not vainly hurt the feelings of my children. Forbid that I should laugh at their mistakes or resort to shame and ridicule as punishment. Let me not tempt a child to lie and steal. So guide me hour by hour that I may demonstrate by all I say and do that honesty produces happiness. Reduce, I pray, the meanness in me. May I cease to nag; and when I am out of sorts, help me, O Lord, to hold my tongue. Blind me to the little errors of my children and help me to see the good things that they do. Give me a ready word for honest praise. Help me to treat my children as those of their own age, but let me not exact of them the judgments and conventions of adults. Allow me not to rob them of the opportunity to wait upon themselves, to think, to choose, and to make decisions. Forbid that I should ever punish them for my selfish satisfaction. May I grant them all of their wishes that are reasonable and have the courage always to withhold a privilege which I know will do them harm. Make me so fair and just, so considerate and companionable to my children, that they will have a genuine esteem for me. Fit me to be loved and imitated by my children.[PN37,,,R,10] With all Thy gifts, O God, do give me calm and poise and self-control. Garry C. Myers

JESUS WANTS ME FOR A SUNBEAM Jesus wants me for a sunbeam, To shine for him each day; In ev'ry way try to please him, At home, at school, at play. A sunbeam, a sunbeam, Jesus wants me for a sunbeam; A sunbeam, a sunbeam, I'll be a sunbeam for him. Jesus wants me to be loving, And kind to all I see; Showing how pleasant and happy His little one can be. I will ask Jesus to help me, To keep my heart from sin; Ever reflecting his goodness, And always shine for him. I'll be a sunbeam for Jesus, I can, if I but try; Serving him moment by moment, Then live with him on high. Nellie Talbot

THE CALL OF LOVE Far above earth's tumult, The call of love we hear, Shall its gentle pleading Fall on a heedless ear? O hear the call of love, O hear the call of love. The call of love is to mercy And pardon, and peace, The call of love is to service That never shall cease, Till we shall enter That land of promise Where true joys abound, Then onward press, my comrades, We are gaining We are gaining ground. Not from far off country, Or land across the sea, Comes with earnest pleading The call of love to me. He who is my neighbor, And needs a cheering word, In his faintest whisper That call of love is heard. C. Austin Miles

Men are what their mothers made them.

Ralph Waldo Emerson

BLESS THIS HOUSE Bless this house, O Lord we pray, Make it safe by night and day; Bless these walls, so firm and stout, Keeping want and trouble out; Bless the roof and chimneys tall, Let Thy peace lie over all; Bless this door, that it may prove Ever open to joy and love. Bless these windows shining bright, Letting in God's heavenly light; Bless the hearth a-blazing there, With smoke ascending like a prayer; Bless the folk who dwell within, Keep them pure and free from sin; Bless us all that we may be Fit, O Lord, to dwell with Thee, Bless us all that one day we May dwell, O Lord, with Thee. Helen Taylor

I believe the most valuable thing a mother can teach her child is belief, confidence, and faith in a loving God—to reach outward and upward beyond himself for strength and courage—and to instill in that child the simple faith that he or she is a child of God with a purposeful life ahead. Life is filled with the unexpected: accidents, deaths, hazards, fears. Mother, father, the light switch, water in the tap may not always be there. But resource to God is always available.

G. Homer Durham
