Thomas S. Monson, Favorite Quotations from the Collection of Thomas S. Monson ( 1985)

Proclaiming the Gospel

EXCERPT FROM THE WENTWORTH LETTER

Our missionaries are going forth in different nations. The standard of truth has been erected; no unhallowed hand can stop the work from progressing. Persecutions may rage, mobs may combine, armies may assemble, calumny may defame; but the truth of God will go forth boldly, nobly and independent, till it has penetrated every continent, visited every clime, swept every country and sounded in every ear, till the purposes of God shall be accomplished, and the Great Jehovah shall say the work is done.

Joseph Smith

Go in all meekness and sobriety, and preach Jesus Christ and Him crucified; not to contend with others on account of their faith, or systems of religion, but pursue a steady course. This I deliver by way of commandment, and all who observe it not will pull down persecution upon their heads, while those who do shall always be filled with the Holy Ghost; this I pronounce as a prophecy.

Joseph Smith

"Wherefore, now let every man learn his duty, and to act in the office in which he is appointed, in all diligence. . . ."

Let the idea be emphasized throughout the entire church . . . that when a young man enlists under the missionary banner it means that he is superior in every way: in character, in faith, and in a desire to serve the Lord.

True Christianity is love in action. There is no better way to manifest love for God than to show an unselfish love for one's fellowmen. That is the spirit of missionary work.

God bless the missionaries wherever they are today, for they are God's servants, as long as they keep themselves pure and spotless from the sins of the world. I testify to you that His Spirit is guiding them, magnifying them in their youth and making them a power in preaching the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

David O. McKay

The kind of men we want as bearers of this Gospel message are men who have faith in God; men who have faith in their religion; men who honor their priesthood; men in whom the people who know them have faith and in whom God has confidence—and not some poor unfortunate beings who are wanting to leave a place because they cannot live in it. We want men full of the Holy Ghost and the power of God, that they may go forth weeping, bearing precious seed and sowing the seeds of eternal life, and then returning with gladness, bringing their sheaves with them. Men who bear the words of life among the nations ought to be men of honor, integrity, virtue and purity; and this being the command of God to us, we shall try to carry it out.

John Taylor

I feel like shouting hallelujah, all the time, when I think that I ever knew Joseph Smith, the Prophet.

Brigham Young

Conversion occurs when we see with our eyes, hear with our ears, and understand with our hearts.

"I will go and do the things which the Lord hath commanded, for I know that the Lord giveth no commandments unto the children of men, save he shall prepare a way for them that they may accomplish the thing which he commandeth them."

1 Nephi 3:7

"And if it so be that you should labor all your days in crying repentance unto this people, and bring, save it be one soul unto me, how great shall be your joy with him in the kingdom of my Father!

"And now, if your joy will be great with one soul that you have brought unto me into the kingdom of my Father, how great will be your joy if you should bring many souls unto me!"

D&C 18:15-16

"And ye shall go forth in the power of my Spirit, preaching my gospel, two by two, in my name, lifting up your voices as with the sound of a trump, declaring my word like unto angels of God."

D&C 42:6

There never was a set of men, since God made the world, under a stronger responsibility to warn this generation. We are required to do this. This is our calling. It is our duty. It is our business.

Wilford Woodruff

If I could have my wish today, it would be that every one of God's children could hear this glorious message and earnestly give consideration to it. I am sure that thereby there would come into countless hearts through the whisperings of the Spirit that joy and happiness which attend our own testimonies of the truth. Through our missionary system we have made a tremendous contribution to this end, but it is not enough. We must find new ways to inform and persuade the world, and if we are faithful and truly devoted, God will open the way. That is my conviction.

I know as I know that I live that this is His kingdom. He will never desert it. God help all of us never to desert Him.

Stephen L Richards

"I will go before your face. I will be on your right hand and on your left, and my Spirit shall be in your hearts, and mine angels round about you, to bear you up."

D&C 84:88

There is nothing we can't do in the building of the Lord's kingdom if we have the desire, do the work, and have the faith.

Henry D. Moyle

Missionary work is the lifeblood of the Kingdom. When the blood stops flowing, the Kingdom stops growing.

Spencer W. Kimball

"Behold I have given unto you my gospel, and this is the gospel which I have given unto you—that I came into the world to do the will of my Father, because my father sent me.

"And my Father sent me that I might be lifted up upon the cross; and after that I had been lifted up upon the cross, that I might draw all men unto me, that as I have been lifted up by men even so should men be lifted up by the Father, to stand before me, to be judged of their works, whether they be good or whether they be evil."

3 Nephi 27:13-14

"I know that which the Lord hath commanded me, and I glory in it. I do not glory of myself, but I glory in that which the Lord hath commanded me; yea, and this is my glory, that perhaps I may be an instrument in the hands of God to bring some soul to repentance; and this is my joy."

Alma 29:9

Our missionaries are not salesmen, with wares to peddle; rather, they are servants of the Most High God, with a testimony to bear, truth to teach, and souls to save.

Thomas S. Monson

What a thrilling thing it is to see an aggressive, resourceful, willing, untiring, well-directed, spiritual missionary who can do the right things on his own initiative and keep on doing them to the end.

If you go on a mission to preach the Gospel with lightness and frivolity in your hearts, looking for this and that, and to learn what is in the world, and not having your minds riveted—yes, I may say riveted—on the cross of Christ, you will go and return in vain. Go forth weeping, bearing precious seed, full of the power of God, and full of faith to heal the sick even by the touch of your hand, rebuking and casting out foul spirits, and causing the poor among men to rejoice, and you will return bringing your sheaves with you. Let your minds be centered on your missions and labor earnestly to bring souls to Christ.

Brigham Young

The ABCs of missionary work:

A=Attitude

B=Behavior

C=Companion

Missionaries of the present-day ministry must believe the Gospel; they must preach the Gospel; but especially, they must live the Gospel.

Christian Beacon

"I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ: for it is the power of God unto salvation." (Romans 1:16.) If we are not ashamed of the Gospel, we should not be ashamed to teach it; and if we are not ashamed to teach it, we should not be ashamed to live it.

Delbert L. Stapley

It is by no means improbable that some future textbook, for the use of generations yet unborn, will contain a question something like this: "What historical American of the nineteenth century has exerted the most powerful influence upon the destinies of his countrymen?" And it is by no means impossible that the answer to that interrogatory may thus be written: "Joseph Smith, the Mormon Prophet." And the reply, absurd as it doubtless seems to most men now living, may be an obvious commonplace to their descendants. The man who established a religion in this age of free debate, who was and is today accepted by thousands as a direct emissary from the Most High—such a rare human being is not to be disposed of by pelting his memory with unsavory epithets.

Josiah Quincy, Jr.

"For though I preach the gospel, I have nothing to glory of: for necessity is laid upon me; yea, woe is unto me, if I preach not the gospel!"

1 Corinthians 9:16

You are called upon to declare the words of eternal life with vigor, humility, and faith—bringing out of darkness those who sit in darkness.

Joseph Fielding Smith

Presidents, the testimony of a mission president to a wavering missionary is the most important message he could convey.

Harold B. Lee

Your mission is preparation. It is your school for eternity. You won't forget that, will you? This mission is not just a two-year stretch. This is the time when you cultivate the seeds of godhood so that you can help other people on their way toward exaltation. How small are we who think of the mission as just being a stretch of time, some physical things to do, a little studying to do, some praying. This is the most purposeful thing, perhaps, you have ever done in your life and possibly the most purposeful thing that some of you will ever do. It's up to you to let this be the prelude to your life, to let it be the beginning of a great and glorious life.

Spencer W. Kimball

FOUR GIFTS FOR CONVERTS

Gordon B. Hinckley

There are many excellent men but very few really good missionaries. A good missionary is a man who has sociability, whose friendship is permanent and sparkling, who can ingratiate himself into the confidence and favor of men who are in darkness.

Joseph F. Smith

Dear Mom and Dad:

I want to thank you from the bottom of my heart for the many wonderful things you have done for me.

I want to thank you for listening to the wonderful message the elders presented to you when they knocked at your door. I thank you for the way you grasped the gospel and made it the mold around which you shaped your lives and the lives of your children.

I love both of you very much. Thank you for the way in which you taught me, for your love which you expressed in many ways. Thank you for directing me in the right paths—for showing me instead of forcing me.

I am thankful for your beautiful testimonies and for the guiding love in which you helped me gain mine. I know the gospel is true. My few experiences out here have strengthened my testimony. I pray that I can live up to your expectations. . . . I should, with the Lord's help.

Thank you again, Mom and Dad.

Your loving son,

David
