Thomas S. Monson, Favorite Quotations from the Collection of Thomas S. Monson ( 1985)

Helps for Leadership

Let each bishop attend faithfully to his ward and see that every man and woman is well and faithfully and profitably employed; that the sick and aged are properly cared for, that none suffer.

Let each bishop be a tender and indulgent father to his ward, administering a word of comfort and encouragement here, a word of advice and counsel there, and a word of chastisement in another place, where needed, without partiality, wisely judging between man and man, caring for and seeking earnestly the welfare of all, watching over the flock of God with the eye of a true shepherd, that wolves and dogs may not enter among the flock and rend them.

Brigham Young

The best way to help a man increase his output, or his leadership of any kind, is to help build the man. Help him increase his stature as a man, and he will just naturally do better—on the job and off.

Earl Nightingale

Are those for whom you are responsible in a "Never, Never Land?" Never the object of concern, never the recipient of needed aid?

Thomas S. Monson

Most church workers are like a clock:

Church workers, like clocks, need to be regulated. This is the responsibility of the executives.

One hundred years from now, it will not matter what kind of car I drove, what kind of house I lived in, how much I had in my back account, nor what my clothes looked like. But the world may be a little better because I was important in the life of a boy.

Big-minded executives do not feel called upon to defend their position, regardless of whether it is right or wrong. A quite moderate degree of conciliatory behavior will probably win a good measure of what is desired.

There is nothing noble in feeling superior to some other person. The true nobility is in being superior to your previous self.

Hindu Proverb

There can be no substitute for integrity in a person seeking to be a leader. This involves more than simple abstention from crime. It includes adherence to ethical principles and soundness of moral character. Fairness and impartiality are especially needed in the character of a person in authority. He must speak the truth to those under him and keep his promises to everyone, regardless of status.

A person in authority is not necessarily a saint, an artist, a philosopher, or a hero; but he respects truth, appreciates what is beautiful, knows how to behave himself, and is courageous in meeting his obligations. He will have intellectual curiosity and will be always learning. He is tolerant, liberal, and unshockable. If he is not always affable and urbane, he at least is never truculent or overbearing. He will be a cultured, broad-minded scholar who lives according to the spirit of reasonableness.

The true function of leadership is to bring out the best efforts of others, and people most willingly pay heed to those whom they consider most able to direct.

HOW TO CHOOSE LEADERS

CHECKLIST FOR EXECUTIVES

Promise without performance is an adult hypocrisy.

Followship comes before leadership.

If you must be aggressive, use tact. If you are right and others are wrong, use delicacy in telling them.

Royal Bank of Canada Newsletter

The manager must, as one executive put it, learn how to disturb the equilibrium without upsetting the apple cart. Seek help, accept help, and give help generously.

Royal Bank of Canada Newsletter

The good administrator is tolerant of other people's ideas and is not dogmatic about his own. He keeps in mind the necessity of yielding to everyone his rights.

A good leader inspires other men with confidence in him; a great leader inspires them with confidence in themselves.

Two basic qualities of delegation are the superior's authority to delegate and his own, as well as his subordinate's, responsibility for the final results. A third important factor is accountability. An employee's accountability is his responsibility to keep the boss informed as to how the delegated task is progressing. This responsibility can be encouraged or discouraged by the manager's reaction to the employee's reports. If the boss continually finds fault with mistakes instead of trying to help correct them, the employee will feel like a failure and will no longer care about doing his best on the task at hand.

Capsuled Comments

The real art of management is understanding men—not just as statistics, or as parts of a large whole, but as individuals. What, for example, makes one man suspicious and distant and another man outgoing and happy? The same stimulus might call forth both reactions. It is up to the manager to know what makes people tick, to recognize talent and to see one person's strength and another person's weakness.

While man has found reason, logic, and order in a number of the phenomena that surround him, he himself remains a puzzle of great potential. Isn't he worth knowing? As A. M. Sullivan put it, "Man is still the most engaging syllable in management."

Capsuled Comments

A good leader takes the position that the other fellow is capable of being far more than he is, and it is the leader's responsibility to help him develop to his fullest potential.

Lawrence A. Appley

Good leadership consists of showing average people how to do the work of superior people.

John D. Rockefeller

Nobody is especially interested in how hard a manager has worked, but in what he has produced.

Royal Bank of Canada Newsletter

Wide general acquaintance with the humanities may not give a man the technical qualifications to put across a big deal, but it will prepare him to grasp the essentials of the human situation; and all deals, big or little, resolve themselves into dealing with human beings.

Royal Bank of Canada Newsletter

When performance is measured, performance improves. When performance is measured and reported back, the rate of improvement accelerates.

Thomas S. Monson

'Twas a sheep, not a lamb, that strayed away In a parable Jesus told; A grown-up sheep had gone astray From the ninety and nine in the fold. Out on the hillside, out in the cold, 'Twas a sheep the Good Shepherd sought. And why for the sheep should we earnestly long And so earnestly hope and pray? Because there is danger, if they go wrong; They will lead the lambs astray. For the lamb will follow the sheep, you know, Wherever the sheep may stray. When the sheep go wrong it will not be long 'Til the lambs are as wrong as they. And so, with the sheep, we earnestly plead For the sake of the lambs today; If the lambs are lost, what a terrible cost Some sheep will have to pay.

Of the best rulers, The people (only) know that they exist; The next best they love and praise; The next they fear; And the next they revile. When they do not command the people's faith, Some will lose faith in them, And then they resort to oaths! But (of the best) when their task is accomplished, their work done The people all remark, "We have done it ourselves." Laotse

In the interior of our consciousness each of us has a sort of private Hall of Fame, reserved exclusively for the real leaders who have influenced the direction of our lives. Relatively few of the many men who have exercised authority over us from childhood through adult life meet our test for admission to this precinct. That test has very little to do with the outward trappings of power or an abundance of this world's goods. The leaders whom we admit into this private sanctuary of our reflective meditation are usually those who set our hearts afire with devotion to truth, who made obedience to duty seem the essence of manhood, who transformed some ordinary routine occurrence so that it became a vista whence we saw the man we aspired to be. The leaders of our choosing were men who personified faith and fidelity, who were instinctively repulsed by what was unclean or unfair, in whose presence evil cringed and seemed repulsive—men who were blessed with a faculty for striking a direct blow at the painted face of falsehood and deceit and were capable of awakening in us a desire to develop to the fullest our own talents and aptitudes.

Edward Hanify

A leader must be more than an administrator. He must have executive abilities, true, but he must know how to vitalize the power of people. He must understand how to build enthusiasm and self-reliance in those he directs by setting a good example himself. In influencing others to strive willingly for mutual objectives, the leader must radiate confidence and create an instant image of competence. This can be more powerful than any other quality.

Lou Laurel

A good formula for successful leadership is:

The man whose authority is recent is always stern.

Aeschylus

When in charge—ponder.

When in trouble—delegate.

When in doubt—mumble, then refer the problem to a coordinating committee for review.

If you are one of those managers who just can't seem to communicate with people in meetings, chances are that there is a good reason for your problem. It helps if your presentations are carefully planned and organized, and this includes full explanations of any terms or abbreviations that might be difficult for your colleagues to understand. Another point to remember is that too much detail can kill a presentation. Other features of a successful presentation include a definitely stated goal, good use of audiovisual aids, good delivery, plenty of proofs and examples, and able handling of questions.

If you want to give a light to others, you have to glow yourself.

People may talk and never teach, unless they practice what they preach.

I think that to have known one good man . . . helps our faith in God, in ourselves, and in each other more than many sermons.

George William Curtis

The eye's a better student and more willing than the ear.

Fine counsel is confusing, but example's always clear,

And the best of all the preachers are the men who live their creeds,

For to see the good in action is what everybody needs.

I can soon learn how you do it if you'll let me see it done.

I can watch your hands in action, but your tongue too fast may run;

And the lectures you deliver may be very wise and true,

But I'd rather get my lesson by observing what you do.

For I may not understand you and the high advice you give;

But there's no misunderstanding how you act and how you live.

Edgar A. Guest

If we want knowledge without values, we can find it in almanacs. If we want information without motivation, we can get it in computers. But if we are looking for leadership, then the first test is for character.

Norman Cousins

A good example has twice the value of good advice.

Don't be an average leader, for an average leader is only the worst of the best and the best of the worst.

HOW TO DISCOVER SOLUTIONS TO PROBLEMS

TEN COMMANDMENTS FOR SALESMEN

Dr. Frank Crane

MY CHUM He stood at the crossroads all alone, The sunlight in his face. He had no thought for the world unknown— He was set for a manly race. But the roads stretched east and the roads stretched west, And the lad knew not which road was best, So he chose the road that led him down, And he lost the race and the victor's crown. He was caught at last in an angry snare Because no one stood at the crossroads there To show him the better road. Another day at the self-same place, A boy with high hopes stood. He, too, was set for a manly race; He, too, was seeking the things that were good. But one was there who the roads did know. And that one showed him which way to go. So he turned from the road that would lead him down, And he won the race and the victor's crown. He walks today the highway fair Because one stood at the crossroads there To show him the better way. Unknown

The job of the executive is to think, plan, direct, check, and inspire.

Formula for failure: Try to please everybody.

A real leader has the ability to get others to work willingly through his influence and example. His efforts are directed toward influencing people to want to do certain things—not to make them obey commands.

Six qualities great leaders possess:

David O. McKay

The manager is expected to originate, visualize, organize, energize, and supervise.

Royal Bank of Canada Newsletter

ATTRIBUTES OF A GOOD LEADER

THE MANLY LEADER He readies each assignment With vigor and with vim; He gets it clearly in his head Until it's part of him. When he gives a lesson, His eyes know where to look. They like to meet a young man's eyes— Not pages of a book. The conscientious leader Is much concerned for youth. His lips and tongue and vocal cords Will always speak the truth. Because he is a gentleman, His knees you seldom see, But you can tell he has them For he's on them frequently. His legs may not be muscle greats; They're fit, though, for the climb. And one thing's sure: they'll get him there, Every time—on time. In the reach for something better It is just as you suppose: This super he-man leader Is always on his toes!

The manager's chief need, given technical skill to handle the mechanics of his particular business, is to understand people. Some are born with this quality; others acquire it. The manager must have it either by inheritance or by study and practice.

Royal Bank of Canada Newsletter

We teach best by example. Edmund Burke said, "Example is the school of mankind, and they will learn at no other." To me one of the clearest examples of teachers who care about the people they teach comes out of the music classroom. Here are musicians, performers themselves, some sufficiently talented to be recitalists. Yet they sit in a room with a beginning violinist, listening to the squawk and screech and scrape of the bow across those strings. How can they stand it—the violation of their art, this desecration of music? Because the music teacher cares more about that child than about the art itself.

Someone has said, "A mediocre teacher tells, a good teacher explains, a superior teacher demonstrates; but the great teacher inspires." I'm a teacher and a writer today because I was inspired by a high school teacher of English in London, Ontario—a man named David Carr. His love for books and ideas was exceeded only by his love for people. He was the first person to bring literature to life for me, the first to encourage me to write for publication in the city newspaper. "A teacher affects eternity," said Henry Adams. "He can never tell where his influence stops."

D. Bruce Lockerbie

A good executive in any field, including the spiritual, increases the output of all those with whom he works.

A successful general is one under whose leadership the staff, as well as the rank and file, will work and die with enthusiasm.

Walter Gifford

In all our leadership it is well for us to remember that each of us is a partner of our Heavenly Father in helping to lift the individual toward eternal life. Nowhere does this come to us more forcibly than from the meeting on the mount of Moses with the Lord. The Lord there showed Moses the earth below, "and there was not a particle of it which he did not behold." (Moses 1:27.)

Man attains in the measure that he aspires.

James Allen

There is no greater responsibility in the world than the training of a human soul.

One of the marks of executive leadership is the capacity to assign responsibility, give authority, and hold men responsible for that authority. And, of course, he must see to it that the job gets done.

Five aspects in appointing and supervising successful leaders:

Spencer W. Kimball

I believe that a business's greatest assets are its human assets, and that the improvement of their value is both a matter of material advantage and moral obligation. I believe that employees must be treated as honorable individuals, justly rewarded, encouraged in their progress, fully informed and properly assigned and that their lives and work must be given meaning and dignity on and off the job. If I have the supervision of so much as one other person, I will strive to honor these principles in practice.

Clarence Francis

Successful sales executives know when and how to delegate responsibility and authority. The answers to the following questions can determine your ability to delegate:

If "yes" is your answer to five or more of the above inquiries, then you need to learn more about the art of delegating.

Father to leader: "I wish you would do something for my boy."

Leader to father: "I wish you would, too."

One of the qualities of leadership which contributes most to success is seldom listed. This trait is often overlooked or unobserved because other factors stand out. It may be the reason for the drive or even the ambition. Certainly it contributes to the awareness and the constant emphasis on performance.

A leader constantly seeks ways to do better whatever needs to be done. If a person with this quality will continue positive application of this negative factor, that person will have a leadership role.

The quality: dissatisfaction. To make the unsatisfactory satisfactory or better is the mark of leadership. Never be satisfied with less than top performance, and progress will be the reward.

Vince Lombardi

The world's most unrewarding activity is to "follow the follower." It cannot supplant "follow the leader."

MAN-MAKING We are blind until we see That in the human plan Nothing is worth the making if It does not make the man. Why build these cities glorious If man unbuilded goes? In vain we build the world, unless The builder also grows. Edwin Markham

The calling of the gospel teacher is one of the noblest in the world. The good teacher can make all the difference in inspiring boys and girls and men and women to change their lives and fulfill their highest destiny. The importance of the teacher has been beautifully described by Daniel Webster when he said, "If we work upon marble, it will perish; if we work upon brass, time will efface it; but if we work upon immortal minds, if we imbue them with principles and the just fear of God and love of our fellowman, we engrave upon those tablets something that will brighten through all eternity."

With this philosophy in mind, the Church has established a program for teacher development. Teachers in the Church must be prepared to meet the challenge to those forces that seek to mold the minds of men. Satan is on the move as never before. The world is changing rapidly in both positive and negative ways. This program is prepared for three groups: present teachers, prospective teachers, and Church leaders. And, of course, the aim is to inspire the individual member to think about, feel about, and then do something about gospel truths and principles. To do this, we must and will develop great teachers in the Church.

Harold B. Lee

Four goals of an effective teacher are: (1) to inspire; (2) to instruct; (3) to illustrate; and (4) to ignite.

A teacher affects eternity; he can never tell where his influence stops.

Henry Brooks Adams

The great influencing factor in the classroom is the teacher, his personality, what he thinks—not just what he says, but what he is, really and truly, in his heart. This is what influences his students.

I hear and I forget; I see and I remember; I do and I understand.

As the individual in the large corporation becomes increasingly nameless and faceless, leadership traits and the ability to distinguish them grow more important. The successful leader combines these four qualities:

Actually, these traits are simply the qualities of a mature individual.

SUGGESTIONS FOR SUCCESSFUL INTERVIEWS

Ivy Lee, a management consultant, created a $25,000 idea that can apply to leadership. He suggests that you

If you want something postponed, give it to a committee.

Charles Franklin Kettering

The late Jacob D. Cox, Jr., formerly president of Cleveland Twist Drill Company, used to tell the following story:

Jimmy Green was a new union committee member who stopped in to see Mr. Cox after contract negotiations had been concluded. Jimmy said that every other place he had worked he had always gone home grouchy; he never wanted to play with the children or take his wife to the movies. And then Jimmy said, "But since I have been working here, all that has changed. Now when I come home, the children run to meet me, and we have a grand romp together. It is a wonderful difference, and I don't know why; but I thought you would like to know."

As Mr. Cox observed, there must be a lot of Jimmy Greens in the world who want an opportunity to take part freely in a cooperative effort that has a moral purpose.

O.A. Ohmann

A good leader takes a little more than his share of the blame and a little less than his share of the credit.

Arnold H. Glasow

If you would become a leader, be prepared to assume heavy responsibility and take a lot of thoughtless, unjust criticism.

A pioneer is one who goes before, showing others the way to follow.

On the wall of the Engineering Society Library in New York is the following inscription: "Management is the art and science of preparing, organizing and directing human effort applied to control the forces and utilize the materials of nature for the benefit of man."

Who touches a boy by the Master's plan Is shaping the course of a future man, Is dealing with one who is living seed And may be a man whom the world will need.

A psychologist by the name of J.W. Bagby of New York's Roosevelt Hospital asked American and Mexican school teachers to look into a device that showed simultaneously a different picture to each eye. One eye of each person who looked into the device was shown a picture of a baseball player, and the other eye was shown a picture of a bullfighter. After they had been shown the two simultaneous pictures, they were asked what they saw. An overwhelming proportion of the Mexicans "saw" the bullfighter. What those teachers saw, of course, was mostly determined by their cultural filter. It was a test to prove that we see things in terms of our conditioning.

Earl Nightingale

A leader needs to follow a line of action and thought that will lead him to make right decisions: get the facts, weigh and appraise, take action, and check results.

Royal Bank of Canada Newsletter

Guiding missiles is the work of scientists. Our task is the guiding of souls.

A DOZEN RULES FOR THE EMPLOYEE ON THE WAY UP

No organization can take men's time unless it lifts men's lives.

Mr. George Spatta of Clark Equipment Company, when asked what he looks for in an executive, replied: "One who has ability to think clearly, has knowledge of the job, is a hard worker and can get along with others."

What is the executive's most fundamental task? It is to deal with change.

The real qualities of leadership are found in those who are willing to sacrifice for the sake of objectives great enough to demand their wholehearted allegiance. Simply holding a position of leadership does not make a man a leader. If you would be a real leader, you must endure loneliness. If you would be a real leader, you must endure weariness. Leadership requires vision.

A real leader ought to be able to foresee what his policies will do to the next generation. Vision must have hope and optimism in it. The past must push us—never pull us.

Clarence F. Sharer

A leader must realize that he is in a position to set an example and must deny himself, therefore, many of the privileges of a follower. Further, he must realize that, as he progresses to positions of increasing leadership, he must continue to study, train, and practice. His efforts to develop himself must be unceasing if he is to meet the challenge of leadership.

Gordon Ellis

The executive who is concerned with what a man cannot do rather than what he can do and therefore tries to avoid weakness rather than make strength effective is probably weak himself. He probably sees strength in others as a threat to himself. But no executive has ever suffered because his subordinates were strong and effective.

Peter Drucker

Hearts will inspire other hearts with their fire; for the strong obey when a strong man shows them the way.

Sigmund Romberg

Always show your customer what your product can do for him.

Amos Parrish Advertising Executive

From my years of experience, I have come to this conclusion: Management simply must get more information. Our people have more valuable information than one thinks.

Stephen R. Covey

The most valuable of all capital is that invested in human beings.

Alfred Marshall

It was reported that one bishop formed the habit of going down to the railroad station every morning to see the train pull out. Someone asked him why, and he said that it just made him feel so good to see something move on its own power without his having to push it.

Sterling W. Sill

Those who believe that might is right must always be mighty.

Ken Follett

"Follow the Leader" is more than a game when we remember that the power to lead is the power to mislead, and the power to mislead is the power to destroy.

Thomas S. Monson
