Thomas S. Monson, Favorite Quotations from the Collection of Thomas S. Monson ( 1985)

Striving for Exaltation

Men not unfrequently forget that they are dependent upon heaven for every blessing which they are permitted to enjoy, and that for every opportunity granted them they are to give an account. You know . . . that when the Master, in the Savior's parable of the stewards, called his servants before him, he gave them several talents to improve on while he should tarry abroad for a little season, and when he returned, he called for an accounting. So it is now. Our Master is absent only for a little season, and at the end of it He will call each to render an account.

Joseph Smith

If we get puffed up by thinking that we have much knowledge, we are apt to get a contentious spirit.

Joseph Smith

Inscription on the wall of the Library of Congress: "Beauty is truth; truth is beauty."

The nearer a person approaches the Lord, the greater power will be manifest by the Adversary to prevent the accomplishment of his purposes.

Heber C. Kimball

Alcohol demoralizes those who make it, those who sell it, and those who drink it.

Robert Ingersoll

"Be ye angry, and sin not: let not the sun go down upon your wrath."

Ephesians 4:26

A great virtue in having a sense of values is that you have a compass you can trust. When Francis Chichester crossed the Atlantic in mid-1962 he was alone in his twenty-eight-foot sailboat, and all around him the sea met the sky in an unmarked horizon. But he was not lost. He had a compass; his course was charted; the stars were overhead.

Royal Bank of Canada Newsletter

The Lord God gave unto man that he should act for himself. "Wherefore, men are free according to the flesh; . . . they are free to choose liberty and eternal life, through the great Mediator of all men, or to choose captivity and death, according to the captivity and power of the devil."

2 Nephi 2:27

"Believe in God, . . . that he created all things. . .; believe that he has all wisdom, and all power, . . . Believe that ye must repent of your sins and forsake them, and humble yourselves before God; . . . if you believe all these things see that ye do them."

Mosiah 4:9-10

"Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you?"

1 Corinthians 3:16

"Prepare to die" is not the exhortation of this Church and Kingdom, but "prepare to live." Then let us seek to extend present life to the uttermost.

Brigham Young

"For behold, the Spirit of Christ is given to every man, that he may know good from evil; wherefore, I show unto you the way to judge; for every thing which inviteth to do good, and to persuade to believe in Christ, is sent forth by the power and gift of Christ; wherefore ye may know with a perfect knowledge it is of God.

"But whatsoever thing persuadeth men to do evil, and believe not in Christ, and deny him, and serve not God, then ye may know with a perfect knowledge it is of the devil."

Moroni 7:16-17

A sense of values is needed in private life as well as in the marketplace. All our lives we are exercising choices, preferring this to that, deciding between better and worse.

Life would be uninteresting and drab if we did not set for ourselves certain goals and commit ourselves to some method for keeping score.

I would rather walk barefoot all the way to the Celestial Kingdom than to let the things of this world keep me out of that kingdom.

N. Eldon Tanner

In this day when modesty is thrust into the background and chastity is considered an outmoded virtue, I appeal to you to keep your souls unmarred and unsullied from this sin, "the prostitution of love," the consequence of which will smite and haunt you intimately until you conscience is seared and your character sordid.

David O. McKay

CHOOSE THE RIGHT Choose the right! there is peace in righteous doing; Choose the right! there's safety for the soul; Choose the right in all labors you're pursuing; Let God and heaven be your goal. Joseph L. Townsend

The Savior's refusal to misuse his power guaranteed the continuance of his power.

Hugh B. Brown

"Behold, I am Jesus Christ, whom the prophets testified shall come into the world. . . . I am the light and the life of the world. . . . Whoso believeth in me, and is baptized, the same shall be saved; and they are they who shall inherit the kingdom of God."

3 Nephi 11:10-11, 33

"In the world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer; I have overcome the world."

John 16:33

The prophet Joseph Smith set forth the purpose of the Church when he declared: "It is the bringing of men and women to a knowledge of the eternal truth that Jesus is the Christ, the Redeemer and Savior of the world, and that only through belief in Him and faith which manifests itself in good works, can men and nations enjoy peace."

The sturdy discipline of intimate friendship with Jesus results in men becoming like Him.

Harry Emerson Fosdick

The recognition of a power higher than man, himself, does not in any sense debase him. If, in his faith, he ascribes beneficence and high purpose to the Power which is superior to himself, he envisions a higher destiny and nobler attributes for his kind and is stimulated and encouraged in the struggle for existence.

He must seek, believing, praying, and hoping that he will find. No such sincere, prayerful effort will go unrequited—that is the very constitution of the philosophy of faith.

Divine favor will attend those who humbly seek it.

Stephen L Richards

Would you judge the lawfulness or unlawfulness of pleasure? Then use this rule: Whatever weakens your reason, impairs the tenderness of your conscience, obscures your sight of God, takes from you your thirst for spiritual things or increases the authority of your body over your mind, then that thing to you is evil. By this test you may detect evil no matter how subtly or how plausibly temptation may be presented to you.

Susannah Wesley Mother of reformist John Wesley

Faith and doubt cannot exist in the mind at the same time, for one will dispel the other.

Charles S. Hyde

"We walk by faith, not by sight."

2 Corinthians 5:7

A PLEDGE OF CHRISTIANITY

I will learn;

I will love;

I will serve;

I will obey.

Should the commandments of God be rewritten? No—reread and, I might add, relived.

Richard L. Evans

O LITTLE TOWN OF BETHLEHEM O little town of Bethlehem, How still we see thee lie! Above thy deep and dreamless sleep The silent stars go by. Yet in the dark streets shineth The everlasting Light; The hopes and fears of all the years Are met in thee tonight. How silently, how silently, The wondrous Gift is given! So God imparts to human hearts The blessings of His heaven. No ear may hear His coming, But in this world of sin, Where meek souls will receive Him, still The dear Christ enters in. Phillips Brooks

I shall never believe that God plays dice with the world.

Albert Einstein

THE CONQUERERS Jesus and Alexander died at thirty-three. One lived and died for self; one died for you and me. The Greek died on a throne; the Jew died on a cross. One's life a triumph seemed, the other but a loss. One led vast armies forth, the other walked alone; One shed a whole world's blood, the other gave His own. One won the world in life and lost it all in death; The other lost His life to win the whole world's faith. Jesus and Alexander died at thirty-three. One died in Babylon and one on Calvary. One gained all for himself, and one Himself He gave. One conquered every throne, the other every grave. The one made himself a god, our God made Himself the less. The one lived but to blast, the other but to bless. When died the Greek, forever fell his throne of swords; But Jesus died to live forever Lord of lords. Jesus and Alexander died at thirty-three. The Greek made men slaves; the Jew made men free. One built a throne on blood, the other built on love. The one was born of earth, the other from above. One won all this earth, to lose all earth and heaven. The other gave up all, that all to Him be given. The Greek forever died; the Jew forever lives. He loses all who gets, and wins all things who gives. Charles Ross Weede

Our doubts are traitors,

And make us lose the good we oft might win,

By fearing to attempt.

William Shakespeare

"But I can't go on a mission to Canada, Brother Joseph," protested John E. Page. "I don't even have a coat to wear."

"Here," said Joseph Smith, removing his own coat, "take this, and the Lord will bless you."

THE DESERT I said to a man who stood at the gate of the year: "Give me a light that I may tread safely into the unknown." And he replied: "Go out into the darkness and put your hand into the hand of God. That shall be to you better than a light and safer than a known way." So I went forth and, finding the hand of God, trod gladly into the night, And He led me toward the hills and the breakings of day in the lone East. Minnie Louise Haskins

The Psalmist wrote ever so long ago: "It is better to trust in the Lord than to put confidence in man. It is better to trust in the Lord than to put confidence in princes."

Psalm 118:8-9

When I was in England many years ago, I purchased a book entitled The Young Man and the World. The book was written by the late senator from Indiana, Albert J. Beveridge. It was written originally as a series of contributions to The Saturday Evening Post, after which it was compiled in book form.

In one chapter, "The Young Man and the Pulpit," the author said that a certain individual with a very splendid opportunity of securing answers to interrogations, during an entire summer vacation asked every minister with whom he came in contact [two] questions:

First: "Yes or no; do you believe in God the Father, God a person, God a definite and tangible intelligence—not a congeries of laws floating like a fog through the universe; but God, a person in whose image you were made? Don't argue; don't explain; but is your mind in a condition where you can answer yes or no?"

Not a minister answered, "Yes," but they all gave a lot of explanations to the effect that we could not be sure about such things. . . .

The next question was: "Yes or no; do you believe that Christ was the Son of the living God, sent by Him to save the world? I am not asking whether you believe that He was inspired in the sense that the great moral teachers are inspired—nobody has any difficulty about that. But do you believe that Christ was God's very Son, with a divinely appointed and definite mission, dying on the cross, and raised from the dead? Yes or no?"

Again, not a single minister answered, "Yes." The sum total of their answers was that He was the greatest moral teacher that ever lived. I maintain that He could not possibly have been a moral teacher if He were not the Son of God, because that was the foundation of His teachings. He came as the Son of God to do the will of God, and He announced that those who had seen Him had virtually seen God, because He was in the image of God.

Heber J. Grant

THE PACKAGE OF SEEDS I paid a dime for a package of seeds And the clerk tossed them out with a flip. "We've got 'em assorted for every man's needs," He said with a smile on his lip, "Pansies and poppies and asters and peas! Ten cents a package! And pick as you please!" Now seeds are just dimes to the man in the store, And the dimes are the things that he needs; And I've been to buy them in seasons before, But have thought of them merely as seeds; But it flashed through my mind as I took them this time, "You have purchased a miracle here for a dime!" "You've a dime's worth of power no man can create, You've a dime's worth of life in your hand! You've a dime's worth of mystery, destiny, fate, Which the wisest cannot understand. In this bright little package, now isn't it odd? You've a dime's worth of something known only to God." Edgar A. Guest

Only faith in a life after death, in a brighter world where dear ones will meet again—only that and the measured tramp of time can give consolation.

Sir Winston Churchill

God left the world unfinished for man to work his skill upon. He left the electricity still in the cloud, the oil still in the earth. He left the rivers unbridged and the forests unfelled and cities unbuilt. God gave to man the challenge of raw materials—not the ease of finished things. He left the pictures unpainted and the music unsung and the problems unsolved, that man might know the joys and glories of creation.

This is Lincoln's statement of faith formulated by Dr. William E. Barton from the martyred president's own words:

I believe in penitential and pious sentiments, in devotional designs and purposes, in homages and confessions, in supplications to the Almighty, solemnly, earnestly, reverently.

I believe in blessings and comfort from the Father of Mercies to the sick, the wounded, the prisoners, and to the orphans and widows.

I believe it pleases Almighty God to prolong our national life, defending us with His guardian care.

I believe in His eternal truth and justice.

I believe the will of God prevails; without Him all human reliance is vain; without the assistance of that Divine Being I cannot succeed; with that assistance I cannot fail.

I believe I am a humble instrument in the hands of our Heavenly Father; I desire that all my works and acts may be according to His will; and that it may be so, I give thanks to the Almighty and seek His aid.

I believe in praise to Almighty God, the beneficent Creator and Ruler of the Universe.

A BAG OF TOOLS Isn't it strange that princes and kings And clowns that caper in sawdust rings, And simple folks like you and me Are builders for eternity? To each is given a bag of tools, A shapeless mass and a set of rules; And each must make, e're life has flown, A stumbling block or a stepping stone. R. L. Sharpe

How oft have wise men and women sought to dictate Brother Joseph by saying, "O, if I were Brother Joseph I would do this and that;" but if they were in Brother Joseph's shoes they would find that men or women could not be compelled into the kingdom of God, but must be dealt with in long-suffering, and at last we shall save them.

Joseph Smith

The smile of God's approval is the greatest of all gifts.

RETRIBUTION Though the mills of God grind slowly, Yet they grind exceeding small; Though with patience He stands waiting, With exactness grinds He all. Friedrich von Logau

GOD OF OUR FATHERS, KNOWN OF OLD God of our fathers, known of old, Lord of our far-flung battleline, Beneath whose awful hand we hold Dominion over palm and pine, Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet, Lest we forget, lest we forget! The tumult and the shouting dies, The captains and the kings depart; Still stands thine ancient sacrifice, An humble and a contrite heart; Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet, Lest we forget, lest we forget! Far-called, our navies melt away, On dune and headland sinks the fire; Lo, all our pomp of yesterday Is one with Nineveh and Tyre! Judge of the nations, spare us yet, Lest we forget, lest we forget! Rudyard Kipling

[The gift of the Holy Ghost] is necessary to make and to organize the Priesthood. . . . No man can be called to fill any office in the ministry without it; we also believe in prophecy, in tongues, in visions, and in revelations, in gifts, and in healings; and . . . these things cannot be enjoyed without the gift of the Holy Ghost.

Joseph Smith

ODE Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting: The soul that rises with us, our life's star, Hath had elsewhere its setting, And cometh from afar: Not in entire forgetfulness, And not in utter nakedness, But trailing clouds of glory do we come From God, who is our home: Heaven lies about us in our infancy! William Wordsworth

On May 8, 1838, Joseph Smith was desirous of setting forth the answers to questions which had been presented to him over and over again. To one of these questions he replied as follows:

Question: What are the fundamental principles of your religion?

Answer: The fundamental principles of our religion are the testimony of the Apostles and Prophets concerning Jesus Christ: that He died, was buried and rose again the third day and ascended into heaven; and all other things which pertain to our religion are only appendages to it.

William Gladstone described as the world's greatest need: "A living faith in a personal God."

Today, more than ever before, our survival—yours and mine and our children's—depends on our adherence to ethical principles. Ethics alone will decide whether atomic energy will be an earthly blessing or the source of mankind's utter destruction.

Where does the desire for ethical action come from? What makes us want to be ethical? I believe are two forces which move us. One is belief in a Last Judgment, when every one of us has to account for what we did with God's great gift of life on the earth. The other is belief in an immortal soul, a soul which will cherish the award or suffer the penalty decreed in a final Judgment.

Belief in God and in immortality thus gives us the moral strength and the ethical guidance we need for virtually every action in our daily lives. In our modern world many people seem to feel that science has somehow made such "religious ideas" untimely or old-fashioned. But I think science has a real surprise for the skeptics. Science, for instance, tells us that nothing in nature, not even the tiniest particle, can disappear without a trace. Think about that for a moment. Once you do, your thoughts about life will never be the same.

Science has found that nothing can disappear without a trace. Nature does not know extinction. All it knows is transformation!

Now, if God applies this fundamental principle to the most minute and insignificant parts of His universe, doesn't it make sense to assume that He applies it also to the masterpiece of His creation: the human soul? I think it does. And everything science has taught me—and continues to teach me—strengthens my belief in the continuity of our spiritual existence after death. Nothing disappears without a trace.

Dr. Wernher von Braun

LEAD, KINDLY LIGHT Lead, kindly Light, amid the encircling gloom; Lead thou me on! The night is dark, and I am far from home; Lead thou me on! Keep thou my feet; I do not ask to see The distant scene—one step enough for me. I was not ever thus, nor prayed that thou Shouldst lead me on; I loved to choose and see my path; but now Lead thou me on! I loved the garish day, and, spite of fears, Pride ruled my will. Remember not past years. So long thy power hath blest me, sure it still Will lead me on O'er moor and fen, o'er crag and torrent, till The night is gone, And with the morn those angel faces smile, Which I have loved long since, and lost awhile! John Henry Newman

How far is heaven?

It's not very far.

With people like you,

It's right where you are.

"Children, obey your parents in all things: for this is well pleasing unto the Lord."

Colossians 3:20

"If you will that I give unto you a place in the celestial world, you must prepare yourselves by doing the things which I have commanded you."

D&C 78:7

When the moment for decision arrives, the time for preparation is past.

Thomas S. Monson

In A Man for All Seasons, Thomas More converses with Richard Rich, an ambitious young intellectual who ultimately betrays More and who loses his soul by selling out to ambition. More, who intuits Rich's problems and probable future, has told him to be satisfied with being a teacher; he can be a fine one. Rich asks who would know it if he were, and More replies, "You, your students, your friends, God. Not a bad public, that."

If I could choose what of all things would be at the same time the most delightful and useful to me, I should prefer a firm religious belief to every other blessing.

Sir Humphrey Davy

I believe . . . that the soul of Man is immortal and will be treated with justice in another life respecting its conduct in this.

Benjamin Franklin

Imagine yourself as a living house. God comes in to rebuild that house. At first, perhaps, you can understand what He is doing. He is getting the drains right and stopping the leaks in the roof and so on. He knew that those jobs needed doing and so you were not surprised. But presently He starts knocking the house about in a way that hurts and does not seem to make sense. What on earth is He up to? The explanation is that He is building quite a different house from the one you thought of—throwing out a new wing here, putting on an extra floor there, running up towers, making courtyards. You thought you were going to be made into a decent little cottage; but He is building a palace.

C. S. Lewis

Moral decay and religious principle are like twin buckets in a well. When one goes up, the other goes down. When religion declines, immorality inevitably will be on the rise.

Richard Wiley

Hope is the anchor of life. Religious hope is that and, we might add, also the wind and the sail.

"For all who will have a blessing at my hands shall abide the law which was appointed for that blessing, and the conditions thereof, as were instituted from before the foundation of the world."

D&C 132:5

We carry upon our shoulders the reputation of the Church—each and every one of us.

Heber J. Grant

Thomas Carlyle made the following comment of his own hometown: "This community needs a man who knows God other than by hearsay."

A test whereby we can know whether or not revelation is from God:

By answering this series of questions, you can know by the Spirit whether or not the information comes from God.

Wouldst thou be gathered to Christ's chosen flock? Shun the broad way too easily explored. And let thy path be hewn out of the rock—the living rock of God's eternal word.

William Wordsworth

One, on God's side, is a majority.

Wendell Phillips

I am one of those who believes that all institutions and organizations exist primarily for the purpose of securing to the individual his rights, his happiness, and proper development of his character. As soon as organizations fail to accomplish this purpose, their usefulness ceases.

Jesus always sought the welfare of the individual, and individuals grouped and laboring for the mutual welfare of the whole in conformity with the principles of the gospel constitute the Kingdom of God.

To the members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the worth of the individual has special meaning. Quorums, auxiliaries, wards, stakes, even the Church itself, are all organized to further the welfare of man. All are but means to an end, and that end is the happiness and eternal welfare of every child of God.

David O. McKay

They who know the truth are not so great as they who love it; and they who love the truth are not so great as they who live it.

Chinese Proverb

"And we did magnify our office unto the Lord, taking upon us the responsibility, answering the sins of the people upon our own heads if we did not teach them the word of God with all diligence; wherefore, by laboring with our might their blood might not come upon our garments . . ., and we would not be found spotless at the last day."

Jacob 1:19

The time has come to cease emphasizing the gadgets of everyday living and to set over against them the imperishable qualities of honesty, integrity, unselfishness, and respect for law.

"There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—and when we obtain any blessings from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated."

D&C 130:20-21

"I, the Lord, am bound when ye do what I say; but when ye do not what I say, ye have no promise."

D&C 82:10

In a welfare meeting of the Monument Park West Stake, Elder Paul C. Child of the Welfare Committee asked the question: "What is the worth of a soul?"

One in the audience gave a rather interesting answer: "The worth of a soul is its capacity to become as God."

"Organize yourselves; prepare every needful thing; and establish a house, even a house of prayer, a house of fasting, a house of faith, a house of learning, a house of glory, a house of order, a house of God."

D&C 88:119

The knights of France and England wrote this into their code of chivalry whereby they spurred themselves to heroic and generous actions: Courage is splendid, fidelity is noble, distressed people should be rescued, and vanquished enemies should be spared.

In our quest for knowledge, there is no room for cheating, for dishonesty or that which would degrade us or cause the loss of our precious self-respect. In decision making we ask not "What will others think?" but "What will I think of myself?"

MY CREED I would be true, for there are those who trust me; I would be pure, for there are those who care; I would be strong, for there is much to suffer; I would be brave, for there is much to dare. I would be friend of all— the foe, the friendless; I would be giving, and forget the gift; I would be humble, for I know my weakness; I would look up—and laugh— and love—and lift. Howard Arnold Walter

Of all the acts of man, repentance is the most divine. The greatest of faults, I should say, is to be conscious of none.

Thomas Carlyle

You cannot repent too soon, because you do not know how soon it may be too late.

Thomas Fuller

We must not insist on remembering what God has indicated He is willing to forget.

Hugh B. Brown

Money is not required to buy one necessity of the soul.

Henry David Thoreau

Do not pray for tasks equal to your powers. Pray for powers equal to your tasks. Then the doing of your work shall be no miracle, but you shall be the miracle.

Thomas S. Monson

"The Lord appeared to Solomon . . . and the Lord said unto him, I have heard thy prayer and thy supplication, that thou hast made before me: I have hallowed this house, which thou hast built, to put my name there for ever; and mine eyes and mine heart shall be there perpetually."

1 Kings 9:2-3

"Create in me a clean heart, O God; and renew a right spirit within me. Cast me not away from thy presence; and take not thy holy spirit from me. Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation; and uphold me with thy free spirit."

Psalm 51:10

REVELATION I knelt to pray when day was done. And prayed, "O Lord, bless everyone; Lift from each saddened heart the pain And let the sick be well again." And then I woke another day And carelessly went on my way. The whole day long I did not try To wipe a tear from any eye; I did not try to share the load Of any brother on my road; I did not even go to see The sick man just next door to me. Yet once again when day was done I prayed, "O Lord, bless everyone." But as I prayed, into my ear There came a voice that whispered clear: "Pause, hypocrite, before you pray, Whom have you tried to bless today? God's sweetest blessings always go By hands that serve Him here below." And then I hid my face, and cried, "Forgive me, God, for I have lied; Let me but see another day And I will live the way I pray." Whitney Montgomery

I believe in prayer, and I pray.

David M. Kennedy Former U. S. Secretary of the Treasury

My words fly up, my thoughts remain below:

Words without thoughts never to heaven go.

William Shakespeare

There is no act of a Latter-day Saint, no duty required, no time given, exclusive and independent of the priesthood. Everything is subject to it, whether preaching, business, or any other act pertaining to the proper conduct of this life.

Brigham Young

The greatest force in this world today is the power of God as it works through man.

It is your duty first of all to learn what the Lord wants and then by the power and strength of your holy priesthood to so magnify your calling in the presence of your fellows that the people will be glad to follow you.

George Albert Smith

If you find yourself further away from God than you were yesterday, you can be sure who has moved.

If I had been set to turn the world over, to dig down a mountain, to go to the ends of the earth, or traverse the deserts of Arabia, it would have been easier to have undertaken to rest while the priesthood was upon me. I have received the holy annointing, and I can never rest until the last enemy is conquered, death destroyed, and truth reigns triumphant.

Parley P. Pratt

AN ESSAY ON MAN Vice is a monster of so frightful mien, As to be hated needs but to be seen; Yet seen too oft, familiar with her face, We first endure, then pity, then embrace. Alexander Pope

Neglect of opportunity in holy things develops inability.

James E. Talmage

There was never yet a truly great man who was not at the same time truly virtuous.

Benjamin Franklin

We are not teaching lessons; we are preparing for a temptation which will surely come.

Harold B. Lee

TO A WATERFOWL Whither, midst falling dew, While glow the heavens with the last steps of day, Far, through their rosy depth, dost thou pursue Thy solitary way? Vainly the fowler's eye Might mark thy distant flight to do thee wrong, As, darkly painted on the crimson sky, Thy figure floats along. Seek'st thou the plashy brink Of weedy lake, or marge of river wide, Or where the rocking billows rise and sink On the chafed ocean-side? All day thy wings have fanned At that far height, the cold, thin atmosphere, Yet stoop not, weary, to the welcome land, Though the dark night is near. And soon that toil shall end; Soon shalt thou find a summer home, and rest, And scream among thy fellows; reeds shall bend, Soon, o'er thy sheltered nest. He who, from zone to zone, Guides through the boundless sky that certain flight, In the long way that I must tread alone, Will lead my steps aright. William Cullen Bryant

"The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament sheweth his handywork."

Psalm 19:1

It matters not what else we have been called to do or what position we may occupy or how faithfully in other ways we have labored in the Church; none is exempt from the great obligation of performance of temple work for the dead. It is required of the Apostles as well as of the humblest Elder. Place or distinction or long service in the Church, in the mission fields, the stakes of Zion or where or how else it may have been, will not entitle one to disregard the salvation of one's dead. Some may feel that if they pay their tithing, attend to their regular meetings and other duties, give of their substance to feed the poor, perchance spend one or two years preaching in the world that they are absolved from further duty. But the greatest and grandest duty of all is to labor for the dead. We may and should do all these other things for which reward will be given, but if we neglect the work for the dead, all our other good works notwithstanding, we shall find ourselves under severe condemnation.

Joseph Fielding Smith

Why is not God already real to Americans who are among the most church-going people in the world? Partly because of the blight of secularism in the churches, which have become just another valued branch of American democratic culture instead of its center. What used to be the minister's study is now his office, and as a busy agent of the social gospel, he is less a spokesman of God than a useful citizen, making East Overshoe "a better place to live." A society that apotheocizes techniques and talks more about its processes than its aims has made God Himself a technique instead of the source and goal of our being.

Life

"For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also."

Matthew 6:21

"With my whole heart I have sought thee: O let me not wander from thy commandments."

Psalm 119:10

If you want to know what the Lord has for this people at the present time, I would admonish you to get and read the discourses that have been delivered at this conference; for what these brethren have spoken by the power of the Holy Ghost is the mind of the Lord, the will of the Lord, the voice of the Lord, and the power of God unto salvation.

Harold B. Lee

"Lord, who shall abide in thy tabernacle? who shall dwell in thy holy hill? He that walketh uprightly, and worketh righteousness, and speaketh the truth in his heart."

Psalm 15:1-2

"Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh."

Matthew 12:34

"Let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart, be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, my strength, and my redeemer."

Psalm 19:14

We should avail ourselves of those sacred and potent ordinances of the Gospel which have been revealed as essential to the happiness, salvation and redemption of those who have lived in this world when they could not live the Gospel and have died without the knowledge of it, and are now waiting for us, their children, who are living in an age when these ordinances can be performed, to do the work necessary for their release from the prison house. Through our efforts in their behalf, their chains of bondage will fall from them, and the darkness surrounding them will clear away, that light may shine upon them and they shall hear in the spirit world of the work that has been done for them by their children here, and will rejoice with you in your performance of these duties.

Joseph F. Smith

"Whatsoever thing is good is just and true; wherefore, nothing that is good denieth the Christ, but acknowledgeth that he is."

Moroni 10:6

"Attend to my words; incline thine ear unto my sayings. Let them not depart from thine eyes; keep them in the midst of thine heart."

Proverbs 4:20-21

"And when ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost."

Moroni 10:4

"Yea, behold, I will tell you in your mind and in your heart, by the Holy Ghost, which shall come upon you and which shall dwell in your heart."

D&C 8:2

Man has changed again and again, but the mandates from God are still the same as they have always been because the fundamental principles of good behavior are immutable.

David Lawrence

Family prayer is the greatest deterrent to sin and thence the most beneficent provider of joy and happiness.

OH SAY, WHAT IS TRUTH Oh say, what is truth? 'Tis the fairest gem That the riches of worlds can produce, And priceless the value of truth will be when The proud monarch's costliest diadem Is counted but dross and refuse. Yes, say, what is truth? 'Tis the brightest prize To which mortals or Gods can aspire; Go search in the depths where it glittering lies Or ascend in pursuit to the loftiest skies: 'Tis an aim for the noblest desire. The sceptre may fall from the despot's grasp When with winds of stern justice he copes, But the pillar of truth will endure to the last, And its firm-rooted bulwarks outstand the rude blast, And the wreck of the fell tyrant's hopes. Then say, what is truth? 'Tis the last and the first, For the limits of time it steps o'er. Though the heavens depart and the earth's fountains burst, Truth, the sum of existence, will weather the worst, Eternal, unchanged, evermore. John Jaques

"The spirit and the body shall be reunited again in its perfect form; both limb and joint shall be restored to its proper frame, even as we now are. . . . Spirits uniting with their bodies, never to be divided; thus, the whole becoming spiritual and immortal."

Alma 11:43-45

"God hath numbered thy kingdom, and finished it. . . . Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting."

Daniel 5:26-27

In New York City on 5th Avenue and 65th Street is a Jewish Synagogue. On the exterior wall, chiseled in granite, are these two inscriptions: "Does justice love mercy?" "Walk humbly with thy God."

"After they had been received unto baptism, and were wrought upon and cleansed by the power of the Holy Ghost, they were numbered among the people of the church of Christ; and their names were taken, that they might be remembered and nourished by the good word of God, to keep them in the right way, to keep them continually watchful unto prayer, relying alone upon the merits of Christ, who was the author and the finisher of their faith."

Moroni 6:4

"The spirit and the body are the soul of man."

D&C 88:15

"Know ye not that your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost, which is in you, which ye have of God?"

1 Corinthians 6:19

The purpose of the home teaching program is to have every member of every family do his duty.

Marion G. Romney

Home teaching is missionary work to the member. Missionary work is home teaching to the nonmember.

Harold B. Lee

Our central task [in home teaching] is to produce an individual who walks uprightly before the Lord.

David O. McKay

It is a wise leader who follows the charted course, thereby eliminating errors and pitfalls. The captain of a ship would never put out to sea without a map and a compass. Nor would the pilot of a plane or an explorer in the jungle or arctic wastes set forth without the guidance of charts and maps. Where would the bus driver find himself if he just sallied forth aimlessly without direction?

The Lord has marked the path, and every point is defined for those to follow who would return unto Him. He has been very specific in His instructions, and they are well defined and available to us. He has told us that there is but one road, not many, to success (exaltation) and that this road is hard and difficult. "Strait is the gate and narrow is the way" are His words.

G. Carlos Smith, Jr.

"Wide is the gate, and broad is the way, that leadeth to destruction, and many there be that go in thereat."

Matthew 7:13

THE VISION OF SIR LAUNFAL, PRELUDE

At the devil's boot are all things sold.

Each ounce of dross costs its ounce of gold.

James Russell Lowell

You will meet sin; shun it! You inherit freedom, protect it!

You have a testimony; share it! You know the truth; live it!

Thomas S. Monson

"He is the light and the life of the world; yea, a light that is endless, that can never be darkened; yea, and also a life which is endless, that there can be no more death. Even this mortal shall put on immortality, and this corruption shall put on incorruption, and shall be brought to stand before the bar of God, to be judged of him according to their works."

Mosiah 16:9-10

"In my Father's house are many mansions: if it were not so, I would have told you."

John 14:2

John Quincy Adams thus expressed his thoughts on immortality to a friend. When the friend inquired how he was, he replied:

Thank you! John Quincy Adams himself is well, sir, quite well, I thank you. But the house in which he lives at present is becoming dilapidated. It is tottering upon its foundations. Time and the seasons have nearly destroyed it. The roof is pretty well worn out. Its walls are much shattered, and it trembles with every wind. The old tenement is becoming almost uninhabitable, and I think John Quincy Adams will have to move out of it soon; but he himself is quite well sir—quite well.

We have the Holy Ghost. Every one of us who is a member of the Church has had hands laid upon his head and has been given, as far as ordinances can give it, the gift of the Holy Ghost. But as I remember, when I was confirmed, the Holy Ghost was not directed to come to me. I was directed to "receive the Holy Ghost." If I receive the Holy Ghost and follow his guidance, I will be among those who are protected and carried through these troubled times. As so will you, and so will every soul who lives under his direction.

Marion G. Romney

No man for any considerable period can wear one face to himself and another to the multitude without finally getting bewildered as to which may be true.

Nathaniel Hawthorne

The Holy Ghost is the third member of the great trinity, the Godhead. He differs in some respects from the other two members. Our Father in Heaven, Elohim, and Jesus Christ, the Redeemer, have bodies of flesh and bone as tangible as man's. The Holy Ghost is a personage of spirit who has not a body of flesh and bones. His body is like the one Jesus had before He, Jesus, was born to Mary, the one we read about in the book of Ether, chapter 3.

These three—the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost—constitute the great governing council that controls the universe. One of the assignments of the Holy Ghost is to enlighten the minds of the believers in Christ. Those who accept His gospel, who repent and are baptized and receive the gift of the Holy Ghost by the ordinance of the laying on of hands, are given the right, based on continuous righteous living, to be guided by this third member of the Godhead, the Holy Ghost. He could come to one in person. He has the power to penetrate with his influence into the spirit and soul of every person in the earth. His power and influence go into every person in the earth who really accepts the Christ and complies with the principles and ordinances of His gospel. Such persons receive direction from that Holy Spirit, which guides them in their lives. That direction guides their thinking. It gives them strength, power, and knowledge. One who enjoys the gift of the Holy Ghost is brought back, to that extent, into the presence of God.

You can have the guidance of the Holy Spirit in selecting your profession or your vocation or whatever else you undertake to do in righteousness, if you are humble, live the standards that make us a peculiar people, and pray until you learn to talk with your God. The most valuable lesson you can learn in life is to be guided by the Holy Spirit.

Marion G. Romney

"If a person gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage in the world to come."

D&C 130:19

"I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; . . . the sea gave up the dead, which were in it; and death and hell delivered up the dead which were in them."

Revelation 20:12-13

"The spirits of all men, as soon as they are departed from this mortal body, yea, the spirits of all men, whether they be good or evil, are taken home to that God who gave them life. . . . The spirits of those who are righteous are received into a state of happiness, which is called paradise, a state of rest, a state of peace. . . . The spirits of the wicked . . . shall be cast out into outer darkness . . . a state of awful, fearful looking for the fiery indignation of the wrath of God upon them; thus they remain in this state, as well as the righteous in paradise, until the time of their resurrection."

Alma 40:11-14

"I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: And whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die."

John 11:25-26

"Do we begin again to commend ourselves? or need we, as some others, epistles of commendation to you, or letters of commendation from you? Ye are our epistle written in our hearts, known and read of all men . . . , written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God; not in tables of stone, but in fleshy tables of the heart.

"[God] hath made us able ministers of the new testament; not of the letter, but of the spirit; for the letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life."

2 Corinthians 3:1-3,6

The earth's a gentle place When Spring first breathes anew, And lifts its smiling face To say that Winter's through. The sun that paints the skies, Which Winter grays conceal, Bids nature to "Arise!" And breaks the ice-tong's seal. What song of hope is ours As heaven's grace is shed On hilltops crowned with flowers That yesterday were dead? The woodlands bleak and bare, As death clutched every limb, Now sanctify the air With Resurrection's hymn. Great signs that thrill the eyes! How can they but impress? If lowly plants must rise, Should man expect much less? Gerard Leo Tierney

KNOW THIS, THAT EVERY SOUL IS FREE Know this, that every soul is free To choose his life and what he'll be; For this eternal truth is given That God will force no man to heav'n. He'll call, persuade, direct aright, And bless with wisdom, love, and light, In nameless ways be good and kind, But never force the human mind. Anonymous

PRAYER I know not by what methods rare But this I know: God answers prayer. I know that He has given His word Which tells me prayer is always heard And will be answered, soon or late, And so I pray and calmly wait. I know not if the blessings sought Will come just in the way I thought But leave my prayers with Him alone Whose will is wiser than my own, Assured that He will grant my quest Or send some answer far more blessed. Eliza M. Hickok
