Thomas S. Monson, Favorite Quotations from the Collection of Thomas S. Monson ( 1985)

Preparation for Achievement

It is better to be nobly remembered than nobly born.

John Ruskin

As Theseus, King of Athens, said in one of Sophocles' plays: "Nor am I careful to adorn my life with words of praise, but with the light of deeds."

One cannot get much satisfaction out of endless dreaming. One must perform.

Our circle of concern is greater than our circle of action.

My life cannot implement in action the demands of all those to whom my heart responds.

Anne Morrow Lindbergh

THE QUITTER Fate handed the quitter a bump, and he dropped; The road seemed too rough to go, so he stopped. He thought of his hurt, and there came to his mind The easier path he was leaving behind. "Oh, it's all much too hard," said the quitter right then; "I'll stop where I am and not try it again." He sat by the road and he made up his tale To tell when men asked why he happened to fail. A thousand excuses flew up to his tongue, And these on the thread of his story he strung, But the truth of the matter he didn't admit; He never once said, "I was frightened and quit." Whenever the quitter sits down by the road And drops from the struggle to lighten his load, He can always recall to his own peace of mind A string of excuses for falling behind; But somehow or other he can't think of one Good reason for battling and going right on. Oh, when the bump comes and fate hands you a jar, Don't baby yourself, boy, whoever you are; Don't pity yourself and talk over your woes; Don't think up excuses for dodging the blows. But stick to the battle and see the thing through. And don't be a quitter, whatever you do. Edgar A. Guest

If you could kick the person responsible for most of your troubles, you wouldn't be able to sit down for six months.

Gordon Gray

To most of us the future seems unsure. But then, it always has been; and we who have seen great changes must have great hopes.

John Masefield

THE MAN WHO THINKS HE CAN If you think you are beaten, you are; If you think you dare not, you don't. If you like to win, but think you can't, It's almost a cinch you won't. If you think you'll lose, you're lost, For out in the world we find Success begins with a fellow's will; It's all in the state of mind. If you think you're outclassed, you are; You've got to think high to rise. You've got to be sure of yourself before You can ever win a prize. Life's battles don't always go To the stronger or faster man; But soon or late the man who wins Is the man who thinks he can. Walter D. Wintle

When you are discouraged, look back carefully and honestly, and you will find that your work has not been done with all your might. Victory is bound to come to him who gives all of himself to the cause he represents, if there be truth in the cause.

Our business in life is not to get ahead of others but to get ahead of ourselves; to break our own records; to outstrip our yesterdays by our todays; to bear our trials more beautifully than we ever dreamed we could; to give as we never have given; to do our work with more force and a finer finish than ever. This is the true idea: to get ahead of ourselves.

Carl Holmes

Men will work hard for money; they will work harder for other men. But men will work hardest of all when they are dedicated to a cause. Until willingness overflows obligation, men fight as conscripts rather than following the flag as patriots. Duty is never worthily performed until it is done by one who would gladly do more if he could.

Harry Emerson Fosdick

I will do everything I can to serve you, and I will do everything I can to honor this high calling. God bless you, and God bless me, and will you please pray for me, that no enemy shall dent the small sector of the line which I am assigned to defend.

Marion G. Romney

We should be painting a vastly greater mural on a vastly more spacious wall.

John Gardner

THE WAYS To every man there openeth A Way, and Ways and a Way. And the High Soul climbs the High Way, And the Low Soul gropes the Low, And in between, on the misty flats, The rest drift to and fro. But to every man there openeth A High Way, and a Low, And every man decideth The way his soul shall go. John Oxenham

Do we have good excuses for lack of achievement? History is replete with people with problems. Homer could have squatted at the gates of Athens, have been pitied and fed by coins from the rich. He, like Milton the poet and Prescott the historian, had a good alibi: he was blind, as were they. Demosthenes, greatest of all great orators, had a wonderful alibi: his lungs were weak, his voice hoarse and unmusical, and he stuttered. Julius Caesar, statesman and general, was an epileptic. Beethoven was stone deaf at middle age. They all had good alibis—but they never used them!

No power on earth can keep a first-class man down nor keep a fourth-class man up.

Have great dreams and dare to live them.

THE MAN IN THE GLASS When you get what you want in your struggle for self And the world thinks you king for a day, Just go to the mirror and look at yourself, And see what that man has to say. For it isn't your father, your mother, or wife Who judgment upon you must pass; The fellow whose verdict counts most in your life Is the one staring back from the glass. You may be like Jack Horner and chisel a plum And think you're a wonderful guy; But the man in the glass says you're only a bum If you can't look him straight in the eye. He's the fellow to please, never mind all the rest; For he's with you clear to the end. And you've passed your most dangerous, difficult test If the man in the glass is your friend. You may fool the whole world down the pathway of years And get pats on the back as you pass; But your final reward will be heartaches and tears If you've cheated the man in the glass.

William James announced the "as if" principle: If you want a virtue, act as if you already have it. If you want to be brave, act brave. Theodore Roosevelt was once decorating one of his subordinates for bravery. He said in substance: "This is the bravest man I have ever known. He was right behind me all the way up San Juan Hill. That may sound a little egotistical, but 'out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh,' and if you don't have it in you, you can't get it out."

Can Do will never fall down. He will always bring home the bacon. He will always keep us identified as our better self. Can Do knows his business; he keeps us at our peak of performance; he never has to be reminded or coaxed.

Sterling W. Sill

The man who swears allegiance to a cause places upon himself limitations beyond a slave because he has given his heart.

Harry Emerson Fosdick

Don't bring me your successes, for they weaken me; rather, bring me your problems, for they strengthen me.

Boss Kettering Former president, General Motors

We cannot all be John Cabots, sailing off into the blue with the king's patent to discover new lands; but we can be explorers in spirit, with democracy's mandate to make this land better by discovering new ways of living and doing things.

The spirit of exploration, whether it be of the surface of the earth or the principles of living greatly, includes developing the capacity to face trouble with courage, disappointment with cheerfulness, and triumph with humility.

Royal Bank of Canada Newsletter

It's better to accomplish small tasks than to think great deeds.

During World War II, soldiers were asked to compete to see who had the most powerful grip. They averaged 101 pounds per man. Then they were hypnotized and given the negative suggestion that they were weak and sickly, feeble and anemic. They were told to grip the machine as tightly as they could. They averaged 69 pounds per man.

Before they were awakened from their hypnotic trance, they were given the positive message that they were Herculean, Samson-like and powerful. They were then told to grip the machine as tightly as they could. What do you think was the result? They now averaged 140 pounds per man. This more than doubled their 69 pound grip under the defeatist or negative attitude and was almost 40% better than their best record in the normal waking state.

Dr. George W. Crane

MR. MEANT-TO Mr. Meant-to has a comrade, And his name is Didn't-do. Have you ever chanced to meet them? Did they ever call on you? These two fellows live together In the house of Never-win, And I'm told that it is haunted By the ghost of Might-have-been. Unknown

When I find out what the Lord wants me to do, I do it!

Joseph Smith

There is nothing we can't do in the building of the Lord's kingdom if we have the desire, do the work, and have the faith.

Henry D. Moyle

Ninety percent of our problems can be solved if we will but make up our minds.

Franklin D. Richards

A paralyzed woman who had lain for thirty years upon her bed, helpless but not hopeless, succeeding by a miracle of courage in her single aim—never complaining—always imparted a bit of her joy and peace to everyone who came near her.

God give us men! A time like this demands Strong minds, great hearts, true faith, and ready hands.

Josiah Gilbert Holland

Remember that if we but have the right attitude, everything leaves us a blessing. No wind can blow except to fill our sails.

WORTH WHILE It is easy enough to be pleasant When life flows by like a song, But the man worth while is one who will smile, When everything goes dead wrong. For the test of the heart is trouble, And it always comes with the years, And the smile that is worth the praises of earth Is the smile that shines through tears. It is easy enough to be prudent, When nothing tempts you to stray, When without or within no voice of sin Is luring your soul away; But it's only a negative virtue Until it is tried by fire, And the life that is worth the honor on earth Is the one that resists desire. By the cynic, the sad, the fallen, Who had no strength for the strife, The world's highway is cumbered to-day; They make up the sum of life. But the virtue that conquers passion, And the sorrow that hides in a smile, It is these that are worth the homage on earth, For we find them but once in a while. Ella Wheeler Wilcox

"Behold, the Lord requireth the heart and a willing mind; and the willing and obedient shall eat the good of the land of Zion in these last days."

D&C 64:34

The greatest discovery of my generation is that men can alter their lives by altering their attitudes of mind.

William James

IT SHOWS IN YOUR FACE You don't have to tell how you live each day, You don't have to say if you work or play, A tried, true barometer serves in your place However you live, it will show in your face. The false, the deceit that you bear in your heart Will not stay inside, where it first got a start, For sinew and blood are a thin veil of lace, What you wear in your heart you wear in your face. If you life is unselfish, if for others you live For not what you get, but for how much you can give, If you live close to God, in His infinite grace, You don't have to tell it, it shows in your face. Unknown

YOU You can do as much as you think you can, But you'll never accomplish more; If you're afraid of yourself, young man, There's little for you in store. For failure comes from the inside first; It's there if you only knew it. And you can win, though you face the worst, If you feel you're going to do it! Edgar A. Guest

NEWCASTLE, ENGLAND (UPI)—Fifteen-year-old Michael Little gave a mighty heave Thursday and single-handedly lifted a three-hundred-pound gate post which had fallen on three-year-old Susan Brown. After freeing the girl and seeing her safely off to the hospital in an ambulance, the slim teenager tried to move the pillar to clear the footpath it fell across. He had to call on two men to help him budge it.

A soldier, prior to being killed in the first World War, wrote in his diary: "I will work; I will save; I will sacrifice; I will endure. I will serve cheerfully and do my utmost, as though the entire conflict depended on me alone."

To pick up the pieces, to repair what is spoiled and start over, is a noble act. John James Audubon, the ornithologist, left a box containing two hundred of his beautiful drawings at home when he went on a business trip. Upon his return he found that a pair of rats had entered the box and gnawed the paper on which he had drawn a thousand birds.

Audubon was prostrated for several days by the shock; then he took up his notebook and pencils and went out into the woods. "I felt pleased," he said, "that I might now make better drawings than before."

Royal Bank of Canada Newsletter

The past is behind; learn from it.

The future is ahead; prepare for it.

The present is here; live in it!

Thomas S. Monson

I don't go into a ball game just hoping to play a good ball game. I go into the ball game to try to win. They still keep score, don't they? As long as they keep score, someone is anxious to know how it is going to come out, and I am one of those anxious people.

Adolph Rupp Kentucky University Coach

You don't beat the best when he does not make a mistake.

Bruce Crampton

Whether you think you can or whether you think you can't, you're right!

Henry Ford

THE WINDS OF FATE One ship drives east and another drives west With the selfsame winds that blow. 'Tis the set of the sails And not the gales Which tell us the way to go. Like the winds of the sea are the ways of fate, As we voyage along through life: 'Tis the set of the soul That decides the goal And not the calm or the strife. Ella Wheeler Wilcox

Socrates: "Know yourself." Cicero: "Control yourself." Jesus Christ: "Give yourself."

Of this be sure: You do not find the happy life; you make it. If you could ascend to some great height giving a view of all the future landscape of your life, then you could recognize the best things afar off, and strike out for them. But since you cannot see very far ahead, you need to take each step with all the wisdom you can muster. While sensing what lies dimly ahead, you must do competently what lies clearly at hand.

Royal Bank of Canada Newsletter

Everyone can be discontented if he ignores his blessings and looks only at his burdens.

TEN COMMANDMENTS OF HOW TO GET ALONG WITH PEOPLE

"[Give] no offense in any thing, that the ministry be not blamed: but in all things [we should approve] ourselves as the ministers of God, in much patience."

2 Corinthians 6:3,4

OMAHA, Neb., (UPI)—Arlan Greve said today that he was unable to explain how he managed to reach and rescue a three-year-old boy who was caught in his jacket and choking to death near the top of a backyard gymnasium set.

Greve, twenty-six years old, was crippled by poliomyelitis fifteen years ago and can walk only with crutches. Greve said he was leaning on a pair of crutches and looking out the back window of his home Thursday when he noticed Dean Alexis Zerbe hanging motionless from the gym set. Dean is the grandson of U. Alexis Johnson, United States Ambassador to Japan.

Greve yelled for help, but no one heard him. He then made his way through his yard to a wire fence separating his property from the home of Dean's parents, Mr. and Mrs. Mason Zerbe, Jr.

The gym set was close to the fence, but Greve could not reach it, he said. He tossed his crutches across and then he leaned backward against the fence until his weight plunged him into the Zerbe yard, he said.

Greve said the hood on the boy's jacket was caught near the top of the gym set and was choking him. "I don't know how I got up or got the boy down! I usually can't do that sort of thing," Greve said.

When he got him down, Greve said, the boy was blue-faced and stiff. He said the youngster had stopped breathing and that he could not detect a heartbeat.

Greve, a laboratory technician at Methodist Hospital here, began mouth-to-mouth resuscitation. When that failed, he switched to artificial respiration. Greve said he continued this for about fifteen minutes and continued yelling for help but got no response. When he was sure the boy was breathing well enough to be left alone briefly, Greve went to the Zerbe home and called Mrs. Zerbe, who then telephoned for the rescue squad. She called neighbors also.

At Children's Hospital, from which Dean was released yesterday, doctors told Mrs. Zerbe that Greve had saved Dean's life.

Greve and his wife have two small children and have lived near the Zerbe family for only two weeks.

We must refuse to compromise with expediency. We must maintain the courage to defy the consensus. We must continue to choose the harder right instead of the easier wrong.

It has been said that history turns on small hinges, and so do people's lives. We are constantly making small decisions, some of them apparently trivial. The total of these decisions finally determines the success or failure of our lives.

That is why it is worthwhile to look ahead, to set a course, and so to be at least partly ready when the moment of decision comes. By anticipating events we avoid muddle-headedness.

Royal Bank of Canada Newsletter

One of the imperative requirements of life is to be able to make choices. In order to do so, one must know how to look at things and oneself. One must also learn that to live means being able to cope with difficulties. Problems are a normal part of life, and the great thing is to avoid being flattened by them. One has to grapple, instead of diving for the cyclone shelter every time a strong wind blows.

Royal Bank of Canada Newsletter

Courage becomes a living and attractive virtue when it is regarded not as willingness to die manfully, but as the determination to live decently. A moral coward is one who is afraid to do what he thinks is right because other men will disapprove or laugh.

Royal Bank of Canada Newsletter

It must not be expected that the road of life spreads itself in an unobstructed view before the person starting his journey. He must anticipate coming upon forks and turnings in the road. But he cannot hope to reach his desired journey's end if he thinks aimlessly about whether to go East or West. He must make decisions purposefully.

Royal Bank of Canada Newsletter

All great leaders have deliberated with caution but acted with decision and promptness.

All men have fears, but those who face their fears with dignity have courage as well.

Ernest Hemingway

Courage does not consist in refusing to admit danger when the danger is there. Courage avoids taking foolhardy or frivolous risks. Courage is strength of mind that gives you the physical strength to act. Courage is the self-esteem that gives you the urge to undertake a job without waiting for others who might bear part of the blame for failure.

Royal Bank of Canada Newsletter

You see things and you say, "Why?" But I dream things that never were, and I say, "Why not?"

George Bernard Shaw

Never, never, never, never give in.

Sir Winston Churchill

June 6, 1973 LOS ANGELES (UPI)—A blind father rescued his three-year-old daughter from drowning Tuesday, finding her under water in a swimming pool by tracking the sound of air bubbles from her lungs.

Thomas Sullivan, 26, told police his daughter Blythe fell in the pool at the family home while he was on the telephone. He heard the splash, he said, and ran outside. Standing beside the pool, he listened to the sound of air bubbles rising to the surface and moved about the pool until he thought he had the source located, then jumped in and found the girl under seven feet of water.

Blythe was revived by mouth-to-mouth resuscitation and was reported in satisfactory condition.

Do it! Do it right! Do it right now!

Eagles see rivers but fly over them; wise men meet obstacles but overcome them.

William Arthur Ward

The critical step in handling any challenging occurrence is making the decision about what to do. No one can be successful in business or private life unless he is able to make decisions backed by resolution. The important thing is to do what your good judgment tells you offers some probability of success, even though you know that if you were given time to think and to plan, you might come up with a better scheme.

Royal Bank of Canada Newsletter

The fine art of executive decision consists in not deciding questions that are not now pertinent, in not deciding prematurely, in not making decisions that cannot be made effective, and in not making decisions that others should make.

Chester I. Barnard

The unconditional surrender of our enemies was a signal for the greatest outburst of joy in the history of mankind. The Second World War had indeed been fought to the bitter end in Europe. The vanquished as well as the victors felt inexpressable relief. But for us in Britain and the British Empire, who had alone been in the struggle from the first day to the last and staked our existence on the result, there was meaning behind what even our most powerful and most valiant allies could feel. Weary and worn, impoverished but undaunted and now triumphant, we had a moment that was sublime. We gave thanks to God for the noblest of all His blessings: the sense we had done our duty.

Sir Winston Churchill

Let us have faith that right makes might, and in that faith let us to the end, dare to do our duty as we understand it.

Abraham Lincoln

It isn't enough to do one's best. One must do what is necessary.

Sir Winston Churchill

Life is a sea upon which the proud are humbled, the shirker exposed and the leader revealed. To sail it safely and reach your desired port, you need to keep your charts at hand and up to date. You need to learn by the experience of others to stand firm for principles, to broaden your interests, to be understanding of the rights of others to sail the same sea, and to be reliable in your discharge of duty.

Royal Bank of Canada Newsletter

LEND A HAND I am only one, but I am one; I can't do everything, but I can do something. What I can do, that I ought to do; What I ought to do, By the grace of God I will do! Edward Everett Hale

I know what pleasure is, for I have done good work.

Robert Louis Stevenson

Bill Brown made a million—Bill Brown! Think of that! A boy, you remember, as poor as a rat; He hoed for the neighbors, did jobs by the day, But Bill made a million, or near it, they say. You can't understand it? Well, neither could I, And then I remembered, and now I know why: The bell might be ringing, the dinner horn blow, But Bill always hoed to the end of the row. Bill worked for my father, you maybe recall; He wasn't a wonder—not that, not at all; He couldn't out-hoe me, or cover more ground, Or hoe any cleaner, or beat me around. In fact, I was better in one way that I know: One toot from the kitchen and home I would go; But Bill always hoed to the end of the row. We used to get hungry out there in the corn. When you talk about music, what equals a horn? A horn yellin' dinner, tomatoes and beans, And pork and potatoes and gravy and greens? I ain't blamin' no one for quittin' on time, To stop with the whistle, that ain't a crime. But as for the million—well, this much I know: That Bill always hoed to the end of the row.

When I do good, I feel good; and when I do bad, I feel bad.

Abraham Lincoln

"He that findeth his life shall lose it: and he that loseth his life for my sake shall find it."

Matthew 10:39

Having started moving in the right direction, a youth needs to realize an ancient but still valid truth: that nothing can be had for nothing. If a man wishes to reach the top of a hill, he must not shirk the trouble of climbing. He may fail, and failure has a certain dignity—but not failure to try.

Brightly beams our Father's mercy from His lighthouse evermore, But to us He gives the keeping of the lights along the shore. Dark the night of sin has settled: Lord, the angry billows roar. Eager eyes are watching, longing; for the lights along the shore. Trim your feeble lamp, my brother; some poor sailor tempest-tossed, Trying now to make the harbor, in the darkness may be lost. Let the lower lights be burning; send a gleam across the wave; Some poor fainting, struggling seaman you may rescue, you may save. Phillip Paul Bliss

It was said of Abraham Lincoln: "He prayed as if everything depended upon God, and he worked as if everything depended upon himself."

We are such stuff as dreams are made on.

William Shakespeare

"Do all things without murmurings and disputings: that ye may be blameless and harmless, the sons of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation, among whom ye shine as lights in the world."

Philippians 2:14, 5

When an administrator in Africa rode out to inspect land that had been devastated by a storm, he came to a place where giant cedars had been uprooted and destroyed. He said to his official in charge of forestry, "You will have to plant some cedars here."

The official replied, "It takes two thousand years to grow cedars the size these were. They don't even bear cones until they are fifty years old."

"Then," said the administrator, "we must plant them at once!"

Royal Bank of Canada Newsletter

Nothing great was ever achieved without enthusiasm.

Ralph Waldo Emerson

Enthusiasm is the genius of sincerity, and truth accomplishes no victories without it.

Edward Bulwer-Lytton

There is one thing more contagious than enthusiasm, and that is the lack of enthusiasm.

On October 6, 1955, a United Airlines plane crashed into the top of Medicine Box Mountain in Wyoming. Sixty-five people lost their lives. The pilot was flying at 12,000 feet. If he had been flying at 12,055 feet, the greatest air disaster in American history to that date could have been averted, and the lives of sixty-five people would have been saved. What a difference a few more feet in altitude would have made to those people and their families. Even though the plane was exerting the power and thrust it needed, and everything was riding smoothly, just one little mistake made a big difference.

Let us take an example from this accident and make sure we make it over the last few feet. Don't let it be said that we were riding smoothly and then all of a sudden found that we had not put forth enough effort to get us over the top—and ended in failure.

Genius is: (1) the power to visualize the objective; (2) constancy of purpose; and (3) ability to make continuous effort.

After all that has been said, the greatest and most important duty is to preach the Gospel.

Joseph Smith

"Fear God, and keep his commandments: for this is the whole duty of man."

Ecclesiastes 12:13

You can buy a man's time; you can buy a man's physical presence at a given time and place; you can even buy a measured number of skilled muscular motions per hour or day; but you cannot buy enthusiasm. You cannot buy devotion of hearts, minds, and souls. You have to earn these things.

Clarence Frances

What does it mean to magnify a calling? It means to build it up in dignity and importance, to make it honorable and commendable in the eyes of all men, to enlarge and strengthen it, to let the light of heaven shine through it to the view of other men. And how does one magnify a calling? Simply by performing the service that pertains to it. An Elder magnifies the ordained calling of an Elder by learning what his duties as an Elder are and then by doing them.

The fight song of Yonkers High School in New York contains a verse: "Lead us, oh lead us, Great Molder of Men, out of the darkness to strive once again."

If we don't try, we don't do; and if we don't do, then why are we here?

Shenandoah

The poorest man is not one who does not have a cent but one who does not have a dream.

These are the times that try men's souls. The summer soldier and the sunshine patriot will, in this crisis, shrink from the service of his country; but he that stands it now, deserves the love and thanks of man and woman. Tyranny, like hell, is not easily conquered; yet we have this consolation with us, that the harder the conflict, the more glorious the triumph.

Thomas Paine

If you do not magnify your calling, God will hold you responsible for those you might have saved had you done your duty.

John Taylor

If a person is to walk with head held high, he must make his contribution to life. If he is to fulfill his destiny, he must leave the world a little richer and better than it would have been had he not lived and performed his services.

Royal Bank of Canada Newsletter

DUTY I slept and dreamed that life was Beauty: I woke and found that life was Duty: Was then thy dream a shadowy lie? Toil on, sad heart, courageously, And thou shalt find thy dream to be A noonday light and truth to thee. Ellen S. Hooper

The heights by great men reached and kept Were not attained by sudden flight, But they, while their companions slept, Were toiling upward in the night. Henry Wadsworth Longfellow

THE CHAMPION The average runner sprints Until the breath in him is gone; But the champion has the iron will; That makes him carry on. For rest, the average runner begs, When limp his muscles grow; But the champion runs on leaden legs His spirit makes him go. The average man's complacent When he does his best to score; But the champion does his best And then he does a little more.

The most realistic self-image of all is to conceive of yourself as made in the image of God. You cannot sincerely hold this conviction without experiencing a profound new sense of strength and power.

Maxwell Maltz

You can't be right by doing wrong, and you can't be wrong by doing right.

Thomas S. Monson

There comes a day when the worrisome checkbook, the jangling telephone, the brainstorming conference, the pressures of being a man in the jet age, have to be set aside.

There even comes a day when he just can't take his daughter's hockey stick or wrestle with his son's algebra. It's time for him to be alone, to think things through, to put the "Out to lunch" sign on his heart and nervous system.

Time to go fishing.

Time to sit in the sun.

He'll assume his role as a better husband, a better father, a better friend, a better worker, if he's urged to be alone once in a while, out of the intense glare of a demanding man-made turmoil and into the tranquil world of nature.

Royal Bank of Canada Newsletter

Stick to your task 'til it sticks to you; Beginners are many, but enders are few. Honor, power, place and praise Will come, in time, to the one who stays. Stick to your task 'til it sticks to you; Bend at it, sweat at it, smile at it too; For out of the bend and the sweat and the smile Will come life's victories, after awhile.

If a thing is right, it can be done; if wrong, it can be done without.

If you think you might fail, you tend not to try.

For workers in World War II with ties to the men on the battlefronts—the fathers, mothers, brothers, sisters, and wives on the production lines at home—there was a special incentive that outweighed everything else: the possibility that their own handiwork might somehow directly affect the life of a loved one. They relished the story of a seaman named Elgin Staples, whose ship went down off Guadalcanal. Staples was swept over the side; but he survived, thanks to a life belt that proved, on later examination, to have been inspected, packed, and stamped back home in Akron, Ohio, by his own mother.

Ronald H. Bailey

At Westminster Abbey, on the plaque beneath which lies the Unknown Soldier, is this inscription: "They buried him among the kings because he had done good toward God and toward his house."

Nurture your mind with great thoughts, for you will never go any higher than you think.

Benjamin Disraeli

I find the great thing in this world is not so much where we stand, as in what direction we are moving: To reach the port of heaven, we must sail sometimes with the wind and sometimes against it—but we must sail, and not drift, nor lie at anchor.

Oliver Wendell Holmes

After the big London fire in 1066, the great English architect, Sir Christopher Wren, volunteered his services to plan and superintend the building of one of the world's greatest cathedrals. Unknown to most of the workmen, he passed among them often, watching the construction. To three stone cutters one day he put the same question: "What are you doing?"

One of them answered, "I am cutting this stone."

Another answered, "I am earning my three shillings per day."

But the third stood up, squared his shoulders and proudly said, "I am helping Sir Christopher Wren build this magnificent cathedral."

The Scouter's Minute

When Elder John A. Widtsoe was made a member of the Council of the Twelve, he was president of the University of Utah. A professor in the East wrote to him and said: "I do not understand why you should resign as president of a great state university to become affiliated with any Church organization."

Elder Widtsoe's reply was, in part: "I am only as clay in the hands of the Potter, for my time is mine only to serve with, and it matters little to me in what capacity I am asked to spend my time and strength."

Under a cartoon depicting the log cabin which was Abraham Lincoln's home, we read: "Lincoln: ill-housed, ill-fed, ill-clothed."

Duty is the sublimest word in our language. Do your duty in all things. You cannot do more. You should never wish to do less.

Robert Edward Lee

TRUE NOBILITY Who does his task from day to day And meets whatever comes his way, Believing God has willed it so, Has found real greatness here below. Who guards his post, no matter where, Believing God must need him there, Although but lowly toil it be, Has risen to nobility. For great and low there's but one test; 'Tis that each man shall do his best. Who works with all the strength he can Shall never die in debt to man. Edgar A. Guest

Enthusiasm is interest plus energy. People are defeated in life not because of want of ability, but for lack of whole-hearted effort.

Royal Bank of Canada Newsletter

One cannot rest content with mediocrity when excellence is within his grasp.

Thomas S. Monson

One must have the adventurous daring to accept oneself as a bundle of possibilities and undertake the most interesting game in the world: making the most of one's best.

Harry Emerson Fosdick

Every job is a self-portrait of the person who did it. Autograph your work with excellence.

When Wilma Rudolph was a little girl in Tennessee, she had to walk with braces, her legs weakened with polio, double pneumonia, and scarlet fever.

At nineteen she became the first American woman to win three gold medals in a single Olympiad, setting world records in three events along the way.

She attributed her successes to determination, faith, and hard work which enabled her to rise above her childhood handicaps and become a world-class athlete.

Tom McCarthey

Our responsibility is to lengthen our stride.

Spencer W. Kimball

A lesson in persistence was given in the log of Columbus's first voyage across the uncharted Atlantic. Day after day he wrote: "This day we sailed on."

If one were to enumerate the marks of greatness which characterize those who achieve, perhaps prominent mention would be made of faith, of prayer, testimony, effort, constancy of purpose, or ability to plan or to be obedient to self-discipline. All of these are indeed marks of greatness which will contribute to the success of anyone.

However, there is an additional mark which underlies the attitude and the life of great men. I have rarely, if ever, seen a leader who did not possess it. This mark of greatness is a willingness to give of oneself. The Lord himself declared, "Behold, the Lord requireth the heart and a willing mind; and the willing and obedient shall eat of the good of the land of Zion in these last days." (D&C 64:34.)

We read in the Book of Mormon that, before candidates were baptized, they expressed a willingness to bear one another's burdens.

Our Savior willingly died, that all men might live again. Are we ready to live willingly and serve willingly? If so, one of the marks of greatness will have been achieved in our lives.

Thomas S. Monson

Inscription on the wall of the Library of Congress: "The history of the world is the biography of great men."

There's a prison warden who makes a speech to prisoners and young people entitled "Thirty Seconds That Can Save Your Life." He stresses the importance of waiting just thirty seconds to think over a rash act before doing it. The same speech could apply to thinking over what we're going to say.

When the secretary of President George Washington tried to excuse his lateness by saying his watch was slow, Washington replied, "Then you must get a new watch or I another secretary." Isn't it quite likely that God may feel the same way about us when we continously and habitually violate this first law of order, which is punctuality?

Sterling W. Sill

Build thee more stately mansions, O my soul, As the swift seasons roll! Leave thy low-vaulted past! Let each new temple, nobler than the last, Shut thee from heaven with a dome more vast, Till thou at length art free, Leaving thine outgrown shell by life's unresting sea! Oliver Wendell Holmes

Ideals are like stars: You will not succeed in touching them with your hands, but like the seafaring man on the desert of waters, you choose them as your guides, and following them you will reach your destination.

Carl Schurz

"When we take people," thou wouldst say, "merely as they are, we make them worse; when we treat them as if they were what they should be, we improve them as far as they can be improved."

Johann Wolfgang von Goethe

Sometimes the hardest thing in life is simply to put one foot in front of the other—to keep going. And, sometimes, the most worthwhile things in life are accomplished inch by inch, by people who are struggling not for greatness but simply to put one foot in front of the other. Seldom has this been more clearly illustrated than in an incident in the career of Walter Johnson, one of the greatest pitchers in the history of baseball. Johnson was scheduled to pitch a crucial game, but his arm was painfully sore that day. His manager, Clark Griffith, told him, "Try one inning. If your arm gives you trouble, I'll take you out." After an inning, Johnson's arm still pained him, but he said he would try another. He pitched the second and then the third. At the conclusion of nine innings of out-and-out agony, he had pitched the only no-hitter in his twenty-year career.

Nothing in the world can take the place of persistence. Talent will not; nothing is more common than unsuccessful men with talent. Genius will not; unrewarded it's almost a proverb. Education will not; the world is filled with educated derelicts. Persistence and determination alone are omnipotent.

Calvin Coolidge

Almost everything that is great has been done by youth.

Benjamin Disraeli

That which stirs the pulses of youth are the love of knowledge and the joy of the discovery of the causes of things.

Aldous Huxley

Tolstoy wrote: "There never has been and cannot be a good life without self-control." More recently, Lord Beaverbook said that a man "can only keep his judgment intact, his nerves sound and his mind secure by the process of self-discipline."

Royal Bank of Canada Newsletter

IF If you can talk with crowds and keep your virtue, Or walk with kings—nor lose the common touch; If neither foes nor loving friends can hurt you; If all men count with you, but none too much; If you can fill the unforgiving minute With sixty seconds' worth of distance run— Yours is the Earth and everything that's in it, And—which is more—you'll be a Man, my son! Rudyard Kipling

The virtue of all achievement is victory over oneself. Those who know this victory can never know defeat.

A. J. Cronin

Live fish swim upstream.

My experiments never came about by chance. I worked!

Thomas A. Edison

TEN STEPS TO SUCCESS

A man's personal philosophy, his way of looking at the world and the men and women around him, determine his success as a manager of things and people more than any other single factor. His basic attitudes are far more significant than the techniques he uses. The executive's skill with people—or lack of it—is the determining element in his long-range success or failure.

Stanley F. Teele

Success is the progressive realization of a worthy ideal.

It has been said of a man who seized his opportunities with success that he "stumbled on a good idea." There may be some truth in the comment, but the whole truth is that the moment of inspiration would not have come to him if he had not prepared himself for it. Pasteur once wrote that "chance favours only the prepared mind."

Each man has his own vocation. The talent is the call. There is one direction in which all space is open to him. He has faculties silently inviting him thither to endless exertion. He is like a ship in a river; he runs against obstructions on every side but one. On that side all obstruction is taken away, and he sweeps serenely over a deepening channel into an infinite sea.

Ralph Waldo Emerson

If a man has a talent and cannot use it, he has failed. If he has a talent and uses only half of it, he has partly failed. If he has a talent and learns somehow to use the whole of it, he has gloriously succeeded, and won a satisfaction and a triumph few men ever know.

Thomas Wolfe

The woods would be very silent if no birds sang there except those who sang best.

John James Audubon

Great men have not been merely dreamers. They have returned from their visions to the practicalities of replacing the airy stones of their dream castles with solid masonry wrought by their hands.

Initiative is doing the right thing at the right time without having to be told.

Sloth is one of the seven deadly sins, responsible for a great deal of the failing and underachieving we see; but idling away one's time is not enjoying life. "Not to be occupied and not to exist amount to the same thing," said Voltaire. And Emerson followed up with: "God offers to every mind its choice between truth and repose. Take what you please; you can never have both."

You can't legislate equality; you have to deserve it. You can't demand success; you have to earn it. You can't be handed an education or skill; you have to learn by hard work. You can't vote yourself security; you have to produce for it and save for it. For hundreds of years false leaders have preached, "Give me your support and I will care for you. I will take from others and give you a living you don't have to work for." And for those same hundreds of years men have been drugging themselves into that dream—and waking up, not in Heaven, but in Purgatory.

KSL Editorial Salt Lake City, Utah

"He that gathereth in summer is a wise son: but he that sleepeth in harvest is a son that causeth shame."

Proverbs 10:5

It is better to light one small candle than to curse the darkness.

Confucius

STORMS BRING OUT THE EAGLES BUT THE LITTLE BIRDS TAKE COVER When the "storms of life" gather darkly ahead, I think of these wonderful words I once read And I say to myself as "threatening clouds" hover Don't "fold up your wings" and "run for cover" But like the eagle "spread wide your wings" and "soar far above" the trouble life brings, For the eagle knows that the higher he flies The more tranquil and brighter become the skies . . . And there is nothing in life God ever asks us to bear That we can't soar above "On the Wings of Prayer," And in looking back over the "storm you passed through" You'll find you gained strength and new courage, too, For in facing "life's storms" with an eagle's wings You can fly far above earth's small, petty things. Helen Steiner Rice

Wherefore, when we build let us think that we build forever. Let it not be for present delight, nor for present use alone; let it be such work as our descendants will thank us for, and let us think as we lay stone on stone that a time is to come when those stones will be held sacred, because our hands have touched them; and men will say, as they look upon the labour and wrought substances of them: "See, this our fathers did for us."

John Ruskin

Inscription on the wall of the Library of Congress: "Too low they build who build beneath the stars."

THE BRIDGE BUILDER An old man going a lone highway Came at the evening, cold and gray, To a chasm, vast and wide and steep, With waters rolling cold and deep. The old man crossed in the twilight dim, That sullen stream had no fears for him; But he turned when safe on the other side, And built a bridge to span the tide. "Old man," said a fellow pilgrim near, "You are wasting your strength with building here. Your journey will end with the ending day, You never again will pass this way. You've crossed the chasm, deep and wide, Why build you this bridge at eventide?" The builder lifted his old gray head. "Good friend, in the path I have come," he said, "There followeth after me today A youth whose feet must pass this way. This chasm that has been naught to me To that fair-haired youth may a pitfall be. He, too, must cross in the twilight dim— Good friend, I am building the bridge for him." William Allen Dromgoole

There is no greater nor more satisfying reward than that which comes from discovering and developing men. The possibilities are almost unlimited. Talent, like oil, is discovered in unexpected places and in surprising quantities.

A. A. Stambaugh

A new hospital administrator, holding his first staff meeting, thought that a rather difficult matter had been settled to everyone's satisfaction when one of the participants suddenly asked, "Would this have satisfied Nurse Bryan?" At once the argument started all over and did not subside until a new and much more ambitious solution to the problem had been hammered out.

Nurse Bryan, the administrator learned, had been a long-serving nurse at the hospital. She was not particularly distinguished, had not in fact ever been a supervisor. But whenever a decision on patient care came up on her floor, Nurse Bryan would ask, "Are we doing the best we can do to help this patient?" Patients on Nurse Bryan's floor did better and recovered faster. Gradually over the years, the whole hospital had learned to adopt what came to be known as "Nurse Bryan's rule." They had learned to ask: "Are we really making the best contribution to the purpose of this hospital?"

Though Nurse Bryan herself had retired almost ten years earlier, the standards she had set still made demands on people who, in terms of training and position, were her superiors.

Commitment to contribution is commitment to responsible effectiveness. Without it, a man shortchanges himself, deprives his organization, and cheats the people with whom he works.

Peter Drucker

Leisure without study is death; it is a tomb for the living man.

Lucius Annaeus Seneca

Leaders of the Church, then, should be men not easily discouraged, not without hope, and not given to forebodings of all sorts of evils to come. . . . If men standing in high places sometimes feel the weight and anxiety of a momentous time, they should be all the firmer and all the more resolute in those convictions which come from a God-fearing conscience and pure lives. . . . It is a matter of the greatest importance that the people be educated to appreciate and cultivate the bright side of life rather than to permit its darkness and shadows to hover over them.

Joseph F. Smith

The world has not a man who is an idler in his own eyes.

Far better it is to dare mighty things, to win glorious triumphs, even though checkered by failure, than to take rank with those poor spirits who neither enjoy much nor suffer much, because they live in the gray twilight that knows not victory nor defeat.

Theodore Roosevelt

No one is proud of what he intends to do.

Henry Ford

Inspiration is a guest who does not visit the lazy or the procrastinator as often as he does the busy and diligent.

There is a quotation which serves as the foreword to the first book of Northwest Passage, a novel of exploration and adventure during the latter half of the eighteenth century. It fittingly reflects the theme and subject matter of the book as a whole. The book is the story of two men. . . . Both men exhibit the unextinguishable spark that compels them onward—one toward the realization of a dream, the other toward the fulfillment of a talent. The quotation follows: "On every side of us are men who hunt perpetually for their personal Northwest Passage, too often sacrificing health, strength and life itself to the search; and who shall say they are not happier in their vain but hopeful quest than wiser, duller folk who sit at home, venturing nothing."

Kenneth Rogers

You say you love me, but sometimes you don't show it. In the beginning you couldn't do enough for me. Now you seem to take me for granted. Some days I even wonder if I mean anything at all to you.

Maybe when I'm gone you'll appreciate me and all the things I do for you. I'm responsible for getting food on your table, for your clean shirt, for the welfare of your children . . . a thousand and one things you want and need. Why, if it weren't for me, you wouldn't even have a car. I've kept quiet and waited to see how long it would take for you to realize how much you really need me.

Cherish me, take care of me and I'll continue to take good care of you. Who am I? I am your job.

Tool and Die Institute News Bulletin

QUESTION NOT Question not, but live and labor, Till your goal be won, Helping every feeble neighbor, Seeking help from none; Life is mostly froth and bubble, Two things stand like stone— Kindness in another's trouble, Courage in our own. Adam Lindsay Gordon

TEN RULES OF HAPPINESS

David O. McKay

If you do not think about the future, you cannot have one.

John Galsworthy

Decision is of little account unless it is followed by action, and there is no recipe as good for getting things done as the one to start doing them.

The only person who ever got his work done by Friday was Robinson Crusoe.

A. J. Marshall

It has been said that industry is a better horse to ride than genius.

Think of your objectives, not your obstacles. Don't try to find excuses for your failures.

N. Eldon Tanner

We have forty million reasons for failure, but not a single excuse.

In The King and I, by Rodgers and Hammerstein, the following conversation takes place between Anna and her son, Louis:

"Was he as good a king as he could have been?" Louis asked.

"Louis, I don't think any man has ever been as good a King as he could have been; but this one tried—he tried very hard."

IT COULDN'T BE DONE Somebody said that it couldn't be done, But he with a chuckle replied That "maybe it couldn't," but he would be one Who wouldn't say so till he'd tried. So he buckled right in with the trace of a grin On his face. If he worried he hid it. He started to sing as he tackled the thing That couldn't be done, and he did it. Somebody scoffed: "Oh, you'll never do that; At least no one ever has done it"; But he took off his coat and he took off his hat, And the first thing we knew he'd begun it. With a lift of his chin and a bit of a grin, Without any doubting or quiddit, He started to sing as he tackled the thing That couldn't be done, and he did it! There are thousands to tell you it cannot be done. There are thousands to prophesy failure; There are thousands to point out to you, one by one, The dangers that wait to assail you. But just buckle in with a bit of a grin, Just take off your coat and go to it; Just start to sing as you tackle the thing That "cannot be done," and you'll do it. Edgar A. Guest

The difference between what we call a good man and a bad man may not be so much the impulses they have as how they control them.

I THINK CONTINUALLY OF THOSE I think continually of those who were truly great— The names of those who in their lives fought for life, Who wore at their hearts the fire's center. Born of the sun they traveled a short while toward the sun, And left the vivid air signed with their honor. Stephen Spender

The Lord doesn't ask about our inabilities or abilities. He only asks about our availabilities. If we show our dependability, He will help us in our capability.

Neal A. Maxwell

It's the steady, constant driving To the goal for which you're striving, Not the speed with which you travel That will make the victory sure. It's the everlasting gaining, Without whimper or complaining At the burdens you are bearing, Or the woes you must endure. It's the holding to a purpose And the never giving in; It's the cutting down the distance By the little that you win. It's the iron will to do it And the steady sticking to it. So, whate'er your task, go to it And life's purpose you will win.

It is practically a law in life that when one door closes to us, another opens. The trouble is that we often look with so much regret and longing upon the closed door that we do not see the one which has opened to us. We no doubt see challenges and problems before us. Let us see, with equal clarity, the promises.

Only a mediocre person is always at his best.

Somerset Maugham

Before you can move anyone else, you must move yourself.

Socrates

You can become strongest at your weakest place.

John Mott

The journey of a thousand miles begins with one step.

Laotse

Every person is in reality two persons: He is the person he is today, and he is the person he could become tomorrow and in the future.

The greatest achievement of the human spirit is to live up to one's opportunities and make the most of one's resources.

"Four things come not back:" says an Arabian proverb, "the spoken word, the spent arrow, the past life and the neglected opportunity." It is easy to let life slide by, as children at the seashore fill their hands with sand and let the grains flow through their fingers until all are gone; but it is mentally unhealthy for mature people to let opportunities slip away like that.

Nothing ever does itself. Nothing ever memorizes itself. Nothing ever accomplishes itself without the requisite effort. Carlyle said: "Men do less than they ought, unless they do all that they can." It is not enough just to try; we have to succeed. The Lord expects us to see things through.

I do not ask for any crown But that which all may win; Nor try to conquer any world Except the one within. Louisa May Alcott

No honors are too distant for the man who prepares himself with patience.
