Thomas S. Monson, Favorite Quotations from the Collection of Thomas S. Monson ( 1985)

Patriotism and Holidays

So many signs of Christmas! We see them everywhere. There's such a strange excitement; We feel it in the air. So many friends at Christmas! With you we'd like to share This lovely, strange excitement, Because we know you care. Primary Children's Hospital Christmas Card

My door is on the latch to-night, The hearth fire is aglow. I seem to hear swift passing feet, The Christ Child in the snow. My heart is open wide to-night For stranger, kith or kin. I would not bar a single door Where Love might enter in! Kate Douglas Wiggin

THE THREE KINGS Three Kings came riding from far away: Melchior and Gaspar and Balthazar. Three Wise Men out of the East were they, And they travelled by night and they slept by day; For their guide was a beautiful, wonderful star. Henry Wadsworth Longfellow

I sometimes think we expect too much of Christmas day. We try to crowd into it the long arrears of kindliness and humanity of the whole year.

David Grayson

A FRIEND'S GREETING I'd like to be the sort of friend that you have been to me; I'd like to be the help that you've been always glad to be; I'd like to mean as much to you each minute of the day As you have meant, good friend of mine, to me along the way. I'm wishing at this Christmas time that I could but repay A portion of the gladness that you've strewn along my way; And could I have one wish this year, this only would it be: I'd like to be the sort of friend that you have been to me. Edgar A. Guest

Christmas is the family time, the good time of year.

Samuel Johnson

Despite discouragement and disheartening conditions throughout the world, Christmas is the happiest season of the whole year. But let us ever keep in mind that people are most blessed whose daily conduct most nearly comports with the teachings and example of Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior, at whose birth was proclaimed: "Peace on earth, good will toward men."

David O. McKay

Christmas is sharing of joys, memories, homes, and thoughts. A sharing of what we have—with our loved ones and with those who are less fortunate.

Christmas is a sharing of emotions; a sharing of our hopes and dreams for the year to come; a sharing of food, conversation, and laughter.

Christmas is a sharing of the beauty and wonder of the little Child who has inspired millions of lives since that night when angels sang: "Glory to God in the highest!"

Pearl S. Buck

Keeping Christmas is good, but sharing it is better.

Arnold Glasow

I will honor Christmas in my heart and try to keep it all the year. I will live in the Past, the Present and the Future. The spirits of all three shall strive within me. I will not shut out the lessons that they teach.

Charles Dickens

The best Christmas gift of all is the presence of a happy family all wrapped up in each other.

Woodmen of the World Magazine

"Lift up your head and be of good cheer; for behold, the time is at hand, and on this night shall the sign be given, and on the morrow come I into the world, to show unto the world that I will fulfill all that which I have caused to be spoken by the mouth of my holy prophets."

3 Nephi 1:13

I HEARD THE BELLS ON CHRISTMAS DAY Then pealed the bells more loud and deep: "God is not dead, nor doth he sleep; The wrong shall fail, the right prevail, With peace on earth, good will to men." Henry Wadsworth Longfellow

Rings and jewels are not gifts, but apologies for gifts. The only true gift is a portion of thyself.

Ralph Waldo Emerson

"For unto us a child is born . . . and his name shall be called . . . The Prince of Peace."

Isaiah 9:6

Where charity stands watching and faith holds wide the door the dark night wakes—the glory breaks, and Christmas comes once more.

Phillips Brooks

A BIRTHDAY GIFT What can I give Him, Poor as I am? If I were a shepherd I would bring a lamb, If I were a Wise Man I would do my part, Yet what can I give Him, Give my heart. Christina Rossetti

CHRISTMAS 1847 On that Christmas, in this valley stood Rude homes of men around the Old Fort Square. Two thousand souls or less were living there, Bound by the ties of faith and brotherhood. All day they labored—some with hammer's din, Some molding 'dobe bricks, mud to their knees. Thankful the dreaded winter still was mild; They sang, with happy wives and babes within A shelter mean, as cradled Mary's child. But unlike us, in surfeit hard to please, In each brave heart there was a Yuletide glow Of gratitude that we can never know. Jessie Miller Robinson

THE CHRISTMAS SPIRIT I am the Christmas Spirit. I enter the home of poverty, causing pale-faced children to open their eyes wide in pleased wonder. I cause the miser's clutched hand to relax, and thus paint a bright spot on his soul. I cause the aged to renew their youth and to laugh in the glad old way. I keep romance alive in the heart of childhood, and brighten sleep with dreams woven of magic. I cause eager feet to climb dark stairways with filled baskets, leaving behind hearts amazed at the goodness of the world. I cause the prodigal to pause a moment on his wild, wasteful way, and send to anxious love some little token that releases glad tears—tears which wash away the hard lines of sorrow. I enter dark prison cells, reminding scarred manhood of what might have been, and pointing forward to good days yet to come. I come softly into the still, white home of pain, and lips that are too weak to speak just tremble in silent, eloquent gratitude. In a thousand ways I cause the weary world to look up into the face of God and for a little moment forget the things that are small and wretched. I am the Christmas Spirit. Unknown

"And the angel said unto them, Fear not: for behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people. For unto you is born this day in the city of David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord."

Luke 2:10-11

From the diary of Mrs. Rebecca Riter, December 25, 1847, Great Salt Lake Valley: "The winter was cold. Christmas came and the children were hungry. I had brought a peck of wheat across the plains and hid it under a pile of wood. I thought I would cook a handful of wheat for the baby. Then I thought how we would need wheat for seed in the spring, so I left it alone."

Christmas—a Christmas of comfort and joy, of love among those who are with their families, of soft memories among those who are enduring sorrow.

From the silent instant of midnight, through all the quiet hours before dawn, and then the cheerfully noisy ones of tomorrow, may this be a merry time for the children, a peaceful time for the old, and a warmly memorable Christmas for all.

May we all make the journey to Bethlehem in spirit, carrying with us a thankful heart as our gift to the Christ.

Deseret News Editorial Salt Lake City, Utah

OVER THE RIVER AND THROUGH THE WOODS Over the river and thro' the woods, To grandfather's house we go; The horse knows the way To carry the sleigh, Thro' the white and drifted snow. Over the river and thro' the woods, Oh, how the wind does blow! It stings the toes And bites the nose As over the ground we go. Over the river and thro' the woods, To have a first-rate play; Oh hear the bells ring, "Ting-a-ling-ling!" Hurrah for Thanksgiving Day! Unknown

WHEN THE FROST IS ON THE PUNKIN When the frost is on the punkin and the fodder's in the shock, And you hear the kyouck and gobble of the struttin' turkey-cock, And the clackin' of the guineys, and the cluckin' of the hens, And the rooster's hallylooyer as he tiptoes on the fence; Oh, it's then's the times a feller is a-feelin' at his best, With the risin' sun to greet him from a night of peaceful rest, As he leaves the house, bareheaded, and goes out to feed the stock; When the frost is on the punkin and the fodder's in the shock. James Whitcomb Riley

"You have told us that our day is finished, that we can grow no more and that the future cannot be the equal of the past. But we, the people, do not believe this, and we say to you: Give up the vested interest you have in depression, open your eyes to the future, help us build a new world. We need a new outlook, a new way of getting at things." Thus stated Wendell Willkie. Willkie gathered together in one brief, eloquent statement all the traditional convictions that had been distorted by propaganda and circumstances. He repaired them, reconstituted them and soon they rained down on the citizenry in a torrent, providing solace to the America which, Gunnar Myrdal explains, "is continually struggling for its soul." New frontiers were cited, new resources were developed, plans expanded, and the free enterprise system was back in business at the old stand. The economy spurted ahead, and the poor and discouraged began again to move up the economic ladder under their own steam. Hope was reborn. The clouds blew away, and there again was the future bulging with promise.

I am thinking of you today because it is Christmas, and I wish you happiness. And tomorrow, because it will be the day after Christmas, I shall still wish you happiness. I may not be able to tell you about it every day, because I may be far away or we may be very busy. But that makes no difference—my thoughts and my wishes will be with you just the same. Whatever joy or success comes to you will make me glad clear through the year. I wish you the spirit of Christmas. Henry Van Dyke

On a plaque at the base of the statue of Liberty, which statue was given to the United States by the citizens of France in 1884 and is a universal symbol of the love for freedom shared by these two nations, appear these stirring words by Emma Lazarus:

" 'Keep, ancient lands, your storied pomp!' cries she

With silent lips. 'Give me your tired, your poor,

Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free,

The wretched refuse of your teeming shore.

Send these, the homeless, tempest-tossed to me;

I lift my lamp beside the golden door.' "

At the International Executive Board Meeting of Boy Scouts of America held in Dallas, Texas, on 8 February 1984, John Sloan, from Los Angeles, California, made the following comment: "In Los Angeles we were hosting a 75th anniversary event for Scouting. Curtis LeMay, Secretary of the Air Force, was the invited speaker but could not come. In his place he sent the new commandant of the Air Force Academy. He who introduced the commandant said in his introduction that he had toured the Air Force Academy and that they literally had everything: new buildings, new campus, adequate budget, prestige—everything. A comparison was made with the aging campuses of Annapolis and West Point. As the Commandant commenced speaking he said, 'We have all of the things you mentioned, but one thing we desperately lack: tradition.' "

The only freedom which deserves the name is that of pursuing our own good in our own way, so long as we do not attempt to deprive others of theirs or impede their efforts to obtain it.

John Stuart Mill

The American Constitution is, as far as I can see, the most wonderful work ever struck off at a given time by the brain and purpose of man.

William E. Gladstone

Some people talk of "spending" Christmas, others of "observing" Christmas. As Peter Marshall, chaplain of the United States Senate, once put it: "Let's keep Christmas. May we keep it in our hearts, that we may be kept in hope."

If there is any principle of the Constitution that more imperatively calls for attachment than any other, it is the principle of free thought—not free thought for those who agree with us, but freedom for the thought that we hate.

Oliver Wendell Holmes

I believe there are more instances of the abridgment of the freedom of the people by gradual and silent encroachment of those in power than by violent and sudden usurpations.

James Madison

The following parody on the 23rd Psalm comes from Cambridge, England, and was written by a Cambridge University Medical Society student: "The government is my shepherd; therefore, I need not work. It alloweth me to lie down on a good job. It leadeth me beside still factories. It destroyeth my initiative. It leadeth me in the path of a parasite for politics' sake. Yea, though I walk through the valley of laziness and deficit spending, I will fear no evil, for the government is with me. It prepareth an economic utopia for me by appropriating the earnings of my own grandchildren. It filleth my head with false security. My inefficiency runneth over. Surely the government should care for me all the days of my life, and I dwell in a fool's paradise forever."

BATTLE HYMN OF THE REPUBLIC In the beauty of the lilies Christ was born across the sea, With a glory in his bosom That transfigures you and me. As he died to make men holy Let us die to make men free, For God is marching on. Julia Ward Howe

A distinguished jurist once said: "Freedom cannot be preserved in constitutions if it has vanished from the hearts of its citizens."

Vital Speeches of the Day

I have sworn upon the altar of God, eternal hostility against every form of tyranny over the mind of man.

Thomas Jefferson

Any society that takes away from those most capable and gives to those least capable will perish.

Abraham Lincoln

At Christmas time good friends recall The joys of long ago; The happy, kindly ways of all The friends they used to know; And though some travel far apart And journey different ways, All keep a corner in their heart For happy yesterdays. Edgar A. Guest

To preserve our independence we must not let our rulers load us with perpetual debt. We must make our choice between economy and liberty or profusion and servitude. If we run into such debts . . . we must be taxed in our meat and drink, in our necessities and our comforts, in our labors and our amusements. If we can prevent the government from wasting the labors of the people, under the pretense of caring for them, the people will be happy.

Thomas Jefferson

I see America, not in the setting sun of a black night of despair ahead of us. I see America in the crimson light of a rising sun, fresh from the burning, creative hand of God. I see great days ahead, great days possible to men and women of will and vision.

Carl Sandburg

To open the doors of truth and to fortify the habit of testing everything by reason are the most effectual manacles we can rivet on the hands of our successors to prevent their manacling the people with their own consent.

Thomas Jefferson
