Thomas S. Monson, Favorite Quotations from the Collection of Thomas S. Monson ( 1985)

Love and Service

One of two brothers fighting in the same company in France fell by an enemy bullet. The one who escaped asked permission of his officer to go and bring his brother in.

"He is probably dead," said the officer, "and there is no use in you risking your life to bring in his body."

However, after further pleading, the officer consented. Just as the soldier reached the lines with his brother on his shoulders, the wounded man died.

"There, you see," said the officer, "you risked your life for nothing."

"No," replied the soldier. "I did what he expected of me, and I have my reward. When I crept up to him and took him in my arms, he said, 'Tom, I knew you would come; I just felt you would come.' "

The Scouter's Minute

Remember this: No man is a failure who has friends.

JET DETOURS TO RESCUE INJURED BOY

An Alaska Airlines nonstop flight carrying 150 passengers was diverted to a remote town on a mercy mission to rescue a badly injured boy.

Two-year-old Elton Williams, III, had severed an artery in his arm when he fell on a piece of glass while playing near his home Wednesday in Yakutat, 450 miles south of Anchorage.

Medics at the scene asked the airline to evacuate the boy. As a result, the Anchorage-to-Seattle flight was diverted to Yakutat.

The medics said the boy was bleeding badly and probably would not live through the flight to Seattle, so the plane flew 200 miles to Juneau, the nearest city with a hospital. The flight then went on to Seattle with the passengers arriving two hours late, most missing their connections. But none complained. In fact, they dug into their pocket-books and took up a $150 collection for the boy and his family.

Later, as the flight was about to land in Seattle, the passengers broke into a cheer when the pilot said he had received word by radio that Elton was going to be all right.

Deseret News Salt Lake City, Utah

Although we treasure newer friends, We cannot forget the old. The new ones are like silver, The old ones purest gold.

Where human institutions are concerned, love without criticism brings stagnation, and criticism without love brings destruction. The swifter the pace of change, the more lovingly men must care for and criticize their institutions to keep them intact through the turbulent passages.

John Gardner

FOR WHOM THE BELL TOLLS

No man is an island, entire of itself; every man is a piece of the continent, a part of the main. If a clod be washed away by the sea, Europe is the less, as well as if a promontory were, as well as if a manor of thy friend's or of thine own were: any man's death diminishes me, because I am involved in mankind, and therefore never send to know for whom the bell tolls; it tolls for thee.

John Donne

PEOPLE LIKED HIM People liked him, not because He was rich or known to fame; He had never won applause As a star in any game. His was not a brilliant style; His was not a forceful way. But he had a gentle smile And a kindly word to say. Edgar A. Guest

I KNOW SOMETHING GOOD ABOUT YOU Wouldn't this old world be better If the folks we meet would say— "I know something good about you!" And treat us just that way? Wouldn't it be fine and dandy If each handclasp, fond and true, Carried with it this assurance— "I know something good about you!" Wouldn't life be lots more happy If the good that's in us all Were the only thing about us That folks bothered to recall? Wouldn't life be lots more happy If we praised the good we see? For there's such a lot of goodness In the worst of you and me! Wouldn't it be nice to practice That fine way of thinking, too? You know something good about me, I know something good about you. Unknown

Today I stood among the tall trees and now I am taller.

He who pushes you closer to God—he is your friend.

Often we live side by side but not heart to heart.

An elderly man disclosed at the funeral of his brother, with whom he had shared, from early manhood, a small one-room cabin near Canisteo, New York, that following a quarrel, they had divided the room in half with a chalk line and neither had crossed the line nor spoken a word to the other since that day—sixty-two years before!

He that cannot forgive others breaks the bridge over which he himself must pass if he would ever reach heaven; for everyone has need to be forgiven.

George Herbert

NOT UNDERSTOOD Not understood. Poor souls with stunted vision Oft measure giants by their narrow gauge; The poisoned shafts of falsehood and derision Are oft impelled 'gainst those who mould the age— Not understood. Not understood. How many breasts are aching For lack of sympathy! Ah, day to day How many cheerless, lonely hearts are breaking! How many noble spirits pass away— Not understood. O God! that men would see a little clearer, Or judge less harshly where they cannot see; O God! that men would draw a little nearer To one another; they'd be nearer Thee— And understood. Thomas Bracken

The second most destructive weapon is the gun. The first? The human tongue.

William George Jordan

PASS IT ON Have you had a kindness shown? Pass it on. 'Twas not given for thee alone. Pass it on. Let it travel down the years, Let it wipe another's tears, Till in heaven the deed appears. Pass it on. Henry K. Burton

The greatness of a man can nearly always be measured by his willingness to be kind.

George W. Young

HIAWATHA'S WOOING As unto the bow the cord is, So unto the man is woman, Though she bends him, she obeys him, Though she draws him, yet she follows, Useless each without the other! Henry Wadsworth Longfellow

True Christianity is love in action.

David O. McKay

MAKE THE WORLD BRIGHTER Go gladden the lonely, the dreary; Go comfort the weeping, the weary; Go scatter kind deeds on your way. Oh, make the world brighter today! Mrs. Frank A. Breck

Love gives itself; it is not bought.

Henry Wadsworth Longfellow

Where "thank you" is seldom heard it is doubly appreciated.

Getting along well with other people is still the world's most needed skill. With it . . . there is no limit to what a person can do. We need people; we need the cooperation of others. There is very little that we can do alone.

Earl Nightingale

The late Dr. Abraham Maslow said that one judges a person the same way he judges an apple tree: Look at what he produces or has produced and judge him by that.

Most people have a need to be needed.

Royal Bank of Canada Newsletter

The gift of love is about the only present that isn't exchanged after Christmas.

Kenneth Parsons

When you help someone up a hill, you are a little nearer the top yourself.

I looked at my brother with the microscope of criticism, and I said, "How coarse my brother is."

I looked at my brother with the telescope of scorn, and I said, "How small my brother is."

Then I looked into the mirror of truth, and I said, "How like me my brother is."

Inscription on the wall of the Library of Congress: "Mercy is the characteristic virtue of a great man."

We must go on until we are perfect, loving our neighbor more than we love ourselves. It is folly in the extreme for persons to say that they love God when they do not love their brethren.

Brigham Young

We look forward to the time when the power of love will replace the love of power. Then will our world know the blessings of peace.

William E. Gladstone

It is better to save the life of a man than to raise one from the dead.

Joseph Smith

Inscription on a monument at Guadalcanal where, during World War II, a U.S. Marine regiment was totally annihilated: "When you go home, tell them, and say, 'For their tomorrows, we gave our today.'"

GOD'S LOVE We do not see the wind, We only hear it sigh; It makes the grasses bend Whenever it goes by. We do not see God's love, But in our hearts we know He watches over us Wherever we may go. We do not have to see To know the wind is here; We do not have to see To know God's love is near. Elizabeth Cushing Taylor

"For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord."

Romans 8:38-39

They do not love who do not show their love.

William Shakespeare

OUTWITTED He drew a circle that shut me out— Heretic, rebel, a thing to flout. But Love and I had the wit to win: We drew a circle that took him in. Edwin Markham

A CREED There is a destiny that makes us brothers; None goes his way alone: All that we send into the lives of others Comes back into our own. Edwin Markham

"When ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God."

Mosiah 2:17

Ah! when shall all men's good Be each man's rule, and universal peace Lie like a shaft of light across the land. Alfred, Lord Tennyson

No one can reach everybody, but everybody can be reached by somebody.

Tolerance without compromising truth or principles is one of the great needs of our time.

Richard L. Evans

Men should take care not to make women weep, for God counts their tears.

Be to her faults a little blind, and to her virtues over kind.

Alexander Pope

Boys flying kites call them their white-winged birds; You can't do that when you're flying words. Thoughts unexpressed may sometimes fall back dead, But God Himself can't kill them once they're said.

Nothing is so strong as gentleness, and nothing is so gentle as real strength.

HEAVY-HEARTED OBSERVER

Yesterday was an old man's birthday. He was 91. He awakened earlier than usual, bathed, shaved and put on his best clothes. Surely they would come today, he thought.

He didn't take his daily walk to the gas station to visit with the old-timers of the community, because he wanted to be right there when they came.

He sat on the front porch with a clear view of the road so he could see them coming. Surely they would come today. He decided to skip his noon nap because he wanted to be up when they came.

He has six children.

Two of his daughters and their married children live within four miles. They hadn't been to see him for such a long time. But today was his birthday. Surely they would come today.

At suppertime he refused to cut the cake and asked that the ice cream be left in the freezer. He wanted to wait and have dessert with them when they came.

About nine o'clock he went to his room and got ready for bed. His last words before turning out the lights were, "Promise to wake me up when they come."

It was his birthday, and he was 91.

Unknown

It does not pay to scold. I believe you can get people to do anything (if you can get them to do it at all) by loving them into doing it.

George Albert Smith

The Gospel would give peace to the world just as surely as it does to a family or to an individual, if the world would receive it. There is one, and only one, way by which a universal and lasting peace can be secured to the nations of the earth and that is by their submitting to the dictation and government of the King of peace and by bowing in obedience to the principles which He has enunciated.

George Q. Cannon

A man filled with the love of God is not content with blessing his family alone but ranges through the whole world anxious to bless the whole human race.

Joseph Smith

SONNETS FROM THE PORTUGUESE (XLIII) How do I love thee? Let me count the ways. I love to the depth and breadth and height My soul can reach, when feeling out of sight For the ends of Being and ideal Grace. I love thee to the level of everyday's Most quiet need, by sun and candle-light. I love thee freely, as men strive for Right; I love thee purely, as they turn from Praise. I love thee with the passion put to use In my old griefs, and with my childhood's faith. I love thee with a love I seemed to lose With my lost saints—I love thee with the breath, Smiles, tears, of all my life!—and, if God choose, I shall but love thee better after death. Elizabeth Barrett Browning

The United States Post Office dead letter department receives annually thousands and thousands of children's pre-Christmas letters addressed to Santa Claus asking for things. After it was all over one year, a single, solitary letter thanking Santa Claus was received.

Could this be one of the problems of this troubled world—that people think only of getting, not giving; of receiving, and not even expressing their gratitude for that which they do receive?

Margaret R. Jackson

True happiness comes only by making others happy—the practical application of the Savior's doctrine of losing one's life to gain it.

David O. McKay

TO KNOW ALL IS TO FORGIVE ALL If I knew you and you knew me— If both of us could clearly see, And with an inner sight divine The meaning of your heart and mine— I'm sure that we would differ less And clasp our hands in friendliness; Our thoughts would pleasantly agree If I knew you, and you knew me. Nixon Waterman

They also serve who only stand and wait.

John Milton

"There is no peace, saith the Lord, unto the wicked."

Isaiah 48:22

ABOU BEN ADHEM Abou Ben Adhem (may his tribe increase!) Awoke one night from a deep dream of peace, And saw, within the moonlight in his room, Making it rich, and like a lily in bloom, An Angel writing in a book of gold: Exceeding peace had made Ben Adhem bold, And to the Presence in the room he said: "What writest thou?" The Vision raised its head, And with a look made of all sweet accord Answered, "The names of those who love the Lord." "And is mine one?" said Abou. "Nay, not so," Replied the Angel. Abou spoke more low, But cheerily still; and said, "I pray thee, then, Write me as one that loves his fellow men." The Angel wrote, and vanished. The next night It came again with a great wakening light, And showed the names whom love of God had blessed, And, lo! Ben Adhem's name led all the rest! James Henry Leigh Hunt

LITTLE THINGS Little drops of water, Little grains of sand, Make the mighty ocean And the pleasant land. So the little moments, Humble though they be, Make the mighty ages Of eternity. So our little errors Lead the soul away From the path of virtue Far in sin to stray. Little deeds of kindness, Little words of love, Help to make earth happy Like the heaven above. Julia Fletcher Carney

It isn't easy for those who are young to understand the loneliness that comes when life changes from a time of preparation and performance to a time of putting things away. In the eager and active years of youth, it isn't easy to understand how parents feel as their flock, one by one, leave the family fireside. To be so long the center of a home, so much sought after, and then, almost suddenly, to be on the sidelines watching the procession pass by—this is living into loneliness.

Of course we may think we are thoughtful of parents and of our other older folk. Don't we send them gifts and messages on special days and anniversaries? And don't we make an occasional quick call as a token of our attention? It is something to be remembered on special occasions, to be sure. But passing and perfunctory performances are not enough to keep loneliness in its place the whole year round.

What they need in the loneliness of their older years is, in part at least, what we needed in the uncertain years of our youth: a sense of belonging, an assurance of being wanted, and the kindly ministrations of loving hearts and hands; not merely dutiful formality, not merely a room in a building, but room in someone's heart and life. We have to live a long time to learn how empty a room can be that is filled only with furniture. It takes someone on whom we have claims beyond mere hired service, beyond institutional care or professional duty, to thaw out the memories of the past and keep them warmly living in the present.

And we who are young should never become so blindly absorbed in our own pursuits as to forget that there are still with us those who will live in loneliness unless we let them share our lives as once they let us share theirs. When they were moving in the mainstream of their own impelling affairs, we were a burden—or could have been if they had chosen to consider us as such. But now we are stronger, and they are less strong. We cannot bring them back the morning hours of youth. But we can help them live in the warm glow of a sunset made more beautiful by our thoughtfulness, by our provision, and by our active and unfeigned love.

Life in its fullness is a loving ministry of service from generation to generation. God grant that those who belong to us may never be left in loneliness.

Richard L. Evans

THE TOUCH OF THE MASTER'S HAND 'Twas battered and scarred, and the auctioneer Thought it scarcely worth his while To waste much time on the old violin, But held it up with a smile: "What am I bidden, good folks," he cried, "Who'll start the bidding for me?" "A dollars, a dollar"; then, "Two!" "Only two? Two dollars, and who'll make it three? Three dollars, once; three dollars, twice; going for three—" But no, From the room, far back, a gray-haired man Came forward and picked up the bow; Then, wiping the dust from the old violin, And tightening the loose strings, He played a melody pure and sweet As a caroling angel sings. The music ceased, and the auctioneer, With a voice that was quiet and low, Said: "What am I bid for the old violin?" And he held it up with the bow. "A thousand dollars, and who'll make it two? Two thousand! And who'll make it three? Three thousand, once, three thousand, twice, And going, and gone," said he. The people cheered, but some of them cried, "We do not quite understand What changed its worth." Swift came the reply: "The touch of a master's hand." And many a man with life out of tune, And battered and scarred with sin, Is auctioned cheap to the thoughtless crowd, Much like the old violin. A "mess of pottage," a glass of wine; A game—and he travels on. He is "going" once, "going" twice, He's "going" and almost "gone." But the Master comes, and the foolish crowd Never can quite understand The worth of a soul and the change that's wrought By the touch of the Master's hand. Myra Brooks Welch

THE MAKING OF FRIENDS If nobody smiled and nobody cheered and nobody helped us along, If each every minute looked after himself and good things all went to the strong, If nobody cared just a little for you, and nobody thought about me, And we all stood alone in the battle of life, What a dreary old world this would be! Life is sweet because of the friends we have made and the things which in common we share; We want to live on not because of ourselves, but because of the people who care; It's giving and doing for somebody else—on that all life's splendor depends, And the joy of this world, when you've summed it all up, Is found in the making of friends. Edgar A. Guest

Blessed are they who have the gift of making friends: the power of going out of one's self and appreciating whatever is noble and loving in another.

Thomas Hughes

NEW FRIENDS AND OLD FRIENDS Make new friends, but keep the old; Those are silver, these are gold. New-made friendships, like new wine, Age will mellow and refine. Friendships that have stood the test— Time and change—are surely best. Brow may wrinkle, hair grow gray; Friendship never knows decay; For, 'mid old friends, tried and true, Once more we our youth renew. But old friends, alas! may die; New friends must their place supply. Cherish friendship in your breast; New is good, but old is best. Make new friends, but keep the old; Those are silver, these are gold. Joseph Parry

A true friend is the greatest of all blessings and the one which we take the least thought to acquire.
