Thomas S. Monson, Favorite Quotations from the Collection of Thomas S. Monson ( 1985)

Life and Learning

There is great ability in knowing how to conceal one's ability.

Maslow advances what he calls the "Jonah" complex: the tendency in adults to doubt and even fear their own abilities, their own potential to be greater. We fear our highest possibilities (as well as our lowest ones). We are generally afraid to become that which we can glimpse in our most perfect conditions, under conditions of greatest courage. We enjoy and even thrill to the godlike possibilities we see in ourselves in such peak moments. And yet we simultaneously shiver with weakness, awe and fear for these very same possibilities.

Earl Nightingale

Adversity is sometimes hard upon a man; but for one man who can stand prosperity, there are a hundred that will stand adversity.

Thomas Carlyle

At the relief of Dunkirk, a motor torpedo boat sped away from England to pick up its quota of beleaguered British and French soldiers. The signalman on shore flashed to it: "Good luck."

The captain replied: "Thanks. Actually, we rely on skill."

Prosperity doth best discover vice, but adversity doth best discover virtue.

Francis Bacon

A man never shows his own character so plainly as by his manner of portraying another's.

Johann Paul Richter

See how the masses of man worry themselves into nameless graves, while here and there a great, unselfish soul forgets himself into immortality.

Ralph Waldo Emerson

Man is a builder, first of his own character, then of his family, his community and his nation. The specifications from which he must build are not really a mystery, for God's word, if one seeks it, is loud and clear: "Except the Lord build the house," said the Psalmist, "they labor in vain that build it."

Nation's Business

The world of books is the most remarkable creation of man; nothing else that he builds ever lasts. Monuments fall; nations perish; civilizations grow old and die out. After an era of darkness, new races build others; but in the world of books are volumes that live on as young and fresh as the day they were written, still telling men's hearts of the hearts of men centuries dead.

Clarence Day

A man is himself, plus what he reads.

Parkes Cadman

Inscription on the wall of the Library of Congress: "In books lies the soul of the whole passed time."

Character is what one is; reputation is what one has done.

Personality is persistent; death cannot touch the spirit of man.

David O. McKay

A man with knowledge and great moral principles is a great man; but a man with knowledge and no moral principles is only a clever devil.

Dwight D. Eisenhower

When wealth is lost, nothing is lost; when health is lost, something is lost; when character is lost, all is lost.

A person of character is one who likes and dislikes what he ought. He is honest by habit and as a matter of course. He has been taught this way of living by parents who did not ask him, "What will people think?" but, rather, "What will you think of yourself?"

A game of golf cannot be enjoyed on a course that is all fairway, without any rough, any trees, any water hazard or sand traps. It is the obstacles that make it a game.

Royal Bank of Canada Newsletter

Advice is like snow: the softer it falls, the longer it dwells upon and the deeper it sinks into the mind.

Samuel Taylor Coleridge

Inscription on the wall of the Library of Congress: "We taste the spices of Arabia yet never feel the scorching sun which brings them forth."

Books: Some are to be tasted, others to be swallowed and some few to be chewed and digested.

Francis Bacon

THE FEW The easy roads are crowded, And the level roads are jammed; The pleasant little rivers With the drifting folks are crammed. But off yonder where it's rocky, Where you get a better view, You will find the ranks are thinning And the travelers are few. Where the going's smooth and pleasant You will always find the throng, For the many, more's the pity, Seem to like to drift along. But the steeps that call for courage, And the task that's hard to do, In the end result in glory For the never-wavering few. Edgar A. Guest

A lighthouse with no light is worse than no lighthouse at all.

"The Lord seeth not as man seeth; for man looketh on the outward appearance, but the Lord looketh on the heart."

1 Samuel 16:7

Our complacency tree has many branches, and each spring more buds come into bloom.

BOOKS ARE KEYS Books are keys to wisdom's treasure; Books are gates to lands of pleasure; Books are paths that upward lead; Books are friends. Come, let us read. Emilie Poulsson

Conscience warns us as a friend before it punishes us as a judge.

Stanislaus

A nation without a conscience is a nation without a soul.

A nation without a soul is a nation that cannot live.

Sir Winston Churchill

President Joseph F. Smith warned the Latter-day Saints of three dangers to avoid: (1) flattery of worldly men; (2) false educational theories; (3) sexual immorality.

God's finger touch'd him, and he slept.

Alfred, Lord Tennyson

We shall miss him much; there was so much to miss.

Richard L. Evans

Said one young man from an affluent family: Most people don't think any changes are needed in an affluent community. We have everything, they say. But I guess you have to be rich to really understand that money doesn't buy everything. Values, for example.

Money can't buy you character, self-reliance, physical fitness, mental awareness. Money can't teach you how to live with people. Things like that can't be bought. Only taught.

In the affluent community, we're conscious of our responsibility to business, industry, and politics. Learning how to direct our resources wisely is a high priority. We don't have to keep up with change. We have to keep ahead of it.

He is poor who has nothing but money.

The fate of the country . . . does not depend on what kind of paper you drop into the ballot box once a year, but one what kind of man you drop from your chamber into the street every morning.

Henry David Thoreau

Quotations inscribed on the John L. Vestal School Building, Portland, Oregon: "The child is heir to the wisdom of all the ages. This is his treasure house."

"The child has infinite possibilities. Here he may realize some of them."

CROSSING THE BAR Sunset and evening star, And one clear call for me, And may there be no moaning of the bar, When I put out to sea. But such a tide as moving seems asleep, Too full for sound and foam, When that which drew from out the boundless deep Turns again home. Twilight and evening bell, And after that the dark! And may there be no sadness of farewell, When I embark; For tho' from out our bourne of time and place The flood may bear me far, I hope to see my Pilot face to face When I have crossed the bar. Alfred, Lord Tennyson

Education does not mean teaching people to know what they do not know; it means teaching them to behave as they do not behave.

John Ruskin

AN ESSAY ON CRITICISM A little learning is a dangerous thing; Drink deep or taste not the Pierian spring. Alexander Pope

A friend of mine a while ago came across an interesting relic of the Old West: the last will and testament of a rugged frontiersman. It was crudely made but left a great legacy to his son. "This here," he wrote, "is my last will and testament. I ain't got no money to leave you, nothing exceptin' our old cabin, Old Buck [which was probably his horse], and my two guns. But I do leave you somethin' worth a parcel more than money: (1) A man's word that is as good as his bond; (2) faith in God; (3) courage, so you won't be afraid of nothin' or nobody."

Honesty, faith and courage! What a priceless legacy that is! Euripedes said that courage can be taught, as a child is taught to speak. And I rather think that is just what the frontiersman was trying to say. His example would serve his son better than a pouch full of gold; and he was right.

Norman Vincent Peale

What lies behind you and what lies before you are insignificant compared to what lies within you.

The ultimate aim of education is the training of character.

Plato

The boss handed the new employee a broom. "Sweep up that mess in the stockroom," he commanded.

"But sir," objected the employee, "I'm a college graduate."

"Oh well; in that case," replied the employer, "come—I'll show you how!"

There is never a life without sadness, There is never a heart free from pain; If one seeks in this world for true solace, He seeks it forever in vain. So when to your heart comes the sorrow Of losing some dear one you've known, 'Tis the touch of God's sickle at harvest Since He reaps in the fields He has sown.

Whom, then, do I call educated? First, those who control circumstances instead of being mastered by them; those who meet all occasions manfully and act in accordance with intelligent thinking; those who are honorable in all dealings, who treat good-naturedly persons and things that are disagreeable; and furthermore, those who hold their pleasures under control and are not overcome by misfortune; finally, those who are not spoiled by success.

Socrates

A great mind is one that is neither ancient nor modern; it is neither ashamed of the old nor afraid of the new. It thinks neither in terms of old traditions nor in terms of new fashions. It is only concerned with the true and the workable.

N. Eldon Tanner

All men by nature desire knowledge.

Aristotle

TWO TEMPLES A Builder builded a temple, He wrought it with grace and skill; Pillars and groins and arches All fashioned to work his will. Men said, as they saw its beauty, "It shall never know decay; Great is thy skill, O Builder! Thy fame shall endure for aye." A teacher builded a temple With loving and infinite care, Planning each arch with patience, Laying each stone with prayer. None praised her unceasing efforts, None knew of her wondrous plan, For the temple the teacher builded Was unseen by the eyes of man. Gone is the builder's temple, Crumbled into dust. Low lies each stately pillar, Food for consuming rust. But the temple the teacher builded Will last while the ages roll, For that beautiful, unseen temple Was a child's immortal soul. Hattie Bose Hall

A building which houses archives has printed on its facade the phrase from Shakespeare's Tempest: "What's past is prologue." In the play, Antonio completes his comment by saying, "What is to come is in our hands."

Royal Bank of Canada Newsletter

We pay great homage to fallen leaders. But why is it that man cannot always devise the means to show a living person how deeply he is loved, respected, and admired. Death has taken a mountain of a man from our midst. As general, former President Dwight David Eisenhower comes home to Abilene for the final time. Let us resolve to live in keeping with the spirit of a man whose respect for others made him humble enough to listen and to understand, yet kept him firm in his own beliefs.

Walt Lockman

IN MEMORY OF JOHN P. MALMBERG (1827-1881) A light from our household is gone; A voice we loved is stilled; A place is vacant in our hearts That never can be filled.

Tilford Moots went to the Poorhouse the other day to visit a friend who tried to publish a newspaper that pleased everybody.

Harvey Jacobs

Fear . . . it knows no master but one. His name is Understanding.

REQUIEM Under the wide and starry sky Dig the grave and let me lie. Glad did I live and gladly die, And I laid me down with a will. This be the verse you grave for me: Here he lies where he longed to be; Home is the sailor, home from the sea, And the hunter home from the hill. Robert Louis Stevenson

The man walking down the street carrying a cat by the tail is gaining at least ten times as much experience as the man who is just standing there watching him.

Mark Twain

I don't think much of a man no wiser today than he was yesterday.

Abraham Lincoln

The three C's of failure: Criticism, Condemnation, and Complaining.

The three C's of success: Compassion, Courage, and Commitment.

Never entertain any thought of failure.

Fear is usually the product of incomplete knowledge or incomplete thinking.

Of all the liars in the world, sometimes the worst are your own fears.

Rudyard Kipling

"With some I am not well pleased, for they will not open their mouths, but they hide the talent which I have given unto them, because of the fear of man."

D&C 60:2

In 1587 Sir Francis Drake stopped a Spanish merchant fleet. Its cargo was strange: seasoned oak barrel staves. Drake reasoned they would be used to carry provisions in an attack on England. He burned them. A year later the Armada sailed. Its food, in green, unseasoned barrels, spoiled. Spain's crews sickened. Drake's foresight, more than the battle itself, sent a mighty empire into decline. Luck may bring us opportunity; intelligence alone shapes it to our purposes.

Royal Bank of Canada Newsletter

A sophisticated economy, based upon power tools and computers, upon the engineer and the professional, has no room at the bottom for unskilled labor. "The uneducated need not apply," is the unseen sign on every employment door.

Education is not just a luxury permitting some men an advantage over others. It has become a necessity without which a person is defenseless in this complex, industrialized society. We have truly entered the century of the educated man.

Lyndon B. Johnson

An educated man is not one whose memory is trained to carry a few dates in history. He is one who can accomplish things. A man who cannot think is not an educated man, however many college degrees he may have acquired. Thinking is the hardest work anyone can do, which is probably the reason why we have so few thinkers.

Henry Ford

Credit hours, transcripts, satisfied requirements and diplomas do not an education make. Education is a process, not a completed act. The prescriptions of our time look as though you will be exposed to acquiring an education whether you like it or not. You don't need to ask any more for an educational opportunity. You have only to knock to take advantage of it. But to achieve excellence, you must open the door to learning yourself. Contrary to what we would like to believe, excellence in education is rarely unearned.

Education is derived from the Latin word, educarri, which means "to draw out."

The society which scorns excellence in plumbing because plumbing is a humble activity and tolerates shoddiness in philosophy because it is an exalted activity will have neither good plumbing nor good philosophy. Neither its pipes nor its theories will hold water.

John Gardner

A young agricultural graduate looked over a farmer's field and criticized his method of cultivation. "Why, I'd be surprised if you get ten tons of beets from this field," he said.

"So would I," the farmer replied. "That's a potato field!"

The past is behind; learn from it. The future is before us; prepare for it.

Weber

The one thing we learn from experience is that we don't learn from experience.

George Bernard Shaw

Neither wealth, nor fame, nor any other instrument of power can ever be more reliable in assuring our security and peace of mind than the knowledge of having inspired gratitude in a great many people.

Dr. Hans Selye

AWAY I cannot say, and I will not say That he is dead. He is just away! With a cheery smile, and a wave of the hand, He has wandered into an unknown land, And left us dreaming how very fair It needs must be, since he lingers there. And you—O you, who the wildest yearn For the old-time step and the glad return, Think of him faring on, as dear In the love of There as the love of Here; And loyal still, as he gave the blows Of his warrior-strength to his country's foes. Mild and gentle, as he was brave, When the sweetest love of his life he gave To simple things: Where the violets grew Blue as the eyes they were liken to, The touches of his hands have strayed As reverently as his lips have prayed: When the little brown thrush that harshly chirred Was dear to him as the mocking-bird; And he pitied as much as a man in pain A writhing honey-bee wet with rain. Think of him still as the same, I say: He is not dead—he is just away! James Whitcomb Riley

Education must begin with the teacher. Someone once said that the teacher is the "backbone" of our nation. I would prefer to say that the teacher is the living heart of the nation.

Dr. Lena B. Prewitt

No man need fear death; he need fear only that he may die without having known his greatest power—the power of his free will to give of his life to others. If something comes to life in others because of you, then you have made an approach to immortality.

Norman Cousins

Just before an offensive by United States troops into Germany during World War II, General Dwight D. Eisenhower was asked to offer impromptu words of encouragement. Rain had fallen earlier, and several GI carpenters had hammered together a rude platform on a mound.

After some cheering remarks, Ike stepped off the platform onto a mound of slick gumbo. His feet slipped out from under him, and he took a spectacular pratfall. The troops hollered and laughed.

Most commanders would have reprimanded the troops for such behavior. General Eisenhower, however, merely got back on his feet, brushed himself off, turned to the troops, saluted them and smiled his famous smile. The result? Those troops let loose with a chorus of cheers that could be heard in Berlin.

Virgil Pinkley

This is the law of benefits between men: The one ought to forget at once what he has given, and the other ought never to forget what he has received.

Lucius Annaeus Seneca

LETTER TO MRS. LYDIA BIXBY

Dear Madam,

I have just been shown in the Files of the War Department a statement of the Adjutant General of Massachusetts that you are the mother of five sons who have died gloriously on the field of battle. I feel how weak and fruitless must be any words of mine which should attempt to beguile you from the grief of a loss so overwhelming. But I cannot refrain from tendering to you the consolation that may be found in the thanks of the Republic they died to save. I pray that our heavenly Father may assuage the anguish of your bereavement, and leave you only the cherished memory of the loved and lost, and the solemn pride that must be yours to have laid so costly a sacrifice upon the altar of freedom.

Yours very sincerely and respectfully,

A. Lincoln

General George S. Patton's favorite quotation—the one that his wife, Bea, used as dedication for her husband's account of World War II, War As I Knew It—gives the very flavor of the man and soldier:

THE PILGRIM'S PROGRESS

"My sword I give to him that shall succeed me in my pilgrimage, and my courage and skill to him that can get it. My works and scars I carry with me, to be a witness for me that I have fought his battles who now will be my rewarder." So he passed over, and all the trumpets sounded for him on the other side . . .

John Bunyan

Inscriptions at the American Memorial Cemetery of the Philippines:

"Take unto thyself, O Lord, the souls of the valiant." "Some there be which have no sepulchre; their name liveth for evermore." "Grant unto them, O Lord, eternal rest who sleep in unknown graves." "Let us here highly resolve that the cause for which they died shall live." "Comrades in arms, whose earthly resting place is known only to God." "To their memory, their country brings its gratitude as flowers forever living." "O Lord, support us all the day long until the shadows lengthen and our work is done. Then in Thy mercy grant us a safe lodging and a holy rest and peace at the last."

Great ideas come into the world as gently as doves. Perhaps then if we listen attentively we shall hear, amid the uproar of empires and nations, a faint flutter of wings, the gentle stirring of life and hope.

Albert Camus

It has been determined that the best age for learning is in the twenties. An individual's ability to learn increases up to the age of twenty-two, remains the same to thirty-five and is still high at fifty.

Dr. Ed D. Smith & Sons Newsletter

The Crusades, the whole legal and ecclesiastical fiction of feudalism, laboriously contrived and stunningly staged, soon degenerated into a sordid free-for-all in which those who sought to possess this world and the other at once, wearing the armor of conquest beneath the sacrosanct robes of unworldly pilgrims, ended up possessing neither.

Ill habits gather by unseen degrees—

As brooks make rivers, rivers run to seas.

John Dryden

Good habits are the soul's muscles. The more you use them, the stronger they grow.

Bad habits: First we could break them if we would; then we would break them if we could.

Habits are chains that are too small to be felt until they are too strong to be broken.

Samuel Johnson

Whatever part you choose to play on the world stage, keep in mind that life is like a candid camera: It does not wait for you to pose. You cannot adopt safely the Bohemian belief that washing the dishes should be left until they are needed.

Royal Bank of Canada Newsletter

The happy life is not ushered in at any age to the sound of drums and trumpets. It grows upon us year by year, little by little, until at last we realize that we have it. It is achieved in individuals not by flights to the moon or Mars, but by a body of work done so well that we can lift our heads with assurance and look the universe in the eye. Of this be sure: You do not find the happy life—you make it.

Royal Bank of Canada Newsletter

Keep your face turned always toward the sunlight, and the shadows will fall behind you.

Don't let life discourage you. Everyone who got where he is had to begin where he was.

Ask a woman how she stubbed her toe, and she'll say she walked into a chair; ask a man, and he'll say someone left a chair in the middle of the room.

Lufkin Industries ROUNDUP

People are forever buying things they don't need, with money they don't have, to please people they don't like.

Will Rogers

He is rich according to what he is—not according to what he has.

Henry Ward Beecher

One of literature's best-loved characters, Anne of Green Gables, stated: "Looking forward to things is half the pleasure of them."

Happiness is the desire of most people. But the number of folks who miss it is appalling. Instead of living in the sunshine of happiness, they are dwelling under the cloud of gloom. The road they follow leads to the swamp of despair instead of the garden of happiness. This need not be. There are a few simple rules that, if followed, will produce happiness. They are:

To measure the goodness of life by its delights, pleasures, and safety is to apply a false standard. The happy life doesn't consist of a glut of luxury. It does not make itself content with commercially produced pleasure—the nightclub idea of what is a good time—mistaking it for happiness. The happy life is made up of substantial things and attributes and purposes. To be sure, you do not find the happy life; you make it!

Royal Bank of Canada Newsletter

We should be careful to get out of an experience only the wisdom that is in it—and stop there; lest we be like the cat that sits down on a hot stove lid. She will never sit down on a hot stove lid again—and that is well; but also she will never sit down on a cold one any more.

Mark Twain

One must, having learned to learn, go on learning. What the public takes for brilliance is really the result of thorough, painstaking investigation and downright hard work. We may well rejoice that work is not reserved for slaves. If that were the case, we should be robbed of our greatest field of enjoyment, and we should be forever condemned to mediocrity.

Royal Bank of Canada Newsletter

Learn enthusiasm from youth—young people possess it in abundance.

Learn wisdom from the mature—they have experienced much.

Learn understanding from God—He knows the end from the beginning.

Learn integrity from oneself—let your conscience be your guide.

The fastest and best method of finding the answer to a simple problem is often through trial and error. This axiom is disputed by many women, who think talking about it is more interesting, and by many men, who think they should refer it to a committee.

Edward Hodnett

In the time of your life, live so that in good time there shall be no ugliness or death for yourself or for any life your life touches.

William Saroyan

"Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it."

Matthew 7:14

One of the reasons why so few people are to be found who seem sensible and pleasant in conversation is that almost everybody is thinking about what he wants to say himself, rather than about answering clearly what is said to him.

The more clever and polite think it enough simply to put on an attentive expression, while all the while you can see in their eyes and train of thought that they are far removed from what you are saying and are anxious to get back to what they want to say. They ought, on the contrary, to reflect that such keenness to please oneself is a bad way of pleasing or persuading others and that to listen well and answer to the point is one of the most perfect qualities one can have in conversation.

Francois La Rochefoucauld

It has been written that life is divided into three terms: that which was, that which is, and that which will be. Let us learn from the past to profit by the present, and from the present to live better for the future.

A CAPSULE COURSE IN HUMAN RELATIONS

Robert Woodruff

True humility is not an abject, groveling, self-despising spirit; it is but a right estimate of ourselves as God sees us.

Tryon Edwards

I gather flowers by the wayside, by the brooks and in the meadows. And only the string with which I bind them together is my own.

Michel Eyquem de Montaigne

A Roman poet said: "Let ancient times delight other folk; I rejoice that I was not born till now."

When you deal in generalities, you will never have a success. When you deal in specifics, you will rarely have a failure.

Thomas S. Monson

Princes come, princes go; an hour of pomp and show they know.

Robert Craig Wright

"Father, where shall I work today?" And my love flowed warm and free. Then He pointed me out a tiny spot And said, "Tend that for me." I answered quickly, "Oh, no, not that, Why no one would ever see No matter how well my work was done; Not that little place for me." And the word He spoke, it was not stern; He answered me tenderly: "Ah, little one, search that heart of thine; Art thou working for them or me? Nazareth was a little place, And so was Galilee." Meade MacGuire

Thou that hast given so much to me, give one thing more: a grateful heart.

George Herbert

There is a tendency among men to kiss the foot above and kick the head below on the ladder of life.

John A. Widtsoe

We are preoccupied with material things. Our supreme god is technology; our goddess is sex. Most of us are more interested in getting to the moon than in getting to heaven, more concerned about conquering space than about conquering ourselves. We are more dedicated to material security than to inner purity. We give much more thought to what we wear, what we eat, what we drink and what we can do to relax than we give to what we are.

Billy Graham

I believe we are living in one of the most precious and privileged periods of all human history—a period of change and challenge and infinite promise.

The criteria of emotional maturity consists of:

Dr. William C. Menninger

MY WAGE I bargained with Life for a penny, And Life would pay no more, However I begged at evening When I counted my scanty store; For Life is a just employer, He gives you what you ask, But once you have set the wages, Why, you must bear the task. I worked for a menial's hire, Only to learn, dismayed, That any wage I had asked of Life, Life would have paid. Jessie B. Rittenhouse

To strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield.

Alfred, Lord Tennyson

Those who forget the past will tend to repeat it, with all its attendant sorrows.

Dr. William F. Adams

What was most significant about the lunar voyage was not that men set foot on the moon but that they set eye on the earth.

Norman Cousins

Take things with gratitude, rather than for granted.

James Reston

In a civil defense test, during a mock air raid, Boy Scouts were to impersonate wounded people who would be picked up by the defense units. One Scout, after lying "wounded" for several hours, evidently got a little disgusted; the squad that came to "rescue" him found his scrawled note: "Have bled to death and gone home."

There's nothing wrong in change if it is in the right direction.

Sir Winston Churchill

Nothing is permanent in life except change.

Chinese Proverb

Life is God's gift to man. What we do with our life is our gift to God.

Harold B. Lee

This time, like all times, is a very good one, if we but know what to do with it. I ask not for the great, the remote, the romantic. Give me insight into today, and you may have the antique and future worlds.

Ralph Waldo Emerson

LIFE Life is a gift to be used every day, Not to be smothered and hidden away; It isn't a thing to be stored in the chest Where you gather your keepsakes and treasure your best; It isn't a joy to be sipped now and then, And promptly put back in a dark place again. Life is a gift that the humblest may boast of, And one that the humblest may well make the most of; Get out and live it each hour of the day, Wear it and use it as much as you may; Don't keep it in niches and corners and grooves— You'll find that in service its beauty improves. Edgar A. Guest

Life by the yard is hard; by the inch it's a cinch.

Quality in living is not a newly sought way of life. Several thousand years ago the sacred book of Egypt pictured moral perfection. The soul pleading before Osiris and the celestial jury said: "I have told no lies, committed no frauds, promoted no strife, caused no one to weep, made no fraudulent gains; I have sown joy and not sorrow, given food to the hungry and clothed the naked."

Quality living does not consist merely in not doing wrong. There are people in every age who stand out head and shoulders above others. They are people who have something to do and who do it well.

Royal Bank of Canada Newsletter

God gave us memories, that in life's garden we may have June roses in December.

John Barrie

The memory strengthens as you lay burdens upon it and becomes trustworthy as you trust it.

Thomas De Quincey

I do not believe the greatest threat to our future is from bombs or guided missiles. I don't think our civilization will die that way. I think it will die when we no longer care. Arnold Toynbee has pointed out that nineteen or twenty-one civilizations have died from within and not by conquest from without. There were no bands playing and flags waving when these civilizations decayed. It happened slowly, in the quiet and the dark when no one was aware.

Laurence M. Gould

Our responsibility is to be program-oriented but people-centered. We labor with our hands, with our heads, with our hearts.

To lack wisdom is no disgrace. To lack the desire for wisdom is a pity. But to desire wisdom and not know how to find it is a tragedy.

Leon Gutterman

Change is part of a law of life. We must grow physically from childhood to adulthood, mentally from ignorance to knowledge, emotionally from insecurity to stability and spiritually to an abiding faith in a living God.

In Shakespeare's Henry VIII, Cardinal Wolsey bemoans his fate: "Had I but served my God with half the zeal with which I served my king, He would not in mine age have left me naked to mine enemies."

The sweetness of success had turned into the bitter wormwood of disappointment and defeat. Wolsey commanded tremendous power and prestige, second only to the king. History records that he was arrogant, imperious and extravagant and that people kowtowed to him out of fear. He was spoiled by obeisance and flattery.

Then came the fatal blow. Charged with high treason by Henry VIII, his false friends removed their masks and revealed their real feelings. He became a sick old man, disappointed and brokenhearted. Then he realized the limitations of power and the sin of abusing and misusing it. When it was all too late, he understood the wisdom of Ecclesiastes: "Vanity of vanities, all is vanity."

Rabbi Magnin

This is the triumph of man:

Where there is truth, he must find.

Where there is destruction, he must rebuild.

Where there is love, he must protect.

World's Fair Exhibit

Man is born abroad and spends his life searching for his home.

Charlie Freed

There is a tide in the affairs of men, Which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune; Omitted, all the voyage of their life Is bound in shallows and in miseries. On such a full sea are we now afloat, We must take the current when it serves, Or lose our ventures. William Shakespeare

The true secret of life is to live outside of oneself in love.

It was the best of times, it was the worst of times; it was the age of wisdom, it was the age of foolishness; it was the epoch of belief, it was the epoch of incredulity; it was the season of Light, it was the season of Darkness; it was the spring of hope, it was the winter of despair. We had everything before us, we had nothing before us.

Charles Dickens

Give without remembering; receive without forgetting.

Diane Barton

Of all sad words of tongue or pen,

The saddest are these: "It might have been."

James Greenleaf Whittier

Disappointment is never so bitter, so "sour grapes," as when one has had superior advantages and has neglected them or frittered them away or watered them down.

Sign seen in front of a Protestant church in Melbourne, Australia: Before Easter there must be a cross.

On a motion to award the great general Napoleon a pension, the French Assembly decided that "such glorious deeds could not be rewarded by gold," so they gave him nothing.

What some motorists should keep in mind is that it's not only the automobile that can be recalled by its maker.

We cannot go to heaven in a feather bed. The Savior of the world entered after great pain and suffering. We, as servants, can expect no more than the Master.

Do not forget the hands of the aged; they have touched much of life and have become sensitive and sympathetic.

You can't do today's work on yesterday's equipment if you expect to be in business tomorrow.

When youth is gone, every man will look back upon that period of his life with infinite sorrow and regret. It is the bitter sorrow and regret of a man who knows that once he had a great talent and wasted it; once he had a great treasure and got nothing from it. It is the sorrow of one who knows that he had strength enough for everything and never used it.

Thomas Wolfe

God's wonders are many, but man is the greatest wonder of all.

Alexander the Great

Cicero mentions the following six mistakes of man:

To the past, to the present, and the future I dedicate this book. To the past because I came out of it. To the present because I live in it. To the future because my children will inherit it.

Ruth May Fox

MY CREED

I will be dependable.

I will make prayerful preparation.

I will make this duty a pleasure.

I will leave my troubles at home.

I will bring sunshine into the homes I visit.

I will speak well of everyone.

I will not gossip.

I will not betray a confidence.

I will seek to know the needs of the people I visit.

I will attend my meetings.

I will live worthy of this calling.

When provided with sound economic education, citizens will no longer be deceived by catch phrases, demagogic outbursts, mild impeachments or glowing reassurances, all intended to frighten or appease.

They will then become adult economic realists. They will not be misled, terrorized or won over to new-sounding philosophies and creeds which, in the face of all experience, stand utterly condemned and branded as the cause of the collapse of nations and civilizations.

Orval W. Adams

Wise men talk because they have something to say, fools because they have to say something.

Plato

The history of mankind is strewn with habits and creeds and dogmas that were essential in one age and disastrous in another.

James Reston

Nothing, good or bad, remains static. Change is the normal state in the world today, and a person needs to be resourceful in altering his plans to meet new circumstances.

Royal Bank of Canada Newsletter

Nothing is constant but change.

Edward Atkinson

From an article entitled "Uruguay: Utopia Gone Wild," which appeared in the May 1966 issue of Reader's Digest: Labor wanted higher wages; industrialists wanted bigger income; but nobody wanted to do any work. Citizens thought more of their rights than of their obligations. The country's vast web of social legislation redistributed wealth but did not create it. Nobody had the vision to see that what Uruguay needed was production. Said President Washington Beltran: "We are in a state of crisis—one created solely by our own institutions."

An institution is the lengthened shadow of one man. All history resolves itself very easily into the biography of a few stout and earnest persons.

Ralph Waldo Emerson

Signs by which maturity may be tested:

Dr. Harry Allen Overstreet

A ruler devised a test to see which of the people in his kingdom were sane. The sane ones could continue to live in the kingdom; the others could not. He had built a building which had in it a tank into which flowed a stream of water from a pipe in the wall. Each person would be given a bucket of water and told to empty the tank. If he stopped the flow first and then emptied the tank, he was judged sane.

It is a far, far better thing that I do, than I have ever done; it is a far, far better rest that I go to, than I have ever known.

Charles Dickens

A life spent in digging is worth nothing if you plant no olive trees.

Sicilian Proverb

All men are born equal, but they seem to be born equal to different things—and that's the difference.

When we pick up our newspaper at breakfast, we expect—we even demand—that it bring us momentous events since the night before. We turn on the car radio as we drive to work and expect "news" to have occurred since the morning newspaper went to press.

Returning in the evening, we expect our house not only to shelter us, to keep us warm in winter and cool in summer, but also to relax us, to dignify us, to encompass us with soft music and interesting hobbies, to be a playground, a theater. We expect our two-week vacation to be romantic, exotic, cheap, and effortless. We expect a far-away atmosphere if we go to a nearby place; and we expect everything to be relaxing, sanitary, and Americanized if we go to a far-away place. We expect new heroes every season, a literary masterpiece every month, a dramatic spectacular every week, a rare sensation every night. We expect everybody to feel free to disagree, yet we expect everybody to be loyal, not to rock the boat or take the Fifth Amendment.

We expect everybody to believe deeply in his religion, yet not to think less of others for not believing. We expect our nation to be strong and great and vast and varied and prepared for every challenge; yet we expect our "national purpose" to be clear and simple, something that gives direction to the lives of two hundred million people and yet can be bought in a paperback at the corner drugstore for a dollar.

We expect anything and everything. We expect the contradictory and the impossible. We expect compact cars which are spacious, luxurious cars which are economical. We expect to be rich and charitable, powerful and merciful, active and reflective, kind and competitive. We expect to be inspired by mediocre appeals for "excellence," to be made literate by illiterate appeals for literacy. We expect to eat and stay thin, to be constantly on the move and ever more neighborly.

Daniel J. Boorstin

History is a vast early-warning system.

Norman Cousins

MONEY Workers earn it, Spendthrifts burn it, Bankers lend it, Women spend it, Forgers fake it, Taxes take it, Dying leave it, Heirs receive it, Thrifty save it, Misers crave it, Robbers seize it, Rich increase it, Gamblers lose it, I could use it. Richard Armour

If you have ever leaned on a farm fence at twilight and heard the spring peepers peep, if you have ever stopped while crossing a pasture to listen for a bobwhite, if you have ever breathed fresh air on a high hill or picked watercress by a cool spring or felt the warmth in the cow barn on a January morning, then you are a farmer in spirit as long as you live.

John T. Cunningham

The word economics, traced to its Greek root, means "the laws of the house."

Economic illiteracy is a serious problem. The terrible fact is that a citizen may acquire a high school diploma without once having been exposed to basic economics. He may have passed everything from geometry to Greek mythology and still know next to nothing about the bread and butter system by which he lives.

A nation becomes what its young people read in their youth. Its ideals are fashioned then. Its goals are strongly determined. And the foundations are established for future action.

James A. Michener

Inscription on the wall of the Library of Congress: "Science is organized knowledge."

Anyone may put off decision-making by the simple device of donning a mask under cover of which he analyzes and re-analyzes a problem, postponing the moment he fears.

Royal Bank of Canada Newsletter

Sometimes the statement that a man has no time to read sounds like a boast. Its maker means to say that he is too important, too occupied with big affairs to fritter away time in reading. But reading is a legitimate business activity, designed to provide the mental food which maintains the intellectual life so greatly needed in business.

Reading is one of the true pleasures of life. In our age of mass culture, when so much that we encounter is abridged, adapted, adulterated, shredded and boiled down, and commercialism's loud speakers are incessantly braying, it is mind-easing and mind-inspiring to sit down privately with a congenial book.

Royal Bank of Canada Newsletter

A principle is not like a rule. The rule asks nothing more of you than that you obey; a principle requires you to do your own thinking. A rule gives you credit only for being a creature; a principle gives you stature.

It is well for a man to respect his own vocation—whatever it is—and to think himself bound to uphold it and claim for it the respect it deserves.

Charles Dickens

If a man is satisfied with his work, he is likely to live longer. A study at Duke University showed that job satisfaction is necessary for general happiness, and that happiness promotes good health and probably long life.

Prevention

Newton was loafing under an apple tree when he saw an apple fall and got the gravitation idea; James Watt was loafing in the kitchen when the kettle boiled and he got the idea of the steam engine; Galileo was letting his mind wander from the sermon while he watched the lamp swinging in the cathedral at Pisa and developed the pendulum principle.

The person who travels with his mind relaxed from the narrow circle of his daily pursuits is well on the way to thinking up new ideas and developing ideas that have been buried in his mind under the load of daily work.

Winifred A. Peterson

To be ignorant is not a crime; but to abide in ignorance when it can be avoided—that is a crime against oneself.

It is reputed that an interviewer talked once to the wife of Albert Einstein and asked her, "What do you know about the theory of relativity?"

She replied, "I know nothing about the theory of relativity, but I know everything about Albert Einstein, and that is more than he knows."

Perhaps some of the philosophy that made John Wayne what he was came from his pharmacist father, Clyde Morrison, who had three rules he passed on to his sons: (1) Always keep your word; (2) A gentleman never insults anyone intentionally; (3) Don't look for trouble, but if you get into a fight, make sure you win it!

Deseret News Editorial Salt Lake City, Utah

Wrath is cruel, and anger is outrageous; but who is able to stand before jealousy?

Reading stretches our mental muscles and expands our horizons. It takes us out of our mundane worlds and lets us travel as far as our imaginations and the picture painting words of the authors can carry us. Reading keeps us vibrant; it keeps us alive and makes us far more interesting to our marriage mates and our families. It also is a form of insurance against mental aging. We are only as old as we think we are. Some people say that one way to keep alive is to keep interested in many things, and the way to keep interested is to read widely.

Royal Bank of Canada Newsletter

Education of the heart is the heart of education.

Hugh B. Brown

In your thinking, substitute something for something, rather than something for nothing.

Knowledge is gained one truth at a time.

He who knows not and knows not that he knows not Is a fool—shun him. He who knows not and knows that he knows not Is simple—teach him. He who knows and knows not that he knows Is asleep—awaken him. He who knows and knows that he knows Is wise—follow him. Unknown

A person learns more rapidly from what he does than from what others do for him. One expert has concluded that "the ratio of learning is: one by hearing, ten by seeing, and one thousand by doing." A person does not learn nearly so well by sitting and listening to someone talk as he does by participating. He must be involved in the lesson. The secret of successful teaching, therefore, is getting a person to do something for himself. A class in physical education would not get much physical exercise if the teacher, day after day, went through the exercises herself and left the class idle. Someone else's tongue wagging is not enough activity to keep students alert. The scriptures also stress the importance of activity: "Be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only." (James 1:22.)

There are enough unfulfilled tasks to keep everybody busy.

When you ignore, you injure. When you inform, you inspire.

Thomas S. Monson

To insure the education of their teenagers, parents need to pull a few wires: television, telephone and ignition!

These Times

A jewelry store owner in Ohio has had two diamonds—$700 each—set in his front teeth. He comments: "They look like two headlights. Basically, all men are alike. I wanted to be different."

We are not born equal; we are born unique. Finding our strengths, our unique powers should be the purpose of the journey of life.

Earl Nightingale

The great Canadian physician Sir William Osler worked out a psychological plan for concentrating action into what he termed "daytight compartments," like the watertight compartments of ships. "Each of you is bound on a long voyage," he once told a group of students at Yale University. "By touching a button at every level of your life you can close the iron doors shutting out the past—the dear yesterdays. Touch another and shut out the future—the unborn tomorrows. Then you are safe—safe for today."

Royal Bank of Canada Newsletter

In education, the "newest" does not necessarily make for the "best" education. To my limited knowledge, nothing as effective has yet been invented for transmission of knowledge from one mind to another as the so-called Socratic method. According to Western tradition, the two greatest teachers were Socrates and Jesus Christ. Both individualized their teaching. The Socratic technique was to bring the learner to recognition of a concept or generalization through teacher-led discussion. Christ communicated in a forceful and lucid way with individuals and with groups of individuals.

James K. Wellington

IN FLANDERS FIELDS In Flanders fields the poppies blow Between the crosses, row on row, That mark our place; and in the sky The larks, still bravely singing, fly Scarce heard amid the guns below. We are the Dead. Short days ago We lived, felt dawn, saw sunset glow, Loved and were loved, and now we lie In Flanders fields. Take up our quarrel with the foe: To you from failing hands we throw The torch; be yours to hold it high. If ye break faith with us who die We shall not sleep, though poppies grow In Flanders fields. John McCrae

An educated man stands, as it were, in the midst of a boundless arsenal and magazine, filled with all the weapons and engines which man's skill has been able to devise from the earliest time; and he works, accordingly, with a strength borrowed from all past ages. How different is his state who stands on the outside of that storehouse and feels that its gates must be stormed or remain forever shut against him! His means are the commonest and rudest; the mere work done is no measure of his strength. A dwarf behind his steam engine may remove mountains; but no dwarf will hew them down with a pick axe, and he must be a Titan that hurls them abroad with his arms.

Thomas Carlyle

We know that television and computers are having a profound impact on our society and the world. At one time there were three major socializing influences: family, church and school. Now there is a fourth: television, with computer technology not far behind.

The economic and sociological implications for America are staggering—but we know appallingly little about them. For example, we know we must have a new generation of well-educated children to deal with this information society—but quite the reverse is occurring. For the first time in our history, the generation graduating from school is less literate than its parents. We don't know why, but we cannot shrug it off. Our nation will not remain strong if a large portion of the population is excluded from meaningful economic, political, or social participation because it cannot comprehend or deal with the demands of this new age.

Timothy E. Wirth

Your first duty in life is towards your afterself. So live that your afterself—the man you ought to be—may in his time be possible and actual.

Far away in the years he is waiting his turn. His body, his brain, his soul, are in your boyish hands. He cannot help himself. What will you leave for him? Will it be a brain unspoiled by lust or dissipation; a mind trained to think and act; a nervous system as true as a dial in its response to the truth about you? Will you let him come as a man among men in his time? Or will you throw away his inheritance before he has had the chance to touch it?

Will you turn over to him a brain distorted; a mind diseased; a will untrained to action; a spinal cord grown through and through with the devil grass we call wild oats? Will you let him come taking your place, gaining through your experiences, happy in your friendships, hallowed through your joys, building them on his own?

Or will you fling it all away, decreeing, wantonlike, that the man you might have been shall never be?

This is your problem in life—the problem vastly more important to you than any or all others. How will you meet it—as a man or as a fool? It is your problem today and every day, and the hour of your decision is the crisis in your destiny.

David Starr Jordan

Time is precious, but life is priceless.

Whatever I did not know, I was not ashamed to inquire about; so I acquired knowledge.

CHILDREN'S LETTERS TO GOD

"Dear God: I wished on a star two times but nothing happened. Now what? Anna."

"Dear God: If you made the rule for kids to take out the garbage, please change it. Maurice."

"Dear Holy God: Would you make it so there would not be any more wars? And so every one could vote. Also everybody should have a lot of fun. Nancy."

"Dear God: Charles, my cat, got run over. And if you made it happen, you have to tell me why. Harvey."

"Dear God: I read your book and I like it. I would like to write a book some day with the same kind of stories. Where do you get your ideas? Best wishes, Mark."

Time

There are nine requisites for contented living:

Johann Wolfgang von Goethe

DESIDERATA

Go placidly amid the noise and the haste, and remember what peace there may be in silence. As far as possible, without surrender, be on good terms with all persons. Speak your truth quietly and clearly; and listen to others, even to the dull and the ignorant; they, too, have their story. Avoid loud and aggressive persons. They are vexations to the spirit. If you compare yourself with others, you may become vain or bitter, for always there will be greater and lesser persons than yourself.

Enjoy your achievements as well as your plans. Keep interested in your own career, however humble; it is a real possession in the changing fortunes of time. Exercise caution in your business affairs, for the world is full of trickery, but let not this blind you to what virtue there is; many persons strive for high ideals, and everywhere life is full of heroism.

Be yourself. Especially do not feign affection, neither be cynical about love; for in the face of all aridity and disenchantment, it is as perennial as the grass.

Take kindly the counsel of the years, gracefully surrendering the things of youth. Nurture strength of spirit to shield you in sudden misfortune. But do not distress yourself with dark imaginings: many fears are born of fatigue and loneliness.

Beyond a wholesome discipline, be gentle with yourself. You are a child of the universe no less than the trees and the stars; you have a right to be here. And whether or not it is clear to you, no doubt the universe is unfolding as it should. Therefore be at peace with God, whatever you conceive Him to be. And whatever your labors and aspirations, in the noisy confusion of life, keep peace in your soul. With all its sham, drudgery, and broken dreams, it is still a beautiful world. Be cheerful. Strive to be happy.

Max Ehrmann

"You can be a baseball player and get an education, too," my father told me. We had an old car that was parked in our yard, and we sat in that car and talked and talked. I told him I was going to drop out of school when I got a chance to play baseball. He turned around and put his hand on my shoulder.

"Son, I quit school because I had to go to work to make a living. You don't have to. I put fifty cents on that dresser each morning for you to take to school to buy your lunch and whatever else you need. I only take twenty-five cents to work with me. It's worth more to me that you get an education than it is for me to eat. So let's hear no more about dropping out of school."

You don't forget this kind of sacrifice by your father. Herbert Aaron was always ready to deny himself something if it would help his family.

Henry "Hank" Aaron

There's an old Arabian proverb that goes: A fool may be known by six things: anger without cause; speech without profit; change without progress; inquiry without object; putting trust in a stranger; and mistaking foes for friends.

Earl Nightingale

A PSALM OF LIFE Tell me not, in mournful numbers, Life is but an empty dream!— For the soul is dead that slumbers, And things are not what they seem. Life is real! Life is earnest! And the grave is not its goal; Dust thou art, to dust returnest, Was not spoken of the soul. Not enjoyment, and not sorrow, If our destined end or way; But to act, that each tomorrow Find us farther than today. Art is long, and Time is fleeting, And our hearts, though stout and brave, Still, like muffled drums, are beating Funeral marches to the grave. In the world's broad field of battle, In the bivouac of life, Be not like dumb, driven cattle! Be a hero in the strife! Trust no Future, howe'er pleasant! Let the dead Past bury its dead! Act, —act in the living Present! Heart within, and God o'erhead! Lives of great men all remind us We can make our lives sublime, And, departing, leave behind us Footprints on the sands of time. Footprints, that perhaps another, Sailing o'er life's solemn main, A forlorn and shipwrecked brother, Seeing, shall take heart again. Let us then be up and doing, With a heart for any fate; Still achieving, still pursuing, Learn to labor and to wait. Henry Wadsworth Longfellow

So live that when thy summons comes to join the innumerable caravan that moves to that mysterious realm where each shall take his chamber in the silent halls of death, thou go not like the quarry-slave at night, scourged to his dungeon; but, sustained and soothed by an unfaltering trust, approach thy grave like one who wraps the drapery of his couch about him and lies down to pleasant dreams.

William Cullen Bryant

O, DRY THOSE TEARS O, dry those tears and calm those fears; Life is not made for sorrow. 'Twill come, alas! but soon 'twill pass; Clouds will be sunshine tomorrow. O, lift thine eyes to the blue skies; See how the clouds do borrow Sunshine each one, straight from the sun; So is it ever with sorrow. Then lift thine eyes to the blue skies, Clouds will be sunshine tomorrow. O, dry those tears and calm those fears; Life is not made for sorrow.

The only responsibility that a man cannot evade in this life is the one he thinks of least—his personal influence. A man's conscious influence is woefully small. But his unconscious influence—the silent, subtle radiations of his personality, the effect of his words and acts, the trifles he never considers—is tremendous. Every man has an atmosphere which is affecting every other. So silent and unconsciously is this influence working that many men forget that it exists. Into the hand of every man is given marvelous power for good or for evil—the silent, unconscious, unseen influence of his life. This is simply the constant radiation of what a man is—not what he pretends to be. Every man, by his mere living, can radiate sympathy, happiness, hope, or any of a hundred qualities. There are men whose presence seems to radiate sunshine, cheer, optimism. With them you feel calm and rested and restored, in a moment, to a new and stronger faith in humanity.

William George Jordan
