Think about the choices you make every day. Do you choose what to wear, what to say, what to read and watch, and how to act? The ability to make choices is a gift from Heavenly Father. It is called agency. Using our agency is an important part of Heavenly Father’s plan for us. What helps you choose the right?

Heavenly Father will help you choose the right. You are a child of God, and He wants you to return to live with Him again. Remember, you can pray to Heavenly Father anytime, anywhere, and He will bless you with courage to choose the right.

Jesus Christ will help you choose the right. He is “the way, the truth, and the life” (John 14:6) and the perfect example for you to follow. You will choose the right when you ask yourself, “What would Jesus want me to do?”

The Holy Ghost will help you choose the right. When you are baptized and when you take the sacrament, you covenant (or promise) to keep the commandments. When you do this, Heavenly Father promises that the Holy Ghost will be with you. The Holy Ghost will prompt you to do what is right, warn you, and bless you with peace when you choose the right.

Prophets help you choose the right. The scriptures contain the word of God taught by His prophets. They can help you know what to do. Today, our prophet and other leaders are the servants of God. Listen when they speak in general conference. As you follow their counsel, you will choose the right.

Follow the maze on page F4. Choose the pictures that represent good decisions. As you make the correct choices, the maze will lead you to Jesus Christ.

1.  Teach the Word of Wisdom and the standard of modesty by preparing strips of paper with the following written on them: from D&C 89:7–12, 14; and the following quotes from President Gordon B. Hinckley—“How truly beautiful is a well-groomed young woman who is clean in body and mind.” “How handsome is a young man who is well groomed. He is a son of God, deemed worthy of holding the holy priesthood of God.” “[A son of God] does not need tattoos or earrings on or in his body.” “I promise you that the time will come, if you have tattoos, that you will regret your actions.” “As for the young women, … one modest pair of earrings is sufficient.” “There is no need for any Latter-day Saint boy or girl … to even try [drugs].” (See “A Prophet’s Counsel and Prayer for Youth,” Liahona, Apr. 2001, 30–41). Explain that both modesty and the Word of Wisdom have to do with taking care of our bodies. Place the strips of paper in a bag; then pass the bag while the children sing. Stop the music, and invite a child to choose and read a reference from the bag. Discuss and teach the principles of the Word of Wisdom and modesty in dress.

2.  Post on the board eight to ten pictures from the Gospel Art Picture Kit of Christ doing kind acts for others. Teach the children that Jesus is our friend, and He also taught us how to be a friend by His example. Have each class choose one picture and read the story about the picture from the scriptures or from the back of the picture. As each class presents a role play of the story, discuss ways that Jesus’s example helps us be a friend.
