Susette Green, Dlora Dalton, Dawn Anderson, Every Good Thing: Talks from the 1997 BYU Women's Conference ( 1998)

Pieces of Peace

JANET LEE

I love the Smith Field House at BYU. I know it is just a gymnasium with a track and a few classrooms and offices, but to me it is much more. Despite its rambunctious purpose, this place brings me a peace you cannot imagine. It is a sanctuary, a haven, for me. My memories of experiences in this building provide a piece of peace as I look back through the years shared with my husband, Rex, and as I wonder about the years we will be apart.

As students, Rex and I attended devotionals and forums, basketball and volleyball games, and track meets in the field house. At lunchtime, we could buy hamburgers and brownies at the side of the track. At registration time, the entire building was filled with confused and frustrated students struggling to register for required classes before they filled up. With a little decoration and a big imagination, the field house was even turned into a dance hall. The first picture Rex and I ever had taken together was in this very building. I once wore my wedding dress here. No, we didn't have our reception in the field house, but Janie Thompson, who was in charge of BYU's annual Field House Frolics the year Rex and I were married, wanted a theatrical atmosphere. We sang "Love and Marriage" as we stepped down a tall, winding staircase. A decade later, President Dallin Oaks introduced Rex here as the founding dean of the yet-to-be-organized J. Reuben Clark Law School. Shortly thereafter, when we moved back to Provo, we came here often for family home evenings with our children. Here on this track I ran my first mile, then three, then five. I ran with Rex at my side, giving me encouragement, cheering me on. Sometimes I came in the daytime and settled my young children in the bleachers with paper and crayons or storybooks and the promise of a brownie if they were good while Mommy ran.

Years later, we returned to the same track after Rex's chemotherapy treatments. He walked slowly, holding my hand and gaining strength after a six-month hospital stay. For years we had been running long distances outside and thought we had graduated from a track, but that winter he needed the stability of temperature, and we enjoyed the comradery of friends. He loved greeting people as we walked the track. His voice boomed all through the field house. "Hi, Pete. How are you, Glen? I'll race you," he joked to runner friends as they passed him by. I thought he wouldn't want to draw attention to himself, with his chemically induced baldness and ponderous pace, but he loved their smiles as they passed. Some would stop and walk with him awhile to chat and then be on their way.

By spring, Rex was running two laps and walking one, and by early summer we were running outside together and all over Provo. The following summer, he became president of BYU, and once again, we returned to the field house for sporting events and winter runs when it was snowy outside.

How could I not love this building? My memories are one way I find peace. They have carried me, they brighten my life, and they are a wonderful blessing—a piece of my peace.

I have contemplated peace a great deal over this past year. I have thought a lot more about peace when I haven't had it than when I have. I have told myself, "As soon as I get the hospital bills paid, then I will feel peace . . . as soon as I figure out our finances and feel secure . . . as soon as I answer all the kind letters people have written . . . as soon as I get used to kneeling by our bed each night alone to pray . . . " The list goes on and on. I foolishly put a condition on my peace.

Gradually I have learned not to postpone peace but to accept it as a gift when it comes piece by piece. If I look, I can find pieces of peace in each day—even in a bad day. Life does not have to be perfect to have moments of perfect happiness. They come with the smile of a child, the kindness of a co-worker, the satisfaction of a job well done, or the appreciation of a sunset, a blossom, a familiar melody, or even a well-scrubbed sink.

The Savior has promised us peace: "Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you" (John 14:27). The promise of peace is unconditional. He didn't say, "My peace I leave with you if nothing difficult ever happens in your life" or "My peace I give unto you unless you don't find the right person to marry, unless you have financial reverses, unless you experience poor health, or unless your children struggle."

The Savior didn't qualify his promise. He simply said, "My peace I give unto you," but note that he added "not as the world giveth, give I unto you." We must accept our Savior's gift of peace and recognize it as his peace, not the superficial peace of the world.

We can be relaxing on a beautiful beach, feeling the rhythm of the ocean, the sun in the sky, and a refreshing breeze and still not be at peace. By contrast, we can be anywhere in the workplace, the laundry room, or even in the car and feel a piece of his peace when we are in tune with the Spirit because, as we are told in D&C 6:23, the Lord speaks peace to the mind. Some of my most inspirational moments have come while folding socks at midnight, making orange juice early in the morning, or praying alone in my car. Other pieces of peace come after action—we make a decision, accomplish a task, or work toward a goal.

We cannot remain in that state of peace forever. Daily concerns, mundane responsibilities, duties, and tasks creep into our sanctified moments of still assurance. Usually peace does not come without effort, and most of the time, our pieces of peace do not last very long. In my search for peace over the past year, I continue to return to John 14:27. That scripture has three parts that speak to me of peace: past, present, and future.

Past peace. Of past peace, the Savior tells us: "Peace I leave with you" (John 14:27). That was his gift to us as he left this earth—remembering him and all he has done for us will bring us peace. In my quiet moments of mourning, sometimes I succumb to questioning. Rex's death was untimely. Couldn't someone have done something to keep him here? I think of his pain during those last few years. I remember the agony of his last two weeks, and I wonder if even I completely understood his suffering. I wonder if anyone did. Then I remember the words of Elder Neal A. Maxwell: "Can we, even in the depths of disease, tell [our Savior] anything at all about suffering? In ways we cannot comprehend, our sicknesses and infirmities were borne by Him even before they were borne by us." [^1] It is wonderful to know that no matter what happens to us on this earth, there is someone who understands everything. Thoughts of the Savior's love and compassion for Rex's suffering and my sorrow bring peace. I know that he understands all of our sorrow.

We can also find peace as we reflect on our own good memories. But what about memories that are uncomfortable or even painful? If we need ecclesiastical or professional help, we must seek it immediately so we can begin to move for-ward. Even then, our brief, daily pieces of peace can be part of the healing process. If our uncomfortable memories simply consist of things we wish we had or hadn't said or done, we must apologize or rectify our error. If we cannot improve the situation, then we need to let the memory go. That is hard to do sometimes. For those of us who lie awake nights rewriting the script of our past actions, peace can be elusive.

When Jesus came forth from the tomb and appeared to his disciples, his first greeting was: "Peace be unto you" (Luke 24:36). He did not ask, "Did you see how unfairly I was judged, how cruelly I was treated, or how brutally I was crucified?" He did not ask to be pitied or to have his enemies attacked. Christ knows that resentment and recrimination do not bring peace. They cause us to stagnate, leaving us unable to move ahead vigorously because we stumble when we constantly look back at what has been. "All crosses are easier to carry when we keep moving," Elder Maxwell counsels us. [^2] During this past year, as my heart has yearned to cease grieving, I have prayed for peace, and I receive that blessing as I keep moving.

Present peace. When the Savior tells us, "My peace I give unto you" (John 14:27), he promises the continuation of his gift of peace while we struggle with all that is temporal. Sometimes we miss this gift. Recently, I found a letter I wrote to Rex in the fall of 1991. We often wrote letters or notes to each other, expressing feelings that were difficult to share in person during his nine-year struggle with cancer. Sometimes we delivered these letters in person, with a smile and a hug. Other times they were tucked into a pocket or purse to be discussed later. I must admit I wrote more than he did. I had a need to pour out my feelings.

I knew he read my notes; we often talked about them. But I never knew he saved them. During the past year, as I have gone through his things, I have found letters and notes in pockets, briefcases, drawers, and files. In this particular letter to Rex, I told of an experience with our daughter. I wrote: "This afternoon . . . I took Wendy home, and as we were driving she talked to me a little about how excited she was about the baby, but our talk ended with an account of all the aches and pains and discomforts of pregnancy. She had an understanding ear as she recounted to me such things as a misshapen figure, swollen hands and feet, and a total off-balance, awkward feeling. 'Will I ever be the same again?' she asked as she got out of our car. I smiled and answered that she would, but as I was driving away, I thought, 'No! She will never be quite the same again.' Life is never the same after a big change of any kind in our lives.

"For a few seconds, as I drove along University Avenue, I began to feel sorry for myself and for you for the changes that have happened in our lives over the past four years. I was longing to be relieved of the constant worry, wishing you could be completely well again, wanting our lives to be like they were before you got sick. I took Wendy's question and applied it to you and to me. Will we ever be the same again? I startled myself when I answered 'No!' out loud at a stoplight.

"But as I drove up the hill toward the administration building, the most peaceful feeling came over me. I had been crying, but I stopped and listened as soothing thoughts poured into my mind. The thoughts were neither new nor profound, but what made them pierce my soul was that I felt the power of their source. 'Life's experiences are to be enjoyed and appreciated as they come,' I seemed to be hearing. Life is like a book, a play, or a puzzle. It is difficult to see it in its entirety until it is completed, but to look back or ahead too much takes away from the enjoyment close at hand, and besides that, we miss something important. . . . We must look for the good things about now and enjoy them with all of our hearts. 'No, we will never be the same again,' I thought to myself. And life will continue to change. But life will always be good."

My letter to Rex had been found to remind me of what I had momentarily forgotten. Love and peace overflowed in my heart that day, that moment, as I read.

Future peace. But what of our tendency to worry about the future? Our Savior's words assure us: "Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid" (John 14:27). This is my hardest challenge now. If I spend too much time thinking about the past or the future, I will miss the peace that comes from the present. But I cannot enjoy the present to its fullest unless I feel at peace with the past and the future, trusting that like the apostle Paul, I will have strength to face all conditions by the power that Christ gives me (see 2 Cor. 4:14-16; 12:9).

My niece Mollie is a young missionary. Her ups and downs are perhaps intensified by her missionary experience and her youthful exuberance, but in a miniseries sort of way her letters represent all of us in our struggle for peace. She writes to her family: "It's so funny, a missionary's life. I feel so happy with just me, my ability to talk and pray to God. . . . Last night as I packed my three huge suitcases filled with a ridiculous overabundance of things, I almost felt SICK at how much happiness I had placed on things. Razors, lotion, soap, clothes, shoes. I mean, yes, they are essentials, but why did I have to bring SO MUCH? I hope you don't mind, but I have given SO much away. The people here just don't have anything."

Is this the same Mollie who made an emergency call the day before she left the MTC requesting four extra bottles of Victoria's Secret pear-scented lotion?

She continues: "I'm glancing out my window on the bus—yellow sun, green trees, fields, huge sky. Oh, how beautiful life is. I take joy in loving the Savior. I want to praise him in everything I do. I want my life to glorify him. I love the simplicity of happiness." She was in a really peaceful mood right then.

But four days later, Mollie was transferred, received a new companion, and suddenly faced the challenges inherent in change. She writes: "I'm struggling. . . . It's hot, about 115 degrees. I hope we can be in tune enough to find the souls that are ready." She adds: "I can feel the boards of the wooden bed on my bum through the two-inch mattress. I remember my fluffy feather bed, folded over double, and white satin, down comforter at home. It's wonderful, though, and I appreciate my life here and at home so much more."

Two weeks later she writes: "Do you know what? I'm being refined. Do you know what else? It hurts."

In Mollie's next letter the opening line is: "I got lice, and I cried! I told my companion I just couldn't do this anymore. I hit a wall. I was crying and sitting there, wet hair, bugs all over my scalp, wondering how I was going to live through the day. As I was crying, I looked at the wall. The picture of Christ in his red robe looked back at me. . . . I just cried, 'What can I do? What more can I give?'"

Later in the same letter she writes of finding resolution and peace: "Last night I read in the B of M a line, 'Thy will and not mine be done.' I have been trying to squeeze the Lord's will into mine. And yes, it fit, but like a puzzle piece in the wrong place. There were gaps and places where it was overlapping or too tight. I realized that I need to do the Lord's will and let my will go."

Like Mollie, I too have had to learn about the error of trying to squeeze the Lord's will into mine. When Rex was diagnosed with cancer in 1987, for days I begged and almost demanded of the Lord that Rex be made well. But my heart ached, and I could find no peace. I then began to reason and bargain, but still I felt no peace. Finally, one day my prayer began, "Thy will be done," and the peace I was searching for filled my heart. I thought I would never forget that lesson.

Yet, two weeks before Rex's death, I had to learn it once more. Again I had been trying to squeeze the Lord's will into mine. Again I had to let go of my will to find peace. The Lord didn't need my permission, but in allowing me to submit my will, a gift of peace was given to me by a loving Father in Heaven. He knew it would be easier for me to let Rex go if I could be allowed to do it willingly. Like children who resist being pulled away from play without warning, we struggle, but we can go willingly when allowed our agency. By putting my trust in the Lord, I gained a peace that would have been impossible had I continued to struggle against his will. At times like these, we arrive at a new understanding, and peace accompanies us for a time. Yet, we so often need reminders, guidance, and strength. We so often have to learn and relearn life's lessons.

Some days we think we would have greater peace if we were granted our heart's desire. On other days, we think peace would come if we could simply escape our current burdens. In one of my favorite fantasies, I have returned to the Garden of Eden. The way is so easy. My needs melt away. I bask in the beauty of God's finest creations and walk in the constant, calming presence of the Father and his Son. I feel unprecedented peace.

Yet, I realize that every act of God is purposeful, including the fall of Adam and Eve. They and their posterity had to fall away from permanent peace. We, as the children of Adam and Eve, also face challenges inherent in a fallen world. We spend sleepless nights surrounded by confusion, worry, fear, and discouragement. We struggle, and we ache for others who struggle. We encounter mistreatment and prejudice, injustice and unforgiveness. Sometimes we feel we are either failing or falling short of what is expected of us. Often we long for an easier way. In essence, we are longing for a Garden of Eden. We are asking to live as Adam and Eve once lived, surrounded simply by peaceful circumstances. At a glance, such conditions would seem to provide permanent peace; however, "Adam fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joy" (2 Ne. 2:25). I find a connection between the Fall and finding joy, or eternal peace.

With all my heart, if I could change the course of these past ten years as our whole family has experienced the pain of Rex's cancer, I would do so. And yet, I would never want to give up the growth: the understanding, the insights, the compassion, or the increased love for each other and for our Savior. Without the Fall, we would remain as children, without spiritual maturity, without knowledge, without realizing our ultimate potential of becoming exalted sons and daughters of God. My occasional desire to return to the Garden of Eden or escape to a life of ease is a misdirection, not the way to everlasting peace.

Christ healed bodies, minds, and souls. But after he healed the lepers, were they free from other struggles? After he restored sight to the blind, were they free from fear? Were the five thousand Christ fed ever hungry again? Was the sea calmed by Christ's hands stirred by future storms? Yes. As Helaman warned his children, the winds will continue to blow (see Hel. 5:12).

I often think of the tender last moments Christ shared with his apostles. Concerned, Christ tells his disciples that the time has come for him to leave. Full of heartache, the apostles turn to their Lord, who senses their sorrow. He replies, "Nevertheless I tell you the truth; It is expedient for you that I go away; for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him unto you" (John 16:7). If we expect mountains to move, seas to part, thunder to cease, and blinding light to point the way, we will miss the Savior's offering, his gift of comfort and peace. Peace comes as we truly rely on the Holy Ghost.

Like the fall of Adam and the crucifixion of Christ, there is something very significant, even essential, in being surrounded by conflict and finding peace in the midst of, or even because of, tribulation. "It is expedient for you that I go away," the Savior said (John 16:7; emphasis added).

The Lord promises safety and protection. He offers to all the gift of peace. Sometimes peace comes dramatically, like the calming of a raging sea (see Mark 4:39). Most of the time, however, peace comes quietly, as a subtle feeling of wellness, a renewed sense of God's omnipotent power, and the still, small voice whispering God's messages: words of comfort, thoughts of hope, feelings of strength, and a reassurance of love—the language of peace.

In the last days of Rex's life, he was given medication to ease his pain. As a result, he was sedated and could not talk, and I was not sure how much he could hear. I began to feel an almost desperate need to speak with him, to hear and be heard. I felt a sense of panic and insecurity. I felt out of control, as if I were falling away from all that was familiar to me. Desperate with heartbreak and weariness, I fell to my knees and prayed. As I expressed my urgent concerns to my Father in Heaven, I began to understand that the words I needed to speak to Rex and hear from him had already been given to me. I began to recall past conversations with Rex—conversations we had shared over many years. I sensed the comfort of the Holy Ghost as feelings and thoughts lifted me to a higher sphere, where souls could communicate without conventional conversation. Peace was being spoken to my mind. I was on sure ground again. Words unspoken now seemed insignificant and unnecessary. A lifetime of sharing each other's triumphs and sorrows had been stored in our hearts.

Now, in his hospital room, I thought about the many things he had been asked to do, and I was aware that what we were about to do was the most difficult of all. Memories flooded over me, and I concentrated on tender moments as well as milestones in our lives. Each time we had faced a turning point, I asked Rex what I could do to help him. His answer was always the same and always unequivocal: "Just be happy, Janet." Now, in the midst of our final challenge together, his words came back to me, and I knew what he would tell me if he could. I had never considered peace as part of the process of letting go. Yet when his final moment came, and I knew he was free from his pain, I felt his joy. Unexpectedly, my personal sadness was subdued as we shared his final triumph. I whispered: "I am so happy for you, Sweetheart." As I walked out of the hospital that afternoon, his words filled my heart: "Just be happy, Janet," and I felt a moment of peace in my mighty whirlwind.

The Lord can speak peace to our minds wherever we are. We don't have to be in the temple or on a beautiful beach. Sometimes we are in the midst of trials and strife. It is the gift of peace that brings joy, surety, and solace—the kind of peace that can never be taken away. Piece by piece throughout a lifetime, we will long to return to the presence of the Prince of Peace. Our pieces of peace will fit together like a puzzle as our life takes shape after the pattern of our Savior. Because we are mortal, at times we will be unable to find the peace that is our gift, but our Savior's love can lift us soaring to new heights. In three short lines, Victor Hugo sings my theme song of this past year:

Be like the bird who, halting in [her] flight on a limb too slight

Feels it give way beneath [her],

Yet sings knowing [she] hath wings. [^3]

The boughs beneath us break sometimes. We will not fall. We have wings of truth, wings of faith, wings of glory—gifts of peace from our Savior, Master, and King.

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (London: Latter-day Saints' Book Depot, 1854-86), 9:288.
[^2] Young, in Journal of Discourses, 9:288.
[^3] Abd-er-rahman III, quoted in Jo Ann Larsen, "Life's Full of Happiness If You Know Where to Look," Deseret News, 27 August 1995.
