Susette Green, Dlora Dalton, Dawn Anderson, Every Good Thing: Talks from the 1997 BYU Women's Conference ( 1998)

The Bundle of Life

NANCY BAIRD

As winter deepens, the loss of light saps spirit from even the sturdiest souls. It is a critical time of year—the earth has tilted as far as it will go in its orbit and sent the bright winter stars sliding over the western horizon. Days are short; the midday sun is low and weak. It is easy to feel despair, or at least a nagging uneasiness in the waning light. Could not day disappear altogether and we be left in darkness? Each morning, out running on the streets in December, I impatiently count down the days to the moment when the planet makes its final great arc downward and joyously tilts back at the winter solstice. It is a private celebration for me, a magical, mysterious moment when the war with darkness is once more won and again the earth turns its beautiful, flawed face from death.

How deeply human beings long for light. If only we could always turn toward it, as does the earth at winter solstice, stopping in our self-destructive orbits. The miracle—the gift we are given—is that we can.

Mormon tells us that every man and woman is given the light of Christ and that this is the light by which we are to know, and judge, good from evil (see Moro. 7:16-19). He pleads with us, beseeches us, to search in that light and then to choose the good, that is, to "lay hold upon every good thing" (Moro. 7:19). Thus we are given two gifts: the light of Christ with which we are born, and the freedom to choose or reject that light. This is, of course, the crux of life. We are free to choose, and we do choose, using whatever portion of that light we manage to tap into.

Every moment of our lives we make choices—we turn between good and evil, light and darkness, life and death (see Moses 6:56). The choices define us: there is no escaping the decisions reflected in the shape and contour of minds, the brokenness of hearts, the stability of souls. Our choices are cast on our faces, released on our tongues, shaped on our bodies.

Bodies! Let me talk about bodies for a moment. For six months, recently, I watched my body thin and begin to waste away through disease; then, after medical diagnosis and treatment, thicken and fill with life. Too much thickening, too much life! It was a strange experience, confusing and provocative. It was as though my body, with a mind and perverse will of its own, was itself in darkness—unable or unwilling to absorb nourishment, and then, healing, unable or unwilling to stop.

As I have struggled to be disciplined about what I take into my body, I have thought a lot about being nourished by the bread of life instead of mortal bread. Adam and Eve were literally changed to mortal beings when they ate from the tree of knowledge. Is it not possible for us, in some limited way, to reverse this process and through schooling our minds and our bodies nourish ourselves with light? to take, as Brigham Young says, "a firmer hold on that enduring substance behind the vail, drawing from the depths of that eternal Fountain of Light gems of intelligence . . . a halo of immortal wisdom"? [^1] There are many intriguing references in the scriptures to ingesting spiritual matter. Alma says we can taste light (see Alma 32:35). Joseph Smith wrote in D&C 131:7-8 that all spirit is matter. Christ speaks of himself as the bread of life, the water of life (see John 6:35). And there is this fascinating statement by Brigham Young: "I want to see men and women breathe the Holy Ghost in every breath of their lives, living constantly in the light of God's countenance." [^2]

Could we actually breathe in God's Spirit with every breath and desire to be fed more with light than food? Surely this is the place approached by those souls, so illuminated from within, that God is reflected out of their faces. I once read a remarkable statement by an unknown author: "One can see much in the face of a man as the years pass by. Something happens to the features of the relativist: a slackness, a weakness, a futility seems to stamp itself on them. But the man who has stood unflinchingly for great principles shows an increasing firmness, a nobility and a majesty in his face as time goes by."

At some level, human beings are always monitoring themselves—their thoughts, words, and deeds. Who has not gone through a day without some internal commentary and conversation? People internally register their choices—choices made by that light in every person—and reward themselves for strength, punish themselves for weakness. To be mentally healthy obviously requires choices consistent with one's moral values. And making such choices takes discipline not only of body but of mind. How clearly Moroni spoke so long ago: "Despair cometh because of iniquity" (Moro. 10:22). Perhaps someday we will fully understand the connection between choices and wellness not only of the body but also of the mind and spirit.

I was married with children before I woke to the fact that my mother was one of those truly rare people who "lay hold upon every good thing" (Moro. 7:19). Doesn't everyone come home from school to opera blowing through the house, dinner started, and clean sinks? Doesn't everyone's mother take them to see artists working in the jungle who make their own paper; invite total strangers to lunches of tacos, mangos, and coconut (from her own trees); have little red sweaters with beads and sequins made for them in Hong Kong? My mother is uninhibited, direct, and loving. Workmen follow her around like pets, hoping to (afraid not to?) please her.

Instead of bringing me dinner when I had babies, she brought me new dishtowels, sturdy hangers, soap dishes, and nature music. Her idea of a good TV show is Zubin Mehta at the Met; her bedroom is piled with books—biographies, history, classics, historical novels, inspirational magazines.

All her life, my mother has searched diligently for good things until layering them over her life became a natural instinct. Seeking light, she has, with intent, discarded pretension, dishonesty, and unhappiness.

About the year 960, Abd-er-rahman III of Spain wrote these words: "I have now reigned about fifty years in victory or peace, beloved by my subjects, dreaded by my enemies and respected by my allies. Riches and honors, power and pleasure have waited on my call, nor does any earthly blessing appear to have been wanting to my felicity. In this situation I have diligently numbered the days of pure and genuine happiness which have fallen to my lot: they amount to 14." [^3] My mother has never agonized over her happiness; she has instead chosen to be happy and chosen to live a life of quality. She has nurtured her spirit and her mind, giving them what Einstein called "the deep shudder of the soul in enchantment." [^4]

To live such a life is to be blessed. And I want such a blessing. I want the light of Christ. Without its constant presence, I will never be able to change, to act on my fragile decisions. We are such sorry children! Every day, as I battle myself and despair in my weakness, I think, as did Paul, "what I would, that do I not; but what I hate, that do I" (Rom. 7:15).

In his book In Heaven As on Earth, Scott Peck makes the very interesting observation that what causes burnout in psychotherapists is not the tragedy in their patients' lives but their patients' attachment to their tragedy. People sought help, claiming they wanted to change, but no sooner was it under way "than they started behaving as if the last thing on God's earth they wanted to do was change." [^5] How we cling to our sins and our comforts, like a child with her blanket, instead of putting aside our fear and choosing faith.

I know it is possible to change, to begin making good choices. Sometimes it is simply a matter of taking slow, gradual steps, making small decisions that then multiply on themselves, such as being particular about what we read and see. Every writer knows that what he reads, he will write, or, as Annie Dillard said, "he is careful of what he learns, because that is what he will know." [^6] We have to search for what we value and then lay hold upon it. Only then will we be lifted "from one cleave of being to another." [^7]

In December, as winter presents its longest, deepest days, I am not the only living thing aware of the earth's turning. Everywhere I look—at the peach tree knobbing outside my bedroom window, the aspens thickening in the yard, the bulbs swelling in the frozen ground—the energy, the flesh of life, is gathering strength to peel and explode out of death. And every year I am ready to join the parade, cut open the darkness, reel out of my long sleep. Not for me the regret of Augustine, written so beautifully and sadly long ago: "Too late did I love Thee! For behold, Thou wert within, and I without, and there did I seek thee; I unlovely, rushed heedlessly among the things of beauty Thou madest. Thou wert with me, but I was not with Thee." [^8]

We can choose life. We can act upon our choices. The source of goodness and strength lies within us. It was a gift given us the day we broke the veil and entered this golden but broken world:

And always the light is borne; cupped in steady palms and steadfast faces ...................... By its embrace we are bound in the bundle of life, and by darkness are never mastered. [^9]

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Faith of the Pioneers," Ensign, July 1984, 6.
[^2] Burnham family records, in possession of author.
[^3] M. Russell Ballard, "You Have Nothing to Fear from the Journey," Ensign, May 1997, 60.
[^4] Quoted in Spencer W. Kimball, Tragedy or Destiny, Brigham Young University Speeches of the Year (Provo, 6 Dec. 1955), 7.
[^5] M. Scott Peck, In Heaven As on Earth: A Vision of the Afterlife (New York: Hyperion, 1996), 61.
[^6] Annie Dillard, The Writing Life (New York: Harper & Row, 1989), 68.
[^7] Gerard Manley Hopkins, quoted in The Interpreter's Bible, 12 vols. (Nashville, Tenn.: Parthenon Press, 1980), 5:915.
[^8] St. Augustine, Confessions X.27.38, quoted in Interpreter's Bible, 5:902.
[^9] Nancy Baird, "Christmas 1994," in The Shell in Silk (Salt Lake City: Publishers Press, 1996), 6.
