Susette Green, Dlora Dalton, Dawn Anderson, Every Good Thing: Talks from the 1997 BYU Women's Conference ( 1998)

Becoming a Disciple of Christ

MARILYN S. BATEMAN

From the beginning of time, God has reserved choice lands and promised great blessings for his righteous followers. In the Book of Mormon, the prophet Lehi speaks of a land of promise, a land that is choice above all other lands (see 1 Ne. 2:20). Lehi's journey with his family to the promised land is symbolic of our journey through life to our promised land. Ultimately, it is our return to the land in which God and his Son, Jesus Christ, dwell.

To receive an inheritance in the heavenly city of God, we must learn how to put off the "natural man" and["[yield] to the enticings of the Holy Spirit" (Mosiah 3:19) while journeying through the wilderness of mortality. We must "search diligently in the light of Christ . . . and . . . lay hold upon every good thing" (Moro. 7:19) so the Spirit will bear a personal witness to us of the truth of all things. The Good Shepherd will call us (see Alma 5:38), and if we put aside the things of the world, we will hear his voice and follow him. We will become one of his disciples.

In our journey to this land of the heavenly city, whose builder and maker is God, we will encounter many obstacles and challenges. There will be ruts and holes of grief and despair, rivers of tears, and mountains of sorrow, and each person will travel a different road. Each must blaze her own trail. My sister-in-law Maryland Scholes writes:

"We are the solitary pioneer of our own lives.

"No one has journeyed our path before us.

"No one began the trek with our particular assets and liabilities.

"No one will endure our exact set of hardships.

"No one has challenged our meanest enemies or stilled the terror of our darkest moments.

"Only we can struggle toward our own frontier—and our own safety and our own personal promised land."

But we need not travel the road alone. President Gordon B. Hinckley entreats us to develop a "simple faith, an unquestioning conviction, that the God of Heaven in his power will make all things right and bring to pass his eternal purposes in the lives of his children." [^1]

When we believe that we "can do all things through Christ" (Philip. 4:13), our burdens will become lighter, and we will find that "peace of God, which passeth all understanding" (v. 7) as we travel the road in the fellowship of our brothers and sisters in the gospel.

In 1843, my great-great-grandparents James Lewis Burnham and Mary Ann Huntley Burnham, along with their four little children, joined the Saints in Nauvoo, Illinois. James and Mary Ann had joined the Church earlier that year while living in Beaure County, Illinois. James had been a minister of the Christian church, but upon hearing the "good news" of the gospel he could only acknowledge that he had no authority to preach. He and his wife, Mary Ann, were baptized into The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. He preached and advocated its doctrine faithfully until the day he died.

James and Mary Ann's youngest child, a little girl named Maria Antoinette, died the year after their arrival in Nauvoo. At the time, James was also failing in health: he was afflicted with a lung disease. Nevertheless, he labored quarrying rock for the Nauvoo Temple. He and Mary Ann were anxiously looking forward to the temple being completed so that they could receive their endowments and be sealed together for eternity.

In the summer of 1845, James's health grew worse. In October, he passed away. His death preceded the birth of another baby daughter by four days. That daughter, Mary Ann Burnham Freeze, later wrote: "This was a trying time for my mother, being left in sorrow and destitute of all worldly goods. She had no relatives near to help her. But the Saints were very kind to her in her afflictions. Her relatives in the East would gladly have sent means to take her back but it was no temptation to her. She had cast her lot with the Saints of God and would rather remain with them in poverty than have the wealth of the whole world elsewhere." [^2]

In February 1846, the famous exodus from Nauvoo began. Mary Ann had no means to move herself and her family from the city, so they remained while the mob took over Nauvoo. They were then forced to leave or lose their lives. She received a wagon in exchange for her city property, was lent a yoke of cattle, and began that memorable, toilsome journey with her four young children. She later told of the mob searching their wagon for arms, the obscene language that they used, and how terribly she suffered from fear. She arrived in Winter Quarters late in the fall of 1846 and remained there for a year and a half. Then she, along with others, was compelled by the government to move back to the east side of the river out of Indian Territory.

In the depths of poverty, she let Brother Daniel Wood take her second son, Wallace, who was ten (and who is my great-grandfather), and her third son, George, who was eight, to the Valley with him. This was a severe trial for Mary Ann. She was separated from her young sons for five years because it wasn't until 1852 that she was able to start her trek west. Through the kindness and help of some of the brethren and sisters, she was finally able to cross the plains with the rest of her children. They arrived in Salt Lake City on 8 October 1852.

As I think of Mary Ann's life, my heart confirms the truth of Elder M. Russell Ballard's observation regarding our early pioneers: "Each wagon and handcart was heavily laden with faith—faith in God, faith in the Restoration of His Church through the Prophet Joseph Smith, and faith that God knew where they were going and that He would see them through." [^3] My pioneer forebears paid a heavy price for their discipleship. But they came to know their Savior.

In January 1847, while the Saints were at Winter Quarters preparing to begin their westward journey, the Lord told the prophet Brigham Young: "My people must be tried in all things, that they may be prepared to receive the glory that I have for them, even the glory of Zion" (D&C 136:31).

Much the same message has always been given to the children of God. In Isa. 48:10 we read: "I have refined thee, but not with silver; I have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction." Elder Orson F. Whitney many years ago said: "No pain that we suffer, no trial that we experience is wasted. It ministers to our education, to the development of such qualities as patience, faith, fortitude and humility. All that we suffer and all that we endure, especially when we endure it patiently, builds up our characters, purifies our hearts, expands our souls, and makes us more tender and charitable, more worthy to be called the children of God . . . and it is through sorrow and suffering, toil and tribulation, that we gain the education that we come here to acquire and which will make us more like our Father and Mother in heaven." [^4]

So often the things that teach us the most and give us the greatest insights into God's ways happen while we are struggling. If we turn to God for strength, feelings and sure knowledge pour into our thinking through the light that quickens our understanding. Recently I was pondering how I could be a better friend to my mother. She is a great lady, very active and healthy, living an independent life. But she is alone. My father died a number of years ago, and she has become widowed again in recent years. Loneliness is her greatest challenge.

As I was thinking about my mother, I felt a great sorrow for the difficult life she has had. She was only three when her mother died and nine when her father passed away. She was sent to live with an aunt who was kind but not motherly to her. My mother has been forced to fend for herself throughout most of her life.

As I thought about this, I knew that the Lord is aware of the trials Mother has endured and that he loves her. I also became aware that my grandmother felt great sorrow that she hadn't been able to mother and nurture her daughter in her growing years. I felt my grandmother's presence, and it was made known to me that as I loved and cared for my mother (her daughter), so my grandmother would be by my side and care and watch over me throughout my life.

In this life, we can have help from both sides of the veil. The Lord tells us in the scriptures: "I will go before your face. I will be on your right hand and on your left, . . . and mine angels [will be] round about you, to bear you up" (D&C 84:88).

If we remain true and faithful to the gospel of Jesus Christ and endure to the end, the Lord tells us that the promised land will be ours. The blessings and the riches of eternity will be our inheritance (see D&C 78:18). It is through meeting the challenges of our mortal journey that we become disciples of Christ. As we put our trust in him, he will bless us according to our faith. As we go through pains, sicknesses, afflictions, and temptations of every kind, our Savior will be there to succor us. He has paid the price through his atoning sacrifice to know us and to know how to help us. He knows how to deliver us safely back home. He is our Deliverer—our all!

NOTES

The original presentation of this essay is available on audiocassette from Deseret Book or on the Internet at http://coned.byu.edu/cw/womens.htm

---
Notas:
[^1] Earlier in the chapter, Mormon notes that every woman and man receives the light of Christ as a gift to differentiate right from wrong. A more common name for this light is conscience, a discerning power by which individuals know good from evil (see Moro. 7:15-17).
[^2] Burnham family records, in possession of author.
[^3] M. Russell Ballard, "You Have Nothing to Fear from the Journey," Ensign, May 1997, 60.
[^4] Quoted in Spencer W. Kimball, Tragedy or Destiny, Brigham Young University Speeches of the Year (Provo, 6 Dec. 1955), 7.
