Susette Green, Dlora Dalton, Dawn Anderson, Every Good Thing: Talks from the 1997 BYU Women's Conference ( 1998)

With Heart and Mind

MERRILL J. BATEMAN

The theme of this women's conference volume is taken from Moro. 7:19. In this passage, Mormon describes two steps along the path of life which, if taken, will spiritually transform a person into a begotten son or daughter of Christ. The first is to "search diligently in the light of Christ" so that good may be distinguished from evil. The second is to "lay hold upon every good thing, and condemn it not." [^1]

Mormon's first step of searching diligently describes the quest for truth, for the good. His second command, to lay hold upon every good thing, means to live every good truth once it is found. In both the searching and the living, diligence is required. In the Lord's plan, diligent effort involves both the heart and the mind (see D&C 4:2). Diligently seeking truth and living gospel principles with all one's heart and mind opens the door for the Holy Spirit to transform us. We put off the natural woman or man because of the truths we value. With a humble heart, we["[yield] to the enticings of the Holy Spirit," partake of the Atonement, and become the "children of Christ, his sons, and his daughters" as we are spiritually reborn (Mosiah 3:19; 5:7).

Searching with One's Heart and Mind

A wonderful example of the power inherent in connecting the heart and mind while searching for truth is related by Nephi the disciple at the time the resurrected Savior appeared to the people in the land Bountiful. Approximately twenty-five hundred people were gathered near the temple, marveling at the changes associated with the three days of darkness and discussing the sign given concerning the Redeemer of the world (see 3 Ne. 11:1-2). While conversing with each other, they heard the Father's voice introducing his Son on three separate occasions. They did not understand the voice the first two times, but they did feel the power of the Spirit piercing their hearts to the center, causing their frames to quake and their hearts to burn. They knew something special was about to take place, but their minds did not grasp the meaning of the Father's words. Moreover, the feeling in their hearts registered the importance of the message but not its content (see 3 Ne. 11:1-4).

On the third occasion, the Nephites opened their ears and understood the voice, which said, "Behold my Beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, in whom I have glorified my name—hear ye him" (3 Ne. 11:5-7). The events that follow suggest that even though they understood the words spoken on the third occasion, they did not comprehend their full meaning. They looked into the heavens and saw a Man descending, clothed in white. Upon reaching the ground, he was encircled by the Nephites, who were speechless, believing they were in the presence of an angel (see 3 Ne. 11:8). The thought processes of the mind and the spiritual witness in the heart had not yet combined to help them understand who stood in their midst.

The Savior then introduced himself as Jesus Christ, the light and life of the world. The Nephites learned that he had "drunk out of that bitter cup" given to him by the Father and had "glorified the Father in taking upon [himself] the sins of the world" (3 Ne. 11:11). Before this moment, the thoughts and feelings of the people were disjointed, and they remained confused about the person descending out of the heavens. Despite being told "This is my Beloved Son," their thoughts were not clear, and their reaction remained one of awe rather than of humility. As the Savior's words registered in their minds and hearts, awe and wonderment changed to worship, and the multitude fell to the earth, knowing they were in the presence of Deity. The power that comes with a clear message in the mind combined with the spiritual burning in the bosom is illustrated by this change in their demeanor.

Searching diligently in the light of Christ can have that same effect on each of us as we put off the natural woman or man, humble ourselves, yield to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, become submissive as a child, and receive the fruits of the Spirit. Like King Benjamin's people, we too may have a mighty change of heart come to us, and we will "have no more disposition to do evil, but to do good continually" (Mosiah 5:2). Spiritual rebirth requires us to search diligently in the light of Christ that we may know truth. Sacred truths come when both the heart and the mind are active participants in the process.

Lay Hold upon Every Good Thing

The second step along Mormon's path of discipleship is to lay hold on every good thing, to incorporate sacred truths into our lives. This involves faith, repentance, participation in sacred covenants, companionship of the Holy Spirit, and enduring to the end. It does not mean laying hold on every good thing all at once. The principle is "line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little" (2 Ne. 28:30). Also, the command to serve God with "all your heart, might, mind and strength" (D&C 4:2) should leave one exhausted at the end of life, not midway through the journey. The Lord expects us to pace ourselves, to "run and not be weary, and . . . walk and not faint" (D&C 89:20).

The prophet Nephi explains what it means to serve God with all one's heart. He states that the objective is to serve with "full purpose of heart, acting no hypocrisy and no deception . . . , but with real intent, repenting of your sins, witnessing unto the Father that ye are willing to take upon you the name of Christ, by baptism . . . then shall ye receive the Holy Ghost; yea, then cometh the baptism of fire and of the Holy Ghost" (2 Ne. 31:13).

To serve with all one's heart is to serve with full purpose of heart. The concern is with direction, not speed. The process allows for repentance. What counts is one's desire and determination, not an extraordinary burst of energy. Although the Lord expects us to do our best, he is looking for steady candlepower on a hill and not bright flashes in the sky that briefly illuminate but then fade.

The woman who touched Christ's garment and was healed is a wonderful example of faith, determination, and resolution. Her motives were pure. There was no hypocrisy or deception in her hoping her actions would go unnoticed. She did not want to inconvenience the Master or disturb those listening to him. The woman had spent all her income on physicians, hoping to be cured of a blood disease, but to no avail. With great faith, this sister disciple sought out Jesus and in the midst of a crowd "came behind him, and touched the border of his garment" and was healed. Jesus experienced the withdrawal of spiritual power. He inquired of his disciples, "Who touched me?" The disciples pointed to the multitude thronging him and suggested that it could be any number of persons. Jesus persisted, sensing the special person in his midst and the nature of the event. The woman then came forward, "trembling, and falling down before him, she declared unto him before all the people for what cause she had touched him, and how she was healed immediately. And he said unto her, Daughter, be of good comfort: thy faith hath made thee whole; go in peace" (Luke 8:43-48).

The story teaches at least two lessons. One concerns Christ's spiritual sensitivity to the individual woman. In the midst of the multitude pressing against him, he was aware that one person had not only touched him physically but had made contact with the garment of his soul. The other lesson is the depth of the woman's faith. Because of her faith, she was healed both physically and spiritually. The phrase "thy faith hath made thee whole" often refers to a spiritual healing. It is the same phrase Christ used to bless the one leper who returned to express thanks. All ten lepers were cleansed of leprosy, but only one was made whole—only one was cleansed from within (see Luke 17:11-19). It is also the phrase used by the Lord in answering Enos's question regarding forgiveness of sin. When the voice said, "Enos, thy sins are forgiven thee, and thou shalt be blessed," Enos inquired as to how it was possible. The answer was "thy faith hath made thee whole" (Enos 1:5-8). Enos's spiritual cleansing came through faith. His faith had the power to produce humility, repentance, and a baptism of water and fire. The woman's faith brought the same power enjoyed by Enos and by the leper. Her faith produced a spiritual rebirth in addition to solving her physical problem. Her faith and determination allowed her to lay hold on two good gifts.

As mentioned earlier, the race is not necessarily to the swift but to those who endure—those who continue in the quest to lay hold on good things, those who are facing in the right direction, those still striving to eliminate a few discordant notes in their lives. In the tenth chapter of Moroni, the prophet states that Christ's grace is sufficient, that we will be "perfected in him" if we deny ourselves of ungodliness (v. 33). The capacity of the Atonement is more than sufficient to wash our garments white though they be as scarlet, to lift and change us from mortality to immortality, from corruptible to incorruptible beings (see Isa. 1:18; 1 Cor. 15:42-44). For most of us, this spiritual rebirth process stretches across a lifetime and into the next, as we are refined one step and one principle at a time.

The Blessing of Enduring

Living and serving faithfully with all one's heart, might, mind, and strength is really a function of steadily enduring, of doing one's best each day, in contrast to great bursts of energy that one tries to prolong. Almost thirty years ago I met a wonderful sister who, in the intervening years, demonstrated the power of enduring to the end. Her name is Virginia Cutler. She is now deceased, having passed away four years ago. During the summer of 1969, Virginia and I met in West Africa, where she was serving as a Fulbright Fellow at the University of Ghana developing a home economics department for the university. I was a member of a World Bank team advising the government on economic matters. The two of us plus one other were the only members of the Church in the country at the time. We met on occasion to discuss the gospel, our common interests, and our work. I was struck by Virginia's wonderful laugh and quick mind, by her generosity and quick acceptance of all people as brothers and sisters.

Born in Utah, she had attended the University of Utah on a four-year scholarship, graduating in 1926. She taught for a short time and then married Ralph Cutler, a farmer. Within two years of the marriage, her husband came in one day deathly ill. Within a few hours he was gone. At the time, she had one little son and another soon to be born. It was 1931, the depths of the Depression. She returned to teaching to provide for herself and her two sons. Within a short time, however, she felt a strong desire to improve her circumstances. With the encouragement of her bishop and former faculty members at the University of Utah, she applied for a scholarship at Stanford. There she completed her master's degree and went on to Cornell for her Ph.D. She finished at Cornell a full fifteen years from the time she entered Stanford, but that pace was deliberate: she managed the programs so that the two boys were an integral part of her life.

In 1946, she returned home to head the Home Economics Department at the University of Utah. Once her boys were grown, she accepted an appointment with the United States State Department as an education advisor in Southeast Asia. Seven years later she returned to Utah to become dean of the College of Family Living at Brigham Young University. When we met near the end of her career, she was a Fulbright scholar, establishing a program to train young West African women to become better mothers, teachers, and homemakers.

Toward the end of the summer, as both of us were preparing to return to the United States, she shared one regret that had occupied her thoughts for some time. For most of the years since her husband's death, she had lived in places where Latter-day Saints were sparse and temples did not exist. Consequently, temple worship was missing in her life. She believed that there was one more good thing she should lay hold upon. She then told me of her plan. She would return to her small Provo apartment, and when the new Provo Temple opened she would begin serving. Her goal was to perform as many endowment ordinances as there had been weeks since receiving her first recommend as a young woman. It had been almost fifty years, and her goal was twenty-five hundred.

Our paths did not cross for another eleven years. In 1980, I was called as president of the Provo Utah Sharon East Stake. One of the first members to seek renewal of a temple recommend was my friend, Virginia, a member of the stake. After the interview, as we were reminiscing about our African odyssey, she said, "President Bateman, do you remember our conversation in which I shared my temple goals with you?"

I remembered. How could I forget?

She then said, "I have almost reached my goal. May I share with you a special experience I had in the temple recently? During one of the sessions I was thinking about the sisters for whom I had performed vicarious ordinances. I began wondering if they were aware of the work I had done. Was someone on the other side helping them? I wondered if my husband was aware of my efforts and if he was preparing the sisters to receive their blessings." Typical of Virginia, she then said, "He better be!" She continued, "As those thoughts passed through my mind, I suddenly saw a man's hand pierce the veil of mortality from the other side. I recognized the hand. It was my husband's. I had not seen it in sixty years. I knew he was there. I knew that he knew of my work and that he was assisting sisters on the other side of the veil. I was so glad to be in the temple that day. I can hardly wait to greet him and the sisters he will introduce to me."

Sister Virginia Cutler was faithful to the end. By laying hold upon one more good thing, she took hold of her husband's hand and became his partner in the work beyond the veil. One more good thing brought much happiness to her in her later life. Today, she counts twenty-five hundred women among her best friends.

I am grateful for a Savior and Redeemer. I appreciate his teachings and the great plan of happiness. I am grateful to know that we are spirit sons and daughters of an Almighty Father and that we can become begotten daughters and sons of the resurrected Lord through diligently searching in his light and applying his truths in our lives. May each of us continue the quest for eternal life by["lay[ing] hold upon every good thing" (Moro. 7:19).

NOTE

The original presentation of this essay is available on audiocassette from Deseret Book or on the Internet at http://coned.byu.edu/cw/womens.htm

---
Notas:
[^1] Earlier in the chapter, Mormon notes that every woman and man receives the light of Christ as a gift to differentiate right from wrong. A more common name for this light is conscience, a discerning power by which individuals know good from evil (see Moro. 7:15-17).
