Susette Green, Dlora Dalton, Dawn Anderson, Every Good Thing: Talks from the 1997 BYU Women's Conference ( 1998)

A Fire Burning

SILVIA HENRIQUEZ ALLRED

His word was in mine heart as a burning fire.

—Jeremiah 20:9

I was born and raised in a Catholic home in El Salvador. My parents were average Catholic members, so our family went to church for baptisms, confirmations, communions, weddings, deaths, and anniversaries. As children we learned the appropriate rituals and prayers and had the proper ordinances performed at the recommended ages. Because we lived in a large city, we did not belong to any particular small parish but instead attended different churches every time we went and never developed close relationships with the priests or nuns in our community. Still, I was very spiritually oriented. I recited my prayers with much devotion and belief. I enjoyed reading about the lives of the martyrs and sometimes secretly wished I were one.

My parents and my six brothers and sisters and I lived with my maternal grandparents. My grandfather, who was in the military, owned a new house in a subdivision. We had lived in this house for just a few months when on a beautiful August morning, two young missionaries knocked at our door. Normally they would have found only my grandmother and mother at home; the rest of us would have been either at work or school. On this particular morning, however, my sister, who was seventeen, my aunt, who was nineteen, and I, who was fourteen, were studying for semester finals. We answered the door, and out of courtesy, all five of us sat down to listen to the missionaries' message.

One elder was new and spoke very little Spanish. (In those days, before there was the Missionary Training Center, missionaries didn't learn language skills before they traveled to their missions.) The other missionary was very fluent. He spoke to us about the Godhead and the nature of God. They gave us some pamphlets, and we agreed to let them come back in about three days.

This experience was totally new for us. We had never met anyone who was not Catholic. In my all-girl school, in our neighborhood, and in my family, everyone was Catholic. Religious discussions were totally foreign to us. After the missionaries left, we all agreed that we had felt something during the forty-five minutes of conversation with these missionaries. We didn't know how to explain our feelings, but they were unlike anything we had ever felt before.

Because we were curious, we read the pamphlets before the missionaries returned. They came in the evening when the whole family was at home. We all sat down and listened attentively to their message. This time they talked to us about the early Christian church and the Great Apostasy that followed the death of the apostles. Again they left pamphlets, but this time they also invited us to come to church—a very special meeting on Sunday that they called a district conference. Members from all over the country would be there. This was in 1959, when missionary work in El Salvador had just begun and LDS Church membership was very small. After much pondering, my sister, aunt, and I—not knowing what to expect—summoned the courage to go.

We had to take two buses and walk a little way to a large, old but classy, rented house. Just as the missionaries said, people had traveled from many other places. The missionaries were right there at the door, waiting happily for us. They introduced us to other missionaries and to some young members, and then we sat down in the overflow area on the patio. (The living room-dining room was used for the main seating area.)

We liked what we experienced. The songs seemed happy, unlike the ones I remembered from the Catholic church. The mission president spoke about the growth of the Church and his recent visit to Maracaibo, Venezuela. I understood very little of what was going on, but I remember the feeling, just like I had felt when those missionaries had been at our home.

On their third visit, the elders talked to us about the Restoration and mentioned for the first time Joseph Smith and the Book of Mormon. Would we be interested in buying a Book of Mormon? they asked. We were. The whole family was home, but by this time some members had decided they were not interested. Little by little during the discussion, first my grandparents, and then my mother, excused themselves—until only a few of us remained. But we bought the Book of Mormon, and the missionaries left more pamphlets.

My sister and I raced to see who could read the book first. Neither of us had ever read or even held a Bible before. This was common in a Catholic family then. We were fascinated to be able to open this book and read things about God. We had one book for us to share, and we read it in two weeks. School was forgotten because we were more interested in this brand-new experience. I read with intensity, soaking up this new knowledge.

When we shared our new interest in the Church with our extended family, they were outraged. How could we betray our faith? They put pressure on the family; that may have been one reason why my grandparents stopped listening to the missionaries then. My sister and I started praying as the missionaries had taught us. I don't know when during those first experiences of reading the Book of Mormon that I felt that it was true. But I remember a certain feeling when I was reading in Alma 29:1. Like Alma, I wanted to have the voice of a trump, like an angel, to shout out what I was discovering. I wanted everybody to know. Why couldn't they see that Heavenly Father had a body just like ours? Or that the Trinity was three separate beings? Why couldn't they see the possibilities of a relationship between God and us—that we could pray to him and he would answer?

By this time, my sister Ana Dina and I started going to church twice on Sunday and twice during the week for Mutual and Bible study classes. We became thoroughly immersed in our new activities in the Church. Though my aunt stopped attending, a couple of my younger brothers and sisters joined us.

When we finished the Book of Mormon, we bought a copy of the Doctrine and Covenants. That only took us one week, so the missionaries told us about the Articles of Faith, which we bought and started to read. Next we took on A Marvelous Work and a Wonder, which became my favorite because I could use it to answer any questions my friends or family had about the Church. It became my missionary tool, and I wasn't even a member.

Two months had passed since the missionaries had first knocked at our door. We wanted to be baptized, though the missionaries had never even mentioned baptism. At that time, investigators had to wait a year before they could receive baptism. I didn't know about this requirement. When we asked to be baptized, the missionaries said, "Yes, but since you are just fifteen and your sister is seventeen, you need written permission from your parents." We asked our parents. My father promptly said yes. He preferred religious studies to wild parties or boys and was happy for us.

But my mother was receiving pressure from her family. How could she let us betray our faith? Surely those missionaries had fooled us. Who knew what we were doing there! She would not give her permission. For the next month we begged and begged. Even the missionaries and branch members wondered if we were pushing things too quickly. Although we had read almost all the LDS books that had been translated into Spanish, they still wondered if we were really interested in becoming Church members. We were. Finally one day when my mother was sick in bed, we caught her in a weak moment and she signed the permission form.

In our Catholic tradition, ordinances were major events to be shared with all relatives and friends. (We had no idea what to expect from a Mormon baptism.) "You have to be there," we told our mother. "Parents are always at baptisms." We finally convinced her that since she had signed the permit, she had to be there. My father did not come, but my mother brought my younger brothers and sisters. The evening of November 24, all the missionaries, investigators, and active members of the branch were present. We were baptized in the old rented building and confirmed. The missionaries then asked if we would share our testimonies. My heart just pounded. As I began to speak, a warmth filled my whole body. I could feel a fire burning, and that fire has never left my heart.

As I began speaking, the only thing I could see in the congregation was my mother's face. I wanted her to know and feel what I was feeling. The Spirit touched her, and right after the meeting she approached the missionaries and asked them to resume teaching her the discussions. A month later, she and my younger brothers and sisters were baptized. The whole family, except my father, was then committed to the gospel.

I realize, however, that conversion can bring very real challenges and trials. My husband and I have seen young men who have had to look for another home because they have been disowned by their families. We have seen husbands beating their wives because they go to church. We have seen parents abusing and beating their children for going to church. All this is real. I thank my Heavenly Father it has been easy for me.
