Susette Green, Dlora Dalton, Dawn Anderson, Every Good Thing: Talks from the 1997 BYU Women's Conference ( 1998)

Searching Diligently in the Light of Christ

WENDY L. WATSON

When I was growing up, I read and studied in various places in our home. It didn't matter where I was—in the front room, at the kitchen table, or in my bed—my mother would always find me and say, "Would you like a little more light on the subject?" Actually, I usually wanted a lot more light on the subject. I needed increased illumination—of the pages, of my mind, and of the topic.

She would then turn on a light. Her consistent interest and comforting presence would tell me that even the seemingly impossible task before me was indeed possible, that with continuing effort on my part and the increased light she had provided, I would succeed.

Our theme for this women's conference volume is Moro. 7:19: "Wherefore, I beseech of you, . . . that ye should search diligently in the light of Christ that ye may know good from evil; and if ye will lay hold upon every good thing, and condemn it not, ye certainly will be a child of Christ."

Here Moroni is giving us the words of his father, Mormon, at a time when Moroni hadn't thought he himself would still be alive, let alone writing more on the plates. He begins his final addition to the record: "I had supposed not to have written more, but I have not as yet perished" (Moro. 1:1).

That puts a whole new spin on "publish or perish," doesn't it? These are some of the last recordings of a man who had thought he would be dead by then. Marilyn Arnold notes: "Not only did [Moroni] conclude and conceal the record, but he made of his very life a shield around it." I like that. "Preserving it became perhaps the primary purpose of his existence. We cannot begin to contemplate its preciousness to him who had lost everything but his life and his resolute faith." [^1]

What words of great price does Moroni carefully select to conclude his record? Among them are these: "Search diligently in the light of Christ" and "lay hold upon every good thing" (Moro. 7:19). These two admonitions are, of course, related by their connection to Christ. In Moro. 7:24, Mormon tells us, "All things which are good cometh of Christ."

When Mormon admonishes us to search diligently in the light of Christ so that we can know good from evil, I hear his wisdom about these last days—our days—in which some people do indeed "call evil good, and good evil," and some "put darkness for light, and light for darkness," and some "put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter" (2 Ne. 15:20). Some call the prophets men without vision; and others call wickedness a right. Distinguishing good from evil, light from darkness, is critical in these latter days.

Many may say, "Good from evil? That's not a problem for me. I'm trying to figure out 'better from best' these days." We may need, however, to discern other subtle but significant distinctions that either invite more light into our life or dispel the light that is already there. Our spiritual wattage will often be increased or diminished, depending on the distinctions we make and hold to.

Sometimes we as Latter-day Saint women make distinctions about each other that are not useful. We distinguish between those women who do crafts, and those who don't; those who work outside the home, and those who don't; those who are married, and those who aren't; those who do their visiting teaching, and those who don't; those who are presently participating in church activities, and those who are not. These deeply ingrained distinctions come complete with embedded assumptions, expectations, and permission to behave in certain ways toward the groups so distinguished. Should we go so far as to say that these distinctions—which subtly imply that some of us are "good Latter-day Saint" women and others are "bad Latter-day Saint" women—should we say that these very distinctions are in themselves bad—even evil? These distinctions certainly do not knit our hearts together nor make us His.

Mormon proposes that once we discern good from evil, we then commence to "lay hold upon every good thing" (Moro. 7:19). Before we can lay hold upon good things, however, I believe that we have to lay down some other things first. Let me offer you six beliefs that I find prevent women from laying hold upon every good thing:

So what's a woman to do? The scriptures tell us, "To every thing there is a season" (Eccl. 3:1). We all know that the season is in "the own due time of the Lord" (1 Ne. 10:3). There will be times that we need to "run with patience the race that is set before us" (Heb. 12:1), and at the same time we are not supposed to run faster than we are able (see Mosiah 4:27). And there will be many times that we need to stand still (see D&C 5:34), to "be still and know that [he is] God" (D&C 101:16).

That leads us to the next constraining belief.

Made-to-measure ironies are part of each woman's compressed, personalized curriculum of life. The constraining belief that our plan for our life is the only one that counts causes problems when our life-ironies challenge our five-year plans—and some weeks, even our five-day plans. Diligently searching for more light and responding to these ironies with humility and resiliency allows us to live fully the perpetually unexpected life.

My mother loved the lights in the firmament. Each comet, each planet, each star—falling or not—each phase of the moon, was something to celebrate. She would phone from 150 miles away and excitedly invite me to "run out and look at the moon!" She wanted to share the good light she was seeing. One of my mother's life-ironies was that in the last months of her life, she lost her physical vision. She was blind. She, who had taught others to see more clearly, widely, and enthusiastically, now had her eyes veiled until she passed through the veil.

Her trial brought sorrow and anguish into my life. I needed extra light to understand and endure; however, enduring—rather than just persevering—often tutors us into remembering who we really are—perhaps even jogging loose a premortal memory of a commitment or two.

When we hold to the belief that we are right and others are wrong, there is no room, let alone need, for further light. We already have it all—or so we believe. Our sin of certainty and subsequent actions allow no room for others to co-create with us even more good things.

What there is room for, however, and what is invited in, is unrighteous dominion. And as Elder H. Burke Peterson has pointed out, women can exercise unrighteous dominion just as well as men can. [^3]

In 1 Pet. 2:1, the apostle Peter speaks to the importance of words. He counsels us to["[lay] aside all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies, . . . and all evil speakings."

Words do matter. They lodge in our cells and in our souls.

One woman told me: "My husband's words hit me, and they hurt me so much. I think the word stupid is the meanest word in the whole world because I've heard it so much. I'm not stupid. I know I'm not, but the word still hurts because this is the person I love, and when he calls me that, it makes me feel so bad. It hurts. It hurts my soul. My soul wants to run away and hide. But I can't because this is my marriage."

This young couple who came to me for marital counseling had been struggling with difficulties in their relationship from the beginning of their less-than-two-year marriage. They were successful in resolving their difficulties once they worked together on dissolving the barrier of words they had unwittingly co-created.

Over time, individual cutting words build into full conversations of accusation and recrimination. [^4] These conversations are filled with complaints of unfulfilled expectations: "You never . . . "; "You didn't. . . . " Each person suffers emotionally and even physically, and the relationship disintegrates.

At the same time "building" words strengthen relationships, just words alone are not enough. In 1 Pet. 1:22 we read about the need for unfeigned love. Feigned love occurs when the words of love are present but the behavior of love is not. I met with a young couple contemplating marriage whose relationship had drifted into trouble. In that anguishing interview, they repeatedly threw venomous words—hate, trapped, violated, oppressed—back and forth at each other, juxtaposing all those hateful words with the sacred word love.

Instead of "I love you," this couple should have added a few more words between I love and you. "I love oppressing you." "I love how you squirm when I berate you." "I love seeing you suffer." "I love being more right than you are—and showing you that!" These sentences would represent more accurately their experiences in the relationship. Using the word love is not enough. If the word love doesn't match your behavior or fit the experience of the one you claim so to "love," please use another word.

So, again, words do matter. They lodge in our cells and in our souls. Maya Angelou, past United States poet laureate, has written of words that lodge in the walls of our homes. If words lodge in our cells, souls, and walls, we need words—and tones that accompany those words—that build and maintain the temples of our bodies and the temples of our homes.

Elder Jeffrey R. Holland spoke of a hopeful, encouraging, peaceful word in a recent general conference. That word was repentance. He said: "The very beauty of the word repentance is the promise of escaping old problems and old habits and old sorrows and old sins. It is among the most hopeful and encouraging—and yes, most peaceful—words in the gospel vocabulary." [^5]

His thoughts on repentance suggest a fifth constraining belief:

This constraining belief needs to be laid on the altar of repentance. The guilt and grief we feel are a good sign, an indication of our continued goodness, in spite of our sins. We should congratulate ourselves on still being able to feel guilty! The light is still there. Guilt has had a lot of bad press in the past, yet for most of us, guilt—if used well—is exactly the help most of us need to stop sinning and start toward full repentance.

Let guilt start us on the path of the sincere, heartfelt, and therefore heart-changing process of laying down our sins, even giving away our sins to know the Lord (see Alma 22:18). And as we come to know him, and come unto him, we will also come to know our real selves, unshackled and free from the past. The Savior really did mean it when he said, "Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool" (Isa. 1:18).

The Savior and our ecclesiastical leaders will lead us along, helping us cast off constraining beliefs about repentance. My heart still aches for the woman who told me she believed that sin was like pounding nails into a beautifully smooth board and repentance was like pulling the nails out of that board. After repentance, the nails would be gone, but the board would still be left marred with holes from the nails, never to be as it had once been. She indicated she had learned this from a Primary teacher. (I say "learned" because I am not sure what the teacher believed or intended to teach.) But this woman, from her childhood on, had held that image of sin and repentance and as an adult saw herself as permanently unclean and unworthy. Oh, how we need to be careful about our metaphors when teaching children! The only board and nails that are important in teaching about repentance are the ones that formed the cross upon which the Savior was crucified for our sins.

This particular woman's belief that nothing she could do would ever make the board whole again is partially right. She can't do it, especially on her own. That's why she needs to take the board to the Savior. His grace is more than sufficient, not just to remove any nails but to remove the holes and make the board whole again, as though the nails had never been there. The Lord says he will remember our sins no more (see Heb. 8:12), so why would he leave nail holes in the board to remind us of those sins? It is the prints of the nails in his hands and feet that he wants us to remember.

I love his words: "I, the Lord, forgive sins, and am merciful unto those who confess their sins with humble hearts" (D&C 61:2). Please believe me, I hear him saying, I forgive sins. Come to me. Bring your humble heart. Confess your sins. I am full of mercy.

As we take responsibility for our wrong choices, experience sincere remorse, and deeply desire to turn away from our sins (even our favorite ones)—choosing instead to keep the commandments and devote time to building up the kingdom—we each can experience the Savior saying, "Daughter, be of good comfort; thy faith hath made thee whole" (Matt. 9:22). He said it to the woman who touched the hem of his garment, and he will say it to me and to you as we come unto him.

Many of us act as if forgiveness and repentance are only for the righteous: "Oh, she's a basically good person. I forgive her." What about those who have caused us physical, emotional, mental, or spiritual pain and suffering? What about those who have broken seemingly every commandment and who have profoundly affected our life through their choice to sin? What about hypocrites? What about the unrepentant? Do we have to forgive them?

Let's see what the Lord says. In D&C 64:10 we read: "I, the Lord, will forgive whom I will forgive, but of you it is required to forgive all men." A lot of us act as if this scripture reads in the reverse: God will forgive all; we as mortals will pick and choose whom we will forgive, based on our own standard of forgiveability. And the ultimate criterion of what is or is not forgiveable seems to be that the sinner must first suffer more than those who have suffered at the sinner's hands.

And what happens if we don't forgive another who has wronged us? The Lord is very clear about the outcome: "For, if ye forgive men their trespasses your heavenly Father will also forgive you; but if ye forgive not men their trespasses neither will your Father forgive your trespasses" (3 Ne. 13:14-15). And "wherefore, I say unto you, that ye ought to forgive one another; for he that forgiveth not his brother his trespasses standeth condemned before the Lord; for there remaineth in him the greater sin" (D&C 64:9).

Could this possibly mean that if we do not forgive someone who has wronged and harmed us that we become more sinful than the initial sinner? I believe the Lord means what he says. He hasn't provided his words just to give us something to read at night. He has said that "the greater sin" is to remain unforgiving, and he means just that.

In my clinical practice I see almost daily the outcome and effects of unforgiveness. Unforgiveness increases suffering. Unforgiveness is lethal. Bitterness, resentments, and malice, like dark words, lodge in our minds, hearts, cells, and souls and wreak havoc, causing more mental and emotional pain, more physical and spiritual agony, than even the initial sin brought about.

The Lord's plea that we quit hanging onto the sins of others in no way lessens the gravity of sin or the culpability of the sinner. As the 1995 proclamation to the world on the family states: "We warn that individuals who violate covenants of chastity, who abuse spouse or offspring, or who fail to fulfill family responsibilities will one day stand accountable before God." [^6] But if we find ourselves drumming our fingers and saying to the sinner, either out loud or under our breath, "Your day will come," we just may have a little more soul work to do on forgiveness.

In D&C 64:8, the Lord tells us that we are to forgive one another in our hearts—not in our mouths, not in our minds. This kind of forgiving is not easy, not something that happens overnight. To forgive in our hearts involves a deep spring-cleaning of our souls, even a change of heart so that all the acid constraints of unforgiveness are gone and can never come back. It may be a long process, but it is possible or the Lord would not have commanded us to do it. He will help us find the way if we ask him.

Now that we have laid aside six constraining beliefs, let's consider Mormon's words: "Lay hold upon every good thing" (Moro. 7:19). To "lay hold" upon something implies focusing and permanence. When we "lay hold" upon something, it becomes real to us. We embrace it and it becomes ours.

What happens if, instead of laying hold upon the good we find, we just touch it lightly?

What's the effect of superficial readings of the scriptures?

What's the effect of service that is done to be seen of women?

What happens when we join or belong to the Church in the same way that some of us join a gym, showing up only sporadically and without real commitment and sustained involvement?

What happens when year after year we do not lay hold upon the good things but continue to touch them only lightly?

After a while, we may find that we are not losing our life in His service and for His sake, but rather that we're just losing our life, losing our heart's former desires, losing our stamina, and sadly, even losing our interest in good things (see Matt. 10:39). Thinking we have "been there, done that" with good things, we may move from touching them lightly, to dabbling occasionally, to taking them for granted, and even sometimes to making fun of them.

As our spiritual life wanes, discouragement and despondency may set in, and we may wonder what is wrong when we are "doing everything right," albeit superficially. We're doing good things, aren't we? Yes, but without depth, without passion, without deep love, without vigor, without commitment, and without ever really laying hold upon the good things. And thus the joys that come from laying hold upon good things continually elude our wavering grasp.

Thus Mormon's words are rivetingly true: For our own happiness and salvation, we must "lay hold upon every good thing."

What are the good things that you need and want in your life? What are the good things that you already have in your life—that you do not want taken from you? In your deepest heart of hearts, what constitutes "good things" for you these days?

How about your family? We are all members of a family. Is yours a good thing? Are you laying hold upon every good thing in your family?

What good quality about your husband have you been noticing these days?

What good thing about your sister has been waiting for you to notice and lay hold upon?

When was the last time your child overheard you talking on the phone to a friend, saying, "I don't know what I ever did to merit having a daughter who . . ." or "I'm so blessed to have a son who . . . "

But what about family members with obstreperous behavior or borderline—perhaps even full-blown—prodigal-son ways? Now more than ever is the time to study them and lay hold upon every good thing about them. Secure their goodness. Make it real—for you and for them.

When we recognize and lay hold on the good things in our family, we actually increase the good; because in order to offer sincere commendations, honest compliments, and specific praise, we have to really study a subject. When we care enough to look closely, to get up close and notice, we will see our family members in a new light and be able to commend them on their goodness, their competence, their courage, their tenacity, perhaps even their patience with us. That means we need to be with them in a very different way, and that different way of being together will invite more light—and our ability to lay hold upon even more good things will increase.

One of the marvelous things about commendations, as opposed to condemnations, is that they increase the likelihood that our other words will be received with increased influence. Isn't that just what Joseph Smith told us? Listen to his words: "When persons manifest the least kindness and love to me, O what power it has over my mind." [^7]

Is it any wonder that relationships start building naturally and securely in a commendation-saturated environment? The commendations build into conversations of affirmation and affection and confirm each family members' worth and value. These conversations assist in healing the mind, body, and spirit. When was the last time you had a heart-to-heart talk with a family member that in some way healed you?

Researchers have become very interested in what I am calling the commendation-versus-condemnation ratio. They have found that a certain ratio of positive to negative communication needs to be present in a marriage to keep it on a pathway to improvement and increased happiness. [^8] I believe that their findings apply to all relationships within a family and to all relationships that feel like family.

The magic ratio the researchers found was 5:1. That is, as long as there are at least five times more affection, humor, smiling, complimenting, agreement, empathy, and active, nondefensive listening than there is criticism and disagreement, marriage and other relationships will prosper. So, what does the ratio in your home look like these days?

As we increase the number of conversations of affirmation and affection and decrease the conversations of accusation and recrimination and condemnation, every good thing about our family will become more palpable and therefore easier for us to lay hold upon. Not only that, but because there is such a connection between light and love, the increasing love in our family will invite more light, and the increased light will invite more love. Now, how's that for a virtuous cycle?

What other good things are you drawn toward? What other good things would you like to lay hold upon?

A greater understanding of the scriptures?

More peace in your life? More patience? More charity?

Mormon tells us, in the last verse of Moro. 7, to "pray unto the Father with all the energy of heart, that ye may be filled with this love [which is charity], which he hath bestowed upon all who are true followers of his Son, Jesus Christ; that ye may become the sons [and daughters] of God." Today is the day for us as Latter-day Saint women to search diligently in the light of Christ and to make choices that invite an increase of his light into our lives so that we can "lay hold upon every good thing." May we through our Lord's atoning power increasingly see as the Savior sees and love as he loves and become his own.

NOTES

The original presentation of this essay is available on audiocassette from Deseret Book or on the Internet at http://coned.byu.edu/cw/womens.htm

---
Notas:
[^1] David O. McKay, in Conference Report, October 1942, 69.
[^3] Henry was the son of Mary's only surviving son, William Blood.
[^4] Frederic W. Farrar, The Life of Christ (1874; reprint, Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1994), 89.
[^5] Spencer W. Kimball, The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982), 324.
[^6] Gordon B. Hinckley, "This Is the Work of the Master," Ensign, May 1995, 71; also in Sheri L. Dew, Go Forward with Faith: The Biography of Gordon B. Hinckley (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1996), 515-16.
[^7] The Prophet Joseph Smith taught: "Nothing is so much calculated to lead people to forsake sin as to take them by the hand, and watch over them with tenderness. When persons manifest the least kindness and love to me, O what power it has over my mind, while the opposite course has a tendency to harrow up all the harsh feelings and depress the human mind." Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1938), 240.
[^8] See John Gottman and Nan Silver, Why Marriages Succeed or Fail (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1994).
