Susette Green, Dlora Dalton, Dawn Anderson, Every Good Thing: Talks from the 1997 BYU Women's Conference ( 1998)

The Beacons of His Light

MARY ELLEN W. SMOOT

Lighthouses have stood for centuries, signaling a true and consistent message to travelers. The Egyptians completed one of the world's largest lighthouses in Alexandria. Over four hundred feet high, it guided ships for more than fifteen hundred years until it was destroyed in an earthquake. Atop each lighthouse is a beacon of powerful and distinctive light. Special lenses in the beacon increase the intensity of light from the inner lamp and allow the light to travel further and communicate the position of the shore to ships. These beacon lights guide ships safely away from danger and to shore.

Beacons are used not only in lighthouses but anywhere there is a need to guide or warn. We have been given spiritual beacons to help us travel safely through our earth life. Each of these beacons relies on the same source of light or truth—the eternal truths of the gospel of Jesus Christ. Christ himself acted as a beacon of that light during his life here upon the earth. He was the perfect beacon. In fact, through his mission he became synonymous with light and truth: "He . . . ascended up on high, as also he descended below all things, in that he comprehended all things, that he might be in all and through all things, the light of truth; which truth shineth" (D&C 88:6-7).

President David O. McKay wrote: "Statesmen, men of science, thinking men in all nations, laymen everywhere sense the need of something definite to which to look forward, some clear beacon that will guide the stranded nations to a safe harbor or permanent peace." [^1]

I can bear fervent testimony that our prophet and the Church are a beacon to the world. During the past eleven years, my husband and I have been serving in Church Hosting. In this capacity, we have hosted people from all over the world, as they come to take counsel from our prophet and leaders and to understand what enables the Church to do all that it does. The Church has hosted royalty, leaders of nations, ambassadors, journalists, and business and religious leaders from throughout the world; thousands come every year. Let me share a few of the sentiments expressed by these visitors.

One religious leader inquired, "How do you get your missionaries to voluntarily go out, at their own expense, for two years or eighteen months, and set all their goals and desires aside? We can't even get our youth to attend church services." A member of the Quorum of the Twelve responded, "It's a miracle, isn't it?"

Another visitor asked, "Where do you find so many volunteers? Everywhere we go we see people volunteering. And where do you find all of these commodities to send around the world for people in need?"

One journalist said, "I bring the international writers to Salt Lake City because if they just visit New York or Washington, D.C., they leave the United States saying we are anti-religion and anti-family. I bring them to Utah to witness families, to see parents who are still having and enjoying their children. My mother country has youth, including my own, who have stopped having children; there will soon be no one to take care of the parents and grandparents."

People need not visit Church headquarters to see the beacon of the gospel light. President Gordon B. Hinckley said in the October 1996 general conference: "I wish to say that none of us ever need hesitate to speak up for this Church, for its doctrine, for its people, for its divine organization and divinely given responsibility. It is true. It is the work of God. The only things that can ever embarrass this work are acts of disobedience to its doctrine and standards by those of its membership. That places upon each of us a tremendous responsibility. This work will be judged by what the world sees of our behavior. God give us the will to walk with faith, the discipline to do what is right at all times and in all circumstances, the resolution to make of our lives a declaration of this cause before all who see us." [^2]

Latter-day Saint women, as sisters in the gospel, can be powerful beacons of our Savior's light regardless of our position in life. One such beacon was Mary Stretton Blood. Born in Yoxall, Staffordshire, England, on 25 July 1811, Mary Stretton was the sixth of nine children, with five brothers and three sisters. Mary's parents were sturdy, frugal, and hardworking—the strength of the British Isles, according to a descendant, Mary Linford, who researched Mary Stretton's history.

Mary was about five feet six inches tall, had light hair, blue eyes, and a clear rosy-and-white complexion. She was quick in her movements and very methodical. Little or nothing is known of Mary's early life, beyond the facts that became evident in her later years. From these it is known that she was carefully reared and well trained to take up life as a homemaker and a provider of household needs. She was a baker. She also was adept with knitting needles, and each evening throughout her life she knitted.

The earliest recorded incident in Mary Stretton's life took place when she was employed as a dairymaid at Hare Hill Farm, a gentleman's estate near Sudbury in Derbyshire. William Blood was employed at the same place as farm foreman. They fell in love and were married in the parish church in the neighboring town of Church Broughton on 16 February 1836. Shortly after their marriage, William and Mary opened a bakery and small store. William took a position with the railroad as "plate-layer," and Mary ran the shop. While they resided in Barton-under-Needwood, four children were born—first Ann, then William, Thomas (who died in infancy), and Mary.

In 1842 William returned home one evening and said, "Mary, I have heard the truth tonight, and I want you to go with me tomorrow night." He had heard Mormon elders speaking on the street. Mary and William listened to the message of the restored gospel and were converted. On 1 March 1843, they were baptized into the Church. William's large family turned against them because of their new religion. Mary said, "We shall not bother any of them," and very soon they sold their business and most of their belongings and left for America. They sailed 23 January 1844 on the ship Fanny. The Prophet Joseph Smith himself met the boat and greeted the new Saints in Nauvoo.

Almost immediately after they arrived, William became ill with the fever that was afflicting many. He passed away on 4 May 1844, only three weeks after he landed in Nauvoo, leaving Mary with their three children: Ann, William, and Mary. Another infant was born only four days after her father died. Mary named her Emma, but little Emma only lived a few weeks and was buried beside her father.

More shocking news was soon to come for this young woman. Just eight days after the death of her baby, Mary was stunned to hear that the Prophet Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum had been martyred. For the remainder of her life, Mary remembered clearly the horrors of this period. With her husband and baby gone and the leader of her chosen people murdered, Mary could have turned on her heel and gone back to her family in England, where she would have had security and help in rearing her three living children. A less resolute and self-reliant woman would have been unnerved and crushed by so many losses coming one after another. But she remained undaunted. At this point in her life, she became a beacon of light to her posterity. She looked forward instead of turning back. She was present that historic moment when Brigham Young stood up to address the Saints, and she always declared that he spoke in the voice of Joseph Smith and appeared as if he were Joseph as he spoke. Mary pressed on, sustained by her testimony of the gospel of Jesus Christ and her commitment to do his will. She did not compromise or apologize for her belief.

I am grateful to this stalwart woman; her radiance beams light into my life. She did not foresee that her decision would bring glory on her head and the heads of her posterity forever. She simply did her part in standing firm in the gospel of Jesus Christ and being obedient to the promptings of the Spirit. Mary later married Henry Woolley, who was a good father to her children. They followed William Kay and helped settle Kaysville, Utah. Mary's grandson Henry Blood [^3] became a governor in Utah. The number of descendants from her three living children now number more than one thousand. To measure the magnitude of goodness that has emanated from the life of this faithful beacon would be impossible. I honor the heritage and guiding light left by this devout woman and look forward to meeting her beyond the veil. Mary Stretton Blood was my great-great grandmother. Her life illustrates the principle identified by Frederic W. Farrar: "Christ came to convince us that a relative insignificance may be an absolute importance. He came to teach that continual excitement, prominent action, distinguished services, brilliant success, are not essential elements of a true and noble life, and that myriads of the beloved of God are to be found among the insignificant and the obscure." [^4]

Beacons, however, can be obscured. Haze, smoke, fog, rain, or snow can dim the signal. Spiritual beacons sometimes fall prey to similar obstructions. The trends of the world can distract us from the light of Christ and lead us into dangerous waters. In recent decades, families have been deteriorating with alarming momentum. All of us have felt the repercussions. President Spencer W. Kimball stated: "Society without basic family life is without foundation and will disintegrate into nothingness." [^5]

No activity has a more profound effect for good on society than a mother and father spending loving time nurturing and training a child in the true principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ. And there is no greater void than the absence of a mother from her child during the formative years of that child's life. Please guard against any influence or circumstance that would take a mother from the side of her child more than is absolutely necessary.

During my early childhood years, my world fit neatly within a several-block radius of my home in the small community of Clearfield, Utah. On one side of my home was the church house, built while my paternal grandfather, James G. Wood, was the first bishol of the Clearfield Ward. On the other side was the Smith Canning Factory, built by my maternal grandfather, Albert T. Smith, and across the street was the school. Life was peaceful and happy for my five sisters and me, daughters of Melvin and LaVora Wood.

The gospel of Jesus Christ was an integral part of our lives. My parents both served full-time missions before they were married in 1924. Family prayer was a ritual. Provident living and self-reliance were virtues instilled in us from an early age as we all placed seeds in the ground, watered, weeded, harvested, and canned or bottled in preparation for the winter months. We learned to fast every month and on special occasions to draw on the powers of heaven. We were taught love and respect for our grandparents and other relatives.

My sisters and I learned unconditional love for one another through our parents' example. We watched them love and serve others. Father was the bishop for nine of my growing years, and Mother taught Sunday School and Relief Society and later was both the ward and the stake Relief Society president. My parents taught us the fundamental principles of the gospel and bore testimony to us of their teachings by the way they lived.

As I grew and the boundaries of my world expanded, I had many opportunities to put to the test those lessons taught me by my parents. I learned for myself the truthfulness of gospel precepts. In marriage, I have experienced the sacrifice, trials, and supreme joy of rearing seven children. I have come to understand the divinity of the grand and glorious plan of salvation provided for us by our kind and loving Heavenly Father.

The beacons of the world lead us to practice selfishness, while the light of the gospel gently schools us in the discipline of selflessness. The outcome of these two paths is best described in Christ's own words: "For whosoever will save his life shall lose it: and whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it. For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?" (Matt. 16:25-26).

I humbly embark upon my new calling, having few credentials by the world's standards. But I am not on the world's errand. I am on the Lord's errand. I bring to this calling a lifetime of experiences as a daughter, wife, mother, and servant within the kingdom. Never once has the Lord let me down, nor have I ever regretted my obedience to the eternal truths of the gospel of Jesus Christ. To the contrary, the blessings of obedience have been overwhelming. Although the task that lies before me is daunting, I have peace in my heart because this is the Lord's work and his answers to life's challenges are profoundly simple and complete. As our Savior, he understands what each of us is going through, for he comprehendeth all.

President Hinckley stated: "This is a season to be strong. It is a time to move forward without hesitation, knowing well the meaning, the breadth, and the importance of our mission. It is a time to do what is right regardless of the consequences that might follow. . . . We have nothing to fear. God is at the helm. He will overrule for the good of this work." [^6] I can envision four million women and more, who are members of Relief Society throughout the world, unitedly standing firm in the principles of the gospel as beacons for all the world to see.

I challenge you to rejoice in who you are and the work that we are all a part of. Radiate the Savior's light to all within your sphere of influence. We have within our power the ability to influence the world for good, to reaffirm the importance of the family as the foundation of society. May we rise up and be powerful beacons unto the world, pointing the way to that eternal harbor of peace and safety.

NOTES

%*%The original presentation of this essay is available on audiocassette from Deseret Book or on the Internet at htt://coned.byu.edu/cw/womens.htm%*%

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. Bruce R. McConkie, The Promised Messiah: The First Coming of Christ (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1978), 177.
[^2] 2. John R. Lasater, "Shepherds of Israel," Ensign, May 1988, 74.
[^3] 3. McConkie, Promised Messiah, 179.
[^4] 4. Family genealogical records in the possession of the author, compiled and published by Kenneth R. Stevens.
[^5] 5. Family genealogical records.
[^6] 6. Mark E. Peterson, Moses, Man of Miracles (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1977), 39.
