Susette Green, Dlora Dalton, Dawn Anderson, Every Good Thing: Talks from the 1997 BYU Women's Conference ( 1998)

He Knows Your Name

VIRGINIA U. JENSEN

I am a shy person who would rather be in the background, not up in front. As I have had occasion to sit on the stand as a counselor in the general Relief Society presidency, I have thought to myself, What is a girl like you doing in a place like this? My sense of being out of place began in April when I was in a dressing room trying on a blouse. My mobile phone rang, and when I answered, a voice on the other end said, "Sister Jensen, President Hinckley would like to meet with you and your husband tomorrow at 10:45." I can't remember what I replied, but I remember thinking, Pull yourself together. Don't forget to pay for this blouse and get arrested for shoplifting.

The next day when I left President Hinckley's office, I thought of the words of Psalm 8:3-4: "When I consider thy heavens, the workings of thy fingers, the moon and the stars, which thou hast ordained; What is man, that thou art mindful of him?" And who am I that thou art mindful of me? I wondered. Even to think that President Hinckley knew my name was almost beyond comprehending.

In 1820, a young, unschooled fourteen-year-old farm boy went into the woods to pray. God the Father and his Son Jesus Christ appeared to him, and God the Father called Joseph "by name, and said, pointing to the other—This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him!" (JS-H 1:17). The Lord knew Joseph by name, even though this was the first time Joseph had attempted to pray vocally. Joseph relates the experience of meeting the angel Moroni on 21 September 1823, and again he records, "He called me by name" (JS-H 1:33). Just as the Lord knew Joseph's name, so does he know your name and mine. He knows everything there is to know about us. He knows us better than we know ourselves. He knows the person in the most remote corner of the earth. He knew a boy of fourteen on a small farm in upstate New York. He knew that boy's capacities and strengths. He knows ours. And he knows our sorrows and our joys. We feel no hurt, no pain, no sorrows that he is not very familiar with. And he loves us.

In The Promised Messiah, Elder Bruce R. McConkie writes: "One of the sweetest and most tender terms by which the Lord was known anciently was that of the Shepherd of Israel. To a pastoral people who loved their sheep, who cared for them with tender solicitude, and whose very lives depended upon keeping them safe, this designation taught great truths about the relationship of the Lord to his people." [^1]

In a 1988 general conference, Elder John Lasater, then a member of the First Quorum of the Seventy, told of visiting Morocco as part of an official United States government delegation. One day they visited some ruins, traveling in an impressive entourage of five large black limousines speeding across the lovely Moroccan countryside. "I was riding in the third limousine, which had lagged some distance behind the second," Elder Lasater recounts. "As we topped the brow of a hill, we noticed that the limousine in front of us had pulled off to the side of the road. As we drew nearer, I [saw that] . . . an old shepherd, in the long, flowing robes of the Savior's day, was standing near the limousine in conversation with the driver. Nearby, I noted a small flock of sheep numbering not more than fifteen or twenty. An accident had occurred. The king's vehicle had struck and injured one of the sheep belonging to the old shepherd." Elder Lasater's driver explained that by law the shepherd of the injured animal was "now entitled to one hundred times its value at maturity. However, under the same law, the injured sheep must be slain and the meat divided among the people. My interpreter hastily added, 'But the old shepherd will not accept the money. They never do. . . . Because of the love he has for each of his sheep.' It was then that I noticed the old shepherd reach down, lift the injured lamb in his arms, and place it in a large pouch on the front of his robe. He kept stroking its head, repeating the same word over and over again." The word was the injured lamb's name, the driver told Elder Lasater, adding, " 'Good shepherds know each one of their sheep by name.' It was as my driver predicted," Elder Lasater remembered. "The money was refused, and the old shepherd with his small flock of sheep, with the injured one tucked safely in the pouch on his robe, disappeared into the beautiful deserts of Morocco." [^2]

In The Promised Messiah, Elder McConkie tells more about sheep and shepherds: "In Palestine sheep are led, not driven. The American practice is for sheepherders to drive sheep; the Palestinian custom is for the shepherds to go before their sheep, to call them by name, and to lead them to green pastures and beside still waters. At night the flocks of several shepherds are sheltered and protected together in one sheepfold. In the morning each shepherd calls his own sheep by name, out of the larger intermingled flock, and they follow him into the places of food and water." [^3]

In John 10:14, our Lord and Savior says plainly, "I am the good shepherd." In the parable of the good shepherd, he explains: "He that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep. To him the porter openeth; and the sheep hear his voice: and he calleth his own sheep by name, and leadeth them out. And when he putteth forth his own sheep, he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice. And a stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him: for they know not the voice of strangers" (John 10:2-5).

Even though our Father in Heaven knows and loves us by name—even though he stands ready to lead us beside still waters and to bless us—he cannot shield us from all of life's storms. In 2 Ne. 31:20 we read: "Wherefore, ye must press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope, and a love of God and of all men. Wherefore, if ye shall press forward, feasting upon the word of Christ, and endure to the end, behold, thus saith the Father: Ye shall have eternal life." My husband remarked of this scripture recently that it contains everything a person needs to know and do to live a good life: have hope, love God, love others, follow Christ, and endure to the end.

The life of my husband's great-grandmother Catherine Richards Stevens is a moving example of someone who, despite a particularly pronounced routine of adversity, endured with a steadfastness of hope that I find remarkable. She died in 1959, so she was a modern-day pioneer. She married her childhood sweetheart, George Stevens, when she was seventeen, and by the time she was twenty-nine had delivered five eleven-pound babies and endured with them smallpox, typhoid, whooping cough, diphtheria, and appendicitis. She and George ran a farm, and George was also a full-time schoolteacher and part-time bookkeeper and clerk who drove to neighboring towns on weekends to sell the produce and butter from their farm. Hard work did not diminish their enjoyment of life. In 1904, when she was twenty-nine, she wrote: "True joy, happiness, and satisfaction existed for us . . . the future glowed with promise, even as the present offered its established security and peaceful satisfactions . . . our hopes and plans were established." [^4]

In May 1905, George was called on a mission to New Zealand. He worked very hard to provide for his family and prepare his farm to run without him for two years. This extra effort "wore him down in strength and health," wrote Catherine. Her diary records their mutual faith but does not gloss over the hardship. "Our faith continued strong and we trusted in the Lord . . . but there were so many things to get done. . . . We were humble and prayerful and felt that surely everything would be well, but our hearts were full and our thoughts were heavy." When he left, "neither of us saw the other for tears. . . . Maybe we shouldn't have given in to our feelings so much, but after all we were just human." In his own diary George wrote of his grief at this parting, and as he reached his mission and began his work, he writes of worsening health and his practice of tracting anyway. He copied into his missionary diary this passage from one of Catherine's letters: "Real love is eternal, and nothing can destroy it. Deep waters cannot wash it away; the storm of adversity cannot prevail against it . . . sacrifices but make the flame leap higher; opposition is fuel which feeds it, and absence and separation have no effect upon it." George's last journal entry was made on 8 July 1906: "I'm finally getting concerned about my health." [^5]

On 17 August 1906, George's cousin picked up a copy of the Deseret News while on business in a neighboring town. In it he read that George Stevens, age thirty, had died in New Zealand on 26 July 1906 and that his body would arrive in San Francisco later in August. In her diary, Catherine copied Psalm 102: "O Lord . . . Hide not thy face from me . . . For my days are consumed like smoke . . . My heart is smitten, and withered like grass; so that I forget to eat my bread" (vv. 1-4).

Catherine learned in her early thirties to run the farm herself. Only five foot one inch tall and weighing just over one hundred pounds, she writes demurely, "I was not a big bodied woman and was not used to doing man's hard labor." Her diary details milking cows, stacking hay, and caring for livestock, two orchards, vegetable gardens, and her four surviving children. After thirty years, she sold the farm in 1935, when she was sixty-one, and retired to work in the Logan Temple for many years until her death in 1959 at age eighty-four. Her personal history closes with the Fortieth Psalm, a simple and poignant testimony of a woman whose brightness of hope endured: "I waited patiently for the Lord; and he inclined unto me, and heard my cry. He brought me up also out of an horrible pit . . . and set my feet upon a rock, and established my goings. And he hath put a new song in my mouth, even praise unto our God: . . . Blessed is that man that maketh the Lord his trust" (vv. 1-4).

Catherine Stevens's example of endurance and rejoicing reminds me that no matter what the circumstances of our life may be, we will ultimately look back, with the objectivity that time confers on past events, and see meaning and opportunity that are obscured by emotion when the events are taking place.

My oldest child, a daughter whom I love very much, always wanted to be a mother. But after her marriage, this deep wish of her heart did not become a reality. For years she went through intensive fertility treatments, all the time fearing that she would never bear children. This thought often seemed more than she could accept. Her only recourse was to persist in seeking treatment and pursuing all possibilities. She continued for six years before being blessed with one child and then two years later another. She tells me now that she recalls but no longer feels the pain of those six years and is enormously grateful to her Heavenly Father for what she learned along the difficult path to motherhood.

As I said before, the Lord knows us better than we know ourselves. His divine perspective is not blocked by mortal comparisons and insecurities. He knows the desires of our hearts, he knows our potential, and he knows how we can best serve those in our homes, and in our wards, stakes, and communities.

We were born with abilities and gifts. All the characteristics we need to help build the kingdom of God are inherent within us from our premortal existence. In Abr. 3:22-23, Abraham recalls his vision of that premortal state: "Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones; And God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the midst of them, and he said: These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits, and he saw that they were good."

The story of Moses and the journey of the children of Israel out of Egypt is replete with miracles. The parting of the Red Sea and the plagues visited on the cruel Egyptians were amazing, but do not discount the miracle of the Lord's preparing a leader who would be equal to the task of leadership. Moses was asked to lead almost 650,000 Hebrew families out of Egypt to Israel, a land then inhabited by others. Along the way, he was to teach a people raised in an idolatrous society the word and ways of God. He was to prepare them to receive the holy priesthood and to anticipate the coming of our Savior.

In the wilderness, the Lord spoke with Moses "as a man speaketh unto his friend" (Ex. 33:11). After the children of Israel angered the Lord by making the golden calf, Moses pleaded with the Lord to "forgive their sin" (Ex. 32:32). The Lord agreed to continue leading their camp. Though disappointed with the children of Israel, the Lord reaffirmed to Moses his love for him, telling him, "thou hast found grace in my sight, and I know thee by name" (Ex. 33:17).

What qualified Moses for this task? He had been reared as an Egyptian prince. Egypt at that time was a very civilized society with achievements in writing, science, medicine, engineering, astronomy, and mathematics. As a prince, Moses was "learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and was mighty in words and in deeds" (Acts 7:22). Josephus, an ancient historian, records that Moses "led a military expedition up the Nile and captured Meroe at the junction of the Blue and the White Nile." [^6] No doubt these experiences prepared Moses for the long journey which lay ahead. But the more important spiritual preparation and strength was unseen, even by Moses, who asked, "Who am I, that I should go unto Pharaoh, and that I should bring forth the children of Israel out of Egypt?" (Ex. 3:11).

We do not know our own capabilities as the Lord knows them. We do not always see ahead how we may contribute. As we receive new callings, we may find ourselves asking this same question: Who am I that I should lead the ward choir? Who am I that I can be an effective nursery leader? The Lord does not call us to fail. President Thomas S. Monson assures us that the Lord will not let us fail in his work when we do our part. [^7] Our Heavenly Father needs each of us. Each of us brings our own offering to the Lord and in doing so contributes to the building of his kingdom. We all serve the Lord in our own way and in our own manner (see Luke 10:40-42). Too often we compare ourselves to others. And as we measure our own contribution against someone else's, we often feel that we come up short. The challenge for each of us is to focus on our uniqueness, our contributions—not our sameness: who we are, not who we are not.

In the Hong Kong Temple are three exquisite upholstery fabrics of intricate Chinese design, fashioned by a local textile artist, Cheng Hwa Seng. Cheng Hwa was born and reared in Taiwan, where she joined the Church sixteen years ago. After studying fine art for three years and then working as a designer in Taiwan for about twelve more years, she was admitted to the Philadelphia College of Textiles and Design. In the United States, she studied print design and jacquard weaving design—a weaving technique used to produce upholstery fabric. As a student there, on a visit to the temple in Washington, D.C., Cheng Hwa noticed the beautiful upholstery fabrics in the temple.

When the Church announced its plans to build a temple in Hong Kong, Cheng Hwa expressed to Larry Wyss, who worked with interior design for the temples, her desire to contribute to the Hong Kong Temple. Cheng Hwa's fabrics not only are beautiful but contain symbols important to the Chinese people. One of her weavings is a white piece of fabric with a water lily design, which has been placed in the celestial room of the Hong Kong Temple. Water lilies are very common in China. Their beauty graces ponds surrounding traditional Chinese buildings. Ironically, the beautiful water lily grows in dirty water. For the Chinese, the water lily represents our ability to rise above the temptations of the world and grow into a pure and righteous person. Cheng Hwa's thoughtful and highly skilled offering to the Lord will bless generations of temple patrons.

But what if our talents and contributions seem meager offerings compared to those of others? Alma taught that "by small and simple things are great things brought to pass" (Alma 37:6). My friend Vicki Huebner attended a small singles ward in Orange County, California. Frustrated with her job and after prayerful consideration, she decided to apply for a position at Brigham Young University. The Sunday after she applied, her bishop called her to be the Relief Society president, but she explained she had just applied for a job elsewhere. Did he still want to call her to be Relief Society president?

The bishop, despite her possible move, wanted to sustain her. He had been impressed that she was to be the next Relief Society president. She sought and also received a confirmation that the Lord wanted her to accept the call.

Soon afterward, she was offered the job at BYU, to begin as soon as possible. She and her presidency prayed to know their purpose. How were they to serve the sisters of the ward in only three weeks? The answer came: they were to organize their Relief Society's visiting teaching program.

The visiting teaching program had become disorganized, and visiting teaching supervisors, most of them recent high school graduates, lacked experience or training. In three weeks, the Relief Society presidency reorganized the visiting teaching districts, taught the supervisors and district leaders about the importance of visiting teaching, and met with each visiting teacher to determine the needs of the sisters in the ward. When a new Relief Society presidency was called, the foundation for their work of sisterhood and service was in place. A simple offering to the Lord prepared the way for future Relief Society leaders to accomplish great things.

Our contributions of time and talents to serve our Heavenly Father help build the kingdom of God. My friends Stan and Mavis Steadman accepted a call with another couple to go to Hanoi, Vietnam. Their mission was not to preach the gospel. That was not allowed. In fact, they were strongly cautioned to be alert to prohibitions and not to do anything that the government did not approve. When they were called to this tightly controlled Communist land, they were told, "This is not a call for sissies." Their mission, with no training in spoken Vietnamese, was to teach English to the leaders of the country and to children.

Let me share part of a letter I received from them: "It is early Saturday morning in Hanoi. It is 108 degrees with 90 percent humidity. The streets are lined with Vietnamese families squatting on low four-inch stools eating their breakfasts—chicken soup from big steaming pots. . . . The Lord is leading us in unbelievable paths. Each day is an amazing adventure. We are overwhelmed, overjoyed, and overworked.

"The big excitement is the Messiah! It will be magnificent when it is performed for two nights in October. We are in full rehearsal with the National Vietnamese Symphony and Chorus—100 professional musicians. We don't speak Vietnamese and they don't speak English, but the message of Christ [is] in the music. . . . We have taught the words of the text in English. Can you imagine the thrill of hearing these non-Christian, Buddhist friends sing: 'For unto us a child is born, and His name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace'? . . .

"We rehearse in a dungeon-like room with no air conditioning. When it rains, it is usually flooded and we wade in barefoot. The conductor is a small, dynamic man who sits on a high chair with his feet dangling in the air. When we finished the 'Hallelujah Chorus,' which he takes at breakneck pace, he took out his handkerchief, wiped his brow, looked at us, smiled, and said the only two English words he knows which he has heard us use, 'very good.' We agreed.

"The concert has suddenly taken on a whole new meaning. It is the first time the Messiah has ever been done in Vietnam and probably in Asia, and it is the first time the U.S. and Vietnam have ever worked together on any musical venture. The government officials have seized upon this and want the title to be 'A Bridge of Harmony and Friendship.' There is no word in Vietnamese that means 'Messiah.' Also we cannot use the word 'God' or anything pertaining to government (like 'king') printed on the program. This is a reminder of the very thin line we are treading. . . . The hand of the Lord is in everything that is happening here. He has opened doors that are impossible. We see it every day. And every day I try to repent to be worthy of His trust in me. I have never worked so hard!" [^8]

These dear missionaries are powerful examples of using talents and inherent abilities to build the kingdom. Of course, the Good Shepherd knows their names and will welcome them back home to him. I think of my favorite hymn, "Our Savior's Love," written by Edward L. Hart. [^9] Consider the first verse:

Our Savior's love Shines like the sun with perfect light, As from above It breaks through clouds of strife. Lighting our way, It leads us back into his sight, Where we may stay To share eternal life.

Yes, he knows your name. He knows your heart. When you are broken, he will tenderly pick you up and soothe you, as the good shepherd did. He will lead you when you wander in the wilderness, as he did Moses. If you will ask, he will be your strength and instruct you as he did the boy prophet. He will draw forth your abilities and accept your every offering in service. His love does shine like the sun with perfect light. It does break through clouds of strife. His love will light our way back into his sight.

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] Gordon B. Hinckley, in Conference Report, October 1987, 68; or Ensign, November 1987, 54.
[^2] Spencer W. Kimball, Faith Precedes the Miracle (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1973), 110-11.
[^3] Brigham Young, Discourses of Brigham Young, sel. John A. Widtsoe (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1954), 156.
[^4] Young, Discourses, 32.
[^5] George Q. Cannon, "Freedom of the Saints," in Collected Discourses Delivered by President Wilford Woodruff, His Two Counselors, the Twelve Apostles, and Others, comp. Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, Calif.: B. H. S. Publishing, 1988), 2:185.
[^6] 6. Mark E. Peterson, Moses, Man of Miracles (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1977), 39.
[^7] 7. See Thomas S. Monson, "Duty Calls," Ensign, May 1969, 44.
[^8] 8. Mavis Steadman, letter in possession of author, 29 August 1993.
[^9] 9. "Our Savior's Love," Hymns (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1985), no. 113.
