Susette Green, Dlora Dalton, Dawn Anderson, Every Good Thing: Talks from the 1997 BYU Women's Conference ( 1998)

PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT

Sheri L. Dew

One year while I was attending BYU I invited a friend to make the eight-hundred-mile drive home with me to Kansas for Thanksgiving. As we prepared to leave, the weather was threatening through Colorado and over the Rockies. The night before we left, my father called and told me to buy some snow chains—just in case. I resisted at first—there wasn't a prayer that I'd know how to put them on should I need them—but ultimately I did as Dad instructed. As it turned out, we didn't need them. The roads were treacherous in spots, but we arrived home without incident.

While we were home, Dad insisted on showing my friend and me how to install the snow chains—again, just in case. My mechanical aptitude is pathetic, so I left it to my friend to pay attention to the snow-chain lesson. Frankly, I was a bit smug about the whole thing. I knew we wouldn't need them. I had made that trip at least fifty times, sans@chains, and I couldn't imagine that we'd need them this time.

The trip back to Provo, Utah, proved to be unlike any other, however. We were barely into the Rockies when we came upon the iciest roads I had ever seen. For an hour or so we inched along, the speedometer scarcely registering movement. Finally my friend{wondered out loud if we shouldn't put the chains on. I resisted. Surely the icy conditions wouldn't stretch much farther.

Not five minutes later we crept around a hairpin curve just in time to see a car slide off the road ahead of us and plummet into the Colorado River below. I admitted it was time to pull out the chains, and we began the ordeal of attempting to install them. The process was, to say the least, an adventure. No sit-com duo has done a skit any funnier. For one thing, having paid little attention to my father's instructions, I was absolutely no help. Thank heavens, my friend patiently led us step-by-step through the process. An hour later and frozen through to the bone, we finally had the "easy-install" chains in place. Even then, we hadn't done something correctly, for as we headed down the road the chains clanked against the chassis with every revolution of the tires.

By now, I was not in the best mood. And the banging chains didn't help. You can imagine my reaction when, just fifteen minutes later, we drove out of the ice and onto bare roads. Muttering and complaining, I pulled over, removed the chains, and threw them into the trunk. Obviously, they had proven an enormous waste of time.

For several hours we drove on, attempting to make up time as we went. The poor roads through the Rockies had delayed us so severely, however, that late that night, when we should already have been in Provo, we ran into a horrible blizzard halfway up the last mountain pass between us and home. The snow came with blinding intensity. We couldn't even see the sides of the road, yet we couldn't stop, because there was no place to pull over. Frankly, we were both terrified.

We inched along until we arrived at the summit, where a turnout area allowed us to pull over, along with dozens of other motorists. The wind was blowing so hard that the snow was coming down sideways, and it was bitter cold. Though conditions were ten times worse than they had been when we put the chains on the first time, we had no choice but to do it again. Bracing ourselves, we hopped out, pulled the chains from the trunk, and began the unpleasant task. Because we had been through the process just a few hours earlier, however, we had the routine down. In fact, a truck driver approached us and said, "Well, I was coming over to help, but it looks as though you girls know what you're doing," and walked off. Chivalry is dead, I thought.

Thankfully, we got the chains on—in under fifteen minutes. And as we headed down the mountain, there wasn't that telltale clanking. The second time around we had done a better job. Though the remainder of our drive was a slow one, we arrived home tired but safe.

I have thought about the parable of the snow chains many times. There is absolutely no way we could have installed those chains at midnight in a blinding blizzard with three feet of snow already on the ground if we hadn't had a practice run earlier that day.

Practice is a wonderful concept. To do anything well— whether it's perfecting a turnaround jump shot, performing a Rachmaninoff concerto, or excelling at open-heart surgery—we've got to practice.

The same is true of our spiritual sensitivity and our ability to hear the voice of the Lord—in other words, our spiritual skills. The scriptures are replete with examples of individuals who have enhanced their spiritual skills through practice. Consider the account of David and Goliath. Have you pondered the improbability of that story? An adolescent boy, dwarfed by the mature warrior Goliath, pledges to go up against him in one-on-one combat. But David revealed the source of his confidence when he said, "The Lord that delivered me out of the paw of the lion, and out of the paw of the bear, he will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistine" (1 Sam. 17:37).

David had already done the improbable at least twice. Because of those experiences, he had faith that the Lord would magnify him and enable him to subdue Goliath. He had the spiritual know-how. He had been practicing.

The brother of Jared had a transcendent experience in which he actually beheld the Lord (see Ether 3). Prior to that remarkable event, Jared had asked his brother to plead with the Lord on their behalf: "Cry unto the Lord, that he will not confound us that we may not understand our words" (Ether 1:34). Clearly, Jared's brother was a man of faith; he knew how to hear the voice of the Lord. Yet, later, the brother of Jared was chastened because he had failed to call upon the Lord (see Ether 2:14). Even a man with tremendous spiritual knowledge had an occasion when the Lord had to remind him to continue in prayer. The brother of Jared repented and practiced—and as a result was prepared to have an absolutely magnificent, transcendent spiritual experience.

Do we really believe that when Moses arrived at the shores of the Red Sea, leading the entire congregation of the children of Israel with Pharaoh and his armies in hot pursuit, he waved his arms and the waters magically parted? He already knew how to exercise the power of the priesthood to control the elements. He had drawn upon that power in other situations and knew what to do in the very moment when circumstances demanded such know-how. He had been practicing.

The Lord, through our individually tailored spiritual tutoring, gives us opportunities to practice, refine, and develop our spiritual skills. With that principle in mind, consider this statement by President Gordon B. Hinckley: "Of all our needs, I think the greatest is an increase in faith." [^1] President Spencer W. Kimball said it this way: "We need a storage of faith that can carry [us] over the dull, the difficult, the terrifying moments, disappointments, disillusionments, and years of adversity, want, confusion, and frustration." [^2]

How do we increase our faith and stockpile a spiritual reserve? Among other things, we practice. Like anything else, developing the spiritual skills that may be ours takes practice, repetition, experience, and sustained effort. Alma taught it this way: "Behold, if ye will awake and arouse your faculties, even to an experiment upon my words, and exercise a particle of faith, yea, even if ye can no more than desire to believe, let this desire work in you" (Alma 32:27). Perhaps your faith in the Lord wavers from time to time, or you don't feel completely certain that the Lord will do for you what he has promised he will do for all of us. But in this verse we are counseled that if we only want to believe, we should experiment upon his words. In other words, practice.

When you face seemingly insurmountable problems, when you plead with the Lord for help with something that you can't possibly manage on your own, when circumstances clearly call for direction and strength from a Source greater than anything mortal, have you found yourself wondering, as I have, Will God help me?

I love these two verses in the Doctrine and Covenants: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, ye are little children"—and aren't we all children spiritually?—"and ye have not as yet understood how great blessings the Father hath in his own hands and prepared for you; and ye cannot bear all things now; nevertheless, be of good cheer, for I will lead you along. The kingdom is yours and the blessings thereof are yours, and the riches of eternity are yours" (D&C 78:17-18).

We are little children, and we have no concept of the vast store of riches, spiritual riches, the Lord has available for us. But he has promised that if we will let him, he will lead us along. He will no doubt lead us along by providing opportunities for us to experiment upon his word—opportunities for us to practice. We can practice having faith in him as our Savior, our Redeemer, our Rescuer.

What exactly has the Lord promised he will do for us? How far-reaching is the scope and power of the Atonement?

In Alma we learn that he will take upon him our pains, sicknesses, and infirmities. His bowels will be filled with mercy such that he will succor us—he will run to us (see Alma 7:11-12). He came to heal the brokenhearted, to deliver those who are captive. How many ways are there to be held captive—a captive of circumstances, of bad habits, of weaknesses? And he will "set at liberty them that are bruised" (Luke 4:18). How many of us are bruised emotionally, mentally, spiritually? It was Jacob who taught that the "pleasing word of God . . . healeth the wounded soul" (Jacob 2:8).

Ether recorded these transcendent words of the Lord: "My grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them" (Ether 12:27). Consider the ramifications of such a promise! If you are like me, you regularly conduct the inventory that reveals all of the ways in which you are weak and lacking. You are painfully aware of your mortal weaknesses. Have you found yourself wondering, Can the Savior really make those weak things become strong? This is a doctrine more profound than any behavior-modification course, more penetrating than any resurgent attempts at willpower. Helaman added the promise that if we will build upon the rock of Christ, the devil will have no power over us (see Hel. 5:12).

Finally, consider these verses from the Doctrine and Covenants: "Look unto me in every thought; doubt not, fear not. Behold the wounds which pierced my side, and also the prints of the nails in my hands and feet; be faithful, keep my commandments" (D&C 6:36-37). The sequence of these verses is revealing. Might the Savior be saying, Because the nails pierced my hands and my feet, you have no need to doubt or to fear. In other words, because of the power and scope of the Atonement, we have somewhere we can go to deal with our mortal weakness, our fears, and our anxieties, Someone who can and will make up the difference between where we are and where we want to be—if we will come unto him.

Remember the American Express campaign that "membership has its privileges"? This company enticed new customers by appealing to the desire to become a member of an elite group entitled to special privileges. It was a clever tactic. Who doesn't appreciate privileges?

Have you paused lately to ponder the privileges that all of us have by virtue of our membership in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints? Have you stopped to think about the blessings that come from knowing who you are and whose you are, from believing that a prophet walks the earth, from understanding the priesthood ordinances that bind us to each other? Consider the magnificent blessings associated with the gift of the Holy Ghost and with an endowment of power from on high in the house of the Lord—all of which make you eligible for remarkable spiritual privileges. President Brigham Young taught, "If the Latter-day Saints will walk up to their privileges, and exercise faith in the name of Jesus Christ, and live in the enjoyment of the fulness of the Holy Ghost constantly day by day, there is nothing on the face of the earth that they could ask for, that would not be given to them." [^3] And yet, on another occasion, he taught the sobering doctrine that, too often, "we live far beneath our [spiritual] privileges." [^4]

I, like you, have been blessed with many opportunities to exercise faith in Jesus Christ, experiment upon his word, and practice what I believe. Through those experiences I have come to know that because of the phenomenal act of atonement begun in the Garden of Gethsemane and completed on the cross at Calvary, there is power, peace, comfort, healing, and strength available to help us as we attempt to negotiate life's challenges.

Thank heavens—literally—for the magnificent gift of the Lord Jesus Christ. We all encounter obstacles in life—they seem to be part of the journey. A greeting card from a close friend sums up my feelings when life seems overpunctuated with problems. The front reads, "Mother told me there would be days like this." Inside: "She failed to mention that they could go on for months at a time."

Very simply, things don't always turn out as we hoped or thought they would. Children don't always obey, despite our best parenting efforts. Our health sometimes lets us down, even if we are careful about diet and exercise and live the Word of Wisdom with precision. Money doesn't always magically appear at the end of the month, even for full-tithe payers.

Life circumstances don't always develop as we hope and even pray for. But sometimes the resultant disappointment and even heartache lead us to unlock the strength and power that can be found through fasting and prayer, earnest scripture study, and temple worship—in other words, the privileges associated with sincere spiritual endeavor.

At one point I believed I was within days of announcing my engagement. I was already into my thirties, so the prospects of marriage were particularly sweet. Instead, a few weeks later my intended married a close friend. Loneliness, anger, deep discouragement, and other poignant emotions surged within me. My initial remedy for the pain was to exercise such phenomenal faith, and to enlist all my family and friends to exercise their faith, that the Lord could not deny our combined and repeated petitions for my marriage. I launched an intensive effort to learn everything I could about the Savior and what it meant to truly believe in and trust him. I fasted and prayed, searched the scriptures, and sought solace and direction in the temple as never before. In my mind, it was an earnest search for something that was noble and good. After all, was it good for man—or woman—to be alone? As far as I was concerned, absolutely not! Without realizing it, I was essentially attempting to force the Lord's hand with my brilliant display of faith. After all, I could never be happy until and unless I was married. Right?

The Lord did not respond by giving me a husband. What he did give me, however, was new understanding, more strength, and a deep sense of comfort and peace that I'd never had before. It was a terrible experience; it was a wonderful experience. Through it, I learned that the Savior not only paid the price for sin but compensated for all of the difficulty, the heartache, the betrayal, the disillusionment and disappointment and pain that we feel and face. I learned that, in a very tangible way, he would be my companion. And I learned that he would never let me down or leave me alone.

President George Q. Cannon said: "No matter how serious the trial, how deep the distress, how great the affliction, [God] will never desert us. He never has, and He never will. He cannot do it. It is not His character. He is an unchangeable being; the same yesterday, the same today, and He will be the same throughout the eternal ages to come. . . . We may pass through the fiery furnace; we may pass through deep waters; but we shall not be consumed nor overwhelmed. We shall emerge from all these trials and difficulties the better and purer for them, if we only trust in our God and keep His commandments." [^5]

With each new challenge, each new opportunity to increase our faith, comes the privilege of practicing what we believe and increasing our spiritual skills while adding to the "storage of faith" President Kimball spoke of. Just as school requirements become more challenging from grade to grade, so do the Lord's spiritual requirements of us increase as we progress, grow, and develop. My experiences have taught me that each new challenge results in a deeper faith in the Lord and greater confidence in the spiritual privileges that are ours. Dealing with difficult circumstances seems to prepare us to handle even more complicated opportunities for growth. As difficult as the time was when I dealt with the disappointment of not getting married, other challenges followed that required even more faith.

When I was asked to be involved in preparing President Gordon B. Hinckley's biography, I was both honored and overwhelmed. I had a more-than-full-time job, was serving as a stake Relief Society president, and now was responsible for a project that was filled with enough pressure, stress, and workload to itself deserve full-time attention.

I reorganized my life to be as efficient as possible and then began working on the book, usually scheduling time in the evening—after a long day at the office—to do research and to write. After a few weeks it became clear that this system would not work. There were too many interruptions in the evenings, and I was attempting to do the hardest work of my day—filling a blank computer screen with coherent sentences—after I'd already put in a full day on the job.

About this time, my stake president informed me that both of my counselors were wanted back in their respective wards and that I needed to select two new counselors. I was heartsick. Our presidency had been together for more than three years and worked seamlessly together. I couldn't imagine breaking in two new counselors when I was busier and under more pressure than I had ever been. But through prayer, I recognized that the stake president was right, and I went about the process of selecting new counselors. They were called, and I was with them in the stake president's office when they were set apart. Before we began, the first counselor in the stake presidency, who knew nothing of the extra load I was carrying, said that though there was no need to set me apart again, he wondered if it might be appropriate to give me a blessing.

I was grateful for the suggestion and was subsequently amazed when the stake president acknowledged, during the blessing, the heavy responsibilities that had fallen upon my shoulders. Then he added these words: "I bless you that your body will require less sleep, insomuch that you will not fall asleep in the many meetings you have to attend."

For several days thereafter I pondered the implications of that promise. Finally, I began to calculate just how early I would have to get up to do my writing before I left for work. The advantages were that there would be fewer interruptions and I would be doing the hardest work of the day when I was mentally the freshest. No matter how I figured the time, however, I would have to arise at 3:00 a.m. I am an early riser anyway, but that seemed absurd. Yet, I could not get the words of that priesthood blessing out of my mind. I kept thinking about some of the difficult challenges I had faced in the past and the way the Lord had shored me up, strengthened me, made me able to do things I could never have handled or accomplished on my own. Did I really believe he would support and sustain me? My experience told me that he would. I had been promised, by the power of the priesthood, that my body would be able to get along on less sleep. Did I have enough confidence in him to proceed, assured that he would honor the words of that blessing?

A week after the blessing I decided to take the Lord at his word. And for twenty-three months, six days a week, I arose at 3:00 a.m. Did I have the physical or mental stamina, in and of myself, to do such a thing? Absolutely not. My role in this process was simply to act on my belief that the Lord was able and willing to do something for me that I could not do myself.

I testify that the Lord will do for us exactly what he has said he will do—if we will believe in him and seek his divine direction and intervention in our lives. Strength and power, insight and wisdom far greater than our own are available to us. The key to unlocking those powers is to ask, see, knock, and believe (see D&C 88:63). In other words, to practice by experimenting upon the word.

I cannot describe how overwhelmed I have felt since being called to serve in the Relief Society General Presidency. The nature of the call itself is sobering; the demands on my faith and my time are incredible. I look back longingly at those twenty-three months of early risings and realize that wasn't all that difficult. But as it turns out, that experience provided me with more opportunity to practice, to experiment, and to draw upon the grace of the Lord. I know that if we will seek the Lord first and foremost in our lives, that he will never let us down. He will bolster us. He will do for us as he did for Joseph when he promised: "I will go before your face. I will be on your right hand and on your left, and my Spirit shall be in your hearts, and mine angels round about you, to bear you up" (D&C 84:88).

The Lord Jesus Christ will never leave us alone. He is who he says he is, and he will do for us what he has said he will do. Therefore, "let us cheerfully do all things that lie in our power; and then may we stand still, with the utmost assurance, to see the salvation of God, and for his arm to be revealed" (D&C 123:17).

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Gordon B. Hinckley, "To Please Our Heavenly Father," Ensign, May 1985, 50.
[^2] H. Burke Peterson, "Preparing the Heart," Ensign, May 1990, 84.
[^3] Mother Teresa, directed by Jeanette and Ann Petrie, Time Inc., 1975, PBS videocassette.
[^4] Mother Teresa, Love: A Fruit Always in Season: Daily Meditations from the Words of Mother Teresa, ed. Dorothy S. Hunt (San Francisco: Ignatius Press, 1987), 121; also in Aloha! by Chieko N. Okazaki (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1995), 199.
[^5] Mirabai Bush and Ram Dass, Compassion in Action (New York: Bell Tower, 1992), 174.
