Susette Green, Dlora Dalton, Dawn Anderson, Every Good Thing: Talks from the 1997 BYU Women's Conference ( 1998)

Doing Good and Being Good

HAROLD C. BROWN

The Church has a long history of humanitarian service work. In 1842, Joseph Smith organized the Relief Society to, among other things, "provoke the brethren to good works in looking to the wants of the poor." [^1] Brigham Young appointed "farmers to the Indians," men who were called to help Native Americans improve their agricultural skills. During and after World Wars I and II, the Church sent food, medical supplies, and clothing to victims throughout the world. Efforts much like these continue in the present day, though you may be surprised and certainly impressed with the extent of Church humanitarian work. Few people understand the breadth and the depth of the work of the Church in caring for people of all denominations throughout the world. Joseph Smith said that Church members should strive to "feed the hungry, to clothe the naked, . . . to comfort the afflicted, whether in this church or in any other, or in no church at all, wherever he finds them." [^2] Let me touch briefly on the doctrinal basis for humanitarian work and then provide an overview of what the Church is doing and what you can do if you become interested in humanitarian service.

Why are Latter-day Saints involved in humanitarian work? Four doctrinal principles point to its necessity in our lives. The first principle is from James 1:27: "Pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, To visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep [yourself] unspotted from the world." In short, pure religion is "doing good" and "being good." Mormonism may be summarized in those four words. When we do good, it is easier to be good. And when we are good, our hearts are turned to those in need.

Second, our happiness and joy are rooted in sacrifice and service to others. As we unselfishly give of our means and our hearts to others and discipline ourselves to sacrifice, we experience lasting joy. Giving blesses both giver and receiver. My son is on a mission in Oaxaca, Mexico, where the Saints are very, very poor. Nevertheless, they feed the missionaries. Our son is six foot seven, and our food bill was cut in half when he left. It was cheaper to send him than to keep him home. He seemed to eat everything and anything. He and his companion were invited into the home of a woman he referred to as the poorest woman in the ward in Oaxaca. They sat down to a dinner of beans and tortillas. He wrote to us, "We ate it all." She asked if they would like more. As I was reading his letter, I thought, Please, Troy, say no. But he said, "Yes, please." So she served him the rest of the beans. Then she said, "I have one very small egg left. Would you like that?" Again, as a father, I thought, Please, say no. But he said, "Yes, please." She fried the small egg and cut it in half for those two missionaries and fed them. Then they started to read the scriptures to express their gratitude for what she had done. She broke down in tears and said, "Thank you, thank you. I have felt that others who have come to my home did not like my food. Thank you for letting me give to you." That is the spirit of the gospel of Jesus Christ, the spirit of giving that can bless even the poorest widow in Oaxaca, Mexico.

In my work in LDS Social Services, I have visited with very unhappy people. Sometimes life is challenging. We are all unhappy once in a while. But when we become downhearted or most in need of spiritual strength, we sometimes neglect serving others, which is the very thing that could bring us the greatest joy and happiness.

Third, we have a covenant obligation to care for the needy. There are those today who worry about the world running out of food. But the Lord has said, "there is enough and to spare" (D&C 104:17). Proper distribution, rather than inadequate food, is the problem. We have been blessed with an abundance, especially compared to most of those who reside in other parts of the world, and the Lord asks that we give our portion to the poor and needy.

"What is our portion?" we might ask. I was thinking recently about the cost of automobiles. A friend purchased an expensive car, and I thought to myself, You could have bought a car for less and given the difference to the poor and needy. And then I thought, Well, I don't have that kind of car, but I have a nice car. Why didn't I buy a car for less and give the difference to the poor and needy? Someone who had purchased a new Ford could have purchased a used Ford or perhaps ridden the bus and then given the money saved to the poor and needy. The point is this: you must determine your "portion" in your own heart and soul. No one can decide for you or for me what our portion is. But we should think and pray about this regularly, realizing that we have a covenant obligation to care for the poor and the needy.

Fourth, both our temporal and our spiritual well-being are connected to our caring for others in need. The Lord's promises to us are marvelous. Listen to the prophet Isaiah speaking to those who fast and give to the poor: "Then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thine health shall spring forth speedily: and thy righteousness shall go before thee. . . . Then shalt thou call, and the Lord shall answer; thou shalt cry, and he shall say, Here I am" (Isa. 58:8-9). Our giving and caring for others is tied directly to our spiritual strength. I find that I receive more inspiration from heaven when I do my home teaching or volunteer hours at the cannery or at the Deseret Industries Sort Center than I can by spending long hours on my knees without serving.

Prayer is most effective when it is accompanied by service. Revelation comes to people who are on the Lord's errand. We read of the Lord's command to pray: "Cry unto him in your houses, yea, over all your household, both morning, mid-day, and evening . . . pour out your souls in your closets, and your secret places, and in your wilderness" (Alma 34:21-26). But listen to the sobering words that follow: "And now behold, . . . do not suppose that this [praying] is all; for after ye have done all these things, if ye turn away the needy, and the naked, and visit not the sick and afflicted, and impart of your substance, if ye have, to those who stand in need . . . , behold, your prayer is vain, . . . and ye are as hypocrites" (Alma 34:28). That is unequivocal. Yes, we are to pray, and pray constantly, but if we want God's blessings and presence in our lives, we must also care for others.

During the last decade or so, the Church has been involved in a significant way in assisting those in need in every part of the world. Why, other than for doctrinal reasons, do we do this? We do it simply for the good it does. It is wonderful to bless the lives of people, to care for and help them in some way. Humanitarian service also demonstrates the blessings of the gospel and shows through us, his servants, that God is a caring God. Service also promotes long-term, spiritual well-being, both in the giver and the receiver, and opens doors that may have, in the past, been closed to the Church and its message. Some countries do not officially recognize the Church, but they are willing to cooperate in humanitarian projects. Such efforts may, at some future time, lead to improved relations.

The Church has participated, often linking hands with other service organizations, in more than twenty-three hundred humanitarian projects worldwide during the last decade. At the end of 1995, the General Welfare Committee approved and established an organization known as Latter-day Saint Charities. Latter-day Saint Charities is a nongovernmental organization similar to the Red Cross, Catholic Charities, AfriCare, or Mercy Corps International. Such organizations register in various countries of the world to provide humanitarian aid.

Latter-day Saint Charities acts to relieve suffering during times of emergency when natural disasters occur throughout the world. Church humanitarian aid also addresses the needs of the chronically poor. For example, some African villages are without a water supply—water must be carried for miles. The Church's goal is to help these people help themselves. We help dig wells and organize other efforts to provide some of the goods and expertise that bring about self-reliance. We strengthen individuals and families to be productive and self-reliant and teach them welfare principles. We teach job search skills to help people find meaningful employment. We have sent missionary couples with medical and nursing expertise to train hospital personnel in underdeveloped areas. We help enlarge the capacity of communities and local institutions to teach and serve others.

Some of the money for this assistance comes from donations to the Church. During the last twelve years, $26 million in cash went to these countries. The value of donated products distributed over the same period equaled nearly $163 million, and 137 countries have received humanitarian aid from the Church. More than one thousand volunteers serve as full-time welfare missionaries in thirty-three countries. We have distributed twenty million pounds of food, forty-one million pounds of clothing, and two million pounds of medical equipment and supplies worldwide. One woman from St. Petersburg, Russia, wrote: "We are very pleased to receive this clothing. Last year's winter coats for an adult cost 4,000 rubles; today it is more than 40,000 rubles, an increase of tenfold. This is more than a month's salary for a teacher or an engineer to buy one coat. When we receive these things, it inspires us to reach out to others." [^3]

The Church has also been involved in several hundred projects working with communities to better themselves and more than a hundred individual productivity projects in the past twelve years. For instance, in Kenya, Africa, the Church, in cooperation with other relief agencies, donated 271 tons of food and medical supplies to save the lives of an estimated three thousand malnourished, refugee Somalian children. In Russia, a physician-training exchange significantly reduced infant mortality. Four Utah physicians trained staff members in Russia, and eight Russian neonatologists received training in Utah. The Church also donated equipment valued at $1 million to a Russian hospital. In Cambodia, the Church instituted a food-processing training program and sent experts—couples—to set up equipment and machinery. Cambodia has its first-ever cannery, and, at a local university, Cambodians are learning how to can various types of produce. In Guatemala, people with modest skills and certification can get jobs. But without the means to go to school, they have difficulty finding desirable employment. With a small amount of humanitarian money donated by the Church, Latter-day Saint Charities contracted with an electrician to train and certify more than two dozen Guatemalans in electrical work. All twenty-five or so of the young men who took the course got jobs.

Through the Thrasher Foundation, the Church is also sponsoring a project to help destroy the worms children pick up when they walk barefoot on fecal material. Mothers and fathers often refuse to rub salt on their children's feet to kill the worms because of the pain it causes the children. Once the infection is advanced, the children cannot walk, so they crawl on their hands and knees, and the worms then go into the palms of their hands and into their knees. Donated shoes and other clothing from Deseret Industries also helps address this problem.

Hundreds of thousands of lives have been touched by humanitarian service. Joseph Smith said, "A man filled with the love of God, is not content with helping his family alone, but ranges through the whole world, anxious to bless the whole human race." [^4] In our day, President Gordon B. Hinckley echoes those sentiments: "Where there is stark hunger, regardless of the cause, I will not let political considerations dull my sense of mercy or thwart my responsibility to the sons and daughters of God, wherever they may be or whatever their circumstances." [^5]

What can we do to help? On the donation slip for tithing and fast offerings, a line has been added for donations to humanitarian aid. When we donate tithing and fast offerings to the Church, we may also donate for humanitarian aid that will go directly to care for the needy throughout the world. No administrative costs for overhead or salaries come out of that money. Every penny we donate goes to the care of the poor and the needy. We must not, of course, slight our covenant responsibility to pay our tithes and offerings. Above and beyond that critical responsibility, we are encouraged to donate as we individually are willing and able.

Another easy way to contribute is to donate clothing to Deseret Industries. Some of it will end up for sale in the stores, but yearly, nine to ten million pounds of clothing donated to Deseret Industries will be distributed to the needy worldwide. Income received at Deseret Industries stores is also used to bless the poor and needy who work there.

Consider serving as a Church-service or welfare missionary at some point. Raymond and Jo Reed served in India. He was a professor of physical education at Weber State. Their mission involved teaching basketball workshops at local schools and coaching both the girls' basketball team at a Catholic school and Special Olympics teams. George and Yvonne Hilton taught advanced eye-care techniques at fifteen ophthalmology conferences to specialists throughout India. Garth and Isabell Nelson supervised the installation and maintenance of the cannery in Cambodia. And Doug Christensen helped distribute donations totaling over one million pounds of clothing, food, and medical equipment to the poor and needy in India.

At the Sort Center (where we may also volunteer), books, clothing, and medical equipment are gathered to be sent throughout the world. Some women knit bandages for the Sort Center. While waiting in the foyer for her temple recommend interview, a woman was asked by her stake president what she was knitting. "It's for the Sort Center," she replied. "It's a leper bandage. It's made out of special cotton material that stretches and can be washed." She said that she did not believe she would ever be a Relief Society president or other leader, "but I can knit leper bandages for people whom I will never meet." She has knitted dozens of them. She takes her knitting on the plane or wherever she goes and knits every spare minute for the care of someone she will never know. Just a simple project. You can do similar projects in your home as a family, as an individual, or as a youth or Relief Society project. Start small; a huge project may be overwhelming. Susan Webb, stake homemaking counselor in the Relief Society of the Smithfield Utah North Stake, has described how small projects, begun by the stake Relief Society, sprang up in the families throughout their stake like runners from ivy. [^6]

Many possible projects can benefit our neighborhoods or cities. We do not have to wait to be told what to do. We don't have to work through Deseret Industries Sort Center or Latter-day Saint Charities. There is opportunity everywhere—to do good and be good.

NOTES

>5. Gordon B. Hinckley, "The Victory over Death," Ensign, May 1985, 54.

---
Notas:
[^1] Jill Mulvay Derr, Janath Russell Cannon, Maureen Ursenbach Beecher, Women of Covenant: The Story of Relief Society (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1992), 30.
[^2] Joseph Smith, Times and Seasons, 15 March 1842, 732.
[^3] Letter in the Welfare Services files, Church Office Building, Salt Lake City, Utah.
[^4] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1938), 174.
[^5] Mirabai Bush and Ram Dass, Compassion in Action (New York: Bell Tower, 1992), 174.
[^6] See Susan Webb, "Afghans for Africa," in this volume, pages 101-5.
