Susette Green, Dlora Dalton, Dawn Anderson, Every Good Thing: Talks from the 1997 BYU Women's Conference ( 1998)

Afghans for Africa

SUSAN WEBB

As part of a stake Relief Society women's conference, we invited Brother Ron Garrison, director of Church Human Resources, to speak about the humanitarian work of the Church. As he walked through the building, he saw the items that had been donated, the quilts to be tied set up in the cultural hall, and the many other work projects that were planned for that day. He turned to us with tears in his eyes, "You do not comprehend what you are doing here today," he said. "You are literally saving thousands of lives." Because it was such a simple thing we were doing, we truly did not comprehend. We had merely chosen the high priority items suggested by the Deseret Industries Sort Center. We did not realize that a self-sealing plastic bag filled with items such as soap could save a person's life. In a country ravaged by cholera, that bar of soap means the difference between life and death. After he spoke, the Spirit of the Lord filled that building as we worked, quilted, assembled kits, and completed other projects. We knew that the Lord knew what we were doing. The sisters went home thrilled to have been part of humanitarian service work. These sisters enthusiastically spread the word, and before long everyone in our stake wanted to participate.

When we began, we did not have a budget for the humanitarian project. But this wonderful work does not take a lot of money. Everything you need is in someone's garage, in someone's closet, in someone's basement, in someone's attic. All you have to do is say, "This is what we want to do," and the Lord will provide the way.

Following the Sort Center's guidelines, Primary children made small toys that were simple and easily painted. The priesthood quorums donated the wood and all the other materials, and the brethren cut out the toys. What a sweet experience it was to watch four- and five-year-old children sanding wooden blocks. Our children could scarcely understand that those toys would be going to children who had never had a toy of their own.

When we wanted yarn for knitted and crocheted items, we asked for donations. We filled large plastic garbage bags full of donated yarn. The sisters in our stake made hats. They made scarves. They made mittens and booties and all sorts of other knitted and crocheted items. Sisters thirteen years old, sisters in their late eighties and nineties, and even men knitted and crocheted leper bandages. What a blessing this activity has been for our stake.

Women in their later years who felt they were not needed anymore, that there was no purpose for them, came to us and said, "We can do this. We can do this in our homes. We know we can make a difference." They now feel wanted and needed, and they tell us: "This is what Relief Society is all about." Those older sisters have taught the younger sisters skills they had not wanted to learn before: how to sew, how to knit, how to crochet. Our attendance at homemaking meeting has increased, and this work has brought the Spirit of the Lord into our wards.

One sister made three baby afghans and then began a full-sized one. She has made a lot of afghans, and she knew exactly what she was doing. When she was about a third of the way finished, she held up the afghan and found it was taller than she was. She thought to herself, Well, there are a lot of tall people in the world; I'll just finish this. She continued to work on it. One day her son-in-law visited her. He is six foot four. She held it up to him, and it was taller than he was. Now this sister thought to herself, I am doing this for the Savior. It has to be perfect. I will do it over. (Anyone who has made an afghan knows how much effort that is!) She sat down to take it out, but as she did, in her mind's eye she saw a tall, dark man standing in desolate surroundings. There was a child beside him, and the afghan was wrapped around them both. She decided to finish the afghan as it was because she had such strong feelings for this man. But as she continued to work, she began to doubt herself. She thought, I just imagined that man, but I'll finish it anyway and send it as it is. She took the finished afghan to our women's conference as her donation. She was especially interested when Brother Garrison began speaking about Africa and the need for blankets there, where you wouldn't think there would be a need. "But when people are starving, they must maintain their body heat or die," he explained. Blankets are needed in Africa. As he spoke, she again saw the tall, dark-skinned man in her mind's eye. And she knew that by fall he would have his afghan. What an incredible spirit this work brings with it.

The work has also blessed our youth, mostly through a variety of Laurel and Eagle projects, from gathering first-aid supplies and constructing shipping crates to handcrafting sock dolls. We have seen young people in our wards and in our stake change. Four of my five children are in their teenage years—a very selfish, me-oriented time of life, and a necessary stage in growing up and learning independence. But this project has widened their focus as they have made items for other people, such as leper bandages, quilts, sock dolls and stuffed animals, and, most important to the Laurels, wall hangings for orphanages. The need for brightly colored wall hangings touched their hearts. Many newborn babies in third-world countries end up in orphanages. There they are placed on their backs in cribs. They stare up at white ceilings, white lights, white walls; and they go blind because they never have to use their eye muscles. These cheerful splashes of color in their white world add interest and require them to exercise their optic muscles as they shift focus.

Several families decided to make school kits as a family project. The parents gave their children chores to earn money and then, on a family expedition, they bought the school items for the kits, put them together as a family, and donated them. What a blessing and what a spirit such united effort has brought into those homes.

At our request, the Sort Center gave our stake a special project: to mend clothing that would be sent to Africa and Russia in huge, four-foot-by-four-foot wooden shipping crates. My son decided his Eagle project would be to build shipping crates to contain the items that we mended. To emphasize the plight of people in these third-world countries, I explained to the Scouts at work in our garage why the Sort Center always needed more crates. The Sort Center representative had told us that often when they send shipping crates to Africa, they don't get them back because the people keep them to live in.

One day I went out into the garage where they were working on the crates and noticed a young man, down on his hands and knees on a board drilling holes right in the middle where there shouldn't be holes. I asked him what he was doing. Words can't describe the look on his face as he looked up at me and said, "I didn't want to do that, but something told me to mark this board. I didn't do it—but it came to me again: 'Mark your board.' So I am drilling three holes in the middle of this board. I hope they call me on a mission to Africa. And if they do, I'm going to find this board and preach the gospel of Jesus Christ to the family living beneath it." A fourteen-year-old boy had a spiritual experience with the humanitarian work of the Church in my garage.

I testify to you that this is the Lord's work. It does not matter how old we are or how young we are, blessings will come into our personal lives, into our homes, our wards, and our stakes as we participate in this incredible work. May you feel the joy of humanitarian service that we have felt.
