Susette Green, Dlora Dalton, Dawn Anderson, Every Good Thing: Talks from the 1997 BYU Women's Conference ( 1998)

Succeeding with Literacy

CARMEN PRATT SHUMWAY

I am from Taylor, a small northern Arizona town that is 75 percent Latter-day Saint. We began a literacy program in our stake in October 1995, and implementing it has been a marvelous experience. We not only teach people how to read and write but we teach faith and testimony. As we read the scriptures and bear testimony, the faith of our students increases. As their testimonies increase, so does their ability to master the reading materials.

Because literacy specialists are navigating in uncharted waters, two people should be called to work together. Developing your own program according to the needs of your members takes two. Sister Evon Rogers and I were called about eighteen months ago by the stake president. When I was discouraged, she was enthusiastic—and vice versa. We telephoned each other every day to confer because we each needed a sounding board for our ideas.

Priesthood support has been very important to us. Getting priesthood support is part of the calling. It's important to remember that priesthood leaders have many things to worry about and direct. We have been very specific in our requests and have explained the program carefully. It's our responsibility to teach them. Our stake president lets us use the high council room as a classroom on Tuesdays and Thursday nights for an hour. He announced the first meeting in stake conference; I had written out the announcement for him. He suggested that I accompany my husband, who is on the high council, to explain the program in all the wards when he did not have an assigned partner. All these things helped. The stake president also gave the education counselor in our stake Relief Society presidency the opportunity to present our literacy program in bishops' council. Bishops must understand this program for it to work. Next, the education counselor trained the Relief Society presidencies. As bishops and Relief Society presidents counsel with members, they are the ones who sense individual needs. A man said to his bishop, "I've gone as far as I can in my profession because I can't pass the test to go higher." "We have a program for you," the bishop was able to tell him. "Let me refer you to the literacy program."

At our first meeting, however, only one person attended, so we knew we had to go back to the drawing board and find a new way to draw interest. Our message of hope became: "If you have gaps in your learning, or if you feel uncomfortable when someone asks you to read or to write, we invite you into our homes. We will teach you, one-on-one, to fill those gaps and weave your vast experience together with literature and language. Our work will be completely confidential."

This approach gave people hope. They had had bad experiences with reading and were reluctant to put themselves at risk. We began to get calls—a timid voice on the other end of the phone saying, "Can I take the literacy class?" We have taught fifteen people in the last fifteen months, one-on-one, in our homes.

How rewarding it is to work in this program! We spend about forty minutes together using the Church's literacy manual, Ye Shall Have My Words. Sometimes we give three lessons at a sitting; sometimes we spend three sittings on a lesson. We're not teaching a program; we're filling individual needs. After that forty minutes, they read to us from the Book of Mormon or short articles from the Ensign (the "Mormon Journal" at the back of the Ensign has articles that are just about the right length). If they are beginning readers, articles in the Friend have language that is appropriate for their level. They also read to us from their journals. Every lesson has a writing component: They write in their journals and start to write their life story. This shared reading and discussion time is precious. Although we caution students not to share anything private, the reading of their journal entries is a touching experience. The same Spirit that accompanies a good missionary lesson accompanies a good literacy lesson.

After about two months of work, I asked the stake president for some parameters concerning growth. He referred us to Mosiah 4:26: "I would that ye should impart of your substance to the poor, every man according to that which he hath, such as feeding the hungry, clothing the naked, visiting the sick and administering to their relief, both spiritually and temporally, according to their wants." This scripture has guided our program. We try to help people according to their wants.

Our area has Spanish-speaking people who are not fluent in English but are trying to fit into English-speaking wards. We announced a class time in our Spanish Sunday School, and twenty people—not all of them Latter-day Saints—came to the first meeting. In response to their needs and wants, we developed our own program of English as a second language (ESL). Because we try to help these people with the life skills they need to prosper here in the United States, we devised lessons using language needed for work at a pig farm, in a doctor's or dentist's office, in cleaning a home, or in communicating with teachers at school. As the students become more advanced, they begin to study our Church literacy books, though we have to help them with some vocabulary.

We have only English-speaking missionaries in our area, so our more advanced LDS Spanish-speaking students go on splits with the elders to translate and fellowship. Everyone who has taken an ESL class with us has ended up taking the missionary lessons. Eleven members of our ESL class have been baptized. We hold a weekly family home evening with about thirty in attendance, only ten being LDS. On Sunday afternoons we have a Spanish-speaking Sunday School, and sometimes half the Relief Society room is full. A year or two ago only five or six attended.

Another wonderful thing has happened. As we have begun teaching the Spanish-speaking people, other members of our stake have begun to recognize these neighbors' needs. A woman called me last Christmas and said, "I have a half a beef. Would you distribute it among some of the sisters that need it, members and nonmembers alike?" One interesting phone call brought seven girls and their dates to my house before a school dance. We took them to seven homes, and they left a turkey on each doorstep, knocked on the door, and ran. I can't imagine a better activity before a dance.

One nonmember man wanted to take the literacy lessons. When he called, I said, "You need to understand that part of our reading will be from the Book of Mormon." He said, "I will read from your Book of Mormon if I can take the lessons." He was a businessman who had hired secretaries to do what he couldn't do. Now his work has moved him to a town about eighty miles away, but he drives back twice a week to continue the literacy program.

Right now we're teaching six people one-on-one in our homes, and we're teaching about twenty in the Spanish program. The work hasn't all been easy, but our goal has been to proceed with faith. Look at your ward or your stake as if it were a small town, and then pray to determine what you need. Your situation will not be exactly like ours. Your need may be to improve the gospel scholarship of those who can read well. You may want to help members truly understand the scriptures as they seek understanding and comfort. You may need to provide listening ears for children whose single parents don't have time to listen to them read at home. You surely want to help members gain an in-depth testimony of the gospel of Jesus Christ, to truly know his words and to be able to live by his words. Ask Heavenly Father to bless your efforts, and he will direct you in what you need in your areas. He will open up a way.

Let me relate one example. We have found it very hard to change students from one teacher to another. I had two or three new students, but I didn't have any more teachers. I already had three students myself plus the Spanish class, so I knelt and told Heavenly Father, "I have to have a new teacher, and sometimes callings come slowly." The next day at noon, a sister came up to me and said, "How can I get involved in the literacy program?" I said, "The Lord surely sent you. When can you start?" She was called, and someone else was empowered with new knowledge.

I know the literacy program works. When we work under priesthood and Relief Society leadership, we work under an umbrella of faith and inspiration. The underlying success and strength of our literacy program stems from the fact that not only is it educationally sound but it is an inspired program. Heavenly Father will help you direct its implementation.
