Susette Green, Dlora Dalton, Dawn Anderson, Every Good Thing: Talks from the 1997 BYU Women's Conference ( 1998)

Conflict Resolution: Come Let Us Reason Together

SUSAN BRADSHAW, CHERYL B. PRESTON, AND KATHY PULLINS

Conflict is a fact of life. Lehi instructs his son Jacob, "For it must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things" (2 1 Ne. 2:11). Opposition is the source of all growth and an absolute necessity if one is to be alive, interacting with others. The goal and eternal principle is that the complementary joining of ideas and approaches leads to the best and most creative solutions.

The idea of conflict, a state of opposition, is often equated with contention, a negative and unrighteous attitude, something to avoid. How do we prevent conflict, which is useful, from escalating to contention, which we want to avoid? What are the skills to manage conflict in respectful, peaceable ways? How do we become peacemakers?

Imagine this scenario in a church kitchen. Sister S., the ward Relief Society president, is discussing with one of her counselors, Sister E., a problem the ward is having.

Sister S.: I've been thinking about the parking problem at the chapel. Last week after we set up homemaking meeting, I walked around the parking lot and considered the problem from several angles. Based on my measurements, we could have another row of parking if traffic moved consistently in the same direction. If everyone entered the lot from Parkview and exited on 89th, the process of one ward emptying while the next is arriving would be smoother. If we painted the curb red in front of the church along Parkview, we could use that extra lane for making the right hand turn into the parking lot. Sure, some families will have to go an extra block to enter on the Parkview side, but the result would be well worth any inconvenience. Here, let me draw you a diagram to show you how it could work . . .

[The scene changes to welfare meeting. Sister S. and Sister E. are sitting together in the bishop's office as members of the council.]

Bishop: Welcome to welfare meeting this morning. We have several items on the agenda, but first I want to talk about the parking situation. I am increasingly concerned about this. More and more members are late to sacrament meeting because of the confusion when one ward exits and the next arrives. And last Sunday, we had another "fender bender." By the time everyone gets parked and into the meeting, members are so frustrated it is hard to feel the Spirit. I also know there are really strong and somewhat bitter feelings about the situation with four wards in the building. But there is just no way the stake can take a ward to another building or give us more time between meeting blocks. Any ideas?

[Various council members whisper to their neighbors with some undertones of disagreement. No one offers a specific response to the bishop's question. Sister E. looks meaningfully at Sister S., who just shrugs.]

Was Sister S. right to stay out of the conflict? Every situation is different, of course, but it seems unfortunate to waste Sister S.'s contribution to resolving this problem. We suspect she is practicing avoidance—avoiding contention. Yet, the scriptures warn us about hiding our light under a bushel (see Matt. 5:14-17). In addition, we have all made a commitment to sustain our leaders. Sister S.'s idea could have resolved the controversy, or at least opened a discussion, but instead the problem will continue to fuel bad feelings among the members meeting in this building. Jesus did not shy away from teaching when he had an audience that might learn, even if some people might have been offended by his teachings. In Matt. 5:2, the scripture says that "he opened his mouth," and in Matt. 13:57, we are told that some people "were offended in him."

Perhaps we should give Sister S. another chance. Imagine that same welfare meeting. The bishop has just said, "Any ideas?"

Sister S.: Well, I'm really no expert or anything, and you don't have to take my suggestion—I mean it is just an idea—but I was thinking we could have the traffic go one way . . .

Brother O. (interrupting): We've tried everything already. Remember last summer when we told everyone to walk to church or shuttle from the grocery store parking? [Silence for a moment.]

Sister S.: Well yes, but I was thinking we could paint arrows to indicate one way and the priests could help direct traffic for a few weeks until everyone gets accustomed to the routine . . .

Sister S. volunteered her idea, but how effective was she in conveying it? Her manner of delivery sabotaged her content. Sabot is the French root of the word sabotage. A sabot is a heavy, wooden-soled shoe. During the French Revolution, factory workers who wore them, when being watched, ran the machinery as trained. But, unobserved, they slipped their shoes into the works of the machinery, jamming it so nothing was accomplished. That seems to be exactly what Sister S. is doing. Although she is now expressing her idea on one hand, she is discounting it on the other. We doubt she intends this result, but she has fallen into several language traps that diminish her chances of being taken seriously.

Research shows that women are perceived as less credible and less effective in influencing mixed group decisions when they use culturally trained "self-trivializing messages." [^1] These include an unnecessarily high voice pitch; a rising intonation (a swing upward in tone at the end of phrases or sentences) that conveys hesitancy, uncertainty, and incompleteness of thought; qualifiers; disclaimers; tag questions; and compound requests. In addition, Sister S. allows herself to be easily interrupted and drawn off her point.

Although women in many cultures learn to communicate with each other this way, they can relearn their communication style to talk in more powerful ways when the occasion calls for it. This is not to say that one type of communication style is better than another. Many of us have a closet full of shoes: boots, sandals, dress shoes, athletic shoes, and maybe a sabot or two. What you select to wear for the day depends on where you are going, what the occasion will be, and what you are trying to accomplish. We all have learned how to make appropriate choices in most aspects of our lives. Boots may be the best choice for shoveling snow off the driveway, but sandals are the best choice for a hot day at the beach. Athletic shoes may be the most comfortable, but we don't recommend them for weddings or for wearing with graduation robes. Similarly, we are more effective in our communication if we make style choices based on the best information we can get about the context, audience, and objectives of a discussion.

To avoid being misunderstood, we have to learn the dialect of others with whom we hope to communicate, just as missionaries learn the languages of the people they are sent to teach. And just as there are cultural differences, so there are generational and gender differences in language. In fact, linguists have identified a "genderlect," a kind of dialect that differs by gender. [^2]

Sister S. has a good idea, and she knows it. Yet, she weakens her message in the mind of her audience before it is fully explained. She appears less knowledgeable and prepared than she really is. Moreover, her style suggests that she lacks conviction about the feasibility of her own idea. If she doesn't believe in it, why should anyone else? Although there are audiences, especially in other cultures, to which Sister S.'s style would appear more polite and therefore be more respected, we need to learn the positive elements of a variety of approaches and use each as appropriate to our objectives and audience.

With this suggestion in mind, let's go to Sister S.'s presentation at next month's welfare meeting.

Sister S. (showing a chart): So, to sum up, we could increase parking stalls by fifteen and reduce accidents by directing traffic in the same direction.

Brother O.: It just isn't practical to have everyone turning off Parkview into the lot. That would cause serious backup on one of the city's busiest streets. Just painting the curb red does not make it a turn lane. The city would need to restripe the road, and they will never do that for us. It just isn't workable!

Sister S. (looking hurt and defeated): You're probably right.

[Later, between meetings, Brother O. passes Sister S. in the hallway. He smiles affably at Sister S., who turns away, still offended. She walks out to her car and complains to her family about Brother O. being arrogant.]

It's obvious that Sister S.'s feelings have been hurt by Brother O., but instead of working through their disagreements about the feasibility of a turn lane, Sister S. has become personal and defensive. This interferes with her ability to contribute effectively to the dialogue. In addition, Sister S.'s reaction could poison her relationship with Brother O. Although he probably should have been more sensitive in how he commented on her idea, he most likely didn't mean to offend or to suggest any disrespect for Sister S.

Even in situations where a comment is meant to be hurtful or demeaning, Sister S.'s response is counterproductive. Elder Neal A. Maxwell warns us that "we have an obligation to work out impasses as well as trespasses in interpersonal relationships." He quotes scripture in support of that idea: "Moreover if thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone: if he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother" (Matt. 18:15). As Elder Maxwell explains: "To take the initiative in repairing or strengthening a relationship takes both love and courage. Others don't always respond to such initiatives: some peacemakers are spurned. Absent such initiatives, however, the impasses remain or deepen." [^3]

Let's give Sister S. another try in this situation. Back to the welfare meeting.

Brother O. (interrupting again): Just painting the curb red does not make it a turn lane. The city would need to restripe the road, and they will never do that for us. It just isn't workable!

Sister S.: If we do need to restripe the road, I believe the city will cooperate. I looked in the public records, and the city has restriped or changed traffic patterns in more drastic ways at the request of citizen groups seven times in the last two years. We shouldn't have any problem convincing the city engineer that restriping Parkview is in the city's interest as much as ours.

[Later Sister S. approaches Brother O. in the hall.]

Sister S.: You seemed quite unhappy with my proposal this morning. I am concerned that you may have a problem with me, as well as with my idea. Have I done something to offend you? I have always considered you a good friend and will do whatever it takes to clear up any difficulties in our relationship.

Brother O.: I'm sorry I was abrupt, Sister S. It definitely isn't you. My father has been staying with us, and he is very ill. I have a lot of things on my mind, and I realize I've been irritable with everyone the last few days. You certainly have done your homework. I didn't realize that the city had cooperated with other groups. The more I think about your plan, the more I see it makes sense. It could work.

Our fictitious character Sister S. has come a long way in resolving conflict. She has learned to take the risk of contributing, she can express her ideas with confidence, and she has learned to respond to criticism without becoming defensive or developing hurt feelings. But Sister S. has been in fairly supportive and friendly environments. What happens if she runs into some real hostility? Let's see Sister S. at the city engineer's office.

Sister S. (explaining her idea across the desk from the city engineer): With this minor change in the layout of Parkview, the traffic will flow much smoother and we can avoid the congestion that is common on those days activities are held at our church building.

Engineer (hostile): That isn't the point. I just can't go around moving city streets at the whim of every organization in the city.

Sister S.: I understand your concern. We acknowledge that this will require some expense and time on your part. The nearly twelve hundred citizens of this city who attend church meetings and weekday activities in that building, though, will appreciate your cooperation. And making a right turn lane on Parkview for the length of the church property will ease traffic for everyone who uses that street.

Engineer: You people are so pushy! "Twelve hundred citizens"! Is that a threat? The snobs in that part of town think they have a right to demand all kinds of special treatment. Can't you see I'm just too busy for this nonsense?

Sister S. is in a tight spot now. She may be sorry she ever brought up the idea, but there is bound to be some discomfort when we take risks and seek changes. If we want to make a difference, we can't just avoid discussion. On the other hand, we don't need to become part of the contention in a negative way. The scriptures warn us not to revile against revilers (D&C 19:30) nor respond in kind when we are attacked (Matt. 13:55-57).

When dealing with conflict, it helps to understand on what level the conflict is occurring. At the first level, there is simply a problem to solve. The second level involves problem solving but includes the difficult element of relationship mixed into the problem to be solved. The third level escalates the conflict to a point where one side must "win" or "be right." On this third level, both sides enlist others to agree with them. The fourth and fifth levels represent conflict that has grown out of control and shifted beyond a desire to win to a desire to hurt, banish, or destroy the other.

When determining how to manage conflict, first try to determine the level on which the conflict is occurring. Then think about how to resolve the conflict and also how to avoid having the conflict escalate to the next level.

Most of our conflicts exist at level two. When we have a disagreement with another person, it is difficult to separate the problem from the feelings. The desire to protect ourselves becomes as important as solving the problem.

A primary goal in resolving conflict at level two is to recognize what is making us afraid and what might be creating fear in the other party. It is interesting to note that heavenly messengers often begin by saying, "Fear not." The angel Gabriel said to Mary, "Fear not, Mary: for thou hast found favour with God" (Luke 1:30). An angel appearing to the shepherds said, "Fear not: for, behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy" (Luke 2:10). Christ also used the phrase many times in his teachings. For instance, "And Jesus said unto Simon, Fear not; from henceforth thou shalt catch men" (Luke 5:10).

To resolve a conflict at level two without letting it escalate into contention, we must first take a step back and look at our fears. Consider Susan's experience: "I am one of three Laurel advisors in my ward. I was assigned to prepare the lesson on Easter Sunday. I worked hard and late into the night to prepare, but when I arrived early on Sunday morning, no Laurels were there. The new Young Women president had decided to have them attend Relief Society where one of the other Laurel advisors was giving the lesson for Easter. At first I was very angry. In fact, for a few days I mumbled to myself about how much the new Young Women president had to learn. I soon grew tired of these bothersome thoughts, however, and I took a step back and asked myself, 'What is your fear?' I realized that I was afraid the new Young Women president or others who might have notified me of the change did not value me. I feared not being valued. Once I realized this, my anger dissolved. After recognizing these feelings, the next week I approached the Young Women president to resolve my concerns. Ironically, before I could say a word, she turned to me in tears and said, 'I feel so incompetent. I am making so many mistakes. I am so afraid I cannot do this job. I just don't have what it takes.' When I understood my fears and knew her fears, future conflicts were easy to resolve. I felt nothing but warmth and a desire to support her."

Christ declares, "Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God" (Matt. 5:9; see also 3 Ne. 12:9). If we are peacemakers, we will indeed be as God would have us be. We will resemble him because we act as he acts, contributing peace to a world of strife. With the covenants we have made comes responsibility to change our own hearts and to assist others in their change and growth. Such "heart changing" leads us to view conflict, which is an inevitable occurrence in human interaction, in the way Christ, the bearer of peace everlasting, would—to promote growth and progress toward perfection. Such is the approach of a peacemaker.

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] For further information on the stages of grief, see "From Grief to Solace," in Follow Me (Relief Society Personal Study Guide 4, 1992), 138-41; Relief Society Handbook, rev. ed. (1988), 38.
[^2] For more information on "genderlect," see Deborah Tannen, You Just Don't Understand: Women and Men in Conversation (New York: Ballantine Books, 1990); Janet E. Ainsworth, "In a Different Register: The Pragmatics of Powerlessness in Police Interrogation," Yale Law Journal 103 (1993): 275-86; Roger Fisher and William Ury, Getting to Yes: Negotiating Agreement without Giving In (New York: Penguin Books, 1991); Tom Peters, "The Best Managers Will Listen, Motivate, Support: Isn't That Just Like a Woman?" Working Woman, Sept. 1990, 142; Lee A. Susardi, "When a Woman Speaks, Does Anybody Listen?" Working Woman, July 1990, 92.
[^3] Neal A. Maxwell, Wherefore, Ye Must Press Forward (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1977), 88-89.
