Susette Green, Dlora Dalton, Dawn Anderson, Every Good Thing: Talks from the 1997 BYU Women's Conference ( 1998)

The Grieving Process

IONE J. SIMPSON

I became a widow when I was fifty years old. My husband died in a drowning accident. One day we had been planning what we would do for the rest of our lives; the next day he was gone. All except one of our children were married, in college, or on a mission. Our youngest daughter was a senior in high school, but she also would soon be off on her own. We figured we had about five more years, and then we could make definite plans.

How did I react when my husband was suddenly taken from me? I reacted in a normal way, but I didn't know it was normal. I wish I had known at the time some of the things that I learned later when I went back to school and became a social worker. I wish I had known about grief and its stages. Grieving is so important to our mental health and to our eventual recovery. It's good to understand the grieving process before you are in the midst of it. The steps of grief may not be the same for every individual, but the stages of denial, anger, depression, and acceptance are recognizable and present in almost every kind of trauma. [^1]

Briefly, this was my experience. My husband and I went with some other couples—stake presidents and their wives—on an outing. As we were canoeing down what looked like a quiet river, our canoe tipped over. I got out of the water, but Del drowned. As we drove home that evening—there were five of us in the car—I could hear others crying softly, but I couldn't cry. I was numb. I felt embarrassed, wondering what was wrong with me. I was totally numb. Mentally, I knew what had happened, but I had absolutely no feeling. It hurt me that I didn't. We drove home, and my daughters met me at the door. I told them that their father was gone—that he had drowned. I didn't even think about it at the time, but they didn't cry either. They just looked at me quizzically. I later learned that I was in shock, the first stage of grieving, as were they. But it was a blessing. Had I fully realized at the time what had happened, the shock could have been too difficult to handle. As it was, I temporarily had no feeling or real comprehension of what had occurred. I was in denial.

The next few days seemed unreal. I stoically made plans for the funeral—made decisions about details; spent hours writing a talk to be read by my daughter-in-law about his life; talked with his sisters, gathering information about their early years together—all with little emotion. Even at the funeral and afterward as the family gathered for a meal, I felt nothing.

I don't recall just how long this went on, but I do remember several instances in the next few months of unexpectedly breaking into tears in public with no apparent cause and then feeling embarrassed because by now I was supposed to have "recovered." I later learned that when least expected, something happens that triggers a memory or a feeling, and the tears come. In one instance, I ran into some dear friends of my parents. My parents had been on a mission in Sweden for a year, and I had not seen them since Del's death. Meeting these friends was like seeing my parents, and it brought a flood of uncontrollable tears, which to them must have been most disturbing.

The next stage is usually anger. It can be a totally unreasonable emotion and at times very inappropriate. I recall stamping my foot in front of my husband's picture and saying, "Why did you do this to me?" I felt hurt and angry that Heavenly Father would let this happen, and I recall in my prayers reminding him that we had planned to go on a mission and asking him, "Why? Why did you let this happen? Why?" I even bargained with the Lord, pleading with him to help me handle what seemed like an impossible situation: "I will read my scriptures more faithfully; I'll be more thoughtful of others." And at times I directed the anger at myself: I felt guilty because my husband hadn't particularly wanted to go on that trip that day, but he thought he probably should and he knew I wanted to, so he went. I blamed myself. I cycled through all these irrational thoughts and feelings. I felt anger, and I felt guilt. It's normal to have these feelings. At such times, it is good to have someone to talk to—someone who will listen and not be critical even when you are unreasonable. I was fortunate to have my sister-in-law, who let me call her night or day. Many times I poured out my heart to her. She listened.

The stage of anger may be followed by depression. A woman left suddenly alone may feel lost, wondering what she is going to do for the rest of her life. Often her entire adult life has been centered around her husband's comings and goings, his responsibilities at work, his church callings. Children may also have been a great part of her life, but in a different way; she has been responsible for them. Who is going to be responsible for her? Who will she talk to at night when it's quiet? Who can she tell her problems to? How can she manage without him?

Although the stages of grief are almost universal in times of serious personal disaster, not everyone who has tragedy in their lives reacts the same way. In the case of the widow, the reaction may depend on how death comes. When I went back to school, I read a study of two groups of widows. Half of them had gone through a long period of illness with their mate, knowing that the illness was terminal. The other half had lost their husbands in accidents or by sudden, harsh, unexpected illnesses. The study, continuing over a follow-up period of twenty years, found that those who had time to get used to the idea of the death of their mate before it happened seemed to adjust more readily afterwards. They more often remarried and resumed their normal activities sooner. Those who experienced the sudden trauma of a mate's death had more difficulty adjusting, and more of them did not remarry. Both experienced the grieving, but the first group resumed a normal life more easily.

For me, perhaps the lowest point came after about six months. One evening when I was at MIA, someone, without realizing it, said something that hurt me. I drove home that night in despair. "If Del was home," I reasoned, "I could tell him what happened, and everything would be all right." That thought hurt, but a deep depression swallowed me after I got home when it hit me that never again in this life would I be able to talk about little things like this with my husband. I believe that was when I finally realized what Del's death meant. For days the hurt was so deep and painful I could hardly endure it. Problems that ordinarily would have been small became large; there were no solutions. The depression deepened.

Days later an incident occurred that made me realize I was not alone, and I knew I never would be if I did my part. From then on I began to think more clearly and to accept the fact that Del was really gone and I must go on with my life. Reaching the stage of acceptance did not mean that I did not have feelings of denial, anger, and depression again, but gradually it got easier. The truth is that grief doesn't progress in an orderly fashion. It's messy, disruptive, and overwhelming. One day you'll think, I'm well. I feel so good today. This is finally over now. The next day you'll be right back down in the bottom. You simply have to work your way through it. Don't give up. Grieving eventually leads to healing, and understanding the process can help.

Many wise people advised me correctly when they counseled, "Don't make any big changes in your life for at least a year." If you start making big changes when you're not thinking clearly—and I certainly wasn't thinking clearly that first year—you do things that are unwise. Widows sometimes invest money unwisely or sell their homes and move to another place to get away from memories. But it does not help to run away. Wherever you go, you will want to be in some other place. I had to start rebuilding my life, but I needed to do it when I was thinking clearly.

Another bit of advice that helped me concerned finances. If you receive a large sum of money, perhaps from an insurance policy at the death of your spouse, be careful. It may look like more than enough to live on the rest of your life. Your children with young families may be struggling or there may be others you would like to share with, but what if you live another fifty years? "Put it away until you can plan for what you are going to do with your life" was excellent advice.

Life is not easy. It was not meant to be. Though it is good to know and understand ways to help yourself through these times, the greatest source of strength will come from your faith in our Heavenly Father and the knowledge that he truly loves you and will always be there for you. Through prayer you can talk with him and tell him of your hurt. He may not take your trial away, but he will give you the strength to handle it. We are his children, and he loves us. Someday you will look back and see how he has helped you, and you will understand and be grateful.

NOTE

---
Notas:
[^1] Judy Tatlebaum, Courage to Grieve: Creative Living, Recovery and Growth through Grief (New York: Lippincott and Crowell, 1980), 9.
