Susette Green, Dlora Dalton, Dawn Anderson, Every Good Thing: Talks from the 1997 BYU Women's Conference ( 1998)

The Peace Which Passeth Understanding

BONNIE BALLIF-SPANVILL

Why me? Why this? Why now? What purpose does this serve? Is there no other way? These are some of the questions we ask about our disappointments and heartaches in this lone and dreary world. As we begin to look for answers to these questions, we must know our sorrows, turn them around and around in our minds, and find words to describe our tender feelings. Finding ways to talk about the things that hurt us helps us to weep, to grieve for our losses, and to mourn. Author Judy Tatlebaum, in her book Courage to Grieve, says: "Grief is a wound that needs attention in order to heal. To work through and complete grief means to face our feelings openly and honestly. . . . Many of us fear that, if allowed in, grief will bowl us over indefinitely. The truth is that grief experienced does dissolve. The only grief that does not end is grief that has not been fully faced." [^1]

I often turn to poets, who have words I could never find to capture my feelings so that I can hold them in my mind. When my husband, Robert, died a few months ago, I found the English poet Pamela Gillilan. In a few lines from her poem "When You Died," I found my grief described:

My eyes melted Spilling the inexhaustible essence of sorrow. The soft flesh of the body Melted onto chairs and into beds Dragging its emptiness and pain. [^2]

Your own troubles and sorrows may not deal with a loved one's death. If you are wounded in any way, perhaps you can borrow a few words from Meiling Jin, a woman in Ghana:

My poems are all jagged at the edges because I am a woman who is jagged at the edges I speak only of what I know. [^3]

Our sorrows must be given words and space within us, but we must also move on. As long as we hold on to the happenings of this world as though they are our only purpose for being here, we are like the monkey who sees a cherry in a narrow-necked bottle. Anxious to have the cherry, the monkey slips his hand through the narrow neck of the bottle and clutches it, but with his fist closed around the cherry, his hand is imprisoned. He is so determined to have it that he will never let it go and wanders significantly disabled without the use of his hand. If we fasten our minds onto the things that have gone wrong in mortality, we are similarly disabled, imprisoned by our preoccupation with this world. We must look beyond.

This world, as the Sufis [^4] say, is an illusion. Many years ago I dreamed that my husband and I were walking down a long path. We first came to a small town where people were dressed in clothes of the 1800s. Someone needed help cleaning a fireplace. Immediately I got down on my hands and knees and started cleaning. I felt happy helping. After a few minutes, my husband gently took my arm and lifted me up, urging me to leave the job that I was doing and to walk on down the path. I did so reluctantly. We had not gone very far when we came to another group of people. This time they were dressed in western cowboy clothes. Someone was injured. Again, I immediately began helping another woman care for the wounded man. Hastily we stopped the bleeding and made clean bandages from an old shirt.

Once again my husband took my arm and gently pulled me away toward the path. I hesitated but eventually followed him. We continued down the path until we met a third, a fourth, and a fifth group of people, each with problems. I quickly began to help and felt I was involved and needed in each situation. And, each time, my husband nudged me to continue along the path we had started. After we left the last group of people, we walked up a small incline to the top of a hill. We turned and looked back across the valley where we had been. All the people were taking off costumes, breaking down cardboard sets, loading big trucks, and preparing to drive away. I was stunned. What I had seen as reality was fake, and the fact that I had been caught up in it frightened me. I realized that even though the experiences of this life seem compelling, they are but tiny moments along a path that goes on forever.

Christ teaches us that this world is temporary and that the sorrows of the world will pass. Time and time again he urges us to repent and to cry repentance to others. He does not want us to tell people they are doing everything wrong. He wants us to tell them there is another way to think about our experiences in this world. Repentance is translated from the Greek word metanoia. [^5] In Greek meta means to transform, as in metamorphosis, and -noia means mind. Metanoia, then, means the transformation of the mind. Repentance suggests a whole new way of thinking, a change in the way we view this world, lifting our thoughts to a higher realm, thinking about our problems with Christlike minds.

Everything that Christ tries to tell us is about making this transformation happen in our own hearts. We have to move away from the way the world thinks and on to this new way. Listen once more to some of Christ's teachings about this new way of thinking: When people have taken advantage of you, turn the other cheek; when sued for your coat, give your cloak as well; if compelled to go a mile, go two; love your enemies; bless them that curse you; do good to them that hate you; pray for them who despitefully use you. Do you think about your enemies in this way? What about the people next door who have been rude or judgmental? In your everyday interactions, do you use this pattern of thought that Christ tried so hard to teach us? Most of us do not, at least not all the time.

When I was fifteen, my father was called to be the mission president in New Zealand, a beautiful country of small rolling hills. New Zealand is also called Ate'aroa which means land of the long white cloud. As we traveled up and down the green hills, while moving around the islands, we often saw clouds in the valley and sunlight on the hilltops. It seemed strange to me that we could go down in the valley, slow almost to a stop, unable to see our way, and then climb up to the top of a hill and see perfectly in the bright sunlight. Soon we would drive over the hill and down into a valley where we were again blinded by fog. In a similar manner, we travel through our lives, climbing up to moments of illumination and then sinking down again into habits of thinking about things in a worldly way.

In the last few years, I have lost five of those most dear to me: my eldest sister, my eldest brother, my mother, my father, and most recently my husband. Before his death, my husband was very ill and nearly died on several occasions. I often went to my Heavenly Father to try to understand how to stay up on the hill, to keep my vision clear, to keep from sinking back into the valleys of fog. Let me share one of the many experiences I had that helped me to see my situation more clearly. About seven years ago, my husband went into the hospital for a transfusion. While he was receiving the second unit of blood, he went into a coma. My father and my bishop came to the hospital to give him a blessing; they also blessed me, promising that the righteous desires of my heart would be granted unto me. I sat in the intensive care unit waiting for my husband to come out of the coma. I had lots of time to think. I prayed constantly. I talked to the Lord about Robert. I wanted so much for him to be well. Each time I began to pray, the words of the blessing I had received came strongly into my mind—the righteous desires of my heart would be granted. I wondered what could be more righteous than to have my husband live? My young children needed him! I was confident that my desire was righteous.

The long days passed. I continued to ponder and struggled to understand the righteous desires of my own heart. I finally realized that what I really wanted more than anything else was the greatest possible spiritual development for my husband, my three children, and for me. After that, if God could consider the cries of my heart and let my beloved live a little longer, that was what I wanted. I came to understand that the spiritual well-being of those I love was more important than his living or dying. A rush of the Spirit flowed through me and over me, assuring me that my righteous desires were also God's desires for me; we wanted the same thing. My thinking had been transformed. I went into that week wanting my husband to live at all costs, believing I had the faith for him to be healed. By the end of the week, I was humbled and grateful for the knowledge that whatever was needed to bring about the greatest spiritual well-being in my family was what I desired and God would do. I was beginning to learn how to see my personal struggles from God's point of view.

How do the patterns of thought Christ has outlined in the gospel help us to deal with our own heartaches, losses, and disappointments? I have found a few ideas that help me.

First, manage with grace. Notice that I did not say gracefully manage. Most of us are hanging on by our fingernails. But you can manage with grace. You must realize that of course you cannot handle illness and divorce and difficult children and a host of other problems by yourself, and that you are not alone. The Holy Ghost and God's grace will help. Get up in the mornings, get dressed, and work on one thing. The next day, work on something else. Keep holding on to God's hand. He has promised to lead us through our trials. Hold on. Manage with his grace.

Second, do not be surprised that you have problems. Pain is inevitable in this lone and dreary world. Do not feel that you are being picked on; problems are the fare of this existence. You cannot escape them. When you get through one, others will be waiting to come your way. Problems hurt, but they also teach wisdom, patience, and an understanding of the good and evil.

Third, let suffering go. You cannot avoid pain, but to hold onto pain is to wallow in it. Christ suffered for us. If you have faith in his suffering, then you can let it go and rest upon the Lord.

Fourth, nothing lasts forever. Life continues. Storms come and go within as well as without. Problems challenge and subside. When pain gets unbearable, just hold on; it, too, will pass. Life will get better . . . before it gets worse again.

Fifth, hold on to hope. Keep moving toward righteousness. Keep seeking after good things, after beauty and truth. The American poet Langston Hughes said:

Hold fast to dreams. For if dreams die Life is a broken-winged bird That cannot fly. [^6]

We have the assurance that we will never be kept from seeking after what is most important in this life. We are guaranteed that opportunity.

After we grieve for our disappointments and losses, we must move on. The gospel of Jesus Christ gives us the pattern for thinking about our problems in different ways that will free us from suffering and allow us to keep growing. In the world you and I will have tribulations, but Christ has overcome the world. His ways are not the ways of the world. If we truly seek to understand, our trials open the way for Christ to teach us. Had my husband not been in that coma, I probably never would have learned an important lesson. Trials bring sorrow, which urges us to seek answers, which in turn bring understanding and peace. This is the peace which passeth the world's understanding.

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] Judy Tatlebaum, Courage to Grieve: Creative Living, Recovery and Growth through Grief (New York: Lippincott and Crowell, 1980), 9.
[^2] Pamela Gillilan, "When You Died," in Poetry with an Edge, ed. Niel Astley (Newcastle-upon-Tyne: Bloodaxe Books, 1988), 63.
[^3] Meiling Jin, "Judgement," in Sisters of Caliban, ed. M. J. Fenwick (Falls Church, Virginia: Azul Editions, 1996), 165.
[^4] Sufism is a mystical movement of Islam that originated in the eighth century. Sufis believe that deep intuition is the only real guide to knowledge.
[^5] Maurice Nicoll, The Mark (New York: Thomas Nelson and Sons, [1956]), 89-99.
[^6] Langston Hughes, The Dream Keeper (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1932), 82.
