Susette Green, Dlora Dalton, Dawn Anderson, Every Good Thing: Talks from the 1997 BYU Women's Conference ( 1998)

Daughters of the Millstone

SHARI S. CRALL

Like a tickler file embedded deeply in my mind, my eldest son's eleventh birthday set off an alarm. Years later, a therapy discussion about "triggers" sent me to my journal to find the date the memories began. Previously my mother had checked her meticulously kept Christmas card file, complete with children's birthdays, and told me my first abuser would have been eleven the year he molested me. I was five. Dismayed by the connection, I wondered what other tangled paths I walked, which, from an aerial view, were charted roads.

According to my journal, that birthday morning of 20 February 1993 brought the first flash of insight into scary and evil dreams, which had startled me awake for a month. That morning, as if I were flipping through a photo album, static images swam up before my eyes. Half-awake, I strained to see them, trying to make sense, but they went quickly, and the snippets I caught made me gasp.

For days this continued in the moments between sleep and waking. I began to dread sleep. I prayed deeply to understand what was happening. Was I caught in some warp of evil imagination? What was true? What was real? What had suddenly knocked me from my roles as housewife, PTA mom, and stake Young Women counselor to this insanity?

Soon, the pictures ran together, and the shock of what I saw overwhelmed me. With my teeth clenched to hold back the cascade of more scenes, I desperately called my bishop. Miraculously, he said he could be over later that morning. Feeling pressure like that of a delivering womb when told not to push, I waited.

Finally he arrived, and as we sat in my living room, the story unfolded. In the process, the self-hatred and confusion that had defined my life fell away like old skin. Washing my face later, I looked in the mirror. Startled by what I saw, I realized I had not looked myself in the eye in two decades.

A stillness enveloped me. I was in the eye of a storm—the fury of self-hatred, confusion, and rage was behind me, and the fury of self-knowledge, understanding, and healing was in front of me. The surge of sweet peace I felt then had to carry me through the years of pain ahead. Although a spontaneous healing was not to be, I consider the healing process no less a miracle.

I never knew before that when people spoke of emotional pain, they were talking about the very physical sensations that curled me in a ball, slumped me in a heap, or slammed me to the ground. Searching diligently in the only realm I knew, the light of Christ, I learned to seek priesthood leaders for spiritual assistance, receive help from professionals for my mental distress, and build a network of friends and family to support my crumbled emotional structure.

For my spiritual progression and strength to bear this cross, my bishop was key. I was fortunate to act quickly on the prompting to speak with him and to be met with kindness and sincerity. This step is often very difficult for survivors of sexual abuse, as barriers of distrust for both men and authority loom tall.

During times when rage and bitterness engulfed me, when even the scriptures mocked me as irrelevant, it was my bishop's extended arm that brought the Savior to me with clarity. Although he did not say everything perfectly and at times I felt hurt and misunderstood, I knew he was straining to hear the directions of the Lord to help me. When he gave voice to those whisperings, I felt sweet confirmation of the Spirit.

He gave me blessings when my husband, struggling with his own feelings about events, delayed and didn't. He gently helped me remember the basic essentials of my covenants, which marked the pathway out. He confirmed for me, through the witness of the Spirit to him, that these happenings were true and were no fault of my own. He prayed for me; he checked on me—most of the time by simply catching my eye during sacrament meeting; he encouraged me, initiating meetings and conversations I was too weak to seek.

The time for me to seek professional help came when my daily routine was regularly disrupted by the intensity of feeling, whether sadness, shame, confusion, rage, or fear. I chose LDS Social Services because they gave me a comfort zone of shared faith and values. Although the events were in the past, indeed twenty years earlier, my confusion, self-destructive behavior, and rage were very much in the present. Entering therapy felt like emerging from a jungle—like finally finding treatment after walking crippled for decades.

What seemed a miracle to me, although as common as a doctor setting a broken bone in a cast, the therapist asked me questions and gave information that went right to my symptoms.

"Do you live your life in fear?" I remember him asking one session.

I had never articulated that feeling before. Given thought, the answer was certainly yes.

"Okay, next session I'll take you through an exercise that will help with that."

I left exhilarated. There were exercises for fear? Exercises that, like physical therapy on a broken leg, could help me regain full movement?

After individual therapy, I entered a group organized through LDS Social Services. Survivors of Traumatic Abuse (SOTA) was composed of five women dealing with past sexual abuse, a therapist, and a cofacilitator who was also a fellow survivor.

The group particularly helped me deal with blaming myself for the abuse. As I heard others tell their stories with the usual self-blaming remarks, it was obvious to me they were not responsible. The idea, which had been cultivated in my head, finally took root in my heart. Now I could move even further. I could think, despite a molester's words to the contrary, that maybe his perversion wasn't my fault either.

During this time I also made progress toward understanding the Lord's plan, learning to trust God, and rebuilding my personality to accommodate both the innocent person who existed before the abuse and the wild, frightened, yet still innocent person who remained afterward.

Finally, I purposely built a network of family and friends to rely on. I looked to therapy as a process for my mental health akin to chemotherapy for physical health—and I prepared for sessions the same way. I had three young children in school (one in half-day kindergarten) and one preschooler at home. I told a few close neighbors I was embarking on this process and enlisted their help for regular baby-sitting on the day of therapy, including time to decompress afterward. I asked a friend with no children at home if she would be willing to drive the hour distance with me to Social Services if I found myself too drained to do it myself. Although I never needed the favor, her gracious willingness was an insurance policy with the premium paid.

I felt guided to rely on the direction of my husband. Enduring a marriage when abuse is a factor is heroic. He faced kissing me, even when I turned to stone or started crying because a smell or touch flashed me to scenes of terror. He braved rolling over to pull me close as I slept, only to have me startle and scream. Despite his dismay at what was happening, my husband continually drew boundaries for me, creating space to survive. "I need you to do the dishes today and get some laundry done," he would say. Just as anyone who helps another recuperate, he respected my need to heal without allowing me to just roll over and die.

Finally, I withdrew from what for me were unnecessary activities. When I first remembered the abuse, I was writing the Relief Society birthday program. It was cute, it was fun, but it was not finished, and I could find no strength to finish it. A friend gently told me it was time to call for help and to turn the program over to someone else.

The bishop changed my calling, and I did not substitute teach or volunteer for any extra assignments. I gave myself permission to do what I could, drawing strong limits. For instance, because one of the incidents of abuse happened in the breezeway of my childhood ward building, for months it took all my courage and literal physical effort to keep my body sitting in a pew for sacrament meeting. I weekly fought the urge to run screaming from that familiar chapel scene. During those months, I did nothing more at church than just that.

My son's birthday four years ago gave me knowledge. The ensuing years have challenged me to find ways to use it to progress. As the puzzle of my life came together in the Master's hand, I stepped up to take my turn. I could choose rage, or I could choose peace. I could choose hate, or I could choose love. I could remain crippled, or I could try to move forward.

Because I loved God, all things worked together for my good (see Rom. 8:28). When I regained my strength and returned to my former commitments and activities, I realized the years of struggle had been but a small moment. I am amazed I can say that. I hope it in no way trivializes the depth of anyone's struggle with this devastating trial, including my own.

God loves us, and though the mountains depart and the hills be removed, his kindness shall not depart from us, neither shall the covenant of his peace be removed. Indeed he does protect and care for us, continuing mercifully, "O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not comforted, behold, I will lay thy stones with fair colours, and lay thy foundations with sapphires. And I will make thy windows of agates, and thy gates of carbuncles, and all thy borders of pleasant stones . . . and great shall be the peace of thy children" (Isa. 54:10-13).

Searching diligently in the light of Christ, I was able to find refuge in his healing wings. I have strength to walk again.
