Susette Green, Dlora Dalton, Dawn Anderson, Every Good Thing: Talks from the 1997 BYU Women's Conference ( 1998)

The Other Side of Service

CATHERINE STEFFEN THOMPSON

Like many Latter-day Saint women, I tend to be independent, self-reliant, and at times a bit prideful. I don't like to ask for help. Yet, I realize that I am on the receiving end daily of multiple blessings—not only from the Lord, but from friends, sister Saints, and family members whom I love and who love me.

The apostle Paul in 1 Corinthians teaches us that we all have different gifts, and yet we are to come together in one whole unto Christ. "And the eye cannot say unto the hand, I have no need of thee: nor again the head to the feet, I have no need of you. Nay, much more those members of the body, which seem to be more feeble, are necessary: . . . That there should be no schism in the body; but that the members should have the same care one for another" (1 Cor. 12:21-25). The Lord's plan was to have us be interdependent. That interdependence, which often does not come easily, fosters love and growth. We learn to appreciate one another.

The Lord taught us powerfully on this subject when he served the Twelve at the Last Supper. He rose from the table, took off his outer garment, and tied a towel around himself. Then he poured water into a basin and began to "wash the disciples' feet, and to wipe them with the towel wherewith he was girded. Then cometh he to Simon Peter: and Peter saith unto him, Lord, dost thou wash my feet? . . . Thou shalt never wash my feet" (John 13:5-8). Peter's distress is evident. This is his Lord and his King, his Savior. He is embarrassed by the Master's lowering himself to wash the apostles' feet. And yet, the Savior's act was symbolic: he gives to us daily. We are all in need. Sometimes we are in more visible need—unemployed, seriously ill, or emotionally devastated. Even then, it is hard for us to ask for or accept help from our brothers and sisters. But why? Is it our pride? Do we feel unworthy? Do we feel that we should be able to take care of ourselves? If we are having those feelings when we need help, then we don't understand the blueprint for life that Heavenly Father in all of his wisdom set up for us.

Again, Paul says, "Nay, much more those members of the body, which seem to be more feeble, are necessary" (1 Cor. 12:22). Necessary for whom? Just as one of the purposes of coming to this earth is to experience the bitter so we can appreciate the sweet, so we have to be on the receiving end, the needy end, or we will never fully understand the whole range of experiences that make us whole, like our Father in Heaven. The more I learn of the gospel, the more I realize that all of God's commandments are twofold. Yes, we are commanded to help, forgive, love, and serve others for their sakes; but the commandments are just as much, if not more, for our sakes—for in forgiving, loving, and serving, we learn and mature.

Realizing that this give-and-take process is the cycle of life, we need to recognize that we will at times be on the receiving end as well as on the giving. And we should learn to receive in a way that will help the giver grow as much as possible. That is the other side of service.

Returning to the scriptures, Jesus answered Peter, "If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me. Simon Peter saith unto him, Lord, not my feet only, but also my hands and my head" (John 13:8-9). After we, like Peter, recognize our rightful place on the receiving end of service and blessings from the Lord and from our fellow brothers and sisters, the next most important step is to feel gratitude for all that we are given.

Elder James E. Faust, in his April 1990 general conference address, taught that gratitude is more than a social courtesy; it is a binding commandment (see D&C 59:7). He quoted from Doctrine and Covenants 59: The Lord said that "in nothing doth man offend God, or against none is his wrath kindled, save those who confess not his hand in all things" (v. 21).

Corrie Ten Boom was a Dutch Christian woman who tried valiantly to help Dutch Jews during World War II. She and her sister, Betsie, became prisoners of war when their efforts with the Jews were discovered. The last prison they were transferred to was Ravensbruck—a women's extermination camp. It seemed impossible, but the camp was even grimmer than the other places they'd been. Women were packed into barracks like cattle and expected to sleep in three-tier rickety beds, nine per tier, on straw that was foul from human excrement, lice, and fleas.

As Betsie pleaded aloud to the Lord to show them how they could endure their new circumstances, it occurred to her that the Lord had provided the answer. It was in their Bible reading that morning. "Read that part again!" she urged Corrie. Corrie "glanced down the long dim aisle to make sure that a guard wasn't in sight, then drew the Bible from its pouch." Trying to understand, she read, "Comfort the frightened, help the weak, be patient with everyone. See that none of you repays evil for evil, but always seek to do good to one another and to all." [^1] Those words did seem to be "written expressly for Ravensbruck," Corrie agreed. But then Betsie said, "Go on . . . that wasn't all." So Corrie read on: "Rejoice always, pray constantly, give thanks in all circumstances; for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus."

Betsie interrupted, "That's it, Corrie! That's His answer! Give thanks in all circumstances!"

"That's what we can do?" Corrie was skeptical, but Betsie led her on to express gratitude—for still being together, for no inspection of their belongings. She even found something to be grateful for in the crowding, but when Betsie suggested they should be grateful for fleas, Corrie revolted.

"Thank You," Betsie went on serenely, "for the fleas and for—"

"'The fleas!' This was too much for Corrie. 'Betsie, there is no way even God can make me grateful for a flea.'

"'Give thanks in all circumstances,' she quoted. "It doesn't say in 'pleasant circumstances.' Fleas are part of this place where God has put us." [^2]

Corrie and Betsie found out later that the fleas truly were a blessing, for it was the fleas that prevented thorough and frequent inspections, which allowed them to keep their Bible, read from it, share it, and feel the love and peace of their Savior, Jesus Christ.

Elder Faust also taught: "A grateful heart is a beginning of greatness. . . . It is a foundation for the development of such virtues as prayer, faith, courage, contentment, happiness, love, and well-being." [^3] I believe that, and I also believe that being grateful when we are facing adversity in our lives magnifies greatly the influence for good we can have on others.

My daughter, Lauren, died five years ago at the tender age of eleven from an unknown lung disease. Even in the face of extremely difficult trials in her young life, Lauren counted her blessings daily; and a day never passed without her telling us how much she loved each of us. She also reached out to everyone in her world and let each one know of her appreciation.

In the mailbox one day, I noticed a note for Lauren from the mailman. It wasn't enclosed in an envelope, so I snooped. Reading the note, I realized that Lauren had previously thanked him for the joy his daily mail deliveries brought to her and others. "You must be a very special girl," he wrote in reply, mentioning that no one had ever thanked him before.

Once she had to fill out a questionnaire for a class that she attended when her health permitted. This questionnaire, which asked about hobbies, goals, and aspirations, was designed for the teacher to get to know her students better. One question asked, If you could be any person in the whole world, either past or present, who would you choose? Lauren thought long and hard about that and finally said, "Mom, is it okay if I just put myself? I wouldn't want to be anyone else. I'm happy being who I am." Here was my little daughter, hooked up to an oxygen tank, whom I knew would have loved to have healthy lungs, to enjoy school and sports and outings with friends as she had before her illness. In spite of that, she felt so blessed to be who she was and part of her own family that she didn't wish to trade places with anyone.

We have her last Christmas on video. That morning, instead of tearing into her pile of presents, as most children her age would have done, she took forever just emptying her stocking because she was so interested in watching all of our reactions to our gifts. At one point, her little three-year-old brother started to fuss over a particular gift. Lauren turned to him and lightly scolded, "Adam, that's not being grateful." That sums up Lauren's attitude toward life—she was grateful. She could have been bitter and withdrawn. She could have complained, "Why me, Lord? What did I do to deserve this?" Instead she learned to cope with her limitations, and she reached out to others—family and friends became precious to her. She counted her blessings often and appreciated each big and little thing done for her.

We had only a short eleven years here on earth with Lauren; yet I watched her grow in compassion, gratitude, and even humor as if she had led a long and rewarding life. Yes, she was needy. Yes, she had to have much done for her. But who do you think benefited most from exchanges with Lauren?

At her funeral, I was overwhelmed. I realized that the large crowd of people there to honor her—Church members, neighbors, doctors, and nurses who had worked with her, even deliverymen who had brought oxygen tanks to her every couple of weeks—had been deeply touched by her. These people had all served her diligently.

A wonderful ninety-four-year-old lady lives in my ward. She still lives at home by herself, and though she is frail, her spirit is feisty and independent. When I ask her how she's doing, more often than not she replies, "Oh, I'm still kicking—not too high, but still kicking!" As Relief Society president, I accompany her visiting teacher to deliver a food order from the bishop's storehouse to her every month, which she eagerly and gratefully accepts. She tells us, if we find her dead tomorrow, not to worry because she didn't die hungry! And then, before we leave, we always join hands and pray together for peace and comfort. Her cheeks wet with tears, she then takes our faces, one by one, into her soft, wrinkled hands, kisses our cheeks, and tells us that she knows we are angels from the Lord because she didn't know us, but she had been praying earnestly to the Lord for help. At the end of each visit, she tells us that she loves us and prays for us daily and asks if we will always remember her in our prayers, too.

Who gains the most from that exchange?

I know of one dear woman who was abused in just about every way imaginable during her childhood and consequently struggles with both anorexia and alcoholism. Her life has painful ups and downs as she tries to cope with the past and the present, and her friends are not always sure she is going to be okay. She struggles daily with low self-esteem. But her heart is not bitter or cold. In fact, she is loving and kind and is always serving others. As friends try to help meet her emotional needs, they gain strength from her love and courage as she tries to keep moving forward, to hold on.

Who gains the most in these exchanges?

Every experience, no matter how difficult, can have a purpose and be a time for growth. We all have twofold missions here on earth—to gain our own salvation and to help others along their path. In our most needy times, if we remember with clarity who we truly are and the blessings we still possess, we have the power to bless others, perhaps more than at any other time in our lives. We are in a position to inspire others in our times of need. Our courage can teach others how to deal with their own problems.

A heart completely filled with love and gratitude has no room for bitterness, pride, shame, despondency, self-centeredness, or self-pity. These emotions stunt our growth. Gratitude spurs us on to better things. The commandment from the Lord to be thankful in all things isn't only for the recipient but also for the giver. The Lord is wise and knows what we need—even if it's not what we would ever choose for ourselves.

Gratitude sustained me through my darkest time, the death of my daughter. I am grateful that the Lord honored me to be the mother of such a magnificent spirit. I am grateful for the example that Lauren has left me to ponder and pattern my life after. I am grateful that my testimony of the gospel of Jesus Christ tells me this life is not the end. Gratitude heals my pain and motivates and inspires me.

When we find purpose in our burdens and receive from others with gratitude, then not only do we benefit and grow from our trials—which is one of the purposes of mortality—but the love and inspiration that we generate can allow others to grow from our trials.

What legacy do we leave? Who will benefit from exchanges with us? The last paragraph in The Hiding Place tells what happened in the final years of Corrie Ten Boom's life. She spent them in a pleasant home provided by friends in California. There, a series of strokes curtailed first her physical movement, then her writing schedule, and finally even her power of speech. But her ministry continued. Those who came to cheer the bedridden, speechless old lady marveled that when they left, they were the ones cheered, uplifted, strengthened.

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] Quoted by Spencer W. Kimball, Faith Precedes the Miracle (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1972), 99.
[^2] Ten Boom, Hiding Place, 198-99.
[^3] James E. Faust, "Gratitude as a Saving Principle," Ensign, May 1990, 85-86.
