Susette Green, Dlora Dalton, Dawn Anderson, Every Good Thing: Talks from the 1997 BYU Women's Conference ( 1998)

And Acquainted with Grief

WIN L. MARSH

In writing this essay, I have hesitated over many things. For one thing, someone reading these words is thinking, 5he doesn't know what I feel—she can't possibly know. And that's true. My experience does not make me an expert on anyone's pain or grief except my own. I can write what I found helpful, though it may or may not be what you need. But I write because perhaps an aspect of my experience may help you deal with your own experience of loss and grief.

When I was young, I would listen at church to talks about the glories of motherhood. I would shake my head and tell myself that I wasn't ever going to have that role. I was a tree climber, a fort builder, and a girl who would do absolutely anything to spend time with horses. As a young woman, I became a fairly good mechanic and a fiercely independent person who truly never expected to marry until late in life. How life can change! I met a wonderful young attorney during my last year of college. Steve quickly became my best friend, my confidant, my everything. He was in the process of moving to Texas. Right away I knew that I wanted to spend my whole life and eternity with him. We felt prompted to marry immediately . . . and so we did. I know that the Lord guided that choice.

We planned to wait to have children—I hoped to pursue a career and a graduate degree—but we had such an overwhelming feeling that there was a little girl just waiting to be born to us. Again, we felt that we had followed the Lord's promptings. We prayed and decided to start a family. Thirteen months after our wedding, our first child, Jessica, was born. We had two more daughters over the next six years, and I felt that our lives were going the way the Lord wanted them to. We hoped for another child and talked of my returning to school when the youngest started kindergarten. We had a young law practice, a young healthy family, and dreams for the future.

When our oldest daughter, Jessica, developed the flu, we never imagined she would get so sick. During long days of waiting and praying, I had lots of time to reflect. Why was the Lord allowing this to happen? It was so odd. First graders just get better when they come down with the flu. She had always been healthy; we used seatbelts; her vaccinations were current; we followed the Lord's teachings. What had we done wrong? Why was this happening?

The first inkling I had that something horrible was going on was when Jessica had a blessing. I had always associated priesthood blessings with a warm, peaceful feeling of comfort and reassurance. When Jessica received a blessing, however, I felt an awful sickening in the pit of my stomach. But what did such an indescribably horrible feeling mean? Did it mean that her illness was going to be lengthy? That she would have long-lasting problems? That she would die? We did not know. I prayed for her to be healed if it was the Lord's will.

Jessica died on our wedding anniversary. I do not know how my little family survived that time in our lives. Jessica's medical bills were over $614,000. We found that our medical insurance was not as good as we had thought. That next November I miscarried. It was a very difficult time. Language lacks words to describe such times adequately. The one thing that kept me going was my toddler, Courtney, who needed my constant attention. She was the reason I got up in the morning and tried to function. After bundling my kindergartner, Heather, off to school, Courtney kept me functioning as a mom and as a person for the rest of the day.

As Christmas approached, we wanted to be anywhere but home. We wanted to go someplace without memories of Jessica to tear at our souls. Finances were still a serious concern, so we drove to California to stay with my husband's family. Courtney started displaying flulike symptoms—and not wanting to take any chances with her health, we left presents unopened and spent Christmas morning in the emergency room. Courtney—at twenty-two months of age—was diagnosed as a new diabetic. We were beside ourselves. Jessica had seen her first doctor on Christmas Eve the year before, and now—a year and a day later—our youngest was being admitted to an intensive care unit as the doctors tried to stabilize her. Late that night she had a seizure, which herniated her brain stem. She was pronounced brain dead.

We were far from home, and all our savings were gone—we had been through too much too soon. I shook my fist at God and felt that I really did not want him in my life any more. If this was going to be the way he ran my life, by golly, I would just run it myself.

Back at home, I continued to attend all my church meetings, but I was angry at God. I looked at my life and couldn't find anything I had done to deserve this burden on my soul. I felt that I had given up worldly ambitions to concentrate on being a mom. And I was a good mom. So why had the Lord taken away my identity as a mother? Our middle child, Heather, came to me repeatedly and asked when she was going to die. She just assumed that she would be next. All I could do was hold onto her and pray that the three of us would survive.

A few months went by, and Steve and I desperately wanted another child. We knew that we could not replace what we lost, but our arms ached with emptiness. I became pregnant again, and that pregnancy ended in another miscarriage. Again, I shook my fist at God. I tried to pray, but feelings of betrayal made my efforts painful.

I needed to fill the void in my life. I needed to find something I could excel at. I felt that God had declared me a failure as a mother when he took two of my children. On a rational level, I knew that was not true, but on an emotional level, that was what I felt. I threw myself into volunteer work until I had no time left to think or feel. The void remained. I went back to school, this time in nursing, to take up even more of my time. Gradually I began to be able to handle issues. I began to heal more and more as the months went by. I limited my commitments and took time to feel emotions and reflect. When I was ready to take an active role in the healing process, my anger subsided. My angry question "Why me and why my children?" expanded to "Why anyone?"

I thought back to the month I had spent with Jessica in intensive care. Children arrived at that hospital from all over the world to be treated for various ailments. A large board in the waiting room listed the room number and name of each patient in the intensive care unit. Family and friends left notes and messages there about phone calls to return. When a child became well enough to be moved to a regular floor, the bed was wheeled past the waiting room, and everyone in the room cheered. All too often the names on the board were just quietly erased. I started to ask, "Why would the Lord allow so many children to die before they really had a chance to live?"

I started working part time on a medical-surgical floor. I have seen families grieve as diseases take their course. Why? Why is a young family left without a father? Why is a man taken just before his fiftieth wedding anniversary celebration? Why does a vibrant woman die just weeks before her daughter's wedding? Why do we have to feel such pain?

My questions became more complex:

How can a God who loves me allow such horrible things to happen to me?

How can I trust a God who did not protect me from this disaster?

How can I live through this?

Can I live through this?

Can I be healed?

How can I be strengthened?

The first two questions are really one—Why? Why me? Why this? Why?

The easy answer is the one the world gives. We are either loved by God and saved, or we are hated by God and suffer adversity. That is the message John Calvin gave his followers. Calvin was not alone. Job's friends told him that all adversity comes from sin and any adversity is merely the just and immediate punishment for our sins.

But God reproved Job's friends. It is such an easy thing to hope that all adversity comes from sin. If all adversity comes from sin, then it is a simple matter to avoid at least all major adversity and to quell our fears that we might suffer the same afflictions that others have suffered.

To find real answers to my questions I had to understand, first, why there is adversity and, second, knowing this, learn how I can still trust God. We find answers by hearing the messages God has given over and over again.

The scriptures tell us repeatedly that we are here to gain experience. Our experiences will vary in type, intensity, and duration. We are given opportunities to help ourselves and others. Experience gives us perspective and balance. Adversity offers no simple "either-or" answers, but instead, a balance. We do not either suffer or move on, feel grief or heal, experience pain or grow. Balance allows us to both suffer and move on, feel grief and heal, experience pain and grow, pick up our burdens and keep moving forward—learning the good from the evil and the bitter from the sweet.

When I asked the next questions, "How can I live through this?" and "Can I live through this?" I was really asking, "What can I do when faced with adversity?"

The message of the world is that you either understand or you suffer pain. Television teaches us that in half an hour or less we can escape any pain through understanding. The reality is that it takes longer than thirty or forty or sixty minutes to overcome the pain of adversity. I was surprised at the number of people who asked me, "Why are you grieving? Don't you realize that your children are with God?" They assumed that understanding and a strong testimony of the gospel would protect me from feeling the pain of loss.

The truth is that understanding may actually make pain more intense. The truth is that what makes adversity adverse is that the pain and problems are as real as we are. They will not simply go away if we just look at things "in a more positive light." And the pain is as painful as it feels. We aren't imagining it.

I feel pain because I miss my children. I miss their laughter. I miss feeling them snuggle into my arms. I even miss cleaning up after them. Knowing how long it will be before I see them again just intensifies the pain. Although I know that this life is short, right now I am living it minute by minute, and the time seems to pass slowly.

The real answer to the question "What can I do?" is to keep living. Keep moving through this life and keep your faith. As Paul wrote in Hebrews, "Let us run with patience the race that is set before us" (12:1).

The final questions I began with, "Can I be healed?" and "How can I be made stronger?" really ask: "How can God keep his promises to heal us and turn all things to our good?" The conventional wisdom of the world is that we can either be "a man of sorrows" or we can be happy. The world tells us that joy is always lessened and ruined by any sorrow.

The truth is that we, like Christ, can gain strength through what we suffer (Isa. 53:5; Mosiah 14:3) and we can know deep and abiding joy. We will find peace—in time—and a renewal of joy—in time—by coming to understand that this world is truly not "all there is." The celestial world of God is a deeper, more real and more present reality than is this world.

As I have grappled with pain and adversity in my life, I have learned much about living and dying, about priorities and what really matters.

I find myself thanking God for the new knowledge and insight I have gained. I admit that the price paid for knowledge has been very high. I would prefer to remain terribly ignorant of grief and have my children back. I find myself asking God: "Is there no other way?" and the answer is "There is no other way." It is only through earthly experience, which includes suffering and adversity, that we are able to learn the things that the Lord wants us to learn. The author of this poem states it well:

Pain stayed so long I said to him today, "I will not have you with me anymore." I stamped my foot and said, "Be on your way," And paused there, startled at the look he wore. "I, who have been your friend," he said to me, "I, who have been your teacher—all you know Of understanding love, of sympathy, And patience, I have taught you. Shall I go?" He spoke the truth, this strange unwelcome guest; I watched him leave, and knew that he was wise. He left a heart grown tender in my breast, He left a far, clear vision in my eyes. I dried my tears, and lifted up a song— Even for one who'd tortured me so long. [^1]

I have realized that in this life, we all will either live long enough to experience the grief and despair that accompanies the loss of those we love most dearly, or we will die young enough that we will be the object of their grieving. That is part of the Lord's plan for all of us—to gain knowledge and experience.

God can keep his promises because he offers us infinitely more than we have lost—in tenderness, kindness, and patience. God waits to bring us home, to heal our losses, and fill us with his grace. He can keep his promises because he waits for us.

Each of us will face real pain, disappointment, and loss. Each of us will have real trials and real tests and "the fiery trial" of our faith (1 Pet. 4:12). But from those pains, we can grow in love and hope and care for each other until that perfect day when God takes us home and gives us peace.

Note

Win Marsh was seven months pregnant when she wrote this essay. On 6 July 1997, Robin Elizabeth Marsh was born with a heart defect. Open-heart surgery was performed five days later. Two more surgeries were planned. Robin died in her sleep at eight weeks of age.

---
Notas:
[^1] Janene Wolsey Baadsgaard, Families Who Laugh . . . Last (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1992), 7-8.
