Susette Green, Dlora Dalton, Dawn Anderson, Every Good Thing: Talks from the 1997 BYU Women's Conference ( 1998)

Rearing Good Parents

JAMES M. HARPER

Parents worry a lot. Have you noticed that? "Why are you so serious? What are you so worried about?" our eager-to-be-independent children sometimes ask. The best answer I've found comes from Families Who Laugh . . . Last, by Janene Baadsgaard: "We worry that you won't wash your hands after using the bathroom unless we make you. . . . We worry that you'll go outside without your coat, get a cold, then get double pneumonia and die. We worry that you'll forget to look both ways when you cross the street, and a cement truck will run you down before we have a chance to get your braces paid off. . . . We worry that you really do need to go to the bathroom when we pretend that we can't hear you anymore because we told you to go before we left the house. . . . We worry that you will never quit eating, and we'll end up having to sell the house to keep you in milk. . . . We worry that your brain will rot from watching too much television and that your eardrums will burst from too much loud music. . . . We worry that you'll stuff another pea up your nose, and we won't know about it until it starts stinking. . . . We worry that we made a mess of you because we forgot to say 'I love you' enough between all the 'Don'ts' . . . and that you won't forgive us. . . . [And] we worry that you'll grow up to be just like us." [^1]

It's true. Our children, despite all we do or say, will more often than not turn out to be just like us. That's why rearing good children is really about rearing good parents.

Along those lines, I want to discuss three general parenting principles.

Vision

First, parents must recognize themselves and their children as eternal offspring of our heavenly parents. Moro. 7:24-25 gives us a key: "The children of men . . . began to exercise faith in Christ; and thus by faith, they did lay hold upon every good thing." Faith in Christ gives us a vision of our divine nature that allows us to "cleave unto every good thing" (v. 28).

Many years ago, my son received his patriarchal blessing. He was about sixteen years old and was well prepared for the experience. But I discovered that I was not. We arrived at the home of the patriarch, an older man who had once been our stake president. He began by asking my wife and me to describe our son. We answered thoughtfully, reflecting back on the sixteen years we had shared with our son. I felt certain that I knew him very well. He next asked our son to describe himself, an interesting way to lead into a patriarchal blessing. Then he began the blessing. During the blessing, I experienced a strange sensation. I felt as if I floated out of the room, and at a distance I saw my son in an entirely new light: as an eternal person, not mine, but simply given to me for a time, a child of our Heavenly Father. Up to that point, I had known intellectually that I did not own my son, but I know that at times I did not behave or feel that way. My experience during this patriarchal blessing changed me.

Why is vision a first principle of parenting? Because understanding our divine parentage directly affects how we handle the mistakes and sins in our lives. It determines whether we respond with guilt or with shame, a subject that I have researched carefully. [^2] We feel guilt when we believe we have violated a standard of ours or of someone we respect. The way to get rid of guilt—the way to feel good about ourselves—is to change, to repent. Shame, on the other hand, is a feeling that something is wrong or bad about us as a person, that our very core is different from others. A guilty person feels "I made a mistake"; a shamed person feels "I am a mistake." Many people in our world respond to mistakes with shame. "I am a bad person, flawed. My actions prove that about me." Shamed people rarely repent. They feel bad a lot, but they rarely change their behavior because they feel nothing can change the badness at the core, anyway—who they really are. People who feel good about themselves repent and change their behavior to match who they are or who they aspire to be. Some shamed people eventually do change their behavior, but they often continue through life to feel faulty and inferior and try to prevent other people from discovering their shameful self.

Guilt can be healthy—it pushes us to change and repent—but it should never make us feel that we are bad people. Guilt should help us to do better, to continually restore us to the holiness, to the goodness, that we came to earth with. We must learn this aphorism: I made a mistake, but I am not a mistake. Then we must believe it.

Our children will feel less shame if they understand that it is all right to make mistakes. And we, as parents, need to understand that, too. In fact, our attitudes about our own mistakes convey more strongly than any words what we really believe. Our fourth child, our first daughter, is now seventeen. Much against her mother's counsel, she decided to register for four advanced placement (AP) courses in her junior year of high school. She's a bright young woman, but the teachers in AP courses assume theirs is the only course of any consequence their students are taking, and they pile on the homework. Even her advanced sculpture course was tremendously time consuming. As the third term ended, she was megastressed. I asked her one morning, "What can I do to help you? I know it's the end of term, and you're stressed with so much to do. How can I help?"

"Dad, it's my ceramics class. My sculpture is cracking in some places. If you'll just soak it in water, it will be malleable when I come home from school, and I can work with it."

"Okay, I think I can manage. How do I do it?"

"You just soak it in water for a few minutes," she tossed off as she hurried out the door. So before I left for work, I filled the sink full of water and immersed the sculpture, a marvelous candy bowl in the shape of a turtle. How long? Well, a few minutes—that must be about seven to ten, I reasoned. I'll go unload the dishwasher, gather things I need for work, and plan my day. When I returned, I carefully reached down into the sink and brought up the magnificent turtle—disintegrating, dripping through my fingers. I panicked. In that moment, I instantly lost faith in myself as a basically decent human being and adequate parent. I foresaw my daughter returning home, becoming even more stressed, and forming the message that she would remember for the rest of eternity: her father let her down. I've known supposed grown-ups who didn't speak to each other over less significant affronts.

Possible solutions flashed through my mind. I could stay home from work and shape the clay so that it looked like her candy bowl. But not having much experience in ceramics, I decided that was not a workable idea. Instead, I prepared myself for the speech I would give when she returned from school. I could have prepared a shame speech: "I'm a bad father and an idiot. I should have known that ten minutes was too long—that clay turtles disintegrate in water." Not only did I discover that clay turtles rapidly decompose in bathroom basins, I discovered later in the day that you can't scoop silty clay out of the water once the turtle has disintegrated. So I washed it down the drain. Not long afterward, I discovered that ceramic clay solidifies in drains.

By the time my daughter returned home from school, I had prepared several alternate speeches about the demise of the clay turtle and had called a plumber to clean out hardened clay from our drains. It had not been a good day. But, I said to myself, I arrived on this earth as a child of Heavenly Father. There was a time in my life when I was holy, though maybe it's not today. Nonetheless, knowing that shame is a bad thing, I will not assume that I am a bad person, but that I am a good person who has made a bad mistake. Therefore I can change. Never again will I leave a ceramic turtle in water for ten minutes; that's easy. I will do my best to make restitution; that will be more difficult.

I left work early so I would be at home when my daughter arrived. "I have made a big mistake," I told her when she walked in. Then I told her the story, expecting her to fall to pieces. She looked at me and smiled a slow, wide Cheshire cat smile. "Dad, you really owe me on this one," she said. We then worked together through most of the night to recreate the ceramic turtle.

In retrospect, this is a funny incident, but it loomed large in my emotions at the time, as I thought it would hers. My daughter could have decided not to trust me again. I could have felt shamed, tried to shift the blame to her for scanty instructions, or decided not to offer help in the future. Some people do judge each other and make decisions based on trivialities. That is not to say I have not made more serious mistakes as a parent or a person, ones I can't laugh about. But the principle still applies. Two good people, a father and a daughter, who sometimes make mistakes, stayed up till three or four in the morning to recreate a turtle. My daughter survived her third term. So did I.

So the first step in rearing parents with celestial vision is to admit to mistakes and then to repent. The second is to beware of criticizing. Not only does our criticizing our children negate the larger vision of them as offspring of God but it also may indicate that we're uncomfortable with something in ourselves. For example, adolescent children often force parents to deal with unresolved issues from their own childhood. That's one of the reasons adolescence can be so rocky for parents. I hassle my own children about school the most. I've concluded that it's an issue I didn't resolve in my own adolescence—not that I had poor school performance; in fact, just the opposite is true. I couldn't give myself a break as an adolescent. I was a high achiever, driven to perform. It's taken me a long time to be more flexible, to see others' ideas, to relax, to experience leisure. When I feel critical of my children, I let that signal me to look first at myself. Am I feeling something not quite right about me? Am I unconsciously thinking that if I can correct this in my children, they won't have to experience what I have or that somehow it will make me better? Life never works that way.

Sometimes we criticize simply because life is chaotic or too fast-paced. It's almost a given that when the pace of family life is in high gear, there will be more irritation, argument, and contention. Children respond with similar irritation and more petty squabbles to the anxiety that a fast-paced life creates in fathers and mothers. What's the solution? Be easier on ourselves, learn to manage our schedule better in the next few days or weeks—give ourselves a break. When we do that, we will be less critical of others.

The first general principle of parenting includes, then, the ability to develop a vision of ourselves as an essentially good person who is not perfect. Yes, we need to repent because we make mistakes, but our very being is from God. We are essentially holy, and the work we are about in rearing children is God's work. Sister Patricia Holland has said, "When the Lord created parents, he created something breathtakingly close to what he is." [^3] We need to pray for a clearer vision of ourselves and our purpose as well as that of our children.

Hearing

The second general principle in rearing good parents is to learn to listen and respond to feelings. It's very important for you and your children to know that it is normal to feel. It is the very process of living. The scriptures speak of beliefs of the heart, not of the head. [^4] For five years in a row, I was asked to give a talk on Easter in church. Moving made no difference; leaders still asked me to speak on Easter Sunday. I finally decided that Heavenly Father was trying to give me a message, but I hadn't gotten it yet. In preparing that fifth Easter talk, I finally discovered the message: there are many ways to die other than physical death. We can die emotionally. We stop feeling. There is just as much a need for resurrection from that state as there is from physical death. I've never been asked to give an Easter message since that talk. I guess I finally got it right.

This idea applies to children. At times they are angry or sad; they cry; they have fears. But we often aren't very patient with those feelings. We get impatient, angry, or correct their feelings with "Oh, there's no reason to feel sad. Buck up and go on." Or "You shouldn't be jealous. That's not nice." Or "Don't be silly. There's nothing to be afraid of." And so on. Over time, children assume that if so many feelings that emanate from inside and are part of them are wrong, then they themselves must be wrong inside—they themselves must be bad. Or they may learn to distrust or reject their feelings. After all, most feelings seem to be just wrong. You're not supposed to have them. If you do have them, it's not wise to share them with anybody.

Children whose feelings are often dismissed or corrected never learn the language of talking about feelings. The vocabulary isn't difficult. There are basically only seven categories of emotions: anger, fear, sadness, hurt, love, happiness, jealousy—although there are lots of synonyms and words full of nuances but close in meaning. Giving credibility to children's feelings helps them understand their emotions and feel good about themselves.

Listening accomplishes the same vital task; yet even in the family, people too seldom listen to each other. Unfortunately, when children want parents to listen to them, we tend to respond by giving advice. As one adolescent daughter wrote her mother: "When I ask you to listen to me and you start giving advice or telling me I shouldn't feel a certain way, or solving my problems, you aren't giving me what I've asked for. Please just listen to me. Don't talk or do." Do you suppose that one reason prayer is so effective in people's lives is that God listens? He seldom gives us quick fixes in prayer. He seldom tries to talk us out of the experience we have. He listens and from time to time gives subtle suggestions. Generally he lets us work to solve our concern ourselves. Perhaps the reason we have difficulty listening to children is that we lack faith in them or in the Lord's plan for them. We assume that they can't solve problems for themselves, so we've got to solve them for them. We've got to fix what's wrong, tell them to buck up, or give them advice. If we really had a vision of who they are, we would see them as capable of discovering their own solutions. Our role as parents is to trust and be a sounding board, dispensing advice only when requested.

Have you ever wondered how you might have responded if you'd been Joseph Smith Sr. when young Joseph came and told you about his experience? Would you have rushed him off to the local psychiatric ward for fear he was hallucinatory? Or would you have trusted him and had faith in who he was? To see our children clearly and support them through what Heavenly Father intends for them is an important task for parents. It involves turning our children to Christ, preparing their hearts for the Savior's touch. There's a subtle difference between forcing children to come to Christ—which we cannot really do—and facilitating their personal relationship with God.

Let me tell you a story to illustrate what I mean. Eighteen-year-old Latter-day Saint young men struggle to decide about missions, some more than others. My second son was no exception. We watched him go through this struggle, but when he turned nineteen, he filled out his papers, had his physical and dental exams, and made an appointment with our new bishop to turn in his mission papers. This was the bishop's first interview with a prospective missionary. My son returned from the interview with all his papers still in hand and announced: "I just told the bishop I am not going on a mission." I said nothing, at least knowing better than to be critical. I had learned that maybe I needed to look inside myself to find why this was so scary for me. His mother said something very interesting. "Son, we'll support whatever you choose to do," she said, "but far more important than how we feel about this as your parents is that you work out your relationship with Heavenly Father, with Christ as your mediator. So I ask only one thing of you. Make sure that you pray about this." I suppose my wife could have tried to convince our son that a mission was the best thing to do, reminding him of all the teachings in our family. Instead she chose to facilitate his own discovery and try to prepare his heart for the Spirit's touch in that prayer. A week later he went back to the bishop to turn in his papers.

This must have been quite a trial for our new bishop. He later shared with us what our son had told him: "You know, when I came in last week, I thought that the only reason I wanted to serve a mission was because my parents expected me to, but I've learned this week that my parents will support me no matter what I choose. Far more important, I've learned this week that the Lord expects me to serve a mission, and I need to do it to be of service to him." He served his mission and has been home for several years. It changed his life in all the ways that missions do.

Children of God come equipped with some natural and some God-given abilities to solve their problems. I am certain I have learned far more being a parent than my children have learned from having me as a parent.

Being There

The third principle of parent rearing concerns sharing our lives with children: ideas, experiences, affection—the good in life. Develop a language of emotion and closeness—women are often better at this than men—and along with this, tell them stories rather than drowning them in do's and don'ts. Often we don't think to tell children the personal stories that contain the themes and values of our lives and our personal feelings. Tell your children stories of your spiritual experiences as they occur. Every Sunday I share with my children some spiritual experience I've had as a member of a stake presidency.

Share favorite books. From the time our children were little, we've enjoyed reading books together out loud, especially when we're riding in the car. We've shared The Best Christmas Pageant Ever, A Swiftly Tilting Planet, Clarence's Last Chance, and in recent years (because our children are now in high school), The Scarlet Letter, Grapes of Wrath, Jane Eyre. Our reading has provided a context to discuss and share. We also read individually and share the stories with one another.

Share music—maybe not everything, but enough. Music opens our hearts to each other. My children could tell you that my favorite music is from Les Miserables. I think it's easy to feel God in this music. It's about things that really matter—justice versus mercy, forgiveness, grace. But do you know who listens to that music almost as much as I do these days? My children. If you cultivate the music of the spirit that you love, it will rub off. Music can spring your spirit into instant empathy.

Share service and family work projects, even projects as simple as the daily work of washing and drying dishes. When we work together, we transmit values from one generation to the next. And don't hesitate to share physical affection. When Mormon says, "Lay hold upon every good thing" (Moro. 7:25), I take that literally—lay hold on your children. Give them hugs. Be affectionate. They learn, even with all the mistakes they make as children, even with all the mistakes we make as parents, that they—and we—are good inside.

Recognize that your children can share things with you. Too often we dismiss our children's thoughts as negligible—intrusions in our adult conversations. It's reported that when Joseph Smith met visitors, he first stooped down to look in the eyes of children and pay attention to them, and then he greeted the adults. We can learn something from the Prophet's behavior about valuing children and their contributions. At least ten sources in diaries from individuals who were children in Joseph Smith's time talk about their experiences with the Prophet. Once he simply held a little girl up to a mirror. They both looked in the mirror, and he smiled. As an old woman, she recorded in her diary that she never forgot the experience. Another time the Prophet was speaking in a meeting, and a small girl began fussing. He stopped, put her foot on his knee, and put his hand on her foot. She stopped fussing immediately, and he went on teaching. Another time he was talking while some boys were playing in the area. A man motioned for the Prophet to stop and called out, "Boys, you need to go home. You're being disruptive." But Joseph stopped him, "No. Let the boys stay. They may hear something today that they will never forget." [^5]

Please allow for differences in your own style of parenting. What works for other parents may not work for you. Be flexible—different children need different styles of parenting. If you are blessed to be in a traditional household with a father and a mother, and your parenting styles are quite different, count your blessings: the two styles are often complementary for children. Even if you think your husband is too harsh and he thinks you are Marshmallow Woman, children compensate for those differences in style and benefit from them as long as parents don't pick at each other over those differences. There is no one model for good parenting. Read all the parenting literature—it can be fascinating and helpful—but only one Expert should guide your life. Prayer often gives me a whole different perspective, and it changes my heart and mind more quickly than all the literature aimed at doing just that.

Being a good parent is more about changing ourselves than about changing our children. If we learn to love ourselves, our children will benefit. We must learn to love our children, not their accomplishments. Joseph Smith once said that celestial people would create a celestial environment around them. [^6] Have you ever considered that your very nature, the fact that you are holy by nature, by the endowment that comes with you as an offspring of our Heavenly Father, has potential in and of itself to create goodness for the people around you? Even if you are not on your best behavior, even if you are not directly serving them, just being in your presence can be a good thing for your children or for other people. If you have ever been with the First Presidency, members of the Twelve, or other people of exceptional quality, you have probably experienced this goodness of presence.

We often talk about children developing, but we tend to forget that parents are developing too. I'm a far better parent today than I was twenty years ago. I'll be a far better parent as a grandfather than I am today. The temple experience teaches us symbolically about progression, and that principle applies to both children and parents. We talk as though parents have all the knowledge and wisdom to impart to their children. In my experience, my children have imparted far more wisdom and information to me—when I have been willing to pay attention to them. We are all learning, precept by precept. From the perspective of our eternal progression as children of God, living and growing together, we are in a sense, rearing each other.

I pray that we will be blessed on this journey—this curriculum that the Lord has planned for parents—to learn about ourselves. When we focus more on our own need to learn and grow than on our children's, they will benefit. As we become better people, we become better parents.

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] Janene Wolsey Baadsgaard, Families Who Laugh . . . Last (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1992), 7-8.
[^2] James M. Harper, Uncovering Shame: Integrating Individuals and Their Family Systems (New York: W. W. Norton, 1990).
[^3] Patricia Holland, "Parenting: Everything to Do with the Heart," Ensign, June 1985, 12.
[^4] See, for example, Deut. 6:6: "And these [commandments] . . . shall be in thine heart"; 2 Ne. 8:7: "Ye that know righteousness, the people in whose heart I have written my law"; Eccl. 1:17: "I gave my heart to know wisdom."
[^5] Truman G. Madsen, Joseph Smith, vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1997), audiocassette tape.
[^6] Madsen, Joseph Smith, audiocassette tape.
