Susette Green, Dlora Dalton, Dawn Anderson, Every Good Thing: Talks from the 1997 BYU Women's Conference ( 1998)

As Good As I Wanna Be

LISA O. FILLERUP

I was sitting at the kitchen table one Sunday digging in a bag of microwave popcorn with my teenage daughters when the phone rang. A member of the bishopric. Would my husband and I speak in church next Sunday on families? I hung up the phone and told the children, hoping for some positive response—like what wonderful parents we are, or a least what made being in our family fun. But instead our most dramatic daughter asked with a smear of sarcasm, "Oh, because we have the perfect family?"

That remark made me take an honest look at my family of six children, beginning with our youngest, James, who lives in the Paleozoic world of stegosaurus and is rarely interested or fully present in the real world; then Micky and Rebecca, elementary-age partners in crime, who can break anything you really like, free of charge; or Bo and Heidi, teenagers who would rather serve at a ward dinner for two and a half hours than take five minutes to empty the dishwasher at home; and, last, our oldest daughter, Sarah, whom we never worry about at college until she calls and tells another white-knuckle story of almost losing her life skiing, bungee jumping, or walking to the library. Speaking in church on the topic of families caused me to look at our family objectively. We're just a regular, slightly weird family, trying to do good but feeling far from perfect or even as good as we want to be. I wondered, Could we create an environment where searching for the light of Christ meant more than looking for the family home evening manual? I knew we needed "home improvements," but just where to begin I wasn't sure.

Then I remembered visiting with our stake patriarch, Jim Smedley, who shared with me how he prepared his home for giving a patriarchal blessing. He was specific: "Before each blessing, I make sure the room where we will be is vacuumed, dusted, and orderly. I usually ask my daughter Rachel to play hymns about an hour before each blessing—music makes such a difference. Conflicts and disagreements at work are something I try to avoid on 'blessing days,' or, if possible, I solve them quickly. All these things invite the Spirit—something I can't give blessings without." In his home, I could feel a spirit and a light that went beyond their smudge-less picture window.

The idea grew in my mind like July's zucchini. Could this same spirit and feeling happen in our rambunctious family? Not long after our speaking experience came the dedication of the Mount Timpanogos Utah Temple. My husband and I had never been involved in a temple dedication, and this was to be "our" temple. Could we build on this event to invite the light of Christ into a home like ours, and if it came, would it want to stay? I thought it worth the test.

Peter and I knew that we needed to lead out, to decide together our course of action. Like fearless Christians in the lions' den, this took some prayers not unlike Daniel's—prayers that our lions would begin by being kinder to each other. Not that we hit and scream, but we are big-time teasers—with a slight twist, that can turn combative in a flash. A couple of weeks before the dedication, I wrote down all the dedication activities on the kitchen calendar so everyone who was conscious and eating would know what was going on. This list included a ward project planting bushes on the temple grounds, distributing dedication tickets to ward members, and ushering for one of several dedication services. The two youngest, James and Becca, were not old enough to attend the dedication, but they participated when we sought the cooperation of all at family home evening and proceeded to make The List.

First, we knew that our family watched too much TV. Even though most of our time was spent with videos, we still wanted to cut that time. I decided the TV cables should mysteriously disappear. We also set aside rowdy popular music in favor of more reverent classical pieces.

As I mentioned, we have trouble with teasing at our house. It's something genetic that comes down from both sides, I'm afraid, but despite the odds, Peter and I really prayed for a miracle—that bickering and teasing would be kept to a minimum. And when conflicts did flare, we tried to resolve them immediately and not let anyone enjoy being mad.

I also tried having planned and organized meals. I'm not good at this. I actually know how to cook five things that "knock your socks off," but after that it's hit or miss. You might get liver nuggets or tofu brulee. I wanted to gather everyone to a fully set table, smiling as if they were on a Bisquick commercial, and not have any forks thrown from the dishwasher to the table after the prayer. I had to plan, but the peaceful meals seemed worth the effort.

Our scripture reading had at times deteriorated to yelling scriptures to the kids as they were running to the bus—"Remember: 'A soft word turneth away wrath!'" And to tell the truth, we had been discouraged by irreverence, so we hadn't been all that consistent. We decided being consistent was what we needed, and maybe the Spirit would follow. With the dedication only two weeks away, the children cooperated. We actually sat down for scripture study and read whole chapters in one sitting.

Last, we all tried to keep the house a little more orderly. Everyone was assigned a station, and when we cleaned, we referred to the phenomenon as the "white tornado." I could feel the Spirit begin to thrive in our new "house of order." Perfection was an impossibility, especially in only two weeks. "How good do we want to be?" was a question we asked ourselves when things got tough. But being better was something we really wanted—so we pressed on.

As the two weeks neared their end, the results were noticeable. There was a distinct difference in our home, an increased feeling of love, and amazingly, less teasing, more piano playing, more reading, more jokes without a jab attached. I even saw one of the children pet the dog. Feelings were shared without having to take a trip to the mall (shopping and sharing seemed to go together at our house), and the children were more willing to help. Mom was less critical, and Dad was more patient, even when he found his hammer out in the strawberry bed . . . again. By Sunday our home was a much better place. When we welcomed Sarah home from college, we watched in awe as she took an arm-in-arm walk with Bo, who last year considered herself Sarah's personal terrorist.

The Monday of the dedication finally came, and just the fact that the children got to miss school generated an intense degree of excitement. As everyone ate sandwiches in the car on the way down Provo Canyon, I read the dedicatory prayer used at the Kirtland Temple and prayed that this same feeling would extend to this dedication. The service was simple, the children even reverent, and after the beautiful dedicatory prayer, we walked out of the temple squinting in the sunshine. Bo put her arm around me, Micky was walking close by and I grabbed her hand, seconds later Heidi put her arm through Bo's, and Sarah latched onto Micky and Peter to Heidi. We walked in one linked chain, and in all that brightness we felt for a brief moment a taste of something celestial, something as real as the building we had just walked from, a link so alive it could not be mistaken.

This was no less a miracle than Moses parting the Red Sea, only this involved people, who are a lot harder to deal with than water. And for this average, macaroni-and-cheese-type family, an amazing transformation had taken place. We all knew it, but for fear recognition would make it disappear, we kept quiet about it. I felt like we were the group mentioned in Isaiah's prophecy—"the people that walked in darkness have seen a great light; they that dwell in the land of the shadow . . . upon them hath the light shined" (2 Ne. 19:2).

But as wonderful as this experience was, we found it difficult to maintain. Reality bites hard some days, and life's spiritual experiences ebb and flow. I know that there will be nights of frozen pizza and Monday night football, that eventually my children will find the TV cables, and that despite our reading scriptures daily, all our conflicts will not be resolved in an hour or a day or even a lifetime. And that is when I think of Peter's grandmother, a bright, intelligent woman who passed away at the age of ninety-six. After her death, we were given a book from her lifetime collection, and when we opened its pages, out fell a three-inch-by-five-inch card. In her familiar, shaky script were written the words: "Do better; be better," a reminder to herself that even at ninety-six she was still working on a few things and knew that searching for the light of Christ was a daily struggle. Those words haunt me as if they're being whispered from somewhere between heaven and creamed tuna over peas. Doing better is a journey. It's a lifetime of laundry for people you love, sweeping up popcorn every Sunday evening, loving the unlovable, doing beyond yourself, always reaching for the light.
