Susette Green, Dlora Dalton, Dawn Anderson, Every Good Thing: Talks from the 1997 BYU Women's Conference ( 1998)

Strengthening Our Nurturing Natures

LADAWN JACOB

Women as caregivers—wives, mothers, grandmothers, teachers, friends—are at the center of the wheel of life and, as Anne Morrow Lindbergh wrote, must strive "to be the still axis within the revolving wheel of relationships, obligations, and activities." [^1] How can we bless the lives of those intertwined with ours so that they can come to know, through our love, the love of the Savior—and their importance?

To be effective nurturers, we must look to the Savior who taught us to be gentle, meek, full of love, patient, and long-suffering. But how can we be like that when our two-year-old has just created a Picasso look-alike with his permanent markers on our new wallpaper, or when our delightful sixteen-year-old calls to tell us he has just had one more "well-I-was-just-changing-the-CD-and-didn't-notice" fender bender, doubling our car insurance.

At times, we all feel overwhelmed, our reservoirs of love nearly empty. Several years ago, I read a biography of Mother Teresa. As a young Albanian nun, she trained in medicine, nutrition, academics, and religion, and then donned the Indian sari worn by those she served and began her work among the poorest of the poor in Calcutta. The first few days she walked among the endless poor and saw disease, ignorance, malnourishment, and death everywhere she looked. She returned home each night exhausted with the magnitude of what she had undertaken. But she did not return to her peaceful, cloistered life among the Sisters of Loreto. "She was determined. She would not stop. Instead of thinking of the crowds, the thousands, she thought of the one—the one closest, the one she was helping." [^2]

Mother Teresa's example leads me to ask myself, How can I, in the most effective and Christlike way, minister to the one nearest me? Several years ago, my cousin Donna was a Gospel Doctrine teacher. The course of study that year was the Doctrine and Covenants. One morning, her husband, dressed for work in his immaculate, pressed suit, mentioned that he had an appointment for lunch with the stake president. Donna had put on her old work clothes, gearing up to manage their seven boys at breakfast. "You know," she said to her husband, "the Doctrine and Covenants is such a wonderful priesthood manual for men. I'm wondering, Where is my mothers' manual for handling these spirits that the Lord has entrusted to me?" As she later worked in her garden, this question kept returning. Finally she prayed, "Heavenly Father, where is the manual, the instruction booklet for me, for all mothers?" And the Spirit whispered to her, "Donna, I wrote it in your hearts." Women have been blessed with the gift of inspired nurturing, entitling us to have his words written in our hearts to guide each of us in our individual stewardships.

All of us need his words written in our hearts, especially when we are called upon to offer strength, love, and care. Those words may direct us to cradle in our arms a child taller than we are, stroking her hair in silence while she sobs. Perhaps a loved son needs those words in a letter, a son struggling with larger-than-life problems. We need them to exercise gifts of the Spirit. I think of my husband's great-grandfather, Thales Haskell. He was a missionary to the Indians and spoke many Indian languages, but his greatest accomplishment was that he could remain silent in all of them. Knowing when to be silent is a gift of the Spirit.

Nurturing may mean being with a suffering, beloved, and broken friend, or holding up the hands that hang down, or strengthening the feeble knees of aging parents. Nurturing wears many faces. Charlene, a dear neighbor of mine, brought me, in a moment of need, a framed statement in calligraphy that reads, "A friend knows the song in my heart and sings it to me when my memory fails." [^3] My Grandmother Andersen is an example of inspired nurturing. She could zero in on the needs of others and know how to lift them just by being around them. My aunt once told me of a man who came to her home and was visiting with my grandmother. This man had about thirty grandchildren. Glowing with joy, he told my grandmother about all the successes and wonderful accomplishments of these grandchildren, and my grandmother basked in his joy with him, saying how much the Lord must love him to fill his quiver so full of righteous posterity. After he left, my aunt said to my grandmother, "Mother, why didn't you tell him that you have eighty-plus grandchildren?" She replied, "You know, Donna, that wouldn't have increased his joy one bit." I think of those words often. One way we nurture is to increase joy. People need us to share their joys with them.

Many times my mothering has been far from inspired. In fact, my children say that when they were sick, if they got a glass of orange juice every other day and a quick check to see if they were still alive, they felt fortunate. Many times I have felt that the best thing I could have done for my children is to have put them up for adoption so they could be raised in a really good home.

As a mother I always feel it is unfair that every time I am mad, the whole family is mad. I used to say to my children, "Can't I be grumpy without the whole household turning sourpuss?" For years, every New Year's I resolved to speak in a quiet voice. I have a very loud voice, and the decibels go higher and higher as my frustration mounts. I put beans in my shoe until I was practically crippled, trying to remember. I tied bandanas around my mouth and nose and everything else. My house was full of signs that said "Her voice was ever soft, gentle, and low—an excellent thing in woman." [^4] One day when I was screaming at my kids, I tore that sign off the fridge, ripped it up, threw it in the garbage, and shouted, "I will yell without that thing looking at me!" We all struggle with weaknesses when we try to develop charity within ourselves. Can we still nurture others, faults and all? Yes. My mother says I've forgotten a lot of things that she did wrong, and I keep hoping that maybe my children will be forgetful, too.

A major roadblock to nurturing that I have found in my own life is judging and criticizing others rather than feeding their souls. Several years ago I read a talk by Sister Patricia Holland entitled "The Fruits of Peace." She cautioned against expecting perfection from people and urged us to overlook faults in others. How? For one day, Sister Holland suggested, note every time you speak or even think critically of someone else. If you pass judgments on yourself, your children, husband, friends, the bus driver, the neighbor, or anyone, keep track of them. Then the next day, see if you can go an entire day cutting off each critical thought that comes into your mind. "This little exercise might surprise you," Sister Holland said. "My husband will verify that I conscientiously work at never speaking ill of anyone. It is a virtue I earnestly seek, and I see it as fundamental to true Christianity. When I undertook this little exercise, therefore, it amazed me to realize how often I did pass judgment, at least mentally. I was even more amazed to note how incredibly good I felt about myself when I was able to go through a whole day keeping that tendency in check." To explain why being uncritical of others feels good, Sister Holland referred to Matt. 7:2: "For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged: and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again." Our attitudes bounce back at us. "A critical, petty, or vicious remark is simply an attack on our own self-worth. On the other hand, if our minds are constantly seeing good in others, that, too, will return, and we will truly feel good about ourselves." [^5]

I am trying hard to develop this ability. To nurture others is to love them rather than judge and criticize them. Some time ago in my mothering, I was struggling with particularly difficult and challenging problems with one of my children. The harder I tried to get through, the greater the chasm between us seemed to grow. I wrestled alternately with keeping my mouth closed to giving lengthy and emotional lectures. Was I being too hard, or not hard enough? Had I exacted enough justice, or was I being too merciful? On a relatively quiet day at home, I went to my room to pray and think and ask the Lord's direction as I had done so many times before. This time I felt desperate for his help. I knelt at the edge of my bed and tearfully entreated the Lord. After a time in prayer, I opened the scriptures. My eyes were drawn to these words: "Sufficient to such a man is this punishment, which was inflicted of many. So that contrariwise ye ought rather to forgive him, and comfort him, lest perhaps such a one should be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow. Wherefore I beseech you that ye would confirm your love toward him" (2 Cor. 2:6-8; emphasis added). Through my tears, I read the words over and over again and felt the sweet, comforting voice of the Spirit instructing that what my child needed was not added reproach or directives but rather assurances of my unconditional love.

Judging and criticizing is a serious obstacle to nurturing. Another is neglecting our own needs. Do you ever feel overwhelmed and drained by the needs of others? Have you ever wondered, How can I possibly be to everyone, give to everyone, what they need? When a very busy father, physician, and church leader asked President Harold B. Lee, "How should I handle my time?" President Lee said to him, "A man's [or woman's] first responsibility is to himself, then to his family, then to the Church, realizing that we have responsibilities in our professions as well." [^6] We need to bring our best selves to whatever tasks we are engaged in. That means that eating well, exercising, and sleeping—the basics—must not be sacrificed to our responsibilities to nurture others. We want to bring to our nurturing "our healthiest, happiest, heartiest self," explains Sister Holland. "When they ask for bread, let us not be so weary and unhealthy that we give them a stone." [^7]

Many people in my life have nurtured me. There have been exceptional teachers, affectionate neighbors, and loving friends. My home was also a place of warmth and security. As a little girl, I thought that the greatest thing on earth was to have a new baby come to our home. In fact, every time we went under an overpass, we'd stick our finger on the car roof and wish for another baby. It seemed to work because my mother had twelve. My parents brought home my youngest brother, Dean, on Thanksgiving Day. We all had our noses pressed against the front window, waiting for the car to drive down "washboard lane" and pull into our driveway. When it did, we rushed out, opened the doors, and ushered in my mother and father and our new little brother. Carefully we unfolded the blankets, looked in, and wondered at the beautiful baby inside. He looked a lot like me, I thought. Then my father laid this little boy on our front room table, and as a family we knelt down. It seemed unusual because it was in the middle of the day, not in the morning or night when we usually had family prayer. Then my father acted as voice for our family and expressed his gratitude for this little child that the Lord had sent to our home. That day as he prayed, I felt a warmth covering me. I realized that I had been loved and wanted in just that same way. I'm so grateful to have been reared in such a home. Once while my mother and father were on a mission in Mexico, my father wrote to me, "LaDawn, what a transcendent privilege it is to have the association of little children." I kidded him that it was only because he was three thousand miles away from us that he was able to say that.

I realize that many have not been reared in a nurturing home. Perhaps you are one whose parents, or father, or mother, didn't treat you as if you were their most cherished possession. If so, I want you to know that the Lord can fill those vacancies in your heart and teach you how to nurture even if you have been denied nurturing in your own childhood or youth. The Lord can mend and fill broken hearts and teach us all things if we will but be prayerful and humble and submissive to his will.

Several years ago, a dear friend I will call Pam went through some tremendous trials. Her husband developed chemical allergies and was unable even to go out of the house. He stayed in a tiled room, and Pamela put his food outside the door and then told him on the intercom that it was ready. They had four sons and a baby daughter. Hoping for improvement, they decided to move from California to Arizona, which had fewer air pollutants. Finding a home and caring for her sick husband and her children was incredibly stressful. Pam also suffered a physical illness that caused all her hair to fall out. She had no eyelashes, no eyebrows, and was completely bald. One day she was driving between the home where her husband was staying and the one where she was staying with their children (he couldn't be around anyone who had been contaminated with chemical pollutants). As she drove, she said, "I thought of all of the dreams of my life and how many had not come true as I thought that they would. A lot of those dreams had shattered and fallen down around me. I also thought as I drove along how ugly I was. Nobody could love me, I was so bald and thin and unattractive." As the tears began to flow, she felt a warmth around her and the words, "Do you think that I don't love you?" She remembered the love of the Savior for her. She knew she was precious to him. The warmth of that moment carried her through many, many weeks of difficult times.

God's nurturing can be felt in warm support as we learn to be nurturers, even when we are dealing with the pinpricks of daily life. A word or two of practical advice from my mother has helped me through the years to nurture my own companion. First, she said, clear a path in front of the door so that he can get in. That may sound kind of obvious, but it's so nice to come home to your "palace" and find some semblance of order. Second, identify where your children are. It's embarrassing for a husband to drive up to his home and see little Johnny running down the street naked. Third, have some evidence of dinner in the making. You may just set the table—that would make him believe that food is coming—or throw an onion in a pot of boiling water—the smell promises sustenance to come. And fourth, meet him with a smile, not a snarl. My husband was a rancher, and he always came home later than he said he was going to. I'd give him a kind of snarling look that said "Where have you been?" He would sometimes remind me with a sheepish grin, "Honey, it is better to dwell in the wilderness than in a wide house with an angry and contentious woman" (see Prov. 25:24).

Though few of us will have the good fortune to be full-time, stay-at-home wives and mothers all our married lives, these principles from my mother's era can be adapted to make home feel like home. Establishing order and planning to be affectionate is worth the effort. My daughter-in-law Jennifer impresses me. Every night when my son comes home and she is there before him, Jennifer runs from wherever she is in the house and almost knocks him off his feet with her exuberant welcoming hug, she is so excited to see him. She told me, after they were married, that several months before they were engaged she felt she would probably marry him, and each night after she had been with him, she would go home and write in a little booklet something about him that she had learned that day or some act that she loved and appreciated. On their honeymoon, she gave that booklet to him. He told me, "You know, if we ever had a fire, I'd grab Jennifer and then that book. To think someone thinks all those things about me!" Just think how much happier so many homes would be if a husband or wife, coming in from work, could expect a hug and a smile, and if they each were thinking, I'm going to find something that I love and appreciate to write about my sweetheart tonight.

Several years ago I read a narrative called "Eve's Diary" by Mark Twain. Twain gives a humorous account of the struggles, challenges, and experiences of our first parents. At the end of the play, Eve dies. Adam, who had learned to love this complicated, talkative woman, stands by her grave at her death. His words are simple, yet profound: "Wheresoever she was, there was Eden." [^8] I have often thought the same of my mother. It is said that God could not be everywhere, so he gave us mothers. I am grateful for a loving mother in heaven who nurtured me; though the veil is drawn, I know she is there with my Heavenly Father. I am grateful for a mother on earth who is precious to me and who has given me love undauntedly through the years. May we have a clearer vision of the great, profound influence that we have as nurturers, and rejoice and be glad in that Christlike service.

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] Anne Morrow Lindbergh, Gift from the Sea (New York: Random House, 1955), 51.
[^2] Patricia Reilly Giff, Mother Teresa: Sister to the Poor (New York: Viking Kestrel, 1986), 31.
[^3] Attributed to Kathy Davis. Framed quotation in possession of author.
[^4] William Shakespeare, King Lear, act 5, scene 3, lines 273-74.
[^5] Jeffrey R. and Patricia T. Holland, On Earth As It Is in Heaven (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1989), 29.
[^6] Holland and Holland, On Earth As It Is in Heaven, 65.
[^7] Holland and Holland, On Earth As It Is in Heaven, 66.
[^8] Mark Twain, "Eve's Diary," in The Bible According to Mark Twain, ed. Howard G. Baetzhold and Joseph B. McCullough (Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1995), 33.
