Susette Green, Dlora Dalton, Dawn Anderson, Every Good Thing: Talks from the 1997 BYU Women's Conference ( 1998)

At Home with Attention-Deficit Disorder

PAMELA BUSHMAN

Introduction by Nina Johnston, adult with ADD and session moderator

Living with Attention-deficit Disorder (ADD) is difficult but doable, and our families are a terrific resource. Older siblings can be very helpful to little children who struggle with trying to keep on task and be appropriate socially. Our older children thought their younger brother was truly wonderful with all his energy, creativity, and joyous spontaneity. They included him in their assemblies in high school, creative asking-for-a-date preparations, and even on some dates. They helped build this child's self-esteem when lots of life's experiences were knocking it down.

I am an adult with ADD. I appreciate many parts of the personality, and I enjoy now much of what was a challenge to me to get control of when I was younger. It would have been helpful as I struggled as a child to have understood why I was so restless, why I had the impulse to run to whatever sounded more fun, why I talked out impulsively, and why I annoyed people without intending to. Luckily, I was blessed to be born into a structured, loving home with high expectations. As an adult, I find that having ADD is more of a plus.

As a mission mother and the mother of missionaries, I am concerned that we focus on the positive abilities of these creative missionaries. When my son with ADD was sixteen, he said to me, "If you were going to be lost in a jungle, would you rather have a survivor's kit, or ME with a pocketknife?" It was a no brainer! If I were lost, I know that his creativity and ingenuity would get us out, and besides, we would have fun doing it. There is a long list of advantages to having ADD: high energy, creativity, intuitiveness, resourcefulness, tenacity, a hardworking, never-say-die approach, warmheartedness, a trusting attitude, a forgiving attitude, sensitivity, ability to take risks, flexibility, loyalty, and a good sense of humor. [^1] These great characteristics could get us out of all kinds of jungles in life.

I would like to give you a synopsis of our family. We have seven children. Our three adopted children have Attention-deficit Disorder (ADD). [^2] Our twenty-year-old son has ADD with anger disorder. The seventeen-year-old has ADD with oppositional disorder. The fifteen-year-old has ADD with hyperactivity (ADHD). (He was a drug baby, which accounts for a host of other brain disorders: Tourette's syndrome, manic-depression, obsessive-compulsive disorder, anxiety disorder, oppositional disorder, and excessive impulsivity.)

Neither the fact that they are adopted nor their ADD and other disorders has lessened our love and commitment to them. The very struggles that these time-consuming challenges require are part of what binds our family so strongly together. In addition, many of the parenting strategies that we have found to be effective for our children with ADD can benefit the whole family. As Sam Goldstein, a specialist in learning and behavior disorders, points out, "What's good for kids with ADHD is good for everyone, and what's bad for everyone is extra bad for kids with ADHD." [^3]

Home Adaptations

Three core principles guide our parenting. First, we provide our children with structure and a narrow range of choices. Our children with ADD functioned poorly when offered a wide range of choices. They functioned better within a structure of only two or three choices.

Second, we try to be consistent and persistent. Our children with ADD can be very annoying. We learned early to resist the temptations to indulge, to get angry, or to give up and turn our backs on them. Indulgence is not love. Anger is not love. Indifference is not love. Love is unconditional, but it does not tolerate the wasting of their lives. True parental love insists on the children obeying righteous rules. For my own peace of mind, I have prayed often to know when to insist and persist—and when to let something go. Many times, the Lord has inspired me. That gives me confidence and our boys security. I recommend the Lord's inspiration to you. It will be your best resource.

Third, love their eternal spirits. Knowing the restored gospel, we expect to find sterling qualities in our sons. We know they achieved brilliantly in premortality. We know they can achieve in the next life. Meanwhile, we want to make their mortality as productive and joyful as anyone else's. Outside the Church, I have met parents who have given up on their children with ADD. The stress and difficulties overwhelm them. But you and I understand that these are children of God whom we should love and help for their eternal sakes. We, and they, will be blessed for every honest effort we make.

Our honest efforts include becoming educated about ADD. We joined the local CHADD chapter, a support group for parents and friends of people with ADD. Along the way, we learned much from reading many useful books on the subject. We called local mental health agencies and private groups that work with ADD and learning disabilities. They sent information, much of it without charge. They were eager to offer help and leads to other resources. We were amazed at the resources made readily available to us.

Throughout the months and years, I prayed. These giant challenges with ADD motivated me to really listen for answers. Let me emphasize again how important prayer is. I knew that we couldn't handle these challenges on our own. We needed divine guidance. I needed the Spirit with me every minute of the day. So, I continually fine-tuned my relationship with my Father in Heaven. Several times each day, I still pray for help from the Holy Ghost. The Lord has blessed me many times with the knowledge I have needed.

Then, my husband, Bill, and I had to educate our parents and other relatives who would interact with our children with ADD. Of course, some of them blamed us as parents. "If you were stricter," they'd say or think. It took many sessions and much time, but the ones we converted became valuable allies. It was worth persevering.

Because most children with ADD misbehave much of the time, they hear few compliments about their behavior. Frequent criticisms—ours and others—undermined their self-esteem. We tried to counterbalance those messages. For example, we remind them often of their intelligence, talents, and spiritual nature. My husband gives them priesthood blessings. We speak of them lovingly and appreciatively in family prayer. We avoid calling them insulting names. Instead of criticizing, we try to say, "I like it better when you do such-and-such," giving an example of what the child can say or do.

We show confidence in them: "Knowing you, I'm sure you'll do fine," or "That's a good idea. Let's try it." We focus on their contributions: "That was thoughtful of you," or "I've really enjoyed being with you today." We recognize effort and improvement: "It looks as if you've really worked hard on that. I'm proud of you for persisting." "Look at the progress you've made!" We learned that highly structured martial arts, such as Karate or judo, taught them self-discipline and obedience. We put our sons with ADD into a martial arts class. They gained self-confidence.

Structure and high expectations go hand in hand. All children need to accept responsibility for their words and actions, including those with ADD. Our children will not function as adults if they grow up thinking that not they, but "the ogre," ADD, is responsible for their actions. Bill and I have tried to emphasize that the gift of agency involves consequences. We teach our children that they are free to choose their actions but not the consequences. They must accept responsibility for the results of their choices.

Even though we know children with ADD are highly impulsive, when our children speak or act impetuously and offensively, we hold them responsible. We don't let it slide. We must teach them to think and behave correctly, just as we teach any child.

Medical Approaches

Not all children with ADD perform better on medications. Mine do; medications help them modify their behaviors. They can focus better and learn more. But medicine does not think or act for them. I think of medications as bringing them up from the basement to the main floor, where they can act for themselves, as children without ADD can. Medications don't take them up to the second floor; they have to do that themselves.

We involved our children in decisions, including medication, as much as their age, intelligence, and desire permitted. We educated them about the disorder and how to compensate for it. Sometimes parents forget that the disorder is the child's challenge more than theirs. A child with ADD has to learn how to live and cope with his or her own ADD.

If your doctor recommends medication, learn all you can from doctors and pharmacists about the effects and side-effects of available medications. Once incomplete information from a doctor about a medication caused one child a serious problem. Since then, I have been careful to stay well informed.

A doctor also depends on continuing feedback to determine the optimum level of medication for each individual child. I kept a daily log for the doctor to help track how the medications were affecting our sons. In that log, I wrote the highlights of the day. Then I asked the child, "What kind of day did you have?" Seeing me write down their answers involved my sons in solving the challenge of their having ADD, another benefit of record-keeping.

Two cautions: First, do not expect any prescription to be the right one forever. Some medications may work well for a year or two and then taper off in effectiveness. We found a few that worked only six weeks. We kept alert to changes, so the doctor might increase, decrease, or perhaps discontinue or change the medication. Second, be aware of "rebounds" from medication. Some children may act aggressive, angry, and insolent, or, in some cases, sad, weepy, and depressed when medications wear off. When a son becomes insolently aggressive at the end of the day, I tell him, "Son, you are in a rebound period. You are not a disrespectful person. You are kind. This is not how a respectful person speaks." We talk until he calms down. This isn't easy. I have had to learn, so he can learn from me, which emotional muscles to flex to get hold of himself.

Medication may be one part of helping children with ADD cope with their disorder. A structured environment in a loving home is another far more critical part. Many children with ADD have low self-esteem and low ambition, so a third valuable aid for children with ADD, especially in their teen years, may be psychotherapy to help them deal with their discouragement and fear of failure. Our psychologist is also teaching us, as a family, how to accommodate to the stress and disruption of ADD. At times, although we needed professional help, we couldn't afford it. To serve the same purpose, we organized a parent-support group. Parents met in our home and shared common experiences. We were relieved to learn that others shared our burdens. The collaboration of ideas from many homes helped all of us work better. The courage of other parents reinforced our persistence.

Discipline That Works

We strive to maintain good relationships between parent and child. "A good relationship with a child is a prerequisite to effective discipline. When the relationship is good, almost any form of discipline is effective. When the relationship is poor, however, almost no form of discipline works well. Never use discipline that damages your relationship with children." [^4]

The key to effective discipline is to be in control of yourself. When I am calm, I can better judge the situation. If I get angry, I cannot discipline appropriately. So I calm myself first. At the moment of provocation, I pray for the Spirit to be with me so I can act the way I want my child to act. Children mimic our actions. After praying, I wait for the calming Spirit to come. If a child is physically out of order, I turn the child toward me, place my hands on the child's shoulders, look into the child's eyes, and then bow my head until I feel calm. I do not leave the situation. When I get myself under control and I speak softly, my children listen. (They react violently if I scream.)

Our children learn calming strategies from us. That is one of the most valuable gifts and skills we can give a child with ADD. Sometimes I lower the volume of my voice to a whisper to control my anger. I see results when I speak calmly, precisely, and to the point. Always I try not to lecture. Children disengage during a lecture—especially children with ADD. The first rule on lecturing is, The briefer the better. The second is, Take time to listen.

I never arise from bed in the morning without saying a prayer that the Spirit of the Lord will guide my actions. That helps me receive the words I should say during the day. When a provoking situation arises, I stop to think before I speak. (If necessary, I bite my tongue or my cheek.) And I listen to the child, but not until I've made sure he's calm. I listen only to calm and respectful messages from him.

I also recommend developing a detailed plan of discipline. Several years ago, Bill and I noticed that our discipline had become uneven. To the children, it probably seemed haphazard and perhaps arbitrary. So, my husband and I worked on a philosophy of discipline. We aimed to balance firmness with kindness—justice with mercy. Our children needed clear direction from parents who would not back down. They also needed an atmosphere of love and kindness. We agreed upon logical consequences for common misbehaviors to help us avoid excesses or indulgences. For example, when a child acted up at dinner, he lost the privilege of eating with the family for five minutes or until he became calm. When he damaged a toy either impulsively or in anger, we took toys away for several days. We used Thomas Phelan's "1-2-3 Magic" method with time-outs. [^5]

Chore time is often resistance time. Our other children learned to complete their chores fairly easily. Our children with ADD were not task-oriented. They were not motivated to help, and they were easily distracted. Getting them to follow through was difficult. But we stuck to our guns. We assigned chores to each child every day after school. They had to earn the privilege of free time—after they completed their chores and homework.

As our children got older, discipline has included counsel about cars, dating, curfews, and reminders about morality. When our children wanted to disregard our counsel, we suggested they seek the Lord's counsel in prayer or in a priesthood blessing. We have found that our children with ADD listen to the Lord's counsel given in a blessing.

We adapted a response to disobedience that is similar to the Lord's when he chastened the Prophet Joseph Smith for procrastinating the start of the Kirtland Temple (see D&C 95). We tell the child what he did wrong. We say why it is wrong. We ask the child what would be right. If he doesn't know, we tell him. And we tell him we love him. We plant those good seeds in his mind.

Classroom Adaptations

Current laws in this country require schools to provide extra resources to children with ADD. We took advantage of that extra help. Find out what is currently available and then develop a plan for your child. Generally, schools will not give your child help until you ask for it. Teachers may want to, but they are forbidden to diagnose disorders. So, parents need to take the initiative. You'll need to obtain a professional diagnosis in writing. Then call a conference with the teachers and school educators. Once a diagnosis is confirmed, the law requires that schools must prepare an individualized education plan (IEP).

If you like the plan, that's good. If you don't, speak up. Remember, as a parent, you are divinely called to be an advocate for your child. I've sometimes had to ask, and ask, and then ask again before I received the help that enabled my children to learn and prepare for life. Sometimes I've had to oppose the opinions of educators and experts. That was hard for me, but calm, informed persistence has always worked, even with people who seemed oppositional at first.

We found it best not to sound pushy or dictatorial. We always prayed before we entered a teacher conference. We tried to speak with calmness and peace, but we would not relent on being concerned. We asserted what we thought was best for our child. Once an IEP is in place, stay alert. Watch your child's progress in school.

Two notes about homework. It's often the bane of children with ADD and a pain for parents. Homework assignments can be lost, thrown away, or misplaced. Our children with ADD sometimes deceived us into thinking they had no homework. Other times, they honestly forgot or failed to write down assignments. Some years we had to call teachers every week to find out which assignments were missing. Those calls kept the child from falling behind. If your school has a homework hotline, use it.

Second, we learned early that some homework is terribly hard for our children with ADD to do. Because math and science are difficult for many minds with ADD, we spent much more one-on-one time with our children on that homework. It was draining. Their distractibility strained our patience. Worst of all, when we later learned that they didn't turn it in, we were sometimes provoked in the early years into fire-and-brimstone style ranting and raving. We regretted it immediately. Ranting and raving made us feel better, but it only hurt the child and our relationship. It did not change the behavior. Our attitude now is to try to serve the children as a coach. We encourage and motivate instead of lecturing. With persistent gentleness, we push the child to stay on task with homework. (A child with ADD can think of a dozen things to do with a pencil . . . except writing.)

We have also developed a reward system to motivate the child to do the homework and to turn it in. I had to devise a new reward system every few weeks to keep the child excited. That taxed my ingenuity, but it was always worth it.

Most teachers noticed that our children with ADD are intelligent, but many didn't understand why they were disruptive and did not complete their tasks. They logically concluded that these children could do better if only they'd try harder. With all the diplomacy we could muster, we explained that this conclusion was common but false. According to developmental child psychiatrist Daniel Amen, "telling people with ADD to try harder only disorganizes them, often to the point where they give up trying." [^6] Ask teachers not to ask children to "try harder" or "hurry up." Call teachers and talk. Become a friend. Offer to help. Remember the teacher is overloaded, so offers to help make it easier for the teacher to help your child.

Usually, to learn a new skill or concept, the child with ADD needs more time, less distraction, more verbal testing, and less writing of tests. When given such help, they can succeed. Sometimes we forget that the point of schooling is for them to learn basic skills and come to love learning. Skills and attitudes are more important than grades—especially in the early years.

Once in a while, you'll get a reward, too. When our youngest son was in the third grade, we kept close tabs on him. We coached him. He worked hard. One afternoon, he came running through the front door. He whipped out his report card and shouted, "I am smart, Mom, I am smart." He had earned straight A grades on his report card. It was a great triumph for him. We hugged and cried together. I shall never forget that victory.

Social Adaptations

We had heard the comment, "Everyone notices when an ADD child walks into a room." It's not a good notice, so we wanted to teach our children social skills.

For years we worked on table manners, telephone calls, answering the front door, and sharing with others. We often used family home evening for role-playing. We let the children act out situations that were causing them problems. We carefully applied the rules to everyone in the family, not just the children with ADD. And we expected our children with ADD to succeed in social settings. That has helped them to improve.

When someone violated a rule at the table, we first warned him. On the second violation, we excused him from the table. The child sat on the mat just inside the front door, "out of bounds." To prevent teasing, we ruled that anyone who teased him was also sent out of bounds. We fixed no limit to the time-out. As soon as the child got himself under control, he could return. Incentives and games to encourage polite manners were also part of our regular routine. For some meals, we had contests, judging who had the best manners. The winner won some treat or privilege. At others, we played manners games. The children delighted in spotting a parent in error. We persisted with this plan until now, as teenagers, they eat politely.

We also needed to reinforce manners in any social event that stressed or excited them. For instance, our sons had a hard time letting others take the first turn in a game. In the family, we made it a big deal when anyone agreed to take the last turn. When our children with ADD were younger, they would act wild when company came to the house. Such sudden changes in environment stressed them. I had to take them from the room and privately discuss their behavior. I found positive statements worked best: "You're polite boys. Polite boys don't act this way. You're capable of acting politely when company comes. You can play in your room for a while, or you can be with us in the living room and listen. Bring a quiet toy with you. [They needed something in their hands to play with.] You may not disrupt company." We had to repeat this ritual many times before they could act in more civilized ways around company. We persisted; eventually they got the concept.

I helped train our boys by setting up "dates" with them. Each boy and I would "go on a date" starting when they were about four. I helped them learn to treat a woman with respect. We had fun together, and they learned at the same time. By the time they were of dating age, they knew how to behave.

Mother Adaptations

I can't succeed as a mother if I don't nurture myself every day. Tough as we are, we mothers need daily breaks. Many frustrated mothers of children with ADD may say, "Taking time for myself is impossible." But I have discovered that it's not only possible—it's essential. We're not immune to burn-out. And if we burn out, who will volunteer to take our place? Even a short ten minutes can refresh my attitude toward mothering. If I've wanted to clean the bathroom that day, I may use my break to clean it. Looking at a clean sink pleases me. It's a visible accomplishment. Cleaning may not be your favorite break. You may prefer to do something creative. You may want to read, or exercise, or talk with someone who nurtures you.

The Lord wants us to see ourselves as worthy of care. He will sustain us, but he expects us to do our part in loving ourselves. He knows it isn't always easy. A degenerative joint disease in my feet (Charcot's) led to gangrene. Both of my legs below the knee had to be amputated four years ago. After the second amputation, I had to wear an intravenous tube for antibiotics. I felt nearly hopeless about returning to my former activities. On top of that, my diabetes damaged the nerves in my stomach. So I felt nauseated—day and night. For several months, I could keep little or nothing down, and I saw little hope for getting much better. I was at a low point emotionally. At that time, we had to switch our twelve-year-old to a new medicine. But first, we had to wean him from all his current medications. During that period without medicine, he was climbing the walls . . . literally! If he wasn't, I wanted to.

One day during this period, I fell down while in my bedroom. I lay there on the floor and just sobbed. Nothing seemed to be going right. I cried out in prayer, "Father, I cannot do this. It's just too hard!" In his great mercy, the Lord answered me. He gave me new understanding. I received this thought: "Pam, Josh has been brought to the earth to teach many people my characteristics—meekness, mildness, kindness, patience, love, and encouragement. You will learn much from him." When this thought entered my mind, I felt a swelling of great love and peace. The thought so deeply impressed me that I could hardly wait to hug Josh.

Afterwards, life stayed the same, but I had changed. I found I had more emotional muscle to handle the daily challenges of my health and my children. I had hope and courage. I could see differently now what the Lord expected of me as the mother of these children and what I am to learn from them. They came to help guide me home.

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] See Edward M. Hallowell and John J. Raley, Driven to Distraction (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1987).
[^2] Even though the most current medical terminology is ADHD (Attention-deficit Hyperactivity Disorder), ADD is the more common term, and I will use it in this essay.
[^3] See Sam Goldstein, this volume, page 194.
[^4] Daniel G. Amen, unpublished manuscript in possession of the author.
[^5] Thomas W. Phelan, 1-2-3 Magic: Training Your Child to Do What You Want! Videotape (Carol Stream, Ill.: Child Management, 1990).
[^6] Daniel G. Amen, interview with the author.
