Susette Green, Dlora Dalton, Dawn Anderson, Every Good Thing: Talks from the 1997 BYU Women's Conference ( 1998)

The Balancing Act

MARGARET BLAIR YOUNG

Using talents wisely is a subject that has been much in my mind, especially over the last several years. Three years ago my good friend Buffy Cannon Wright visited me and my family. Mostly we talked about Buff's getting her master's degree in film and her goal of being a screenwriter. I was still writing. I had been teaching more than I wanted to at BYU-Hawaii during the previous year. We both had four children. She had a baby with Down's syndrome, and we both had three-year-olds and older children. We were going crazy doing too much, and Buff said, "I really don't know if I can handle all this. It is really, really hard. Annie screams all the time." Annie was her three-year-old. Mine was Michael. I said, "Well, Michael . . . Michael is Mr. Destructo. I follow him around with a broom and cloth." We went into my bedroom, and there was Michael with his box of cereal totally dumped out on the master bedroom floor like a visual aid.

That was on Thursday. The following Monday, my little brother called me early in the morning to tell me Buffy had been killed in a car accident. Her baby had been with her. The last thing Buffy did in this mortal life was to throw herself over her baby. She took all of the glass, and the baby had only burn marks from the car seat straps. Later her husband, who was also an aspiring writer, had, as he described it to me, a vision in which he saw Buff. She led him to the bedside of each of their children. First, at Annie's bedside, she said, "This little girl matters more than anything else you are going to do. You'll publish, sure, but it doesn't really matter all that much. Look at this little girl. Have you ever seen anyone more beautiful? Do you know who she is?" Buff did the same at the bedside of each of their children. She let him know that they mattered more than anything else in this life.

That message came very powerfully to me. I feel strongly about not leaving my talents but much more strongly about not leaving my motherhood, about fulfilling my stewardship as it has been assigned. The balancing act is not easy. I am one who struggles. I can show you pictures of my laundry room as an illustration of how I struggle with this balance.

While we are developing talents, the choices, the accommodations that we have to make, often boil down to selective neglect. What am I willing not to do? I can't do everything. I used to do a lot of theater and have realized that I can't be away from my children three hours a night. So theater is not part of my life right now, though it may be when my children are a little older. But I give up laundry quite easily. And it is sort of a choice.

I'm grateful to live with a very good and supportive husband who understands. We lived in England for a BYU semester abroad, which is a fun thing BYU professors of English get to do periodically. I realized that during that time writing was not going to be a possibility for me. I had to home school my children, and there were just too many things going on. We noticed after a couple of months that I had started getting edgy, a little agitated, as if something was not quite right with me. Bruce said the sweetest thing finally: "I think if we had realized just how important your writing is to you, we would have found a way for you to do it." Then he started providing ways that I could go to the British Museum library to do some research on something I wanted to write about. That's an example of a supportive husband. That experience was also a real revelation to us both: My writing is really an essential part of who I am, and if we take that away from me, we get some consequences. I get agitated because I need that creative outlet.

My children understand that I do have a separate identity. I am not just the person who mops the floor and does the dishes. Mom is a writer, too. One of my novels is dedicated to my children, and they love to look at that and talk about it. My writing is a part of our lives. I have at least one child who wants to grow up and become a writer.

Occasionally I feel guilty or can't sleep, worrying that I am not balancing things well. My husband's support, though, helps me have the sense that I am heading in the right direction. We don't choose family over talent or talent over family. They have to balance. Sometimes the balance doesn't feel right, and I make adjustments so that it does. I really believe in trying to negotiate that balance, remembering that the most weight is with my family. But I really feel I am a better mother when taking care of my own creative needs as well. That frees me in a way to do my mothering duties and gives me some space in which I can be a better mother. I can't really feel guilty about that. Occasionally things take me away from my family. I do have a hard time when I've had to go do a reading far away and I've just been away from the family for a while. I do suffer with guilt, and it's probably guilt saying, "That's maybe a bit much. The kids need you at home."

So that's the struggle—the balancing act. And I'm right in the middle of it.

Let me return to Buffy now, briefly.

I spoke at her funeral, and after much prayer, said the things I felt she wanted me to. My entire talk was directed to her children. I said to them, "You matter more to your mom than any of her screenplays, any of her classes, any of her workouts." And I knew I was speaking the truth.

Yet when I think of Buff, I think of her in all her aspects: wife, mother, writer, teacher, friend. Frustrated sometimes—even at her wits' end—but full of love and faith. Negotiating the balance, struggling with it just as I do. She was on her way to work on her master's thesis when she died. I believe she had it in the car with her. It matters to me that she was in the midst of that creative work when she died—I cannot imagine her otherwise. But it matters even more that Buff's final act was to shield, to save, her baby. In the name of love and grace and motherhood, that was how my friend finished her life. That was her last—and most important—statement in mortality. It's one that haunts and inspires me still as I continue in my own journey.
