Susette Green, Dlora Dalton, Dawn Anderson, Every Good Thing: Talks from the 1997 BYU Women's Conference ( 1998)

My Strength and My Song

JANICE KAPP PERRY

I never sang solos until a few years ago when I was in Hawaii. A wonderful Hawaiian woman at church there said, "Will you sing a solo on our program today?" I replied, "Well, I've never really had any singing lessons. Singing solos is just not something I've done." "You know," she answered me, "that's a form of pride that President Benson talked about."

I didn't understand what she meant, but she went on. "He doesn't want us to have a fear of men or women. You're afraid there will be a better singer in the audience."

I thought, For sure there will be.

"President Benson said we should stand up, do our best, and look to the Lord for our approval and not to the world," she added.

I took that lesson to heart, and I have just been singing my best ever since, in the spirit of these words I heard at a Church music workshop years ago: "I'm not in rebellion against fine musicians. But as we admire orchids and roses, we also love sunflowers, asters, and wayside offerings." [^1]

Did you know that both our Savior and our Prophet Joseph Smith wanted music in the last hours of their lives to bolster their strength? The Savior asked his disciples to sing a hymn with him before he went to the Mount of Olives (see Matt. 26:30), and Joseph Smith asked his companions to sing with him and for him before his martyrdom. That puts those of us who love and find comfort in music in very good company. If the Savior wanting a hymn sung is important enough to be recorded in the Gospels, that convinces me that God gave us music to help us through this life.

An idea set to music stays with us in a different way than just the words. I was in a car accident a couple of years ago. Someone crashed right into my driver's side door and shattered every bit of the glass. At the very moment my life was in danger, here's what went through my mind: "When you hear the crash, think of Jones' Paint and Glass." It was useless information then, of course, but somebody had set it to music, and it came floating up at a very unusual time. If that type of music stays with us so long, it's really important to set the gospel to music so that gospel messages come to mind in times of need.

Music enhances every situation of our lives. During difficult times, music makes the burden easier. In happy times, music enhances our happiness. And as Elder Boyd K. Packer notes, "We are able to feel and learn very quickly through music, through art, through poetry some spiritual things that we would otherwise learn very slowly." [^2] As we allow it, the Spirit of the Lord does soften and tune our hearts through worthy music.

Music can touch us and make things a little easier. My daughter, Lynne, tells the following story about music:

"I was probably about halfway through my mission when I was put with a new companion. After about a week together I began to realize that my companion had some serious problems. I found out later that chemical imbalances made her very unpredictable. She would fly off the handle and shriek in rage at me over simple things or even nothing that I could detect. Having been raised in a peaceful home, I was distressed by that kind of contention. I felt like I couldn't function as a missionary under those conditions. She always apologized for these outbursts afterwards. She'd say, 'I'm sorry. I couldn't help it,' and we'd work through it. But occasionally she would have an outburst when we were driving to teach a discussion. There was no way that we could have the Spirit with us after one of those outbursts.

"One morning I was in the shower, crying. It was the only place that I could be alone. I was just kind of sobbing and praying that somehow I could find a way to deal with this for the next few months. I knew my mission president wouldn't just transfer one of us, because that would just give the problem to someone else. I received the impression that music was going to be the key to my relationship with this companion. Music? I thought, because I had had no indication that she was musical. But the impression was very strong. That day as we left in the car to go quite a distance to a discussion, I thought, Okay, that was a definite impression, so I ought to act on it. I began to hum a song of Mom's called 'Song of Testimony.' My companion recognized it and joined in humming with me. Then I started singing, and she sang with me. Though she had no musical training, she loved to sing. We finished a few other songs by the time we arrived at our appointment. As we offered a prayer before going up to the house, we both felt a sweetness and calm that we sorely needed. Many times in the three months that we were together, we had to resort to humming—and sometimes the humming would start kind of loud and frustrated, but it never ceased to make a difference in our relationship. We ended up as very good friends. She died just a few months after we returned from our missions. Her father asked me to sing 'Song of Testimony' at her funeral. I felt honored to sing at her funeral and very grateful to the Lord for turning a very stressful, contentious situation into a good friendship."

Sometimes the songs I have written come back to haunt me. I may learn something from them as I write them, or learn it later when I return to a song and feel like a hypocrite because I'm not living what I wrote. This happened to me when I was a new Relief Society president trying as hard as I could. I went to a training session with President Barbara Winder, and for three hours she told us how to improve our Relief Societies. I felt overwhelmed. I thought, How can we do more than we're doing? At the end of her session, she said something that made it all right: "Just choose one or two things from what we've said. And above all, 'Do not run faster . . . than you have strength'" (D&C 10:4). I went straight home and looked up that scripture. It made me feel so good I decided to write a song about it. And I tried to live that principle.

One day, however, I was at Relief Society all day for a homemaking meeting. My daughter's little girl had burned her hands badly, and I was wishing I was with her so I could see how she was. My mother was also ill, and I felt I should have been with her that day. But my nephew was here from Alaska to enter the Missionary Training Center, and I had promised to help him do his shopping all that afternoon and give an open house for him that evening for all the Utah relatives. I rushed from thing to thing, not doing anything well. Just before the open house, I remembered an item I had forgotten to buy. So I jumped into the car. The radio was tuned to an LDS music station, and when I turned the ignition key, there was my song "Do Not Run Faster Than You Have Strength." It was the strangest feeling. I looked at my radio and said, "Easy for you to say."

A few days ago I talked to Lynne about how her day was going. (Sometimes she calls up and says, "Mom, is this the complaint department?" "Yes, it is," I answer. "Go for it.") She'd had a day that rivaled one of mine. She was trying to phone people in a stake choir, write out a piece of music for their stake conference on Sunday, and prepare dinner for the missionaries. She needed to go grocery shopping, but she had also committed to do two hours of visiting teaching, and she was helping her husband get ready for a mule-packing trip. I said to Lynne, "Each generation improves on the last one," meaning busy to busier to busiest. We all do too much and get stressed. That's when music can help us gain perspective.

I thought that I could do it all, complete each task, accept each call. I never felt my work was done, until I had pleased everyone. I told myself I must be strong, be there for all to lean upon, But in the end I came to see, that's more than God requires of me.

He has said:

Chorus: Do not run faster than you have strength. If you grow weary, what have you gained? You will have wisdom and strength enough, If first you remember to fill your own cup.

Music has helped me the most at the toughest times of my life—the deaths of my father, my mother, and one of our newborn babies. In each case, music helped me gain peace in specific ways. My husband and I had a serious Rh factor problem, and our last baby was two months premature and extremely ill with Rh complications. He was given a name and a blessing, and unsure that he would live, we watched through the night. He passed away by the next morning. At that point I remembered that I had four little children at home who needed reassurance, who needed to see that I was okay so that they would be okay. Even though I felt peace of mind, I didn't really grieve the way I needed to. I didn't fully acknowledge that loss or that I might never have another baby. Twenty years later, I was remembering that experience one night and decided that because it was still somewhat unresolved in my mind, I needed to write about it. Every day for a week or two, I relived the experience, writing lyrics and composing a song that I hoped would put it to rest for me. I cried then in a way I had not cried when it happened. Since then it has been a very happy memory. I look forward to rearing that baby, as Joseph Smith said we would. [^3] My feelings are only happy ones. Here is the song I wrote then:

My Heart Sang a Lullaby

Richie was born on a day in December, I know it was Sunday—some things you remember, Richie's first cries were like music to me, But no one could promise how long he would stay. And the night seemed so long as we watched him and prayed. Richie was gone by the light of the morning, Before his first sunrise, before the day's dawning. So still in our arms, it was our turn to cry, A memorized moment as we said good-bye. And he looked like an angel in his blanket of white. Richie, my son, only here for a moment, He came and he went and the world didn't notice. But nothing's the same, especially for me, Eternity's promise is clearer to see. He has just gone ahead to where we'll someday be. Chorus: And my heart sang a lullaby To celebrate birth, As he crossed the veil Between heaven and earth. My heart sang a lullaby For this tiny one. A song of forever, Of things yet to come. Just a lullaby to carry him home. Yes, a lullaby to carry him home.

My father died when he was fifty-seven, one year younger than I am now. I thought that was awfully young to lose my father. I'd seen him go through a lot during his last few years, so by the time he died, I felt some relief. Even the day he died, I felt exhilarated, happy for him to be free of pain. I went through his funeral with that same feeling. I didn't cry but just felt peace. A couple of days after his funeral, I was driving alone from Provo to Logan, where we were moving. I turned on the radio, early on a Sunday morning, and the Tabernacle Choir was singing: "In my Father's house are many mansions. In my Father's house are many mansions. If it were not so I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you." At that moment I felt the impact of losing my father. But I felt a sweet peace that he had gone to prepare for us to follow. I cried all the way to Logan. It was a great, therapeutic cry. Many years later, my mother died at age eighty-one. A song we had written together, "The Woman You'll Be Some Day," comforted me then and many times since when I've wished to be with her.

I started writing music when I was about forty. I also lost the use of my hand then and could no longer play the piano with it. I've been to forty different specialists, and they have no diagnosis, no cure. One of the last people I went to was Dr. Iliff C. Jeffery, a blind osteopath. He worked hard to help me regain the use of my hand. I sometimes complained to him as he worked about how inconvenient this was and how hard to write music when I couldn't play the piano. One day I realized the irony of my complaining to a blind man. It was a significant moment in my life. I said, "Well, Doctor, I don't think you can fix my hand, but thank you for trying."

"I may not be able to fix it," he said, "but I may be able to help you accept a handicap a little more gracefully." I met with him two more times, and he taught me what we can learn from disabilities. We have more purpose and more humility in our prayers. We learn to trust the Lord's timing. He said, "There is a healing for every problem we have on earth, whether it be now or in the next life."

"Well, I hope for you there will be a blessing in this life," I said, "so that you can see again." He chuckled and then explained that because of pain in his eyes, he had had them removed some years before. "But," he assured me, "there will come a time when you wouldn't trade having the use of your hand for what you have learned from not having it." I couldn't see that at the time, but through the years I have come to that point and have gained peace of mind about it. I wanted to write something to honor him, and it turned into a song called "The Test." One verse is for him, this blind man that I love so much, but the song is for me and for all of us who have prayed in faith for healing or relief and the answer hasn't come in quite the way we'd hoped.

Tell me, friend, why are you blind? Why doesn't he who worked the miracles Send light into your eyes? Tell me, friend, if you understand, Why doesn't he with power to raise the dead Just make you whole again? It would be so easy for him. I watch you and in sorrow question why. Then you, my friend, in perfect faith reply: Didn't he say he sent us to be tested? Didn't he say the way would not be sure? But didn't he say we could live with him forevermore, Well and whole, if we but patiently endure? After the trial, we will be blessed, But this life is the test.

Music can sometimes help in unusual situations. Years ago when our children were young, I had a family home evening lesson to prepare. I had a slight grudge against each person in my family that day, including my husband. I thought, I've got to find a way to get my points across and maybe music will make them more palatable. During the day, I wrote a verse for each of our four children and one for my husband. My irritations with them were little things, such as Steve spending an hour in the shower. So I sang his verse, and then at the end of each verse I had the family join in to sing the chorus,

Steve, Steve, We all love Steve, More than we can say. We love the bad, We love the good, We love him any old way.

I sang a verse for each family member, and then everyone joined in the chorus with the appropriate name inserted. I figured that the chorus made up for the verse. I mentioned it to Steve years later, and he said, "Oh yeah, I remember that. Our favorite verse was the one you wrote for yourself." And I said, "Well, I wouldn't have had a grudge against myself." He said, "No, quite the contrary." And he reminded me of the words I had written for myself:

There's a sweet and gentle woman And her age is thirty-eight. She's more wonderful And kind than any other. You might even say she's perfect And so very humble too. We are blessed to have Saint Janice as our mother. And then they all sang, Mom, Mom, We all love Mom, More than we can say. We love the bad, We love the good, We love her any old way.

Have fun with your talents. Don't let everything be too serious.

One of the most complicated adversities many of us face is marriage. We work at this relationship our whole life. It never is perfect. My husband keeps asking me to write him a beautiful love song, and I never have gotten to it. I've tried, but I can't get it right. I thought that he deserved a song after thirty-six years, though. This is what I wrote:

After thirty-six years I have learned quite a lot About what things will please him And what things will not. So our marriage is blissfully calm and serene Except for a few insignificant things: In raising our children we certainly clicked Except I'm too easy and he's much too strict. But a little of his way, a little of mine, And it seems that the kids have all grown up just fine. We both enjoy movies, but know in advance That he'll choose adventure and I'll choose romance. Yes, we do have a few problems like these— Like he says half his time is spent finding my keys. He loves his computers, he bought one for me. He wants me to learn it, but I won't agree. He'll talk about floppies and hardware and ROMS When I don't even know how to turn the thing on! When it comes to music, we're solid, it seems Except he loves classics, and country suits me. But in this decision we've compromised fairly— No high-brow, no low-brow, just Janice Kapp Perry! When it comes to TV, we're exactly the same. We love basketball, football, all BYU games. But I prefer watching one game at a time While he flips the channels to watch eight or nine. If I had the chance I would willingly choke The guy who invented remote! But we found a solution that works usually His TV is upstairs, mine downstairs, you see. And we are united each time our team scores— I whistle and clap, and he stomps on the floor. I'm sure he's observed I'm a little too round, But he says he just loves me more by the pound. Then I can't resist pointing out lovingly That while I've gained thirty, he's gained forty-three. Just lately he's noticed my hair's turning gray Then quickly pretends that he likes it that way. So I pat his bald spot and say with a flare: "At least I am blessed with a full head of hair!" Except for these few little things I have mentioned, Our marriage is really quite nearly perfection. We've had disagreements, but as I recall, We just did things his way—no problem at all! He may see things differently, I could be wrong, But I get the last word 'cause I wrote the song!

Music helps us ease everyday tensions and can also strengthen us to face very serious challenges. Yesterday I received a letter from a man about the song "I Am of Infinite Worth." He wrote: "I've had a very hard life of abuse and ill health. The first time I heard this song, I broke down in tears and the Spirit of God shot through me like an arrow. I realized for the first time just who I really was—that I am a son of the most High God and am of infinite worth. . . . I was so abused through my life. I can overcome. I do not have the song, but it is impressed in my soul. And in times of tribulation and temptation, I sing that song as I put on the armor of God. Your song is my shield." Music can help us in thousands of ways. Our hymnbook is as scripture to us, and our beautiful hymns can shield us.

A few years ago, I was going through the most difficult challenge of my life. At times, alone in my room, I pleaded with Heavenly Father for some help, some comfort. I kept saying, "Just let my mom come and talk to me. Just let me see her a minute." I pleaded in many different ways. Through my prayers, I finally gained peace. But while I struggled, I kept finding myself singing the first part of a little Primary song that I had written much earlier. I wrote it, but now I was living it. I needed it.

A Child's Prayer

Heavenly Father, are you really there? And do you hear and answer every child's prayer? Some say that heaven is far away, But I feel it close around me as I pray. Heavenly Father, I remember now Something that Jesus told disciples long ago: "Suffer the children to come to me." Father, in prayer I'm coming now to thee.

I have never sung those words without having a witness that he is really there, that he was hearing my prayer, and that in his own way and in his own time my prayers would be answered. And they have been answered. The things I was going through then have been resolved. I know that as you look through your hymnbook, your Primary songbook, or other music that you love, you will find comfort there to meet your challenges.

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] Pay an honest tithe. N. Eldon Tanner, Constancy amid Change [pamphlet], Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1979; address delivered at the welfare session of general conference, October 1979.
[^2] Live on less than you earn. Former Labor Secretary Robert Reich, quoted in Working Woman, September 1996, 29-30.
[^3] Learn to distinguish between needs and wants. Bureau of Labor Statistics: Institute for Women's Policy Research.
