Susette Green, Dlora Dalton, Dawn Anderson, Every Good Thing: Talks from the 1997 BYU Women's Conference ( 1998)

Financial Planning from a Woman's Perspective

KATHLEEN E. VOORHEES

Money is a difficult topic because it seems hard and cold and somehow worldly. But paying attention to money is necessary. As an old saying goes, "I don't like money actually, but it quiets my nerves." This essay isn't intended to make you a millionaire, but it will, I hope, educate and motivate you to prepare for the future. Taking control of your finances can quiet your nerves, I promise you. Money makes a terrible master but an excellent servant. We don't want money to be our master, but with proper planning and use of resources, money can help us be better servants. Financial resources free us to serve missions and help in numerous other ways.

The Lord would have us practice economic constancy. N. Eldon Tanner, when he was a member of the First Presidency, identified five principles of money management: [^1]

What special advice do women need beyond this general counsel? What makes our situation unique?

Generally, both genders have the same concerns: Will I outlive my money? Will I be able to afford a college education for my children? How can I set aside extra money for savings and investments? How can I get good investment returns without too much risk?

Women have a few concerns besides those.

First, women live an average of five to seven years longer than men. So we are going to need more money because we're going to live longer.

Second, women earn less. Though the earnings gap is narrowing, women still earn substantially less than men doing the same jobs. Women earn approximately 73 cents on the dollar compared to men doing the same work. [^2]

Three, retirement income is substantially lower. Retirement benefits—Social Security, company pensions, 401(k) plans, and so forth—are based on time in the workplace. Women experience significant workforce disadvantages because we are the caregivers: we care for children, grandchildren, and elderly parents. No one debates the importance of the nurturing years, but the sad fact is the average Social Security benefit paid to women in 1993 was just $571 per month—25 percent lower than the average received by men. [^3]

Many will experience what I call the "suddenly single" phenomenon. Either through widowhood or divorce, women are forced to make decisions alone. The suddenly single encounter many complex issues. Will you be ready? My heart goes out to those in this situation; it is very tough. My advice is to avoid major decisions for a while. It takes at least a year to adjust to major change. When in doubt, procrastinate. Divorce is financially crippling for women, who stand to lose 73 percent of their standard of living after the breakup. [^4] But suddenly single women might take heart from this statement of Nancy Reagan's: "A woman is like a teabag [herbal, of course]—you can't tell how strong she is until you put her in hot water." Women may end up in hot water, but if we can give birth, we can do anything.

Nine of ten women will be solely responsible for their own financial well-being at some point in their lives. [^5] Using money to make money may sound like man's work, but I believe it is our responsibility, too. It should not be left to someone else. Financial management is not something women can turn their backs on. And believe it or not, an Oppenheimer Management survey indicated that 93 percent of married men felt confident their wives could handle finances alone if they had to. [^6] The chances are nine out of ten that you will have to, so you might as well be ready.

Besides, making money can be fun. If you don't participate and don't learn to understand financial principles, you may find yourself in old age settling for whatever is left, and it may not be enough. Besides that, women make good money managers. Women ask smart questions and insist on understanding before they buy something. They want to be educated about investment options. Women are excellent planners. I see women all the time making lists of things that they need to do for their family—their grocery lists, school shopping lists, and so on. Financial planning is the same orientation: making lists and taking care of them, checking them off. Whereas men tend to view money as an extension of their masculinity, a sign of their virility, and a symbol of power, women understand that money is what you buy things with, including security. [^7]

Finances are a shared opportunity, not a male talent.

You may be starting to get math anxiety. Studies show that girls who did not do well in math in school, or who do not like math, have a difficult time handling their finances later in life. It's their attitude. I was one of those. I didn't like math, and I didn't do particularly well in it. Yet here I am in the money management business. Calculators and computers do all the work. My fear was unfounded. A twenty-dollar financial calculator with just a couple more buttons than the ones you are used to will take maybe twenty minutes to figure out. Then all you need to know is which buttons to push at the right time. Or call your financial advisor and get the answer you need in five minutes. Don't let math scare you.

Let's get to financial-plan basics. A sound financial foundation includes six elements: cash, health insurance, life insurance, a home, retirement savings, and college savings.

Cash. Cash for emergencies is considered a basic—three months' worth of your monthly expenses is the rule of thumb.

Health insurance. Health insurance is a basic because of the consequences if you don't have it. I have a married son who is going to China for six months. His health insurance through his current employment will lapse during that time. He is okay with the idea of dropping his coverage temporarily, but I won't let him. His family could be devastated financially if he doesn't have at least major medical coverage.

Life insurance. Life insurance is owned by 78 percent of Americans. [^8] It's one of the largest industries in every developed nation in the world, because the product they sell fills a basic need. If you have dependents, you need to insure the life of your breadwinner for income protection.

Life insurance looks complicated, but actually it is based on one thing: a 1980 mortality table, which is essentially a table that indicates normal life expectancy for each age and gender. The insurance industry, to be competitive, has little gimmicks, like add-ons, riders, or options. They have different ways to pay the premium and different ways to take out the money, all of which just make it complicated. Look at it as if you were buying a car, say a Ford Explorer. You go to the dealership and see the car. At ten different dealerships the same car will have different financing terms and a different price. You can add different options, such as a sun roof or CD player, but the basic vehicle is the same at every dealership. Insurance is the same way. You might buy a term product, a universal life policy, a variable life product, or a single premium. But it's still a Ford Explorer; it's still the 1980 mortality table. You just have to decide how you want your cereal: toasted, sugar coated, fat free, hot, cold, or just plain.

Which insurance plan should you buy? Discuss it with your financial advisor. He or she can tell you what is available. How much insurance do you need? It's a simple mathematical equation. Your insurance agent can help you figure it out.

A home. Purchasing a home is usually considered one of the basics in a sound financial plan. You might think, We have a nice nest egg in our house. But your liquid net worth usually excludes your house. You've got to live somewhere, so your home is not counted as part of your investment capital. Owning a home might not be counted as a financial asset when totaling your projected retirement savings, but it is certainly an important physical and emotional asset.

Retirement savings. We all dream of what it will be like when we retire. Consider this definition of retirement: twice as much husband on half the cash. In generations past, retirement was not in anyone's vocabulary. Our forefathers worked until they dropped dead. But Social Security and company retirement plans have given the employed public a new and luxurious hope for future rest and relaxation. Sources of retirement income include Social Security, pension plans with your company or your private pension, and your personal savings. Yet, the solvency of Social Security has been a concern for years. Forty percent of American women depend on Social Security for more than 90 percent of their income after age sixty-five.

A lot of people consider the Social Security card the lottery ticket of the future. In other words, it's likely to be worthless. In 1945, there were 42 payers to 1 payee; that is, 42 people worked for each person receiving benefits. [^9] In 1984, 3.3 people worked for each person receiving benefits. [^10] I'm a baby boomer, and economists are predicting that baby boomers will bankrupt the system. If you are a generation Xer (between age eighteen and thirty-four), a widely publicized study suggests that more of you believe in UFOs than in Social Security benefits. [^11] Social Security is not something you can count on, especially if you are young. You've got to start saving for yourself.

How much money, what kind of a nest egg, does it really take to retire? If you read the covers of Money magazine and the financial journals of the world, you know that for their readers it takes $1 million. A million would be nice—wonderful, in fact. But what does it really take to retire? Actually, how much you need depends on the kind of life you plan to lead once you retire. If you want to travel a lot or pay for grandchildren's education (my mother has seventy-seven grandchildren, so she's not going to do that!), you could well want an annual income that's equal to your highest earning preretirement year. If you expect to lead a simple life, you may need only 70 percent or less of preretirement income. That's assuming your home is paid for, your children are grown, you're not rearing any grandchildren, and so on.

Saving should be a habit. The Japanese as a group save 20 percent of their income, and Americans have a 3 percent savings rate. [^12] That's because many of us have a bad attitude about saving: When we save our money, we feel deprived. We have to change that attitude. Saving money should bring a feeling of security and satisfaction, like the feeling you have when you know that down in your basement you've got food storage—you've got wheat, flour, and raspberry jam. Money in the bank and food in the basement are preparations for the future.

There are many options for savings: investment vehicles such as 401(k) plans, qualified plans, and IRAs; financial products such as stocks, bonds, mutual funds, CD's, treasuries. Financial savings are as individualized as the people who make them. Talk with a financial specialist to decide what is best for you. The important thing to remember is to start saving now. Don't wait. Believe it or not, when you retire most of your income is going to come from investment appreciation, not from contributions made by you. You need to give time a chance to work for you.

College savings. You may wonder why college savings is at the bottom of the basics list. After all, most children will go to college before their parents retire. If you can help your kids with their college education, great. Do it. But if you have to make a choice between saving for your retirement and putting your children through college, be self-serving and save for your retirement. You have to be a little bit selfish now if you want to be self-sufficient later on. Besides that, kids can learn a lot by putting themselves through college. They often study better if they know that they are paying the tuition with a part-time job. It won't hurt them. But if you decide to save for college instead of retirement, pick out which of your "well-educated" kids you plan to live with or borrow from when you are seventy-five.

We've got to talk about inflation, public enemy number 1 where your money is concerned. What is inflation? It might be best described as a dollar saved today is seventy-five cents tomorrow. An actual definition is that inflation is the rate of increase in the price of goods and services. Data about inflation in this country has been collected since 1720. During the Civil War, inflation was as high as 25 percent. In recent years, it was highest in 1979—about 13 percent. In the last six years, it has been very low, under 3 percent. We've been lucky. Inflation in the United States is quite moderate compared to that in foreign economies. In 1989, Argentina experienced 5,000 percent inflation, and in 1993, Brazil's rate was more than 1,000 percent. [^13]

An example of inflation in more concrete terms is the cost of a stamp: in 1980 a stamp was 15 cents; today it costs 32 cents. That illustrates the loss of purchasing power of your money. A 4 percent annual rate of inflation will slice 55 percent off your purchasing power in twenty years. Inflation is important to consider when you think about what you are going to invest your money in, your retirement dollar, your IRA, your savings. You have to invest your money in something that will fight inflation.

Do not confuse lack of financial familiarity with a lack of brain power. (Remember that old age is always fifteen years older than you are.) Believe in yourself. Rely on you to take care of you. Handling money can bring anxiety, but the result is that you can get a sense of power, control, and freedom—the best thing of all. Educate yourself. Trust yourself. Know good advice from bad, and stop believing that everyone else knows more than you do.

I can almost hear you saying, "Sure. Right after I make breakfast, shop for groceries, pick up the dry cleaning, attend PTA meeting, run the errands for my husband, deliver the kids to karate lessons, gas up the car, fix dinner, return the videos, let the dog out, and put the kids to bed, I must plan for my retirement."

Don't wait. Please plan for your financial futures. Make time to do what is important. You spend time with your family, you have a physical checkup, and you even make time for unpleasant things like going to the dentist. Charting your financial future is just as vital to your well-being. Take care of it. Take care of yourself.

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph T. Mullan, "The (Mis)meaning of Life Events in Family Stress Theory and Research," paper presented at the Preconference Theory Construction and Research Methodology Workshop, National Council on Family Relations Annual Meeting, October 1983, St. Paul, Minnesota, 11.
[^2] See Richard S. Lazarus and Susan Folkman, Stress, Appraisal, and Coping (New York: Springer, 1984); Anita DeLongis, James C. Coyne, Gayle Dakof, Susan Folkman, and Richard S. Lazarus, "Relationship of Daily Hassles, Uplifts, and Major Life Events to Health Status," Health Psychology 1 (1982): 119-36.
[^3] Lazarus and Folkman, Stress, Appraisal, and Coping, 21.
[^4] Anne Morrow Lindbergh, Gift from the Sea (New York: Random House, 1955), 45, 47.
[^5] Be honest in all your financial affairs. Credit Union Executive, March 1994.
[^6] Social Security Bulletin, Spring 1994.
[^7] U.S. National Center for Health Statistics, Vital Statistics of the United States, annual 1990.
[^8] C. David Chase, Chase Investment Performance Digest: 1960 through 1996 (Concord, Mass.: Chase Global Data and Research, 1997), 290.
[^9] Lili Wright, "On 60th Birthday, Social Security Sees Unhappy Returns," Salt Lake Tribune, 14 August 1995, A1.
[^10] Wright, "Social Security Sees Unhappy Returns," A1.
[^11] "Unidentified Flying Benefits," Registered Representative (July 1995): 34.
[^12] Wright, "Social Security Sees Unhappy Returns," A1.
[^13] Chase, Investment Performance Digest, 38-40.
