Susette Green, Dlora Dalton, Dawn Anderson, Every Good Thing: Talks from the 1997 BYU Women's Conference ( 1998)

Stress and Coping: The Hassle Haystack

ELAINE SORENSEN MARSHALL

Stress is one of the most overworked words in modern life. Yet, more than in any previous generation, our lives at home, work, and church are complicated—by contact with more people, increasing complexity of choices, and by a growing number of important but unrelated tasks and demands. Popular magazines promote "tests" to measure stress, with endless lists of "Ten Happy Habits" to reduce stress. Stress reduction is becoming a common prescription in clinical health-promotion and risk-reduction programs. Is all of this just a trendy sign of our time? No. Research in health and social sciences indicates that stress really can make you sick. Stress has been associated with stomach troubles, headaches, and many other health problems. It can make life miserable or even lead to early death from heart disease and stroke.

What is stress? I found twenty-nine different definitions lurking among library volumes in the social sciences. I am sure that there are more, but I stopped upon finding the following statement: "I would advocate that the word 'stress' be stricken from our vocabulary as soon as possible." [^1]

Some have attempted to define stress according to an index of particular, difficult life events. Self-administered "stress tests" in checkstand magazines instruct the reader to check the number of stressful events in her or his life. The list includes everything from death, divorce, and jail terms to pregnancy, retirement, sexual difficulties, and Christmas—on the same list. Supposedly, enough of such events in one year threatens your health. One year, my score was so high I should have been in the coronary unit. Ironically, that was the year I seemed to cope best.

Actually, recent research indicates that daily hassles, more than major life events, most threaten quality of life and health. Some social scientists have noted that though major life changes, such as divorce and bereavement, are more dramatic, daily hassles may have greater influences on our actual health. [^2] Somehow, we seem to marshal our resources and come through the "big" things in life. Certainly we suffer, but people bring casseroles; we seek help; we pray, and we grow stronger. It is the last-straw, flat-tire stuff that raises our blood pressure, increases muscle tension, and initiates all the physiological stress responses that scientists know make us sick and threaten our health and lives.

The hassle pile-up is what gets to us. A few years ago, I had endured separation and divorce, the loss of a son, reduction of income, selling my home, moving to a new town, getting a job, going back to graduate school, putting my children into a new school, staying up at night through four successive cases of chicken pox—all on the official "Life Stress Events" list (okay, maybe not the chicken pox). Then one day, when I arrived too late for my haircut appointment, after frantically running to children's lessons, my school, and my job, I became hysterical, thrashing and sobbing. The hairdresser stood stunned, but I couldn't stop. That last-straw hassle had toppled me over the edge. (Since that traumatic event, I cut my own hair.)

Psychologist Richard Lazarus defines stress as a "relationship between the person and the environment that is appraised by the person as taxing or exceeding his or her resources and endangering his or her well-being." [^3] That subtle phrase "appraised by the person" means that whatever I think is stressful is stressful. Events that exhilarate one person may devastate another. We may each decide whether something challenges us to grow or threatens our very sense of survival. Women, men, and children all experience stress and hassles uniquely. Life is stress! The goal is not to eliminate stress but to cultivate effective ways of coping with it, growing from it, and perhaps even thriving on it. Researchers are thus turning away from studying the sources of stress to observing how people respond, cope, and grow. Many of their findings are well-known. Let me focus on three that may be less familiar to you.

Viewing Life as a Journey

One basic strategy for effectively coping with stress is to see that life is the journey rather than a way to a final rewarding end or even to a continual series of better-than-now destinations. I am just discovering this, after living nearly half a century saying, "Life will be better after the final exam . . . after I graduate . . . when I go on a mission . . . when I get home from my mission . . . when I am married . . . after the baby is born . . . after the bills are paid . . . " I have a friend who says, "Life is what happens while you are making other plans." I know today that my stress is my life.

We hear the generic "life is a journey" metaphor everywhere from billboards to popular self-help books. If that metaphor has lost its power for you, try a different word: Your life may be an expedition, an adventure, an assembly line, a book in progress, a pilgrimage, an excursion, a parade—whatever image best conveys the process for you. But it is a process, moving through time, offering interesting insights, challenges, and pleasures along the way. It is not a quick, straight shot to heaven and perfection.

Faith and Love

Latter-day Saints know that health is enhanced, healing happens, and hassles are put in perspective when we vigorously exercise faith in God. Current scientific studies are also reporting that prayer correlates with higher numbers of positive outcomes to physical illnesses. Treatment programs for addicts encourage faith in a higher power. Popular authors and television talk-show hosts are promoting daily gratitude journals. They have proven effective: list five things for which you are grateful every day, and by the end of the year you will feel more energy and less stress. Life is better when we are responsive to our daily blessings, sensitive to spiritual moments, and honor the sacred things waiting to be noticed in our daily life.

Another intangible but documented stress reducer is love. In study after study, people with a variety of physical, psychological, and emotional illnesses fared better than expected if they had meaningful supportive relationships. Loving relationships improve health and reduce stress.

In the health sciences, we call this "social support"—that is, nurturant people who are important to you, who love and need you, and who help you when you need it. There are some people who nourish our souls, whose very presence makes life better. My friend Martha is like that to everyone who knows her. I see her only occasionally, and seldom talk for long, but I need only be near her, and life is easier. On the other hand, some people swallow the energy out of a room, drain us, or make us feel less competent, more tense. When our hassle level is high, we need to be far from these people for a time.

Soon after my grandmother died, my grandfather had a stroke that left him unable to speak. Already predisposed to perfectionism and solitude, human interaction became uncomfortable and tense as he struggled to be understood. His simplest request to move a chair became an irritation to him and the person trying to help. By a lovely miracle of sensitivity, a friend gave him a long-haired, white cat. Soon the cat responded to his strokes, seemed to love him as he gave love, and made him feel competent and needed once more. Tension lessened as we all learned to communicate again. This was a miracle of the power of giving and receiving love at the simplest level.

We need love from others, and we need to give love. Giving love and service promotes mental and emotional health. To give freely does not mean being a martyr, however, or giving from an empty reservoir. Some people give beyond their strength, beyond wisdom, and tax their health. Listen to Anne Morrow Lindbergh's words on the danger to women of giving in ways that do not replenish the spirit: "Is this then what happens to woman? She wants perpetually to spill herself away. All her instinct as a woman—the eternal nourisher of children, of men, of society—demands that she give. Her time, her energy, her creativeness drain out into these channels. . . . Woman spills herself away in driblets to the thirsty, seldom being allowed the time, the quiet, the peace, to let the pitcher fill up to the brim." Lindbergh does not argue for a stance of selfishness, however, but for "purposeful giving": "Purposeful giving is not as apt to deplete one's resources; it belongs to that natural order of giving that seems to renew itself even in the act of depletion. The more one gives the more one has to give—like milk in the breast." [^4]

Another way we combat stress is by loving in a special way that developmental theorists call "generativity"—giving to and guiding the next generation. Those who feel a sense of "parenting," though they may not be parents, have a larger perspective and purpose beyond today's hassles. Teaching and mentoring the next generation in any part of our life lends purpose and reduces competitive stress in our own lives. A recent popular magazine listed the four hundred "best" physicians for women, according to peer nomination. My husband, who has spent a career teaching physicians, was not on the list, but he delighted in counting a dozen names who were "his residents" with the same joy as if they were his own children. I realized at that moment that drawing energy from such generative giving promotes health and wisdom.

Work

Among the most common effective antidotes for stress is work. That may be hard to believe because for many of us work is a primary source of stress. To be a stress reducer, work must be loved, and not everyone can find that in the work of their employment. To find a vocation that you love would surely add years of health to your life. But if you are not fortunate in your employment, you must find some activities, both physical and mental, over which you have a sense of control and achievement. You may find you need to balance the satisfying mental exertion of your workplace with a physical interest or vice versa.

Though I love my work, I spend hours in a building, at a desk, among students, in meetings, or near a computer. Eventually such work, though intellectually stimulating, adds to my stress. I need some physical work or play. Though I claim to be allergic to formal exercise, I know activity could reduce my sense of stress and help me be healthier. I love gardening and even housecleaning, and I usually take the stairs at work, but I fall far short of a healthy, stress-reducing lifestyle. My father, who drives cattle, lifts bales of hay, and literally sweats for fourteen hours a day, never complains of stress.

Imagination

The strategies I've mentioned so far may be familiar to you, but the last remedy may be new: imagination. To use imagination to cope does not mean to fantasize and escape into a more comfortable alternative reality. Facing truth, speaking truth, and respecting truth are the foundations of physical and emotional health. Among cancer patients, for example, guided imagery and positive affirmation have both been shown to enhance health, but not until the individual has first faced the truth of his or her medical diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis.

Once we are able to confront and integrate the truth of our lives, however, imagination can be the soul's medicine. Imagination, that uniquely human attribute, allows us to find meaning in the challenges of our lives, whether traumatic events or daily hassles.

While my mother was dying, her body was terribly swollen, and for a time she moaned as if, I perceived, in childbirth. As I washed her and combed her hair, I imagined myself midwife to the one who bore me. I was attending to her as she labored for another passage. I treasure that image. It helps me tolerate the grief of her loss. I have since become aware that this is a common metaphor in poetry, literature, and personal stories. A daughter's care of a dying mother is a return to the essential maternal story of passage.

Two other words, imagery and magic, are found in the word imagination. Imagery can expand our reality and positively reframe stressors almost too harsh for endurance. Coping images are everywhere, if we search among the ordinary, expecting magic and miracles.

In a startling, often-told psychology project, three groups of subjects were assigned a different activity. One group was asked to spend one-half hour a day practicing free throws on a basketball court; the second, to spend one-half hour a day off the court, without a ball, imagining successful free throws in the mind; and the third group was to do nothing. At the end of two weeks, the three groups were brought to a basketball court and asked to make ten free throws. The scores of those who did nothing remained the same. The scores of the group who practiced and the group who imagined the practice both improved and performed equally. Imagery became magic.

Faith, love, work, and imagination are powerful tools, important gear, for coping with life stress on life's journey. So are moderation in life habits of diet, exercise, sleep, and personal maintenance. No matter how well equipped we are, there will be times we simply cannot forge ahead, and we must slow down a while to rest and reflect. We may even choose to reroute our course. I have found life to be a journey forward, and sometimes backward, or even sideways, toward perfection. Striving, progress, stumbling, repentance, and growth have been important milestones on my eternal path. But if I accept life as a journey, then I can expect and accept the rocks and the slippery spots as well as the smooth pavement.

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph T. Mullan, "The (Mis)meaning of Life Events in Family Stress Theory and Research," paper presented at the Preconference Theory Construction and Research Methodology Workshop, National Council on Family Relations Annual Meeting, October 1983, St. Paul, Minnesota, 11.
[^2] See Richard S. Lazarus and Susan Folkman, Stress, Appraisal, and Coping (New York: Springer, 1984); Anita DeLongis, James C. Coyne, Gayle Dakof, Susan Folkman, and Richard S. Lazarus, "Relationship of Daily Hassles, Uplifts, and Major Life Events to Health Status," Health Psychology 1 (1982): 119-36.
[^3] Lazarus and Folkman, Stress, Appraisal, and Coping, 21.
[^4] Anne Morrow Lindbergh, Gift from the Sea (New York: Random House, 1955), 45, 47.
