Susette Green, Dlora Dalton, Dawn Anderson, Every Good Thing: Talks from the 1997 BYU Women's Conference ( 1998)

Daily Walks

ELAINE S. DALTON

Mine is not a spectacular life. Most days the many things I have done that day do not show. Once, in a group of friends, a mother of eight remarked, "I wonder how many pairs of shoes I have bought, sought, and polished in my lifetime?" Another mother speculated about the number of meals she had prepared. I personally wonder about the number of socks that have gone through my laundry room—and where half of them are! I am the facilitator who enables a busy family to go and do and accomplish. I am not usually known by my own name. I am the bishop's wife or Zach's or Jess's mom. And those labels are just fine with me because those people are my life. At times I have resented the dailyness of my life; but as I look back, I see that dailyness has patterned and schooled me. Daily doings add up, and they can make an eternity of difference.

I am a long-distance runner. In preparing to run a marathon, dailyness is vital. The daily runs strengthen you and prepare your body to go the 26.2 miles. It also teaches you much about yourself. Watching the Boston Marathon reminded me of those hills at mile 20. Just when you think you are almost finished, with only six miles to go, here come the hills. There will always be those hills at mile 20.

One almost overwhelming hill came when my father died of viral pneumonia. It was my first experience with deep sorrow. Much of what I have to come to understand of obedience, sacrifice, and grace as a daily gift I learned from my mother at that time. She was left a widow at the age of forty-five with three children. I was the eldest and had just begun school at Brigham Young University. My brother Rob was nine, and my brother Jim was sixteen.

After the funeral, we gathered around the kitchen table to talk and to cry. What were we to do now? My mother said that we would need to be good—to obey the Lord. We would need to keep saying our family prayers because without our father to lead us, we needed the Lord as never before. She reassured us with the scripture, "I, the Lord, am bound when ye do what I say" (D&C 82:10). That became our family motto. She told us that she knew we would be fine and Heavenly Father would watch over us and help us if we were obedient to him. She testified of his grace in our life. It was what I needed to hear.

We discussed our future. My mother would teach school, and we would continue to help her by doing the work around the home. My younger brothers would do the yard work. I volunteered to come home from BYU for a time to assist also. My heart wasn't in my school work; I was behind, and I was lonely. Mother looked me in the eye and said, "You will continue, and you will make your father and all of us proud. I will see that you all graduate from college and serve missions if it means I have to get a morning paper route and take in laundry at night." That was when I understood the meaning of sacrifice. And something in the way she said it made me know that sacrifice involved not only going without but doing so with great love.

My pleadings with the Lord to help me understand why my father died went unanswered for about a year. Then, in a devotional address, a scripture from Proverbs pierced my heart, and I knew it was my answer: "Trust in the Lord with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine own understanding. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths" (Prov. 3:5-6). It became my life's motto. Guided by that motto, I continued on at BYU. There both my mind and my spirit were schooled. There I received answers to important prayers. There the direction of my life was determined.

Other hills in my life—sickness, death, unemployment, back surgery, broken bones, broken hearts—many of you are also acquainted with. At those times I have trusted and tried not to lean to my own understanding. Looking back, I would not trade these experiences. They have schooled me, refined me, and strengthened me. Some have proved to be shortcuts to my goal; they changed my path and brought me closer to the Lord.

In the New Testament Paul refers to life as a race. He tells us to "run all" that we might "obtain" (1 Cor. 9:24). That means to keep running until we "obtain" the goal. Though Mosiah cautions us not to run faster than we have strength, he also tells us to run diligently (see Mosiah 4:27). Life is a marathon, a paced race toward an eternal and sure goal. Diligence—our daily obedience—allows us to progress and move steadily toward our goals.

On morning runs I recognize individuals from a long distance away by their walk or run—by their stride or the bounce of their hair or just the way they hold their arms and body. Mormon said that he, too, knew those to whom he spoke, the followers of Christ, by their "peaceable walk" (Moro. 7:4). Not unlike strength for a marathon, I believe a "peaceable walk" is developed daily. Those who have peaceable walks are learning of the Savior and also listening to him. They walk in the meekness of his Spirit. They do the right things for the right reasons. They are willing to pay the price for personal revelation by living the covenants of obedience and sacrifice.

In D&C 19:23 is the formula for how I will accomplish the next phase of challenges, opportunities, events that the Lord has in store for me. What a comforting set of instructions with a promise: "learn of me . . . listen to my words . . . walk in the meekness of my Spirit . . . and you shall have peace." I do have peace! I know that whatever happens, he is there. He is aware of each of us. He has a plan that involves us. And he will prepare us for whatever lies in our future—gently, over time, with patience and great love. That is grace, true grace.

He will help us. And I have learned how to be grateful and what to be grateful for. I am grateful for the dailyness. In subtle, quiet ways, these patterns prepare us to grow, as Christ did, from grace to grace, in obedience. Nature shows the strength and joy of dailyness. I am grateful for daily sunrises and sunsets, for the stars' and moon's appearance daily. In times of great stress and trial, the routine things sustain us—daily prayer and daily scripture study.

In dailyness we learn obedience and practice sacrifice. What have my life's uncommonly common experiences taught me about obedience and sacrifice? That to be truly obedient, we must have great love, and that our sacrifices, however small, large, or individually tailored, will make us holy.

So I am grateful for mothers and talks and prophets and prayers and kitchen tables, which become altars whereon obedience and sacrifice can be learned. I am grateful for daily experience, reminders that the Father sent his Son on a mission and that he was obedient in all things. Most of all, I am grateful for his atoning sacrifice. My prayer is that we may someday have that walk that will identify us as one of his—that someday we might be worthy to receive the invitation "Walk with me" (Moses 6:34).

***** Page 250-264 "It's About Time by Mary Ellen Edmunds" Goes Here, but "Daily Walks by Elaine S. Dalton" is repeated. ***********************
