Susette Green, Dlora Dalton, Dawn Anderson, Every Good Thing: Talks from the 1997 BYU Women's Conference ( 1998)

The Fire of the Covenant

GERALD N. LUND

The time was fall 1838. The place was Caldwell County, Missouri. Tensions were running high. In the previous two years, more than five thousand Latter-day Saints had moved into what had been a sparsely populated county. The old settlers were getting nervous. Too many Yankee Mormons were moving in. Missouri had entered the Union as a slave state, and it wanted to stay that way. The militia and mobs began to prowl. On the night of 24 October, a mob broke into an isolated settlement, burned the haystacks, torched the barns, and then kidnapped three Latter-day Saint men and threatened to take them back to Jackson County to execute them.

When word reached Joseph Smith in Far West, he called out the Mormon militia under the direction of David Patten, who was second senior member of the Quorum of the Twelve. He gathered a group of men to ride out and intercept that group. [^1] On the way, they stopped at James Hendricks' home and asked him to join them. While he prepared, his wife, Drusilla, filled with great fear but also faith, got his gun down from the fireplace and handed it to him. As he left she said, "Don't get shot in the back." [^2]

They rode all that night. Just at morning they came upon a little place called Crooked River. They didn't realize at first that the mob was camped right across the river. The little band of Mormons was coming from the west, and the rising sun was in their eyes. The Saints couldn't see the mob as they began to cross the river. One of the Missouri picket guards first saw the brethren coming and opened fire. Patrick O'Bannion was hit immediately and died before noon. A fierce battle erupted. Another man, Gideon Carter, was shot in the face and killed instantly. As David Patten tried to fall back across the river, he was shot in the stomach. He died before nightfall, the first apostle martyred in this dispensation. [^3] And James Hendricks? As the furious fire erupted, he turned, ran for shelter, and caught a ball in the back of the neck. He fell to the ground paralyzed from the neck down. [^4]

On October 27, two days later, in Jefferson City, Missouri, Governor Lilburn W. Boggs received a wildly exaggerated account of what had happened at Crooked River. He was told that the whole Missouri militia had been massacred when actually they had lost only one man. The Mormons had lost three dead and seven wounded. In great anger, Governor Boggs issued an executive order that, among other things, read, "The Mormons must be treated as enemies and must be exterminated or driven from the state." [^5]

About twelve miles west of Far West was a small settlement named Haun's Mill for its founder, Jacob Haun, who had built a grist mill there on Shoal Creek. October 30 was a beautiful Indian summer day. [^6] About four o'clock in the afternoon, the women were sitting on their porches shucking corn or doing other things to prepare for the winter. The men were out doing the last of the work in the fields, and the children were playing close by. Suddenly they heard a low rumble and looked up. Across the meadow and the trees, they saw about 240 men riding toward them. The captain of the Haun's Mill militia ran out, waving his hat and crying, "Peace! Peace!" Instead, the riders opened fire. The scene of tranquillity erupted in terror. Children screamed. Women ran to rescue their children. The invaders fired at everyone in sight. Fathers grabbed their sons and ran for the blacksmith's shop, the strongest building in the settlement. The mob showed no discrimination whatsoever. One woman, Mary Stedwell, darted across the road, headed for the millpond. Bullets pinged all around her as she ran across the millrace. Finally one bullet found its target: Mary was shot through the palm of her hand, and, fainting, fell behind a log. Later, the Saints dug out between fifteen and twenty bullets from the log that sheltered her. [^7]

Far more serious, the men and boys who had run into the blacksmith shop had made a terrible mistake. The heavy logs making up the walls had never been chinked, leaving great cracks all the way around the building. As the Saints barricaded the door, the mob dismounted, stepped up to the walls, put the muzzles through the cracks, and opened fire. In the deadly hail of bullets, most of the men were killed outright, and others were wounded. Finally the mob broke through the door and walked around, systematically shooting the survivors. Warren Smith had taken his two sons in with him for protection: Sardius was ten, and Alma was seven. In terror the boys dived beneath the blacksmith's bellows. They watched as a man put a gun to their father's head and pulled the trigger. A member of the mob heard them cry and looked underneath the bellows where he could see Sardius. He tried to pull the boy out, but when he couldn't, he simply put his rifle under the bellows, against Sardius' head, and pulled the trigger. Alma, whimpering in terror, burrowed deeper beneath the bellows. Another man reached in with his muzzle, couldn't quite reach Alma, but fired anyway, blowing away Alma's hip joint. Twenty minutes later, when the mob rode away with clothing and treasures they had looted from the cabins, they left seventeen dead and thirteen wounded. The Haun's Mill massacre became a tragic event in our history.

The day after the Crooked River killings in Far West, knowing the great tension and danger, Joseph Smith had sent word to all those in outlying settlements and villages to come into Far West for protection. [^8] On October 26, Jacob Haun had driven into Far West and looked up Joseph Smith. John D. Lee, who happened to be standing there, wrote the following: "The morning after the battle of Crooked River, Haun came to Far West to consult with the Prophet concerning the policy of the removal of the settlers . . . to the fortified camp. Col. [Lyman] Wight and myself were standing by when the prophet said to [Mr. Haun], 'Move in, by all means, if you wish to save your lives.' Haun replied that if the settlers left their homes, all of their property would be lost . . . and[burn[ed]. 'You had better lose your property than your lives; one can be replaced, the other cannot be restored; but there is no need of you losing either if you will only do as you are commanded.' Haun said that he considered the best plan was for all the settlers to move into and around the mill, and use the blacksmith's shop and other buildings as a fort in case of attack. . . . [Finally the Prophet said], 'You are at liberty to do so if you think best.' Haun then departed, well satisfied that he had carried his point. The Prophet turned to Col. Wight and said: 'That man did not come for counsel, but to induce me to tell him to do as he pleased; which I did. Had I commanded them to move in here and leave their property, they would have called me a tyrant. . . . ' [And then sadly the Prophet said], 'I am confident that we will soon learn that they have been butchered in a fearful manner.'" [^9] The irony is that Jacob Haun went back to Haun's Mill and didn't tell the settlers the whole truth of what had taken place between him and Joseph Smith. [^10] Jacob Haun was not one of the seventeen who were killed. He was one of the thirteen wounded and thus had to live out his life knowing the dreadful consequences of his refusing to follow counsel.

Let's go back a few years to the fall of 1830. Four missionaries were called by direct revelation to go to the western border of the United States in Independence, Missouri, on what is now known as the mission to the Lamanites. Parley P. Pratt, Oliver Cowdery, Peter Whitmer Jr., and Ziba Peterson all left New York and, at Parley P. Pratt's recommendation, stopped at a place where Parley had once lived called Kirtland, Ohio. There they received a warm and wonderful reception. Many accepted their message, including names well known in Church history: Frederick G. Williams, Sidney Rigdon, Isaac Morley, John Murdock, and so on. [^11] In Kirtland, an eleven-year-old girl named Mary Elizabeth Rollins lived with her uncle. She heard that these missionaries had left what they called the Golden Bible with Brother Isaac Morley. She records: "I went to his house just before the meeting was to commence, and asked to see the Book. Brother Morley put it in my hand; as I looked at it, I felt such a desire to read it, that I could not refrain from asking him to let me take it home and read it, while he attended meeting. . . . He finally said, 'Child if you will bring this book home before breakfast tomorrow morning, you may take it.' . . . when I got into the house, I exclaimed, 'Oh, Uncle, I have gotten the "Golden Bible."' . . . We all took turns reading it until very late in the night—as soon as it was light enough to see, I was up and learned [by heart] the first verse in the book. When I reached Brother Morley's . . . , he remarked, 'I guess you did not read much in it.' I showed him how far we had read. He was surprised, and said, 'I don't believe you could tell me one word of it.'" She then quoted him the first verse she had memorized and told him the story in detail of everything they had read up to that point. "He gazed at me in surprise, and said, 'Child, take this book home and finish it. I think I can wait.'" [^12]

This eleven-year-old is the same Mary Elizabeth Rollins who was living with her family in Independence three and a half years later. In July 1833 a mob of some five hundred men, angry at the influence of the growing community of Mormons, attacked the printing office of The Evening and the Morning Star, run by W. W. Phelps. Living close by with her uncle, Mary Elizabeth and her sister Caroline saw the mob coming in and turned and ran for shelter. They ducked behind a split rail fence some distance away and watched as the mob demolished not only the press and the type but the very building. They tore the roof off and then tore the walls down. As the two girls, ages fifteen and twelve, huddled there in terror, Mary Elizabeth saw huge stacks of paper being thrown from one of the upper windows. Because she knew W. W. Phelps well, she knew the papers were the Book of Commandments, a collection of revelations sent from Kirtland to be printed. "Caroline," she said, "we must save those." Her twelve-year-old sister replied, "If we do, they will kill us." Mary Elizabeth said, "Nevertheless we must do it." They jumped up, ran to the building, and picked up as many of those sheaves of paper as they could carry. Two men took after them. The girls darted through the fence, ran deep into a cornfield, threw down the papers and themselves on top of them, and began to pray mightily when they heard the men tromping through the cornfield. Eventually the men gave up and left. Thanks to Mary Elizabeth and Caroline Rollins, we now have a few copies of the original Book of Commandments.13

Mary Elizabeth is one of my favorite people in Church history. One night, Mary Elizabeth awakened to see a figure standing in the air at the foot of her bed. She did what any wise girl would have done: she pulled the covers over her head. When she finally got the courage to look out, the person was gone. The next day, on the street, she passed Joseph Smith. The Prophet said, "Mary Elizabeth, I understand you had a visitation last night." She said, "How did you know that?" And he said, "Because the angel came to me. He said he had come to you and could not deliver the message because you had hid under the covers. He also said that he was greatly offended." [^13] I guess angels aren't used to that kind of treatment.

Let me relate another story. Vilate and Heber C. Kimball were driven out of Far West to a swampy bend on the Mississippi River. They lived in terrible conditions. For a time, they lived in a log lean-to built onto the back of someone else's house. After a year or so of that, Heber was finally able to build Vilate their own one-room log cabin. Then Heber spent years in missionary work, often in England. Finally after all the years of sacrifice, they reached a point in 1845 when Heber was prosperous enough to be able to build a beautiful two-story, brick home. Vilate and Heber moved into that home in November 1845. They locked the door and walked away without receiving a dime for it in February 1846.

They were not the only ones who left painfully. In the middle of April 1846, Bathsheba and George Albert Smith faced a similar situation. On her last day in Nauvoo, Bathsheba tidied up her home, swept the floor, put the broom in its accustomed place behind the door, and then stepped outside to a waiting wagon, leaving behind rooms full of beloved items and a house ready for occupancy by strangers. [^14] I have wondered what kind of woman would walk away from her home, leaving it to her enemies and be sure it is swept clean before she does so.

Ten years later, in October 1856, the Willie Handcart Company had been caught in the first of some furious storms on the high plains of Wyoming. They suffered terribly. Finally in the last week of October, the first relief wagon from Salt Lake appeared. The handcart pioneers were given a limited amount of flour and food but were told the rescuers could do little more until they found the Martin company. Help was ahead, however: waiting at Rock Creek, only sixteen miles away, were other wagons filled with blankets, medicine, food, and beef. But that sixteen miles was through a howling blizzard. The Willie handcart company was camped at the base of Rocky Ridge, which is a three-mile pull, some of it very steep and the last part extremely rough. In the midst of a howling blizzard, they set out to cover that sixteen miles to the supply wagons. It took them almost twenty-four hours from the time they left camp till the last one of the company finally arrived at Rock Creek.

Two people in the Willie Handcart Company were Jens and Elsie Nielsen, well-to-do converts from Denmark who had sold their farm to travel to Zion. When they reached Iowa City, Jens had enough money to buy wagons and teams and outfit his family very comfortably, but the Church agents there asked if anyone had anything extra to help those who did not have enough. Jens Nielsen took enough money to buy one handcart, supplies for himself and his wife, his son, and Bodil Mortensen, a young girl they were responsible for, and gave the rest to the Church agents. [^15]

The Nielsens started up Rocky Ridge. The children, Jens's own son and the girl accompanying them, were so weak and sick that they were riding in the handcart. Jens Nielsen pulled for fourteen or fifteen hours in snow until his feet were so badly frostbitten that he barely hobbled along. Somewhere between Rocky Ridge and Rock Creek, Jens collapsed. "Elsie, I can go no farther. You go on without me."

"I will not leave you, Jens," Elsie said, and she helped him into the cart with the two children. Jens Nielsen was six foot two and weighed two hundred and thirty pounds. Elsie Nielsen was four foot eleven and weighed one hundred pounds. [^16] She pulled them all the rest of the way to Rock Creek. Jens lived, but both children died before morning.

As I read those stories and journals and diaries, I have many questions. Why was the cost in human lives so high? If these were the Lord's people, why weren't the storms tempered? Why were the innocent people in Haun's Mill, who didn't know what had taken place between Jacob Haun and the Prophet, allowed to become part of what happened in that tragedy? What happened to a Sardius Smith, who was killed at age twelve and, because of wicked men, never had the opportunity to grow to adulthood, marry, and have children in this life?

What about the calendar of the exile? When the Church moved from New York to Ohio, it was January. The Saints were forced to flee from Kirtland in December and January. They were driven out of Jackson County in November and December. They were driven out of Far West in January and February, and they left Nauvoo in February. Is that accidental? If the Lord really loves his people, why is no one driven out in May or June occasionally?

Some of the hardest questions for me are these: Why didn't they give up? What was it about this people that drove them on? And, I suppose most sobering, What would I have done in those circumstances? That question comes up over and over again. Would I have been strong enough? Would I have remained a believer?

These stories are the whats of the Restoration story; and they are astonishing, remarkable, incredible, and inspirational. But of far more value to us than knowing what happened is knowing the why. Why did this happen? Why were these people so remarkable? Why did they go on? To answer these questions we have to go back further even than Joseph Smith. These people had a tremendous love for and loyalty to Joseph Smith, but that's not what drove them. That's not what made them what they were. One thing I've learned in all my research is that they didn't think they were remarkable at all. I really believe that if we had a chance to ask them, "Why did you do such great things?" They'd say, "What things?" or "Who, me? You can't be talking about me." They didn't view themselves as unusual in any way.

Why was the way so hard? Why was the cost so high? Part of the answer is in Moses 1:39: "For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." That is what these stories are all about: God's work. They are God's story, and it is an incredible one. He says in his own words that his purposes are twofold: to bring to pass our immortality and our eternal life.

President Boyd K. Packer described our existence as a three-act play: the premortal life is act one; mortality, where we are now, is act two; and the postmortal life will be act three. [^17] If a person comes into a play during act two, it is not surprising for him to be puzzled. Unless he knows what has happened in act one, and unless he has a sense of what will happen in act three, a lot of act two will not make sense. So let's talk briefly about God's plan for us. Some time in the distant past, we were born spiritually. Before that we were intelligences. As spirit children, male and female, we lived with our heavenly parents in the celestial kingdom. If we were with God and our heavenly mother in the celestial kingdom, what ever would have possessed us to leave? Isn't that what we are after—to be back in the celestial kingdom with God? So why did we have to leave? This is a very important point. Most of the Christian world's idea of heaven is to return to live with God, but we believe there is something far more significant. Not only do we want to live with God, we want to be like God. That is what eternal life, God's life, means. What was God like when we were there living with him in the celestial kingdom? Three things are significant. First, he had a glorified, immortal, physical body. We did not; we were only spirits. Second, he had a divine nature, every attribute in absolute perfection. We did not. Third, he had an eternal wife, and they were able to have eternal children. Thus we were living with God in heaven, but we certainly were not like him.

To move forward, to become like God, we had to have a body. Having a body is not just an incidental by-product of mortality. It is one of its central purposes. Until we can be connected with a physical, elemental body, we cannot have a fulness of joy (see D&C 93:33-34). In addition, to be like God, we have to acquire divine attributes. Those two objectives brought us to earth. As I understand it, to prove ourselves, we needed four things: first, an imperfect world; second, a mortal body that could endure sickness, irritation, tiredness, and other ills so that we could gain experience; third, agency, for without choice there is no morality; and fourth, opposition, as Lehi explained (see 2 Ne. 2:11), because we can't exercise agency with nothing to choose between and no conflicting enticements toward good or evil. The Fall was necessary to gain a battlefield, and thus began the plan of God. In scriptural terms life comes down to one word: warfare. Metaphors of war—from "put on the armor of righteousness" (2 Ne. 1:23) to "rejoice not against me, O mine enemy: when I fall, I shall arise" (Micah 7:8)—are found everywhere in scripture. The Spirit helps us in many ways—instructing, comforting, and strengthening us—but the ultimate battle is absolutely individual. It is not a team event. It is not a spectator sport.

That is what those early Saints knew. This vision in their hearts drove them to do what they did. Joseph Smith was the means. He was the one chosen to open the Restoration so that we could have the priesthood and the Church, the ordinances and the covenants. But what those people saw was the why behind it all.

So what drove these people? Why did an eleven-year-old girl want to read the Book of Mormon? Why did she and a twelve-year-old risk their lives to save a batch of papers? Why did fathers and husbands leave their desperately ill and poor families to serve missions? Why did a cultured and refined woman walk away from a beautiful two-story brick home and never look back? Because these people had a clear vision of God's plan for them, and it never wavered in their hearts.

Let me explain. By September 1846, most of the Saints had crossed Iowa at a terrible price and were preparing to winter at Winter Quarters. (Before that winter was over, about six hundred died at Winter Quarters.) On September 25, Brigham Young received word of the Battle of Nauvoo from a group who had just come from Nauvoo. The last ones still in the city were the poor, the widowed, and the orphans who had not been able to find a way to leave. Mobs finally came in and drove them out, picking up the men and throwing them in the river, driving the women and children with bayonets, threatening to kill them if they crossed back over the river. When Brigham Young received word of that, even though the rest of the Saints were in the most destitute and terrible of conditions themselves, he gathered the brethren and said: "The poor brethren and sisters, widows and orphans, sick and destitute, are now lying on the west bank of the Mississippi, waiting for teams and wagons and means to remove them. Now is the time for labor. Let the fire of the covenant, which you made in the house of the Lord burn in your hearts like flame unquenchable." [^18]

Brigham Young didn't talk to them about the suffering of those poor people. He called to their minds the covenants they had made with God in the house of the Lord. He went on:["[I want every man who is able to] rise up with his teams and go straightway. . . . This is a day of action and not of argument." Before too many days had passed, almost a hundred wagons were moving east to go and rescue the poor. [^19] I love that phrase, "the fire of the covenant," because that is what drove these people. That is why they did what they did.

Why was the way so hard then? Why is it still so hard today? We have to remember what God is about. Remember, his work and his glory is to bring to pass our immortality and our eternal life. To make us like him is not something that is done by waving a wand. At a time when the Saints were driven barefoot across sleet-filled prairies, when it was reported that women and children were marched thirty miles and left bloody footprints in the snow from their lacerated feet [^20]—at that very time in our history, the Lord said in revelation: "Whoso layeth down his life in my cause, for my name's sake, shall find it again, even life eternal. Therefore, be not afraid of your enemies, for I have decreed in my heart, saith the Lord, that I will prove you in all things" (D&C 98:13-14). Why? Because a god doesn't buckle under pressure. When things get really rough a god doesn't say, "Hey, I'm outta here. I don't want to do this." Who "will abide in my covenant, even unto death, . . . may be found worthy," he says (v. 14). Worthy of what? Worthy to be with God. Worthy of godhood.

The early Saints had the fire of the covenant in their hearts. That fire helped them demonstrate faith, and out of faith came great power. Mary Elizabeth Rollins, after she read the Book of Mormon, after she saved those papers, wrote of yet another experience in her journal. When she and her group of Saints were driven out of Jackson County, they camped in the low bottomlands of the Missouri River. Mobbers threatened the Mormons with death if they didn't leave the county. One or two families, when it was all finished, were left on the south side at the mercy of the mobs because there was not money enough to ferry everyone across the river. Greatly fearing, those who were left decided to fish during the night, hoping to sell their catch, if any, to get enough money to ferry over. The next day, they brought in three small fish and a catfish that weighed fourteen pounds. From her journal Mary Elizabeth says, "On opening it, what was their astonishment to find three bright silver half dollars [in its stomach], just the amount needed to carry the rest" of them across the ferry to join their brothers and sisters. [^21] Coincidence? No, the power of faith.

Amanda Smith was the wife of Warren Smith and the mother of Sardius and Alma, who was so brutally wounded in Haun's Mill. When her little son was carried out of the blacksmith shop, she said, "I looked at the wound. It was the size of a small melon. There was no hip joint, there was just shattered bone and a huge gap." She laid him down and asked her son, "Alma, do you believe the Lord made your hip?"

"I do, Momma."

"Alma, do you believe he can make you another one?"

"I do, Momma."

She then bowed her head and prayed. She asked the Lord, "If it's your will that my son be taken, then take him now in his innocence, but if it is not your will, then help me." No sooner had she finished that prayer than words began to flow into her mind. She directed her son Willard to go to a firepit, get some ashes and pour water over them, and bring that water to her. She directed another child to go down to the millstream and find the roots of some slippery elm. She bathed the wound, the ash making a lye that bleached the flesh until, she said, it looked as white as chicken flesh. And then she packed the wound with a slippery elm poultice, following the directions of the Spirit. [^22] Nine years later, in the spring of 1847, Alma Smith, his mother, and other family members left for Utah. Alma Smith walked every step of the way, without a cane, without a crutch. He was preserved for a long life of service. I can imagine him telling his story and walking back and forth without a limp to show his listeners what God can do for those who keep their covenants. [^23]

So, if God can work miracles, what of those who died or whose limbs were not restored in the exodus to Zion? In a Sunday School class in southern Utah some thirty years after the Willie and Martin Handcart Companies reached Salt Lake, a Sunday School teacher was being critical. What a foolish decision it had been to leave so late in the season and to be caught in the winter storms, he noted. How easily the tragedy could have been avoided. An old man in the back of the class stood up and said, in substance, the following: "I ask you to stop this criticism. You are discussing a matter you know nothing about. Cold historic facts mean nothing here for they give no proper interpretation of the questions involved. Was it a mistake to send the handcart company out so late in the season? Yes! But I was in that company and my wife," and he named some others. "We suffered beyond anything you can imagine and many died of exposure and starvation, but did you ever hear a survivor of that company utter a word of criticism? No one of that company has ever apostatized or left the church. . . . I have pulled my handcart when I was so weak and weary from illness and lack of food that I could hardly put one foot ahead of the other. I have looked ahead and seen a patch of sand or a hill slope and I have said, 'I can only go that far and there I must give up, for I cannot pull the load through it.' I have gone on to that sand and when I reached it the cart began pushing me! I have looked back many times to see who was pushing my cart, but my eyes saw no one." And then he said, "I knew then that the Angels of God were there. Was I sorry that I chose to come by handcart? No! Neither then nor any minute of my life since. The price we paid to become acquainted with God was a privilege to pay, and I am thankful that I was privileged to come in the Martin Handcart Company." [^24] This brother had not lost the vision, the fire of the covenant. D&C 84:88 reads, "Whoso receiveth you, there I will be also, for I will go before your face. I will be on your right hand and on your left, and my Spirit shall be in your hearts, and mine angels round about you, to bear you up."

In 1842, a few weeks after organizing the Relief Society, Joseph Smith made a most remarkable statement. He said to the sisters: "If you live up to these principles, how great and glorious will be your reward in the celestial kingdom! If you live up to your privileges, the angels cannot be restrained from being your associates." [^25] That is the promise to all. That is why we too—the inheritors of the fire of the covenant—will continue in carrying out God's work and his glory. That is the legacy left to us by these remarkable people who were driven by a vision of what they could become and did not falter from it.

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] "The Spirit of God," Hymns (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1985), no. 2.
[^2] Leonard J. Arrington and Susan Arrington Madsen, "Drusilla Dorris Hendricks: 'Mother's Little Christian'" in Sunbonnet Sisters (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1984), 29-30.
[^3] Barrett, Joseph Smith and the Restoration, 392.
[^4] Arrington and Madsen, Sunbonnet Sisters, 30. See Carol Cornwall Madsen, In Their Own Words: Women and the Story of Nauvoo (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1994), 161-68, for the rest of Drusilla Dorris Hendricks' story.
[^5] Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 2d ed. rev., 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 3:175.
[^6] Much of the description that follows is drawn from Barrett, Joseph Smith and the Restoration, 399-401. See also B. H. Roberts, The Missouri Persecutions (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965), 232-37.
[^7] Smith, History of the Church, 3:186.
[^8] Leland H. Gentry, "History of the Latter-day Saints in Northern Missouri from 1836 to 1839," Ph.D. dissertation (Brigham Young University, 1965), 432.
[^9] Gentry, "Latter-day Saints in Northern Missouri," 432-33; spelling standardized.
[^10] Gentry, "Latter-day Saints in Northern Missouri," 432.
[^11] Church History in the Fulness of Times (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1993), 79-82.
[^12] Adapted from "Mary Elizabeth Rollins Lightner," Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 17 (July 1926): 194. For more details, see "Mary Elizabeth Rollins Lightner: A Mormon Girl with Courage," in Arrington and Madsen, Sunbonnet Sisters, 13-20.
[^13] Adapted from "Mary Elizabeth Rollins Lightner," 196. See also Barrett, Joseph Smith and the Restoration, 250-51.
[^14] Adapted from Mary Lightner, "Testimony of Mary Elizabeth Lightner," address to Brigham Young University, 14 April 1905, Provo, Utah, BYU Archives and Manuscripts, typescript, 3.
[^15] Susan Easton Black and William G. Hartley, ed., The Iowa Mormon Trail: Legacy of Faith and Courage (Orem: Helix, 1997), 112.
[^16] Adapted from "Bishop Jens Neilsen: A Brief Biography Prepared by Albert R. Lyman," unpublished manuscript in possession of the author, 2-3.
[^17] As reported to the author in an interview with two grandchildren of Jens and Elsie Nielsen, 17 October 1996.
[^18] Boyd K. Packer, "The Play and the Plan," Church Educational System Fireside for College-age Young Adults, 7 May 1995.
[^19] Black and Hartley, Iowa Mormon Trail, 163; emphasis added.
[^20] Black and Hartley, Iowa Mormon Trail, 163.
[^21] Barrett, Joseph Smith and the Restoration, 264.
[^22] Adapted from "Mary Elizabeth Rollins Lightner," 197.
[^23] Adapted from Jean Brown Fonnesbeck, "From an Old Diary," Young Woman's Journal 29 (July 1918): 386-87.
[^24] Fonnesbeck, "From an Old Diary," 388-89.
[^25] Maurine Jensen Proctor and Scot Facer Proctor, The Gathering: Mormon Pioneers on the Trail to Zion (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1996), 196.
