Susette Green, Dlora Dalton, Dawn Anderson, Every Good Thing: Talks from the 1997 BYU Women's Conference ( 1998)

The Temple: Taking an Eternal View

S. MICHAEL WILCOX

Have you ever gotten excited at a sporting event? Have you ever gotten so excited at a sporting event that you actually shouted? Perhaps because your team scored a point or got a touchdown or made a big play? Have you ever been so excited that you not only shouted but actually rose from your seat to shout? Have you ever been so excited because you won or the victory was at hand that you rose and shouted and waved something? Your fists or a towel or a hat or a program? What is it about a sporting event that can elicit such exuberant exclamations of joy from us?

Whether or not you have had that experience, I hope that you have had the opportunity to rise, shout, and wave in an exclamation of joy and triumph that cannot be kept inside at an event of deep and eternal significance. I am referring, of course, to the dedication of the house of the Lord, the temple. The idea behind the hosanna shout is, in a reverent and very sacred way, the same idea behind our rising and shouting and waving at a basketball game. The joy is so great that we can't keep it inside, and we rise and shout and wave our excitement and joy. A temple dedication is the only time we do the hosanna shout in the Church, though we sing about it frequently:

The Spirit of God like a fire is burning!

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

We'll sing and we'll shout with the armies of heaven,

Hosanna, hosanna, to God and the Lamb! [^1]

If you have ever participated in that great hosanna shout, you will truly have sung and shouted with the armies of heaven, for the joy on the other side of the veil must be even greater than on this side.

A temple dedication is an occasion worthy of that one most significant exclamation of joy and happiness for many reasons. The temple is many houses all in one, like an accordion of houses folded together. The Doctrine and Covenants mentions many of those houses: a house of glory, a house of order, a house of fasting, a house of prayer, a house of thanksgiving, a house of learning, and a house of refuge and protection (see D&C 88:119, 137; 109:24). I would like to talk about one of those houses: a house of learning and instruction, where we are perfected in our understanding of theory, doctrine, and principle and also perfected in our understanding of our callings (see D&C 13-14).

I went to the temple to receive my endowments when I was eighteen years old and ready to go on a mission. I was unprepared for the temple experience, however. I don't know that anyone can ever be totally and completely prepared for that first visit to the temple, though we do a much better job preparing people now than we did thirty years ago. I was frightened and bewildered by the experience. To be absolutely honest, when I left the temple that day, I had to admit to myself that this did not seem like my church. The experience did not feel like anything I was used to, and I was a bit frightened by it. I have learned since that my first experience in the temple was not unique, that a number of people have some difficulty and bewilderment when they go. I felt that way because I did not know how to learn in the Lord's house. I did not know how to receive the instructions that he was giving me. If I had known how to learn, I would have still been as confused and bewildered, but I wouldn't have been frightened or doubtful or wondering how this could be my church.

The Lord chooses a unique and specific way of teaching in his house. If I could take a pair of glasses and put them on anybody who ever goes to the temple, whether for the first time or the hundredth, I would write in big red letters across those lenses the word symbols. Everything we see in the temple, we should see with that idea in mind. The Lord has chosen to teach his children in the temple primarily through symbols. But in our culture and in our world, we are not particularly symbol-oriented people. We like prose, well-measured sentences laid out so that we can't misunderstand them, sentences with only one very logical and easy-to-assimilate meaning. We are not particularly enthusiastic about poetry. Poetry uses fewer words, and so the words must mean more. The words don't have to be particularly logical. They may have multiple layers of meaning. They can be viewed with different eyes, can mean different things to different people. Many Church members prefer the Doctrine and Covenants because it lays out the doctrines so clearly, line upon line, that it is hard to misunderstand them. Many of us struggle with the Old Testament, which is a little more difficult. First of all, it is longer. But it also has strange rituals and historical events that we sometimes can't figure out, and at the end are all those prophets who don't speak like prophets speak today. We prefer Nephi, whose "soul delighteth in plainness" (2 Ne. 25:4). We don't like Isaiah, who is much more difficult and who paints word pictures. The temple, however, is more poetry than prose, more Old Testament than Doctrine and Covenants, and more Isaiah than Nephi. If we are to understand it, we have to train ourselves to learn through that unique way the Lord has chosen to teach us in his house.

Why does he choose to teach us this way? The primary reason may be that symbols can mean different things to different people at different stages of their life. In the temple we receive an endowment, a particular kind of gift. If I gave an endowment of five million dollars to a university, the university couldn't spend the five million dollars. They could spend only the interest that that money generated. How long would my gift continue giving and blessing the university and the students who went there? Forever. The temple endowment is similar. The symbols—the ceremony, the ordinances, the narrative—are the original gift, and because they can suggest different things to the mind, they continue to generate interest.

The endowment is like the five barley loaves that Jesus used to feed the five thousand. This wonderful story can help us understand the power of the temple. When Jesus first asked for the five loaves, the apostles could not conceive of how he could feed so many with such a small amount of bread. But he had them sit down on the grass, and he blessed the bread, broke it into pieces, and began to distribute it. As the apostles distributed it, the scriptures say, everyone could eat as much as they wanted until they were filled. Afterward twelve baskets of fragments were left over (see Mark 6:37-44). The endowment is like five barley loaves. We might not understand all that it can feed us the first time we see it, but we can eat as much as we will and be filled, and there will always be twelve baskets left over to feast on again and again. There will always be more to learn when you have finished feasting than you thought was there the first time you looked.

The Lord helps us to learn in his house. He prepares and guides us in a number of ways. Let me suggest four of those ways.

First, before we ever go to the temple, we are familiar with ordinances that have multiple layers of meaning—that are symbolic. The sacrament is a symbolic ordinance; baptism also is a symbolic ordinance—outward actions suggest inner truths. There really isn't a whole lot about a little piece of bread and a little cup of water that suggests to us a man's body or blood, but because the Savior told us what they should suggest to our minds and symbolize to our souls, we see past the everyday image, the symbol, to the reality that it represents. If you didn't know much about Christianity and you walked into a Latter-day Saint chapel and saw people sitting quietly, taking little pieces of bread and little drinks of water, you might think that is a strange way to feed people. When my daughter Megan was about four, she thought the sacrament bread was food. She was hungry, so she took a whole handful. We said, "No, Megan, just one piece," and she said, "Why?" And we answered, "Because there has to be enough for everybody." She accepted that until the deacons lined up, and they had bread left in the trays. Then she stood up on the bench, put her hands on her hips, and with great indignation declared, "They have lots left." She was too young to see past the symbol to the beauty and power of what it represents.

Baptism demonstrates in a wonderful way how an outward ordinance can suggest many different things. If I ask what baptism suggests to the mind, some might say, "A bath. It's a cleansing bath; our sins are washed away in the waters of baptism." Would we agree with that symbolism? We have to because it's in the scriptures (see, for example, D&C 39:10). Others might say, "To me baptism is a birth. The font is the womb, and the person being baptized is like a baby in its mother's womb in water. Just before the baby is born, the water breaks, and the baby comes out of the water, born into the newness of life, innocent. So, too, we arise out of the waters of baptism into newness of life." Would we agree with that symbolism? We have to; it's in the scriptures (see, for example, Moses 6:59). Somebody else might say, "Baptism suggests just the opposite to me. Baptism is a burial, and the font is the grave. We take the old man of sin, the natural man, and we put him off. As Paul says, we've crucified him. We bury him in the waters of baptism and resurrect a whole new being. So baptism is a burial and the font is the grave." Would we agree with that symbolism? We have to because that also is in the scriptures (see, for example, Rom. 6:4; Col. 2:12). What is baptism? Is it a bath, a birth, or a burial? It is all of them. In a similar way, the symbols in the temple may have many layers of meaning to suggest different and powerful truths to different people.

The second way the Lord prepares us to learn in his house is through the scriptures. Just as all three of those meanings of baptism are explained in the scriptures, so, for almost every symbol you encounter in the temple, verses of scripture will unlock some of its meanings. Sometimes as you sit in the temple being part of a session, a ceremony, or an ordinance, a verse of scripture will rise in your mind. The Holy Ghost will bring it into your thoughts, and you will say, "Ahh, now I know a meaning for that particular symbol."

The scriptures are full of symbolic language. Discussing scriptural meanings, we can practice learning the language of symbols. So even though I can't talk about the symbols or the narrative of the temple outside the temple, I can talk about Moses and the Exodus. The story of Moses leading the children of Israel out of Egypt into the promised land was designed by the Lord to be studied and applied exactly the same way the temple narrative is designed to be studied and applied. Everything that happened to the children of Israel I am to apply to my life. I must be led across the wilderness of life to the promised land of the celestial kingdom and cross the River Jordan, or the veil, to get there. In the wilderness I must feast daily on manna, the word of the Lord. I will be led across that wilderness by Moses, a prophet, and by the pillar of fire, the Holy Ghost, who will be there day and night to lead me always. I will go to Mount Sinai, the mountain of the Lord, there to receive his law and to meet with him. What's our Mount Sinai? The temple. In this way the scriptures, especially the Old Testament, give us the opportunity to practice with symbolic language and find deeper and deeper levels of meaning and application.

The Lord suggests that to us in the temple. In an ordinance room, what do you look at all through a session? The altar. And what sits on the altar? The scriptures. That's a hint. And do the ordinance workers hold them up occasionally? That's a bigger hint—that the meanings and the power behind so much of what we do in the temple will be found in the holy scriptures. It is also a suggestion, because an altar is a place of gift giving and offerings, that one of the greatest gifts God gives to us is the scriptures. His gift to us lies on the altars of the temple, and we also go to those same altars to give our gifts back to him.

There is a third way that the Lord helps us learn in the temple. Some of the symbols in the temple are very easy to understand. With a little thought, anybody can get them. Everybody wears white. What does that suggest? Purity. Can it also suggest equality in the sight of God? Can it also suggest that as white is a reflection of all the colors of the rainbow, all the beautiful spectrum, so too must my life, now that I have been to the Lord's house, reflect all the colors, all the spectrum, of God's gospel light? Mirrors in the temple face one another. What do they suggest? Eternity. For many years I went to the temple, looked down those mirrors in one direction, and thought, This is my eternal past; I have always existed. And I looked down the other way and thought, This is my eternal future; I will always exist. This is eternity, and everything God does is eternal. But it is dangerous to stop thinking about a symbol, or ever to think you know all of what it means. Symbols in the temple mean, and even the most simple symbols may have different, profound lessons at different times.

Let me give you an example. I was doing baptisms for the dead in the Jordan River Temple several years ago, and I was standing in the font with one of my children. I was waiting my turn. In the Jordan River Temple, mirrors surround the font. > (om the font I could look down those eternal mirrors and think about my ancestors who were being vicariously baptized. A verse of scripture came into my mind: "It is sufficient to know . . . that the earth will be smitten with a curse unless there is a welding link of some kind or other between the fathers and the children, upon some subject or other—and behold what is that subject? It is the baptism for the dead" (D&C 128:18). The words elding link (reminded me of a chain. As I looked down those mirrors, the Spirit whispered, "You are looking at the chain." I thought about that. I looked down the mirrors again. You know, it does look like a chain. Each little box, each little reflection, is hooked to another. If I were looking at the chain between the fathers and the children, then who would be in the next link, the next box, the next reflection? My parents. And the next one, my grandparents, and then my great-grandparents, and so on. And each box would fan out too, in a sense. Who, then, is in the next link behind me? My children and then my grandchildren, and then my great-grandchildren, and so on. Then this thought hit me. I looked up the mirror at my ancestors, and who did I see inside of them, inside every link? I saw myself in my ancestors. And if they looked from their position up the chain down to my link, whom would they see in me? They would see themselves. If I were to look in my children, whom would I see in them? And if they were to look back into mine, who would they see in me? Themselves. When that thought hit, another verse of scripture came into mind: "I and my father are one. I am in my father and my father is in me" (see D&C 50:43). Why can I do work for my twelfth great-grandfather? I am in him and he is in me. That is why I can do the work for him—because we are one. And that is why Jesus speaks for the Father as though he were the Father. That is why I can do work for my ancestors as though I were my ancestors: I am in them and they are in me and we are one. Even the most simple symbols of the temple may hold beautifully profound truths personally for us. This personal truth made baptism for the dead a very wonderful thing for me.

A fourth way the Lord helps us learn is through levels of difficulty in the symbols of the temple. Because some symbols take more thought, more maturity, the Lord gives us at least one meaning for them as they are presented in the temple. In those cases, provided both a meaning and the symbol, we can see how the meaning arises naturally out of the symbol.

Other symbols in the temple are very difficult to understand, and the Lord doesn't tell us what they mean. We just see and experience them. But he says to us, in effect, "Before you came to the temple, I gave you symbolic ordinances with multiple layers of meaning. I've given you the scriptures, which contain symbolic language, verses, and ideas that will open up the symbols of the temple. I've given you some symbols that are very easy to understand. With a little thought, anybody can derive something from them. And I've given you some symbols that are more difficult, that require more maturity for understanding, but I've told you what they mean so you can compare the meaning with the symbol. In some cases I've given you more than one meaning for a symbol. Do you understand now how I teach in my house? You can spend the rest of your life on an adventure of discovery and revelation unveiling all the beautiful truths that lie behind the many and varied symbols of the temple."

We can be assured that everything in the temple is beautiful. If a symbol or anything in the house of the Lord has ever troubled you in any way, or if you have attached a meaning to any symbol in the temple that bothers you or makes you feel demeaned in any way, you will know you do not correctly understand the symbol. You did not get that meaning in the temple because everything in the temple is affirming and beautiful. When we come to understand the beauty and the power behind the symbols of the temple, we will always say, "Ahh, that is beautiful. Now I understand. That is beautiful and edifying and powerful." There is nothing that is not beautiful in any aspect of the Lord's ceremonies, and he wants us to understand what they mean.

Everything in the temple can teach us. Everything. The colors. Have you noticed how some temples get lighter and lighter as you move through? What can that teach? Think of the architecture, the clothing, the words, the actions, what we see, what we do, what we hear. Even the exterior can have symbolic significance. Next time you drive by the Salt Lake Temple, for instance, take off the spires in your mind. If you imagine the pointed parts gone, what remains seems to be a castle, a medieval fortress. The temple is also a house of refuge, protection, and safety. The very shape of the building suggests that to our minds, as it no doubt did to our pioneer ancestors who had fled persecution.

We can't talk outside the temple about many of the symbols of the temple and how they can teach. But a few architectural symbols are appropriate to talk about outside the temple. About every other year the Ensign prints pictures of the sealing rooms in various temples. When we go into a sealing room, we want to learn. The main teacher in the temple is the Spirit, but it is completely appropriate to sit down with our spouse, our parents, or our friends in the celestial room and in a reverent and a quiet tone share insights with one another or ask questions. The scriptural phrase, "He that hath ears to hear, let him hear" (Mark 4:9) does not mean that if you can figure it out all by yourself, go ahead. The expression means that those who have ears to hear—who want to hear—may hear. Every time Jesus was asked by his disciples what one of his parables meant, for instance, he told them what it meant. It is proper and appropriate to share and to want to know what is behind those symbols, remembering that the Spirit is the primary teacher.

When I look around a sealing room, I first notice the altar. What can the altar teach me? The Spirit begins to work with my mind. "What do you do at altars?"

"Well, I got married there."

"Good, I'm glad that you remember that. What else? In the scriptures, what did they do at altars?"

"They sacrificed, they gave gifts, they made offerings."

And the Spirit whispers, "Well, what gifts, what offerings, what sacrifice, what did you lay on the altar when you knelt with your spouse?"

I ponder and I reflect and I realize: I gave myself. I put myself on that altar, and my wife gave herself. We exchanged gifts with each other, and we accepted each other's gifts. And then we joined hands; we laid our hands on the altar. In that action we gave ourselves, as a couple, the two of us, to God and to his great work. Then we learned what that great work was, and we also learned what blessings and promises would be ours if we were faithful. Temple workers didn't tell us that. The altar told us that.

What's the second most prominent thing in a sealing room? Mirrors and a chandelier. I look at that chandelier and think, What can that teach me? It's almost too big for the room, isn't it? It hangs down low over the altar, over the couple that kneels. I begin to ponder, and the Spirit says, "What is associated with light in the scriptures?" Truth, the Spirit, the Savior. I stand up. I take my wife's hand. We look down the mirrors, and what do we notice going with us right down eternity? That chandelier. And the Spirit seems to say, "You must take me with you. You must walk always with the truth, with the Spirit, with the Savior. We will light your way to eternity. Never, never move out from under the chandelier."

I was standing in front of the mirrors once, bobbing and weaving to get a better look. It seemed an exercise in futility, and I thought, I wish I could take myself right out of the mirrors and still stand in front of them. I could see eternity a lot better, but I keep getting in the way. The Spirit whispered, "Truer words were never spoken." I was a bishop at the time, counseling couples with marriage problems, as most bishops do. When that thought hit me, I wanted to bring every couple from my ward that was struggling with a marriage—and those who weren't—into that room and stand them in front of the mirror, side by side, and say, "Can you see what the problem is? Do you understand? One of you or both of you are so focused on yourselves that you can no longer see eternity. The bigger you are in the mirrors, the less of eternity you can see. But if you look at a chandelier, or if you look at your wife, if you look away from yourself, you see much, much farther." No one teaches us that. The mirrors teach us that. Everything in the temple can teach us.

In 3 Ne. 17:2-3, we find a formula for temple worship. It isn't specifically designated as a formula for temple worship, but it serves wonderfully as one. Jesus has spent the day with the Nephites, and they are tired. They've listened a long time and heard a great deal, ending with Isaiah and Micah. Now Isaiah and Micah in the morning are tough, but they are even more difficult when the mind is tired. So Christ is going to come back the next day, and he'll go over those same verses two more times to make sure the people understand. But as he looks around, he realizes that they're just not grasping everything, and so he says, "I perceive that ye are weak, that ye cannot understand all my words which I am commanded of the Father to speak unto you at this time."

Do you feel that way after attending the temple? I still feel that way. I say, "Father, I am weak. I don't understand it all."

And he says, "That's okay. You were never supposed to understand it all at once. This is supposed to feed you for a lifetime. There will always be twelve baskets left over. Don't feel guilty," he says. "Don't think, I'm the dumbest person here. Everybody understands here but me." On the other hand, he also says, "Don't be apathetic. Don't stop going, or don't just go and sleep."

Instead, he instructs us to do five things. All five of them are in the third verse. "Therefore, go ye unto your homes." We say, "Lord, we can do that." The problem is that we do number one and that's it. We just go home. But the power is in two, three, four, and five.

So, what's the second thing? "And ponder upon the things which I have said." Ponder. If I want to ponder the scriptures, I can pull them out and read them again and again and go back and reread, look at individual words, and see how maybe one word in verse 5 matches a word in verse 20. I can really go over it. But I can't do that in the temple. I can't even take a little pencil to just write down a few thoughts. To effectively ponder the temple, I must have these things in my mind. The only way to do that is by consistent attendance. Some of us can get there quickly; others have to travel farther. But I believe the Lord will bless us according to our ability to go. Those who cannot go as frequently will have increased capacity to understand, if they go as often as they can. I ponder in my mind the phrases and actions and the things that I see and do.

The third thing the Savior tells us to do is this: "Ask of the Father, in my name, that ye may understand." I pray: "Father in Heaven, I'm going to the temple today. Why do we do this? What is the meaning and the significance of this thing?" When I first went to the temple, I thought some of the symbols were strange. That's the word I would have used then. Today I would use the words unique and different. It took me a while to realize that in God's great wisdom, he made the temple symbols unique and different. By their very nature they demand of us that we ask the questions the Lord wants us to ask. The first time I went to the temple, I thought, Why do we do that? What is the meaning of this? Why is this significant? These are the very questions the Lord wants us to ask. The danger is not that we will ask the questions; the danger is that we will become so familiar with the symbols that we will stop asking questions. We need to continue to ask the Father to help us learn.

The fourth thing to do is "prepare your minds for the morrow." How do we prepare our minds to receive revelation, remembering that the Spirit is the primary teacher in the temple and revelation is the primary mode of instruction? What prepares our mind to receive it? Let me give you a thought. I am a teacher by profession, but even if you're not a professional teacher, this Church is a church of teachers. You don't get out of the Church without teaching. What is irresistible to a teacher? Hungry students who sit at the edge of their chairs, looking, scriptures open, and saying, "Teach me." For those students you would open your soul. You want to give them everything you've ever thought or known. When Jesus came to the earth, what did he come as? A teacher. What is irresistible to him? Hungry students.

On the other hand, how do you feel as a teacher when you enter a classroom and the people are staring off in all directions, looking around, reading something else, or dozing? You want to get the lesson over with soon. You don't give as much of yourself. So, one of the best ways to prepare our minds to receive revelation is to go to the temple hungry to learn. Then we are irresistible to the teacher of the temple. Little by little he will open things to our minds. The Lord uses "teacher" words in the temple right at the beginning. He says "be alert"—that's a teacher word—and "attentive"—that's a teacher word—and "reverent." Those are teacher words, and if we're alert and attentive and reverent, we begin to learn.

The fifth and final part of our formula is "and I come unto you again." Go back to the temple. He will be there again. He will not cease to teach and instruct. That's the formula: "Go home, ponder, pray, prepare, return." So, the second time I'll understand it all? No. I'm still weak. "That's okay," the Spirit whispers. "Go home, ponder, pray, prepare, return." And as we do that time and again, to quote Ezekiel, the waters of understanding begin to rise.

My favorite scripture on the temple is in Ezek. 47. Ezekiel sees in vision the temple that will one day be built in Jerusalem. When it's all finished, he is brought around to the east doors (because the temple faces the east). The first verse says, "He brought me again unto the door of the house; and, behold, waters issued out from under the threshold of the house eastward: for the forefront of the house stood toward the east, and the waters came down from under from the right side of the house, at the south side of the altar" (v. 1). A spring of water bubbles up right at the east doors of the temple. We have water in front of many of our temples—reflecting pools. Every time you see that water, please think of Ezek. 47.

The water in Ezekiel's vision of the temple forms a river that flows down eastward into the Judean wilderness. Ezekiel returns to the bank of the river and finds "very many trees on the one side and on the other" (Ezek. 47:7). The water goes into the Judean wilderness and then empties into the Dead Sea. Everywhere the water flows in the Judean wilderness, it cuts a swath of green through the desert. Everywhere water flows, life springs up. He says in verses 8 and 9: "These waters issue out toward the east country, and go down into the desert, and go into the sea: which being brought forth into the sea, the waters shall be healed. And it shall come to pass, that every thing that liveth, which moveth, whithersoever the rivers shall come, shall live: and there shall be a very great multitude of fish, because these waters shall come thither: for they shall be healed; and every thing shall live whither the river cometh."

When I read those words, the Spirit whispers this thought: "That which will one day be temporally true of my house in Jerusalem, is spiritually true now of all my temples." Out from the east doors of the Jordan River Temple, where I go most frequently, is a river of water. It is not a river you see with the eyes, but it is there nonetheless. It will do two things: give life and heal everything it touches—our families, our friendships, our bruised and broken hearts battered by the trials of life. Nephi tells us that the fountain of living water is the love of God (see 1 Ne. 11:25). The river that flows from the temple is a river of light, truth, and power, but primarily it is a river of love; it will heal and give life to everything.

How deep is the river? That depends on how often you wade into it. In Ezek. 47:3, Ezekiel walks down the river a thousand cubits and wades into ankle-deep waters. That's not very deep. But on a hot summer day, even ankle-deep water is refreshing, healing, life-giving. Even ankle deep, the power of the temple is refreshing and life-giving. The message is, Don't leave the river. Walk down another thousand cubits and wade in again. In verse 4, Ezekiel wades in, and this time it is to the knees. He says, in effect, "Don't leave the river. Walk down the bank farther, and wade in again." This time it is to the loins, the waist. And I love verse 5. He measures another thousand cubits down the river bank, and "it was a river that I could not pass over." The river was over his head now, "for the waters were risen, waters to swim in, a river that could not be passed over." He could now immerse himself in that wonderful, life-giving, healing river of light and love that flows from our Father's house. One day, the combined rivers from all the temples dedicated in all the lands will bathe this world in light and love and healing.

In your Martha-and-Mary life, in your careful, troubled, cumbered, and compassionate life of service that is so pleasing to God, occasionally take time to sit quietly at the feet of the Savior at rest and be taught. Remember it is needful, it is healing and life-giving, to sit quietly at the feet of the Lord in the temple and be taught by the Spirit. And when you attend a temple dedication and are invited to rise and shout and wave, may you rise and shout with all your soul that great expression of joy and triumph. Then another river begins to flow, and healing and learning and protection and order and prayer and fasting and all the other blessings of the temple are made available to more people. May you love the temple.

NOTE

---
Notas:
[^1] "The Spirit of God," Hymns (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1985), no. 2.
