Susette Green, Dlora Dalton, Dawn Anderson, Every Good Thing: Talks from the 1997 BYU Women's Conference ( 1998)

Jesus, the Very Thought of Thee

ANN N. MADSEN

I am convinced that the very thought of Jesus can change us. Let me explain.

In the spring of 1988 I had a unique experience. I was invited to teach the life of Christ in a classroom on the shores of the Sea of Galilee. For a year at the BYU Jerusalem Center I had been teaching indirectly of Christ in the Old Testament, but now I was to teach of his life directly. I had little time, and I knew I must prepare.

I sensed that this would be one of the most important experiences of my life. And it was. From the time I awoke each morning until I slept each night I was focused on Jesus Christ. There were ways in which I felt that I knew him there for the first time, though I already knew how it felt to love him.

When my two weeks of round-the-clock preparing and teaching ended, I wrote in my journal: "As I sit here I recall the glorious hours of study I spent . . . in a small, pre-fab cabin [which became a holy place to me]. . . . I spent every waking hour earnestly preparing and alternately gazing out our picture window at the many moods of this lake. I was filled almost continually with a spirit which is difficult to describe. I was immersed in the study of Christ's life—so much of which was lived nearby.

"I knelt each dawn before that picture window—before His sea—to plead for His Spirit to direct and organize my study efforts that day. Three hours each morning I would teach. Each time I felt helped. . . . As I look back, I realize how profoundly my understanding was enhanced and my soul expanded. The in-depth study of Jesus was a monumental, marathon task and remains unfinished. I must do much more!" I realize now that it will only be finished when I meet Him face to face.

My ten- to twelve-hour study days on the shores of the Galilee changed me forever. I could identify with Nephi when he exclaimed: "We are made alive in Christ because of our faith. . . . And we talk of Christ, we rejoice in Christ, we preach of Christ" (2 Ne. 25:25-26). I had come to know Jesus in new ways.

I know you cannot travel to Israel to duplicate my Galilee experience. How I wish you could! But just as surely as he walked that shore and that I traced his footsteps there nearly two thousand years later, you must have your own sweet encounters with Jesus Christ. Your experience will differ from mine. You must find him in your own way and in your own place. The gateway to such an experience is the scriptures.

You remember when he walked on that water and beckoned to Peter. "It is I," he said, "be not afraid." And Peter answered him, "If it be thou, bid me come unto thee." And Jesus said, "Come" (Matt. 14:27-29).

So many times he has bidden us to come.

In latter-day scripture he invites us: "Learn of me, and listen to my words; walk in the meekness of my Spirit, and you shall have peace in me. I am Jesus Christ; I came by the will of the Father, and I do his will" (D&C 19:23-24).

He invites us to come to him, walk with him, to remember him in all the moments of our lives. "Look unto me in every thought; doubt not, fear not" (D&C 6:36). I know that that remembering, promised each time we take the sacrament, adds his power to our resolve. Thus we grow towards receiving his "image in [our] countenances" (Alma 5:14), and, over time, a mighty change can take place in our hearts.

We can only remember someone we have known. "For how knoweth a man the master whom he has not served, and who is a stranger unto him, and is far from the thoughts and intents of his heart?" (Mosiah 5:13). It was my new discoverings about Jesus through study and prayer near Galilee which gave me so much more to remember.

I remember his finding moments to be alone. I remember his weeping. I remember his healing—always healing. I remember how he met temptation and paid no heed to it. I remember how he urges us to be one. I remember how he gave himself over and over again and finally completely. I remember how he called the children to him and blessed them. In all these rememberings, I find indelibly in my heart the memory of his unfailing, everlasting love, his tenderness and caring. All were alike to him. No matter where you find yourself at this moment, he loves you. He loves each of us.

Six hundred years before Jesus was born on this earth, he told Jeremiah: "Ye shall seek me, and find me, when ye shall search for me with all your heart. And I will be found of you" (Jer. 29:13-14).I know we can trust that promise. Let us search together, remembering how he lived, and examine the ways we can trace his steps.

Jesus Had Moments Alone to Think, to Pray

I remember how Jesus made time to be alone, to pray. So can we. I learned some of that on the shores of Galilee: "And he said unto them, Come ye yourselves apart into a desert place, and rest a while: for there were many coming and going, and they had no leisure so much as to eat. And they departed into a [solitary] place" (Mark 6:31-32; JST Mark 6:32-33).

We can identify with dashing around in our busy lives, having no leisure so much as to eat, can't we? But how can we ever learn to be like him if we only wave as we pass? Jesus often pulled away to rest and pray: forty days in the Judean desert after his baptism; all night before he called his apostles; later on a high mountain with Peter, James, and John; and finally in Gethsemane.

Such rest and prayer time require privacy. These moments can be sliced out of our busy days. This kind of communing is more than just reaching up; it is our bright awareness of his reaching down. Isaiah describes this over and over: "His hand is stretched out still"; and the Book of Mormon echoes: "Mine arm is lengthened out all the day long" (2 Ne. 28:32; Isa. 5:25; 9:12). He constantly reaches for us. We need only look up and take his hand. Remember, Jesus said, "It is I; be not afraid. . . . Come!" (Matt. 14:27-29).

When can we pull away for time with our Father? Where is our "place apart"?

You are the only one who can answer that. But he has given all of us a precious time. It has been there all along. Remember? "Remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy" (Ex. 20:8). He himself rests and on the Sabbath invites us to join him.

I love the Sabbath day. I learned to love it even more living among the Orthodox Jews in Jerusalem. It has been said that not only have the Jews kept the Sabbath but the Sabbath has kept the Jews. I felt a kind of holy envy for the quiet, kept Sabbaths I experienced living in Jerusalem. Judaism teaches that "the Sabbath itself is a sanctuary which we build, a sanctuary in time." [^1]

I find it exciting to think of walling off that one day each week. (You can tell I don't have any little children at home, but you will all get to be my age some time.) We can wall off that day each week, like a building, a temple, and, after entering it, practice holiness in a day which was constructed for that very purpose.

When I awake early Sunday morning, I am thankful that somehow the day seems totally different to me. On my knees, I take my gratitude, my sins, my petitions, my temptations, and my deepest desires to our Father with ample time before anyone in my household stirs.

Later, when I hear the words of the sacrament prayers spoken, my heart is prepared and waiting. These lines I wrote a few years ago express how I feel. I call it "The Sacrament Prayers":

The words are repeated once again this sacred, Sabbath time. Words I can trace through the week but this time unique, spoken quietly in youthful intonation and the nourishment is proffered to me by a boy's hand in exchange for my changing.

I reach heavenward with all my heart and feel understood and loved. Suddenly, the burdens of the past week are gone or lightened. I feel fortified to meet the new week's challenges—fresh and clean.

We can each learn to build our own["sanctuar[ies] in time," even beyond Sunday. You must find time. It may be late into the night while you wait anxiously for your teenagers to come home. It may be just after your children leave for school. Start small. Take fifteen minutes before you tear into those items to be checked off on your list. It may be while you nurse the baby, which could be any time, night or day. It's your choice, but choose a time.

Jesus Forgave and Forgives

One Sabbath in March 1994, I sat in our chapel waiting to partake of the sacrament. I remembered how Jesus forgave and forgives. I was deep in prayer when these words came to me with such clarity that I wrote them down. I keep them in my scriptures: "Forgiveness is one of our tasks as we partake of the sacrament. If we would be forgiven, we must, ourselves, forgive. To truly forgive, I must identify the hurt, the pain—honestly, not denying it—and then offer that pain as a willing sacrifice to God. Then it can disappear. Once I've given it away, my attitude toward the person who inflicted it is also changed; no grievance or wound remains, and he or she can be seen in a new Light. The other person need do nothing for this to happen. It is in my heart that the 'mighty change' can take place."

Three years later, almost to the day when I wrote those lines, I had a remarkable temple recommend interview with my bishop, which I recorded in my journal: "I had decided to ask his counsel as I tried to forgive someone for long-ago pain and hurt. I had the sense as I brought up the subject that the bishop was reaching up in prayer to know how to teach me." That was a wonderful awareness. I explained that even though the person had been dead for several years, I knew I couldn't ignore the problem any longer. He spoke with me of mercy, pity. I said I had tried to feel that and I was still trying.

"At one point he looked me straight in the eye and said that I should just do it, just let go and forgive, that I needn't keep trying but that I should just do it. It was like he opened a door for me and beckoned me to come through, not waiting a moment.

"Just before I left he said, 'Ann, you have been badly hurt and have been carrying that around with you all these years.' [I remember thinking, compared to others', my hurt is small, but because I nurtured it, it has grown. In my mind I pictured a bundle of pain about the size of a basketball.] Just then he said, 'Throw it away!'" His words fit my imagery so perfectly that I figured I was in tune. Then he added, "'You say to yourself, "Someone should have to pay for this. It isn't fair." But, Ann, someone has paid for it.' I knew immediately that he meant the Savior, and I wondered how I had been so dense for so long, and I began to cry. I remembered the paper I had kept in my scriptures, my personal revelation, that I had been inspired to write down during that sacrament service in March of 1994, and I went home and reread it:

"Forgiveness is one of our tasks as we partake of the sacrament. If we would be forgiven, we must, ourselves, forgive. To truly forgive, I must identify the hurt, the pain . . . and then offer [it] as a willing sacrifice to God. . . . It is in my heart that the 'mighty change' can take place."

The Lord had told me once, all by myself, sitting, waiting to partake of his sacred sacrament. Then the bishop received the same message to give to me again. This time I could hear and understand. How patiently God ministers to us in our need, quietly repeating over and over again, until we have ears to hear and hearts broken enough to understand.

How do we forgive those who we feel have sinned against us? A noted educator and friend, Dennis Rasmussen teaches us one way: "Evil multiplies by the response it seeks to provoke, and when I return evil for evil, I engender corruption myself. The chain of evil is broken for good when a pure and loving heart absorbs a hurt and forbears to hurt in return. . . . Deep within every child of God the Light of Christ resides, guiding, comforting, purifying the heart that turns to him." [^2]

We can turn to him. We can join Christ in his merciful task of remembering sins no more.

Jesus Cared and Healed

I remember Jesus wept with the broken-hearted and healed the sick and the sorrowing. So can we. He wept, overlooking Jerusalem from the Mount of Olives. "O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, . . . how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye would not!" (Matt. 23:37). What sadness he reflects in this lament! It is akin to his cry in Isaiah: "What could have been done more to my vineyard, that I have not done in it?" (Isa. 5:4).

On the other side of the Mount of Olives, he wept with his dear friends Mary and Martha just before he raised their brother, Lazarus. Before the miracle he wept with them in their sorrow, in their pain. We can do that.

I remember Jesus healing, always healing. He went about healing, not hurting. He was sensitive to those who surrounded him, sometimes crowding so closely that he might have felt smothered. He took those who came to him by their hands and lifted them up. The crowds that swirled around him always included those coming to be healed—the sick, the lame—whom some perceived as ugly, stinking, and misshapen. He did not recoil from them.

What did he see? He saw the beauty of the human spirit in those who were unwhole, unfinished. We can pray to see as he sees. "Be thou whole," he said (see John 5:6). He comes, indeed, with the power to make us whole. He healed sickness and sin interchangeably. When the leper called out to him, "If thou wilt, thou canst make me clean," he touched the untouchable and answered, "I will; be thou clean!" (Matt. 8:2-3).

Such sweet patterns of compassion for us to follow. Healing defines Jesus' mission. He has delegated his gentle, healing priesthood power to the men among us so that they might join him in fashioning his miracles, implementing his will, anointing all of us to wholeness. He asks us, as women, to follow him and to do as he did. We were born with the capacity to heal and soothe and lift, to "succor the weak" (D&C 81:5). How often we sense the need to soothe those around us! We know almost instinctively how to minister and heal through our loving touch. Every woman has knelt at the side of a child, perhaps not her own, to "kiss a hurt better." It works. Why? Is it because feeling loved makes everything feel better?

Even a tiny girl knows the secret. Our youngest daughter, when she was about two years old, caught her hand in our old Ironrite as the motor was on and the roller was rolling. Her tiny hand was badly friction burned. As I heard her cry and ran to free her hand and gather her up in my arms, I wept as I saw the wound and blamed myself for her pain. I rushed her to a basin and ran cold water over the burn, all the time sobbing until I became aware that she wasn't crying but was wiping away my tears and whispering, "Don't cry, Mommy. Look, I'll kiss it better." And she did. So can we.

Jesus Paid No Heed to Temptation

I remember how Jesus experienced temptation and paid no heed to it. He exemplified the counsel of James: "Submit yourselves therefore to God. Resist the devil, and he will flee from you" (James 4:7). We can learn to be drawn to righteousness, repelled by evil. Eventually we can lose all desire for sin. To do that we must educate our desires towards righteousness.

Jesus can help us in this, too. He taught us to pray with sincere intent: "Suffer [me] not to be led into temptation, but deliver [me] from evil" (JST Matt. 6:14). This is the decisive moment in our prayers when we ask to be led away from temptation and into righteousness. It is at this moment we make the decision to walk away from the darkness into his light.

"What we are speaking about," Elder Neal A. Maxwell has said, "is so much more than merely deflecting temptations for which we somehow do not feel responsible. Remember, . . . it is our own desires which determine the sizing and the attractiveness of various temptations. We set our [own] thermostats as to temptation." [^3]

I know this is true. We may be enticed in opposite directions in a tug-of-war between light and darkness, but we are always the tie-breakers. Even when we can't see the light clearly, we can always move away from the darkness. As Elder Maxwell explains: "There remains an inner zone in which we are sovereign, unless we abdicate. In this zone lies the essence of our individuality and our personal accountability. Each assertion of a righteous desire, . . . however small . . . , adds to our spiritual momentum. . . . Our loving Lord will work with us, 'even if [we] can [do] no more than desire to believe,' providing we will 'let this desire work in [us]' (Alma 32:27)." [^4] Thus, by educating the desires of our hearts, the battle can be won, sometimes even before we find ourselves muddied in the trenches.

"No one who understands the Savior's agony can think sin and error are overcome easily," observes Elder Jeffrey R. Holland. "But when we are making our best effort, that's when the angels come. Our success is as certain as it is difficult." [^5] I know this is true; the angels do come. We receive tangible help.

Jesus Personifies Love

I remember that Jesus prayed for us to be one, to be bound to one another by love.

Satan seeks to isolate us, to separate us from God and each other, while Jesus taught us to be one, supporting one another in our feeblest attempts at godliness. "If ye are not one ye are not mine," he said (D&C 38:27).

We learn more about this unity in the temple and through kept covenants. Not long ago, on our way home from the cannery, Emily, our eldest daughter, shared a glorious idea with me about temple covenants. "When I am not in the temple," she said, "when I am just walking down the street, I pass by people who share my covenants. All over the world there are such people, millions of us. We may not speak of it. In fact, there is much of which I can never speak. But it is there, just the same, in my heart and in their hearts. I am never alone."

Our gracious God allows us to qualify through personal righteousness for these binding, eternal covenants. By kept covenants, we link our arms in a circle of righteousness, bound to each other and to God by love. This became so real to me a few weeks ago. Just after a baby had been blessed in our fast meeting, a sister in our ward stood to bear testimony that the circle of priesthood that had surrounded that infant symbolically formed a circle of protection against evil throughout that child's life. In my heart I echoed a resounding yes. I left that meeting to rush across town to be a witness as our grandson Robby was ordained a priest. Another circle formed around him. His two brothers, his father, who was also his bishop, and his grandfather (my husband) closed that circle, and his father began, "We, your family, lay our hands upon your head . . . " You can picture them, one hand on his head, one hand on a shoulder, forming a solid ring. For me it was symbolic of linking our arms in circles of righteousness, bound to each other with an unspoken covenant of love and support." Our families are linked forever by covenant.

Jesus taught us of the covenant of love. Jesus loves us, and he taught his apostles: "Love one another, as I have loved you" (John 15:12). How does his love differ from ours or from what we call love? It is pure and tender, totally sincere, gentle, without guile or artifice, no respecter of persons. Sometimes what we call love is demanding, dominating, or manipulative. But his is selfless; free of ego needs, facing outward, not inward; reaching always outward. Sometimes there are those around us whom we love less. We can learn to love them more.

Jesus Gave His All

I remember how Jesus gave himself for us. He taught us about sacrifice and consecration based on a spirit of obedience. Obedience is the one gift we can give God. The giving of it can eventually result in our will being swallowed up in his. Elder Neal A. Maxwell, speaking of consecration, taught us so memorably: "The submission of one's will is really the only uniquely personal thing we have to place on God's altar. . . . It is the only possession which is truly ours to give." [^6]

Consecration is thus an expression of mature love. As I consecrate, I ask myself, What has the Lord blessed me with? How can I contribute these blessings to build his kingdom?

Once when I was studying Eph. 5, I saw something I had not seen before. Paul was listing ways to come closer to God. "Submit to one another out of reverence for Christ" (New International Version, Eph. 5:21). Then he writes of how husbands and wives are to give themselves: "Husbands, love your wives, just as Christ loved the church and gave himself up for [it]" (NIV Eph. 5:25; "up" is in the original Greek). Giving ourselves up is the pattern we learn from Jesus.

This kind of giving or submitting is not "giving in," a situation in which one wins and one loses. It is giving oneself up. Can you see the difference?

How do we give ourselves up? One kindness at a time. Forgiving each offense as it occurs, or, better still, not taking offense. As Sister Elaine Jack taught us: "If people drop an offense, don't pick it up!" [^7] We give ourselves up by looking outward more, inward less; losing our lives in the concerns of others, rather than our own; just letting go of our self-serving, proud impulses.

We live in a world which cries out to us constantly of our rights and entitlements, as if our only duty is to pamper ourselves. But we have the privilege of learning how much we can give, not how much we can take. "Freely ye have received, freely give," Christ counseled his apostles as he gave them power to heal and bless (Matt. 10:8). Is it not our goal to also heal and bless freely? And in the giving, never feel deprived, but rather blessed in offering each other our abundance. "There is enough and to spare" (D&C 104:17).

We give in many ways. "We can give anonymously, not letting our right hand know what our left hand is doing." But sometimes knowing who the giver is, is part of the gift. An attitude, a way of life, is hinted at here. A wonderful Hebrew word hinunee embodies this attitude. It is the common answer of prophets when the Lord calls them to be his messengers. Samuel said it. Isaiah said it. It means "Behold, here am I," with an understood component of "I am at your service. What will you have me do?" It includes the notion of "Thy will be done." Christ said it first, when he offered himself in the heavenly council to do for us what we could not do for ourselves. In answer to the Lord's question, "Whom shall I send, and who will go for us?" Isaiah said powerfully: "Here am I; send me" (Isa. 6:8).

When I was fourteen years old, I learned a rhyme that I didn't know was quoting Isaiah and Jesus, although the compelling last line sounded very familiar:

Let none hear you idly saying "There is nothing I can do," While the souls of men are dying, And the Master calls for you. Gladly take the task he gives you. Let his work, your pleasure be. Answer quickly when he calls you, "Here am I; send me, send me!" [^8]

Jesus Said, "Behold Your Little Ones"

I remember how Jesus called the children to him and taught us to be like them.

Last Christmas our forty-year-old Navajo son came home for a wonderful reunion with our whole family. Since his last visit, we had added many nieces and nephews, some still toddlers, one already on a mission. As we sat together on Christmas Eve, he told us that he had been taught that all the children in his tribe were considered his sons and daughters and were never addressed as nieces or nephews. In his culture, the children were the teachers, and adults were to observe and learn from them. He had seen the family picture we'd sent each year, he said, and had come home to meet and learn from all his new "sons and daughters."

I wondered if his ancestors developed this belief by kneeling at the feet of Jesus, watching him bless the children. Trying to describe that transcendent scene, I wrote a poem called "Behold Your Little Ones":

The children know. They gather in bright bouquets around Him. Baby fingers reach to touch Him, Tiny tendrils waving toward Him. They listen. Some not tall enough to see can hear. Hushed in unexpected silence they stand Stretching souls to listen. He stands, as if to go, But upturned flower faces hold Him fast, The power of their love a match for His; Innocent, untrammeled, full of faith, They hold Him fast. Flowers He cannot bruise, Flowers He must not lose When years trample their innocence. "Be like a child," the Savior said, Because The children know. (3 1 Ne. 17:23)

Jesus directs us to observe our children so that we can be like them. What do they know that Jesus wants us to emulate? If you do not have children of your own, or if they are grown, where do you find them to observe? We are all surrounded by children. Sometimes we don't notice them. Sometimes, even as their mothers, we don't notice them. They are in grocery stores, waiting in line, sitting in grocery carts near us. They stand next to us in elevators, sometimes dwarfed and scared as big bodies crowd around them. They are not far from us in sacrament meeting, tiny babes smiling at us over their father's shoulder even though they don't even know our names. They play on the street in front of our house or on our lawns or in our flowers.

Do we observe and learn from them every chance we get? Do we smile and offer to play a little in the grocery line or quietly take a tiny hand over the bench in sacrament meeting? When we find them muddied in our garden, do we help them pick a bouquet while watching for the qualities Jesus asked us to find? Did you ever notice how fasting produces childlike feelings, even beyond hunger?

All of us remain the children of a loving Father, born innocent and making our way through a wicked world, tried and tested and healed through faith and love, arriving at last, again, purified—childlike.

"Behold, what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called the [children] of God: therefore the world knoweth us not, because it knew him not. Beloved, now are we the [children] of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is. And [everyone] that hath this hope in him purifieth himself, even as he is pure" (1 Jn. 3:1-3).

We have promised to take upon us the name of Jesus Christ. What a seal on our lives. Sometimes we speak his name hurriedly, absent-mindedly, or simply by rote. Elder L. Edward Brown cautions us: "When we use these sacred words, 'in the name of Jesus Christ,' they are much more than a way to get out of a prayer, out of a testimony, or out of a talk. We are on holy ground. . . . We are using a name most sublime, most holy, and most wonderful—the very name of the Son of God. . . . This conclusion to the prayer may, in many ways, be the most important part of the prayer." [^9]

May I suggest that we use those moments when his name is on our lips to pause, speak it slowly, and remember him as you and I have just done, with great reverence and love.

Jesus, the very thought of thee, With sweetness fills my breast, But sweeter far thy face to see And in thy presence rest. [^10]

Gethsemane was Jesus' last "place apart" where he knelt alone and cried out to his Father to be strengthened. One day I was in the garden called Gethsemane all alone. I had a great desire to kneel near where Jesus had knelt to speak my personal thanks for what he had suffered there. Amidst a flood of thoughts of him, I remembered his inviting Peter to come to him across the water and how at another time he promised that when he had been lifted up, he would draw all of us unto him.

I knelt and prayed. It was a sacred moment; one I'll never forget. Before leaving the garden, I wrote down the last words of my prayer and realized it was a poem. I offer it to you as my testimony.

Beneath the Violet Windows—Gethsemane

Dear Lord Jesus, Thou who lovest The people of the Mosque, Who would have gathered The people of the synagogue, Whose arms continue open To each saffron-robed monk And searching nun, Lord of the children And the childlike, Pulled by thy love, Seized by thy suffering, Drawn to thee By everlasting cords, I come!

NOTES

The original presentation of this essay is available on audiocassette from Deseret Book or on the Internet at http://coned.byu.edu/cw/womens.htm

---
Notas:
[^1] Laleta Dickson's History of William James of the Willie Handcart Company, 1856, Archives of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, n. p.; spelling and grammar standardized. See also Trail of Hope: The Story of the Mormon Trail (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1997).
[^2] Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-day Stories of Courage and Conviction (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1997), 10.
[^3] Letter in the possession of the author.
[^4] Bathsheba W. Smith, "Autobiography," ed. Alice Merrill Horne, typescript, 14-15, in author's possession.
[^5] Spencer W. Kimball, in Conference Report, October 1943, 15-16, 18.
[^6] Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1939), 388.
[^7] Elaine L. Jack, "Spiritual Maturity," Clothed with Charity: Talks from the 1996 Women's Conference, ed. Dawn Hall Anderson, Susette Fletcher Green, and Dlora Hall Anderson (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1997), 50.
[^8] Anonymous.
[^9] L. Edward Brown, in Conference Report, April 1997; or "Pray unto the Father in My Name," Ensign, May 1997, 79.
[^10] "Jesus, the Very Thought of Thee," Hymns (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1985), no. 141.
