Susette Green, Dlora Dalton, Dawn Anderson, Every Good Thing: Talks from the 1997 BYU Women's Conference ( 1998)

On Your Right Hand and on Your Left

HEIDI SWINTON

I grew up wanting to write for Newsweek magazine. When I headed east to graduate school in journalism, I recognized that graduate school was the door to writing the big stories, the important ones, the cover stories with the bylines in bold type. I loved the business of reporting: the pace, the research, and the writing of the articles. I had been enrolled only three days in one of the country's most prestigious journalism programs when I knew I had done the wrong thing.

It took months for me to muster the courage to abandon that direction. I now look back and see the Lord's hand clearly shaping another way.

Today, I write about people in the Church, about our history, our leaders, our prophets' teachings, our beliefs, and our experiences. Despite my earlier aspirations, much of what I do has no byline at all. But when you are writing the Church story, that doesn't matter. You aren't writing alone or for you. This is the Church of Jesus Christ, and he has promised, "I will be on your right hand and on your left, and my Spirit shall be in your hearts, and mine angels round about you, to bear you up" (D&C 84:88).

What a promise to a writer! That the Lord will be with you—on your right hand, on your left. And in your heart! No newsroom, no byline or cover story could ever compare with that assurance and association.

The Church story is told in both true accounts and in fictional narratives. The challenge to writing the Church story in fiction is to be believable. The challenge for writing the Church story factually is to be read. Many readers think that if the story is true, it's going to be boring. Not so. I have a greeting card that makes this point well. Greeting cards are sound-byte sermons. This one has a pioneer woman on the front, sitting in a wagon. She looks rumpled, worn-out. She's writing in what appears to be her journal: "I think it was one of my pioneering great-grandmothers, on a trek across the Great Plains, who summed up my philosophy of life in a quote from her diary . . . "

The inside of the card reads: "June 14, 1847: Ate out again. It was good."

I believe that writing the Church story is not just writing history; it is writing truth expressed in the goodness of people's lives. It is teaching principles by example. It is weaving a thread, a teaching that is based on an experience or a commentary, expanding the concept with true teachings and scriptures, and then crafting a lesson on life. It is writing of hardship and great blessings, patience and obedience, righteous choices and personal testimony. Every era is a compilation of such mettle. For me the process begins often with a journal account, a description in a news article, or a letter.

Laleta Dickson, a member of the tragic Willie Handcart Company, is a great example. She wrote in her journal in 1856: "When morning came, Father's body, along with the others who had died during the night, was buried in a deep hole. . . . I can see my mother's face as she sat looking at the partly conscious group. Her eyes looked so dead that I was afraid. She didn't sit long, however. . . . When it was time to move out, Mother had her family ready to go. She put her invalid son in the cart with her baby and we joined the train. Our mother was a strong woman, and she would see us through anything." [^1]

We look around us today and see the Church story now cast in a different context. No handcarts or freezing feet forge their way to Zion, but the messages of faith and fortitude are the same.

A congregation of Saints on the plains of Paraguay lost their homes and all their belongings in a disastrous flooding of the Piclomayo River, which was followed by another. When the relief party from the area presidency's office arrived, one of the older sisters was offering this prayer: "Father, we have lost our beautiful chapel, we have lost our clothing, we no longer have homes, we have no food to eat, we don't have any materials to build anything, we have to walk ten kilometers to get a drink of dirty river water and we don't have a bucket. But we desire to express to thee our gratitude for our good health, for our happiness, and for our Church membership. Father, we want thee to know that under any conditions, we will be true, strong, and faithful . . . " [^2]

One more story. A young man preparing to serve a mission was finishing up his year at college on a campus where he was the only Latter-day Saint. In a letter to his parents he expressed his feelings: "I've become so comfortable here with my friends and the goings-on that it will be hard to be uprooted, not knowing how things will be when I'm planted once again. . . . My friends will still be here at school—and they will change and grow over these next few years. So will I. But I'm going into a different greenhouse, being exposed to different light." [^3]

I love the image he created. He wasn't writing for publication. He was writing home. The sister from Paraguay wasn't praying to be heard by mortal ears; she was praying to her Father. Their words are stirring. I can feel them, and as they are developed into a story, you can feel them, too.

When this young missionary, my son Cameron, returned home from his mission, he found that his friends at school had indeed moved on. But during the two years he was serving, he made a new Friend, described in Mosiah as "the light and the life of the world; yea, a light that is endless" (Mosiah 16:9).

That is the Church story.

These three accounts illustrate the power of true stories. You can't rewrite the opening or final scene of someone's life to make your point. In true stories, you can select material that supports the direction you are going, but you have to maintain the integrity of the experience. That's why true stories are so real—they're like our own lives. We can't make the story be the way we want; we have to accept the way it is. We have to find meaning and strength in reality. That's a powerful lesson, and all true stories teach it.

Look at the power of the true stories in the scriptures. Abinadi, Elizabeth, Hannah, Mary, Joshua, and Sariah teach us so much. I love the words of Caleb and Joshua, "Be strong and of a good courage" (Josh. 1:18) and of Mary, "Behold the handmaid of the Lord; be it unto me according to thy word" (Luke 1:38). They, too, are the Church story.

Let me share some things I have learned in the process of doing this singular form of writing. First, when we are writing the Church story, we must recognize that we are making an offering to the Lord. We are writing for the Lord's library. We are consecrating our gifts, our time, our heart, and our hands. I had to learn that lesson.

About twelve years ago, an experience helped me put my part in perspective. It was a Sunday, a great day. Deseret Book had just published a book of essays on the presidents of the Church edited by Leonard J. Arrington, former Church historian. I had written the chapter on Lorenzo Snow, and my name was right there on the cover to claim it; I was famous. I took my pen to Church, knowing that someone would want my autograph.

I had barely crossed the foyer when a ward member rushed up to me, holding out that familiar sack from Deseret Book. I could see a book inside. It was "my" book, and I beamed as I got ready to whip that pen out of my purse.

"Heidi," she said with a hint of expectation in her voice, "could you get Brother Arrington to sign this for me?"

That experience in the church lobby gave new meaning to this verse in the Doctrine and Covenants: "O ye that embark in the service of God, see that ye serve him with all your heart, might, mind and strength" (D&C 4:2).

It says nothing about signing your name.

Second, writing is a process. Writers are always in some phase of the writing process—drafting, researching, rewriting, editing, reworking, going to bed because it isn't working. Writing is a process, just as the life it describes is a process.

Writing in a journal is good practice, good training. It helps us to see the Lord's hand in our own lives, and that helps us to see how he touches others. My great-great-great-grandmother Bathsheba Smith kept a journal. Last year, when I was writing the PBS documentary Trail of Hope, I turned to Bathsheba's account of leaving Nauvoo to illustrate the tremendous faith of these Saints. She wrote: "We left a comfortable home, the accumulations of four years of labor and thrift and took away with us only a few much needed articles such as clothing, bedding, and provisions. We left everything else behind us for our enemies. My last act in that precious spot was to tidy the rooms, sweep up the floor, and set the broom in its accustomed place behind the door. Then with emotions in my heart which I could not now pen and which I then strove with success to conceal, I gently closed the door and faced an unknown future, faced a new life, a great destiny as I well knew, but I faced it with faith in God." [^4]

Third, it's going to be hard. The heavens do not open and pour out manuscripts. If anything, writing about the Church and its members is the most difficult writing we will ever do. It will also provide some of the sweetest, purest moments. Most of mine are recorded only in my journal. Still, the adversary will work overtime to distract us and discourage us. And we can expect many long days and long nights questioning our own ability—and our own inspiration.

In President Spencer W. Kimball's first general conference address in 1943, he described how he had struggled with his new assignment. When I was putting together the compilation I Know That My Redeemer Lives: Testimonies of the Latter-day Prophets, I found his account. It opened my understanding to this process. He had been called three months earlier to serve as an apostle, and in the long days and weeks before his first address at a conference, he "did a great deal of thinking and praying, and fasting and praying." He said, "There were conflicting thoughts that surged through my mind—seeming voices saying: 'You can't do the work. You are not worthy. You have not the ability'—and always finally came the triumphant thought: 'You must do the work assigned—you must make yourself able, worthy, and qualified.' And the battle raged on." [^5]

Those words sit next to my computer screen on a now-battered Post-it note. His counsel—make yourself able, worthy, and qualified—has great significance. To write the Church story, we have to merit the Lord's being with us, on our right hand and on our left. We can't expect his guidance and inspiration if we aren't worthy. We can't take his help for granted. Nor can we expect to be successful without it.

I love President Kimball's concluding comment: "The battle raged on." When we are struggling to put the words on the page, it will help to remember that President Kimball prophesied of that pressure. Satan does not want this work to go forward. If he can stop us, he claims a victory.

Our Father calls for us to "search diligently in the light of Christ." To write about that light in others' lives, we must first seek it in our own and then sustain it. President Joseph F. Smith spoke of the need to make ourselves able, worthy, and qualified when he said, "It is a self-evident truth, that no one can give what he does not possess, and [one] who is lacking a testimony of the gospel can never inspire such testimony in [others]." [^6]

Everything written about the Church, from within the Church, reflects on the Church. When I write, I think about that. Writing the Church story is finding meaning not just in what happens but in how we deal with it, how we live the commandments, how we stand as a witness of God in a world that misuses his name and misunderstands his power. As writers we have to be humble and teachable and yet certain about the direction we are going and why.

I love the commentary in Moro. 10 because of the beautiful promises, the gifts that give value to work in the Lord's kingdom. We may think we find ourselves in verses 9 and 10: "To one is given by the Spirit of God . . . that he may teach the word of knowledge." But I especially like verse 12: "And . . . to another, that he may work mighty miracles." The Church story is one of mighty miracles. We share them, one consecrated effort at a time. Being involved in the writing, the telling, of these stories may be the most mighty miracle of all.

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] Laleta Dickson's History of William James of the Willie Handcart Company, 1856, Archives of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, n. p.; spelling and grammar standardized. See also Trail of Hope: The Story of the Mormon Trail (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1997).
[^2] Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-day Stories of Courage and Conviction (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1997), 10.
[^3] Letter in the possession of the author.
[^4] Bathsheba W. Smith, "Autobiography," ed. Alice Merrill Horne, typescript, 14-15, in author's possession.
[^5] Spencer W. Kimball, in Conference Report, October 1943, 15-16, 18.
[^6] Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1939), 388.
