Susette Green, Dlora Dalton, Dawn Anderson, Every Good Thing: Talks from the 1997 BYU Women's Conference ( 1998)

The Beatitudes: Constitution for a Perfect Life

CHRISTINE DURHAM

I'm not asked very often in my regular job to give sermons. Having once considered going to divinity school but being unable at the time to figure out what the world was going to do with a female Mormon preacher, I opted for the secular priesthood and became a lawyer. Poor second best, many of my friends would say.

Thus, it is a great pleasure to share with you a feast from the Savior's teachings in the New Testament and in 3 Nephi, a sermon we know as the Beatitudes. The theme for my sermon is that the Beatitudes are a constitution. In a seminar on constitutional law that I teach at the University of Utah law school, I begin by asking my students (mostly second- and third-year law students who have had the basics of legal training), "What is a constitution?" Some of them are surprised by that question, because even though they've been exposed to federal constitutional law, even though they have spent all their lives reading and hearing about so-called constitutional rights and defending and protecting the Constitution, it is frequently true that some of them have not thought very deeply about the meaning and purpose of a constitution. They tend to say things like "A constitution is a charter" and "It's a framework for the life of a community." Those are actually very good responses. They do describe what constitutions do for us. They organize us. They allocate the powers and duties that are to be exercised and performed in any given community. They regulate the relationship between the governed and the government, and between one citizen and another. So those are two important functions of a constitution—to organize power and allocate duty and to regulate relationships. A third very important function of a constitution is to embody, and to seek to enshrine and protect, the community's fundamental values and deepest commitments. With that definition as a basis, let us consider the Beatitudes as a constitution for living.

The Beatitudes have been described as "declarations of blessedness." Like a political constitution, they describe principles or laws that regulate relations between men and women, between men and women and God, and between us and God and back to each other. Similarly, they contain the fundamental elements of spiritual refinement and ultimately of perfection. Structural examination is an important part of any constitutional analysis. As far as we know from the scriptures, Jesus gave this sermon at least twice. It's recorded in the New Testament in both Matthew and Luke in slightly different versions. But the version we have in 3 Nephi has some interesting and probably significant differences, especially when we focus on the language.

The portion of the sermon that we identify as the Beatitudes is very short, and because I am focusing on its language and structure, I would like to read through it. First of all, the context involves Christ teaching the Nephites. He has just called twelve disciples and is in the process of instructing them about their work in preaching the gospel. He says to them, "Yea, blessed are they who shall believe in your words, and come down into the depths of humility and be baptized, for they shall be visited with fire and with the Holy Ghost, and shall receive a remission of their sins" (3 Ne. 12:2). And then begin the eight Beatitudes:

"Yea, blessed are the poor in spirit who come unto me, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

"And again, blessed are all they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.

"And blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.

"And blessed are all they who do hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled with the Holy Ghost.

"And blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.

"And blessed are all the pure in heart, for they shall see God.

"And blessed are all the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God.

"And blessed are all they who are persecuted for my name's sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven" (3 Ne. 12:3-10).

Let us look briefly at differences between the Matt. 5 version and 3 Nephi. Matthew records, "Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven" (Matt. 5:3). In Nephi we read, "Blessed are the poor in spirit who come unto me, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven" (3 Ne. 12:3; emphasis added). The Book of Mormon tells us what "poor in spirit" means—those who are in need spiritually, who come to Christ and receive an answer. They will come to the kingdom of heaven. There's another difference in Matt. 5:6: "Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall be filled." In 3 Ne. 12:6, the sermon is clearer. It reads, "And blessed are all they who do hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled with the Holy Ghost" (emphasis added).

The eight Beatitudes contain the fundamental elements of spiritual refinement and perfection. There's a beautiful harmony, a balance, and a symmetry in this very short, eight-verse sermon. The first four verses—which refer to the poor in spirit who come unto Christ, to those who mourn, to the meek, and to those who hunger and thirst after righteousness—all reflect neediness, an emptiness or a need that requires filling. Each declaration acknowledges the blessedness of spiritual need as the state that each of us must occupy as a human being seeking spiritual growth and response. The reference in these first four Beatitudes is to the internal, to the way we see ourselves in relation to God, to the way we understand and define ourselves as spiritual beings. Are we poor in spirit who come unto Christ? Do we mourn? Are we meek? And do we hunger and thirst after righteousness?

The second four declarations have a slightly different emphasis, referring to those who are merciful, pure in heart, peacemakers, and persecuted for the Lord's sake. Whereas the first four Beatitudes emphasize neediness, the second four emphasize generosity, acknowledging not our neediness as spiritual beings but our obligations and responsibilities in our spiritual life: to be merciful to others; to be pure in heart, to have pure intentions as we interact with others; to be peacemakers, to do what we can to reduce dissent and contention and to bring peace into the hearts of others; and finally to take upon ourselves the name of Christ, even suffering persecution in his name if necessary. The second part of the Beatitudes reaches outward to focus on the way we see others in reference to God.

Someone once asked C. S. Lewis to explain what he meant by the light of Christ. He explained that the light of Christ was not something that he himself could see but something by which he saw everything else. Parts of the Beatitudes provide us with the same kind of light, either for seeing inside ourselves or for seeing outside of ourselves and seeing others as God may see them.

As "declarations of blessedness," the Beatitudes describe an inherent, inevitable, definitional connection between the state of blessedness and the dynamic quality of being blessed. Blessings are descriptive, but blessings are also promises: the promises of connections between cause and effect.

Let us focus briefly on the blessings individually. First, "Blessed are the poor in spirit who come unto me, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven" (3 Ne. 12:3). Wherein lies the blessing? Does the blessing consist of being among "the poor in spirit who come unto Christ," or does it rest in owning, in belonging to, in being part of, and having ownership in the kingdom of heaven? Where's the blessing in verse 6: "Blessed are all they who do hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled with the Holy Ghost"? Does the blessing lie in the state of being hungry and thirsty, of longing and yearning for enlightenment and fulfillment? Or does the state of being blessed lie in being filled with the Holy Ghost?

I've puzzled over the language, trying to understand exactly the nature of the intended blessing. We can read the Beatitudes as describing cause and effect or as a requirement and a promise—if you're merciful, you'll receive mercy. But I'm not sure that the relationship between the parallel structure of the blessings is that straightforward. In some respects, the "ifs" and "thens" operate very much like the two sides of an equation—whatever happens on one side of the equals sign is, although different in character, the same as what's happening on the other side of the equals sign. For example, to be merciful transforms us spiritually in a fashion that makes us available to be recipients of God's mercy. Which is more blessed—to be merciful or to be the recipient of mercy? Which contributes more to our personal growth?

Let's consider mercy as the capacity to put aside personal hurt, personal offense, distress, anger, hatred. If we scratch the surface of any woman or man, we would uncover hardship, suffering, even victimization, that might, logically, give rise to legitimate resentment, anger, and questions about why the world is the way it is and why God permits certain things in the world to happen. Can we enjoy that resentment or anger, or sustain that level of hostility toward the world, and simultaneously exercise any of the blessings that Christ identified in the Beatitudes? I suggest that we cannot and, conversely, that we cannot hunger and thirst for righteousness, or be merciful, without at the same time being eligible for receiving blessings from God.

One of the things I like about the first of the Beatitudes—those that are poor in spirit who come to Christ—is the metaphor of a spiritual journey upon which each of us is engaged. We all have some distance to travel and at the end of that distance is our coming to Christ. But second is the act of "owning the kingdom" in some sense. The scriptures say, "Theirs is the kingdom of heaven." I don't know if that means the kingdom belongs to us, the poor in spirit who come to Christ, in the typical sense of ownership, or if it simply means that that will be a place where we will be at home, where we will be comfortable, where we will be comforted, and where we will be able to dwell in a sense of complete harmony with the Spirit.

Similarly, consider the second Beatitude: "Blessed are all they that mourn, for they shall be comforted" (3 Ne. 12:4). Most of us do not think of the act of mourning, or the process of mourning, as a state of blessedness. Most of us who have been hurt, who have experienced sorrow, who have experienced loss, who have been bereft of something very dear to us and who yearned in vain for its return, would not understand that condition as being a state of blessedness. But those of us who have experienced that condition and who have used it to seek God's comfort in our lives begin to understand the way in which mourning may be a blessing. Mourning opens us up. Pain softens our hearts. Hurt renders us available to messages and teachings that we would otherwise not heed. We know from the scriptures that God, on occasion—usually occasions when he looks around and sees what we have made of his creation—weeps. If God has the capacity for sorrow and the capacity to weep, then the capacity to mourn is in some sense godlike. And it's very clear that grief opens us up to this notion of comfort in a far broader sense.

Think about the last time you were hurt in some fashion, whether physically or emotionally. What did you seek for comfort? We hear a lot these days about things like comfort foods; we all probably have some of those. But I read a beautiful poem not long ago that talked about the process of marriage and what a marriage of long standing could be like. It referred to the "cashmere comfort" of being with someone who knows you well and loves you well. That reminded me of experiences when I've received comfort from my husband, from my children, and in my childhood from my parents. For just for a few seconds, re-create the last time you had a sense of being comforted. Remember that sense of warmth, of being soothed? We sometimes talk about the process of comforting as providing balm for the soul. If you can re-create that experience even for a moment, you can get in touch with the state of blessedness that must be available to those who mourn in a righteous sense according to the Beatitudes.

What about the meek? There's a place in the Psalms where this language—"blessed are the meek for they shall inherit the earth"—is repeated (see Ps. 37:11). The same phrase is used a couple of verses earlier, but that verse says that "those that wait upon the Lord, they shall inherit the earth" (Ps. 37:9; emphasis added). That reference to the capacity to wait upon God teaches us a lot about meekness. I've never been known as a meek person, and yet I don't think that the scriptural quality of meekness as described in the third Beatitude is unavailable to me. Meekness does not mean being without a voice or an identity. Meekness does not mean being unable to understand your own needs and desires, and, then, when they are appropriate and righteous, to pursue them. Meekness as a spiritual quality is in no way incompatible with striving for excellence, working hard, or seeking after the desires of a righteous heart.

But meekness does require that after we have done all that we can do—after we have prepared ourselves, striven, focused our efforts, focused our work, harnessed our ambitions, done everything possible in our lives to find the excellence that we believe our lives should have—then we must be willing, emotionally, spiritually, and psychologically, to wait upon God. That's what I think meekness means in the Beatitudes. It has to do with patience, long suffering, gentleness, kindness, in all of the traditional senses; at its core, however, meekness refers to the ability to turn our hopes, desires, and ambitions over to God, to accept God's time, to accept God's hand as it operates in our lives, and to let his words, his doctrine, his teachings, and his love affect our hearts and transform our spirits. Those who are not known for our meekness in the secular sense may have a little more trouble getting access to that kind of patience; nonetheless, it is available to us all.

And what state of blessedness is going to accompany meekness? The scripture says the meek shall inherit the earth (see 3 Ne. 12:5). Some people have a lot of trouble with this particular phrase in the scriptures because of the incongruity of it. If you think of meekness as being the same as wimpiness, why would the meek want to inherit the earth? What on earth would they do with it when they got it? But again, meekness does not mean weakness or powerlessness. Meekness means being patient and waiting on the Lord, and the promise implies that the capacity to wait will render us capable to receive. I don't know what it means to inherit the earth. I suspect it doesn't refer to instruments of worldly power; that would seem incongruous in the context of the Savior's teachings about differences between mortal life and eternal life. I think the phrase "inherit the earth" means that those who are capable of waiting upon God will come into full possession of all of their heart's desires.

Now consider the next verse: "Blessed are all they who do hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled with the Holy Ghost" (3 Ne. 12:6). The phrase "hunger and thirst after righteousness" suggests images of neediness: yearning, striving, seeking, looking for something that we don't have but that we need. But what are we are looking for? Not answers to specific questions. The scripture does not say that we will find all the answers or solve all the problems of the world but that we will be "filled with the Holy Ghost."

I love the introductory verses in which Christ is talking to the disciples. He describes so vividly and so beautifully being filled with the Holy Ghost: "They shall be visited with fire and with the Holy Ghost, and shall receive a remission of their sins" (3 Ne. 12:2). My experiences of being filled with the Holy Ghost have been like being visited with fire. It's an experience of beauty, of transcendence, of moving up and outside of one's self, and of seeing one's life from a completely different perspective. It's an experience of going from emptiness to fullness.

Next is "Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy" (3 Ne. 12:7). We know from the scriptures that God is rich in mercy. In 1 Nephi we read that the "tender mercies of the Lord are over all" (1 Ne. 1:20). In Alma we learn that "mercy can satisfy the demands of justice" (Alma 34:16), although elsewhere in the scriptures we read that mercy cannot rob justice. They must operate in a complementary way. I would suggest that the adjective merciful is yet another synonym for godlike. If God is rich in mercy, if his tender mercies are over all, and if he is responsible for the mercy that permitted—through the Atonement—the demands of justice to be satisfied, then to be merciful is in some sense to be godlike, to take on an attribute that is part of God's identity.

The next Beatitude speaks of the pure in heart. Why not just "the pure"? Why not those whose lives are stainless? Whose actions are blameless? Who are entirely free from any corruption or taint in the way they live their lives? We would call them pure. But that is not what the sermon refers to. It refers to those who are pure in heart. It looks inward, to examine intentions. The word pure to my mind connotes something that is clear, clean, spotless, and bright—something that is very intense. What happens when you focus your eyes? You see. When you focus your intentions with that pureness, that distilled clarity and intensity, you will see God.

This teaching reflects an orientation to the world, to other people, and to all of our actions. We should act intentionally—with intentionality. I learned about the concept of intentionality from a friend, not of our faith, who is a very deeply spiritual man. "Life is like dancing," he says. "The point of dancing is not to finish." The point of living, at least for most of us most of the time is not to finish. The point of getting up every morning is not to rush through to the end of the day—or at least it shouldn't be. There are days like that, of course; we all have days when we get that first foot on the floor, and we feel like we've started a foot race that is not going to end until midnight. I suggest that when we are living our lives that way, we've lost track of what it is to be pure in heart, because we have lost track of doing what we do, thinking what we think, saying what we say, experiencing what we experience with intentionality, with focus, with the ability to remember who we are and what God wants of us. That's what I think the scripture means in saying, "They shall see God" (3 Ne. 12:8). When our hearts are pure and focused, we can see God.

The next Beatitude concerns the peacemakers. I had a little brother who, when we older siblings were squabbling, would say, "Now, don't fight. It's not nice." His advice didn't endear him to us at the time—a risk all peacemakers run. What does being a peacemaker mean? Is it someone who papers over every dispute, who refuses to acknowledge legitimate differences in people's perspectives? Is it someone who wants to squelch dissent in any form solely for the purpose of civility? In that case, some of the totalitarian governments around the world qualify as successful peacemakers. They do not tolerate contention or dissent, and, on the surface, the societies they manage are peaceful. Some of them are a lot more peaceful than democratic societies: they have less public contention, less violence, fewer opportunities for people to display tension toward each other. But that has nothing to do with the process of peacemaking that Jesus Christ taught.

We learn throughout the scriptures that the spirit of contention is not from the Lord but from the devil. How, then, can we disagree with each other? How can we see the world through our own prisms of experience, education, and individual learning? I suggest that this Beatitude has something to teach us in that regard. It says, "Blessed are all the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God" (3 Ne. 12:9). That language is interesting. It doesn't say for they are the children of God or that they shall be the children of God. It says they shall be called the children of God. They will be identified and labeled and understood in the larger community as having a function that has to do with God's doctrine, God's teaching, and God's peace.

My own opinion is that the peace described in the scriptures, and the peace referred to in this part of the Beatitudes, is not merely a passive peace, an absence of bad feeling or disagreement. Instead, I think, it is a very active, affirmative experience akin to being filled with the Holy Ghost. I hope that you have had the experience sometime in your life of disagreeing strenuously with someone you love and care about deeply, disagreeing about politics, about the solution to a problem, about an ethical choice that has to be made, about things as mundane and essential as the way to run a household, or manage family finances, or teach children. I hope that if you have had the experience of disagreeing with someone you value and love, you have also had the experience of coming to a state of toleration for that disagreement, of understanding that you can still love and value someone even when that someone does not see the world exactly as you see it. When that happens, ideally, the Spirit can enter into our lives and teach us ways of accommodating the enormous and beautiful diversity of human beings and human opinion. Peacemakers are the people who diminish the suffering that is caused by hate, fear, insecurity, greed, carelessness, recklessness. Peacemakers discern beyond the language that we sometimes hear, beyond the actions we sometimes observe; they discern the needs of other human hearts.

I'm married to a peacemaker. He's a peacemaker on many levels, not the least of which is that he hates confrontation. How he ever ended up married to a lawyer, I don't know. We had to work out all kinds of techniques for disagreeing and valuing each other when we disagreed and were trying to solve problems. We had to agree on how to disagree. But it's not that part of his character which leads me to call him a peacemaker. It is his capacity for hearing the voices that speak from people's hearts. When we were newly married, we took a marriage class, and one of the sections was on communication. We discovered in that session that I am what is known as a "technical listener." Language means a great deal to me; I care deeply about it, and it is evocative to me. Language is one of the ways I get in touch with my spiritual life. My husband is not a technical listener, and he's not a technical talker. He is a discerning listener, an emotional listener. He picks up on body language, on tone of voice, on the "affect" of speech and language. I have to say, we've made a pretty good team. I don't know how either one of us would have survived without the other in rearing our five children because there were so many moments over the course of that process when one or the other of our sets of skills was needed. His skills for hearing what people's hearts are trying to express, first of all, makes him a very good pediatrician, gifted in his field. But it also allows him to protect himself in a healthy way from communications that might otherwise be hurtful, confrontational, or hostile and to respond to the need underneath. That has been particularly valuable in our neighborhood, community, and family. I watch him and understand that his idea of a successful interaction with another human being is to understand what that human being needs and to give it to him or to her—to bring peace to people's hearts.

To be a peacemaker you don't have to get a degree in foreign relations and work for the United Nations. You don't have to intervene and terminate every dispute. But if you can facilitate communication between yourself and other people and between other people, you have the beginnings of being a peacemaker. You also have the beginnings, if you are capable and willing, of extending the gospel to the lives of the people around you, to teach them about what God's peace means and to help them incorporate it into their lives. And what does that get you, according to the scripture? It gets you a pretty impressive title: "children of God." That title is appropriate, I think, because children do their father's work, particularly in the spiritual sense. Christ did his Father's work, and we in turn try to do our Father's work.

We come finally to the last of the Beatitudes. On the surface, this is the most paradoxical of the eight and perhaps the most difficult to understand: "Blessed are all they who are persecuted for my name's sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven" (3 Ne. 12:10). Being persecuted is not my idea of a blessing. It stresses me a lot, and I would just as soon avoid it under all circumstances. I've lived long enough, however, to figure out that we can't avoid it and that by virtue of living in the world and putting ourselves out there we run the risk of encountering people who not only disagree with us but in many instances just flat out don't like us, what we stand for, or what we believe in.

Here is a personal example. I am a transplant to the state of Utah. I came here to live more than twenty-five years ago. I've now lived here longer than I've lived anywhere else in my life and it's home, but I was startled when I first moved here. Having grown up in the Church in cities all over the United States and abroad but never here in "Zion," I was startled when I moved here by the extent to which my identity as a Latter-day Saint seemed important to people around me. Not only was it important to the community of Saints that I joined in my neighborhood and ward but it also seemed important to the professional, social, and civic communities that I joined. Now, I had been used to being identified as a Mormon. In fact, in my undergraduate college, there were only three Latter-day Saints, and I was known as one of them. But in that setting I experienced curiosity, as much respect as the lack of it, and a certain degree of being special, or at least different, because of my faith. When I came to Utah, I discovered that the label had other connotations, some of which were not nearly so favorable.

When we live in communities where large numbers of us belong to the same faith, our neighbors sometimes feel wariness. I often found that when people in Utah identified my religion—and that was one of the first things that people wanted to know—they tended to make a whole series of assumptions about what kind of person I was. And they weren't always favorable assumptions, especially in some of the professional circles I moved in.

I realized how important it was for me in that setting to embrace my identity as a Latter-day Saint without foregoing any of the other personal attributes that were part of my identity. When people didn't respect the fact that I was a Latter-day Saint or, on the other side of the spectrum, expected me to be a certain kind of Latter-day Saint, I realized that I was being "persecuted" in a symbolic way for His name's sake. I say "symbolic" because it was reflected in attitudes, not in penalties or punishment. It was nothing like the experiences of the early Mormon pioneers, who literally risked their lives, or the historical experiences of the early Christians or the Jews. But it gives me an insight into what it's like to be reduced to a label. Carrying the name of Jesus Christ means that, among other things, you are willing to accept the judgments others may wish to place upon you as a result of that choice, however misguided those judgments may seem to you.

There is a very interesting symmetry in the Beatitudes. In 3 Ne. 12:3, we began with the "poor in spirit who come unto me, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven." And in verse 10 we end with those "who are persecuted for my name's sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven." The sermon and its teaching have come full circle from a willingness to come unto Christ to a willingness to accept everything that that means, even persecution.

Three verses at the very end of this sermon in 3 Nephi record Christ speaking to some of his people: "Therefore those things which were of old time, which were under the law, in me are all fulfilled. Old things are done away, and all things have become new. Therefore I would that ye should be perfect even as I, or your Father who is in heaven is perfect" (12:46-48). Latter-day Saints should take this sermon, and the Beatitudes that precede it and are part of it, more literally than traditional Christians. For instance, have you ever been told you aren't a Christian because you are a Latter-day Saint? That seems quite odd to us because the name of our Church is The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. We can understand this apparent paradox better when we place Christianity in its historical, doctrinal context. Latter-day Saints are doctrinally, in some respects, outside the definitional boundaries of Christianity. Why? Because we see existence on a continuum, and we believe in what we call eternal progression—that human beings can move along a developmental continuum, can progress from grace to grace and from capacity to capacity, from a state of alienation from God and mortality toward a state of godhood. That is the notion of perfectability. It's right here in the version of the sermon found in the New Testament, but it is not commonly understood by our fellow Christians as we understand it. They have a very different notion of the relationship between God and man and the nature of divinity and the nature of mortality.

This idea of perfectability is quite a radical tenet of the Restoration. As one of my teenagers would say, "It's an awesome doctrine!"—awesome in the sense that it should instill in us a sense of enormous awe about our responsibilities and obligations. People observe our lives without understanding the connection between our doctrine and our lives. Christ's teachings, wherever we find them, sustain us on that continuum of perfectability. It's not an accident that the Beatitudes, which can function as a constitution for living, are found in a sermon that concludes with the Savior's injunction, "Therefore I would that ye should be perfect even as I, or your Father who is in heaven is perfect" (3 Ne. 12:48).

People think we have a lot of chutzpah (a wonderful Yiddish word meaning incredible brass) to believe in the notion of eternal progression, to take literally the injunction at the end of this sermon, to think about, let alone try to work on, becoming perfect. I don't think we have even begun to approach the standard that the Savior set. In the Beatitudes, this "declaration of blessedness" recorded for us in the scriptures, Christ teaches us that there are things we can do, ways we can look at ourselves, and ways we can look at the world that will enable us to begin our own journeys on the continuum of perfectability. I pray that we can manage to maintain our humility and our capacity for meekness on that particular journey. I suspect that if we truly understand the magnitude of what I have called a radical tenet of the Restoration, we won't have any trouble with the meekness part and will be satisfied in the end to wait upon God for the result.
