Susette Green, Dlora Dalton, Dawn Anderson, Every Good Thing: Talks from the 1997 BYU Women's Conference ( 1998)

Studying the Scriptures: A Scholarly Approach

GAYE STRATHEARN

In 1919 President Joseph F. Smith said, "The word and the law of God are as important for women who would reach wise conclusions as they are for men; and women should study and consider the problems of this great latter-day work from the standpoint of God's revelations, and as they may be actuated by his Spirit, which it is their right to receive through the medium of sincere and heartfelt prayer." [^1] Closer to our own time, at the very first general women's meeting in 1978, President Spencer W. Kimball declared: "We want our sisters to be scholars of the scriptures as well as our men. You need an acquaintanceship with his eternal truths for your own well being, and for the purposes of teaching your own children and all others who come within your influence." [^2] At the very next general women's meeting, he elaborated even further: "We want our homes to be blessed with sister scriptorians—whether you are single or married, young or old, widowed or living in a family. . . . Become scholars of the scriptures." [^3]

The question, of course, is "What does it mean to be a scholar of the scriptures?" I sometimes compare studying the scriptures to a rich, multilayered piece of cake, heeding the Lord's counsel to Isaiah to "make the heart of this people fat" (Isa. 6:10). The layers of a multilayered cake can represent different experiences in our lifetime scripture study. For instance, some layers may represent personal study added on at various times in our life; other layers may represent family scripture study or institute or seminary classes; another layer may represent Gospel Doctrine, priesthood, or Relief Society classes and discussions. Each layer adds to the flavorful richness of our study experience. A scholarly approach to the scriptures adds to that richness, but I would like to offer two cautions before diving into our topic.

First, unfortunately, some people want to eat only this one layer. For a few, the scholarly debate can become more important than the spirit of the scriptures. Let me give you an example. In Helaman we read of the missionary experiences of the two sons of Helaman: Nephi and Lehi. At one point in the narrative, Nephi returned to Zarahemla from his mission in the north and found "the people in a state of . . . wickedness" (Hel. 7:4). A series of events followed that led Nephi to prophesy about the murder of the chief judge and the capture of his assailant. Nephi's ability to identify the murderer caused quite a stir. Let's pick up the story there. "And now there were some among the people, who said that Nephi was a prophet. And there were others who said: Behold, he is a god, for except he was a god he could not know of all things. . . . And it came to pass that there arose a division among the people, insomuch that they divided hither and thither and went their ways, leaving Nephi alone, as he was standing in the midst of them" (Hel. 9:40-10:1

Do you see what happened? The people were so caught up in the argument about whether Nephi was a prophet or a god that they ignored him, and whatever great things he could teach them, so they could continue the argument! Surely a spiritually sensitive people would be flocking to him, whether he was a prophet or a god, so they could learn. Their response is in stark contrast to that of their descendants fifty years later who longed for Christ "to tarry a little longer with them" (3 1 Ne. 17:5). To "search diligently in the light of Christ" is the goal of all scripture study (Moro. 7:19). A scholarly approach to the scriptures is a tremendous tool, but it is only a means to an end, not an end in and of itself.

The second caution concerns assumptions people bring to a study of the scriptures. I like to distinguish between what I call academic as opposed to scholarly approaches to scriptures. I use academic to refer to "the philosophies of men, mingled with scripture," [^4] and scholarly to refer to the "philosophies of men, mingled with scripture" but viewed through the lens of the gospel of Jesus Christ. Both approaches use very similar tools, such as history, language, archaeology, literary and text criticism, but the academic approach often makes assumptions that prevent our viewing the scriptures through the gospel lens. Foremost among those assumptions is that we cannot objectively assess spiritual experiences such as visitations, healings, or prophecy; therefore, we must either not discuss them or treat them as unverifiable psychological phenomena—events that individuals believed they experienced but that we can't regard as factual. I believe that Paul was referring to this attitude when he warned of those who were "ever learning, and never able to come to a knowledge of the truth (2 Tim. 3:7), or Peter, when he warned of the spiritually "unlearned and unstable" who "wrest" scriptures "unto their own destruction" (2 Pet. 3:16). [^5] Yet, those very same tools of scholarship can be of tremendous value if they are used within the gospel framework.

With those cautions in mind, let's have fun with two scholarly tools—language and redaction.

Language

When I think of studying language as an important part of a scholarly approach to the scriptures, my mind invariably turns to the Prophet Joseph Smith. Here was a man who knew the scriptures. Divine and angelic beings were his tutors. Besides the Father and the Son, many others—Peter, James, and John, Moses, Elias, John the Baptist, and Moroni—visited the Prophet, conferred keys upon him and his associates, and instructed him in spiritual matters. [^6] These visitations must have been wonderful, spiritual, learning experiences for the young Joseph. In addition, when he received the Book of Mormon plates, he had the Urim and Thummim to help him translate. Yet, when it came to studying the scriptures, the Prophet didn't rely solely upon divine messengers or the Urim and Thummim.

Joseph's journal reflects his commitment to study Hebrew (in particular), as well as Greek and Egyptian. In Kirtland, the School of the Prophets engaged the services of a Jewish scholar, J. Seixas, to formally teach them Hebrew. During this period, Joseph's journal frequently records blocks of intensive study time: "Spent the day [or the afternoon] studying Hebrew [or Greek]." [^7] The things he learned from that study he incorporated into his sermons. [^8] On 17 February 1836, the Prophet recorded the following in his journal: "My soul delights in reading the word of the Lord in the original, and I am determined to pursue the study of languages until I shall become master of them, if I am permitted to live long enough, at any rate so long as I do live I am determined to make this my object, and with the blessing of God I shall succeed to my satisfaction." [^9]

Why was it so important for Joseph to read the scriptures in Hebrew and Greek? Why was he driven, despite many other pressing concerns, to master those languages? Could it be that the very pondering associated with the translation process prompted the Spirit? I think so, and for me the beauty is that those same promptings can be available to us.

What does the phrase "as far as it is translated correctly" in the eighth Article of Faith mean? Any translator faces a number of different possibilities, each of which could be justified. The one chosen may be decided as much by poetry or theology as by syntax. Sometimes, therefore, as we look at a text through the lens of the gospel, we find possibilities other than the one chosen by the translators of the King James Version of the Bible. Let me give you a couple of examples.

After Eve eats the forbidden fruit, God says to her: "I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception; in sorrow thou shalt bring forth children; and thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee" (Gen. 3:16). The preposition translated here as "over" is the Hebrew letter beth. Its primary meaning is "in" or "with" rather than "over." That changes the last phrase to "he shall rule with thee." This alternate translation supports President Kimball's preference to read "preside" rather than "rule" in this scripture, and it would also better capture God's intent for the family. [^10] The Proclamation on the Family declares that although divine responsibilities may differ, "fathers and mothers are obligated to help one another as equal partners." [^11]

Unfortunately, the footnotes in the LDS edition of the Bible don't provide, in this case, this alternate translation of Gen. 3:16. Sometimes the footnotes do provide such information, and that can be extremely helpful. For example, the Psalmist declares: "What is man, that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man, that thou visitest him? For thou hast made him a little lower than the angels, and hast crowned him with glory and honour" (Ps. 8:4-5). A footnote to these verses indicates that the Hebrew text reads, "less than the gods," rather than "lower than the angels," which comes from the Greek Septuagint text. Perhaps those who translated from the Hebrew to Greek felt "gods" smacked of the plural gods of Greek and Roman theology. And perhaps the King James translators followed suit because the Septuagint was the preferred text for Christianity and they weren't comfortable with the theological implications of humans being only a little lower than the gods—but that implication fits very nicely with the Latter-day Saint understanding of human potential. [^12]

Those are two examples. There are many more. Translating from the original text can also help identify words with greater depth and complexity than is readily apparent in the English translation. For example, whereas English has just one word for love, Greek has at least four, each with its own nuance: agapÂ¯e—charity (1 Cor. 13), which Mormon defines as "the pure love of Christ" (Moro. 7:47) eros—sexual love (which we don't find mentioned in the Bible); philos—brotherly love (Rev. 3:19) and storgÂ¯e—family love, parents for children and children for parents (Rom. 1:31; 2 Tim. 3:3; used in the negative sense, "without family love"). Knowing which word was originally used by the writer can add clarity or new perceptions when we are pondering and studying.

I hope these few examples give a feeling for why the Prophet Joseph felt that paying attention to language was important.

Redaction

According to the LDS Bible Dictionary, "The four Gospels are not so much biographies as they are testimonies. They do not reveal a day-by-day story of the life of Jesus; rather they tell who Jesus was, what he said, what he did, and why it was important" (p. 683). As a result, it is extremely difficult, if not impossible, to merge the four accounts of Christ's life and teachings. The authors were not primarily interested in the time line of Christ's life. Each took some events and teachings out of chronological order to better emphasize a point. For example, when Matthew wanted to emphasize Christ's teachings on the kingdom of God, he brought together into a single chapter all the parables that Jesus had taught on that subject (see Matt. 13). In other words, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John sometimes acted as editors of Christ's life and teachings as they wrote their Gospel.

That editorial process is called redaction [^13]—something we are familiar with in the Book of Mormon because both Mormon and Moroni insert editorial comments into their works. Mormon tells us that "a hundredth part of the proceedings of this people . . . cannot be contained in this work" (Hel. 3:14). Obviously he and Moroni, under the direction of the Spirit, had to make some important choices about what to include or exclude and what order to put it in. That's what an editor does. Recognizing the editor's hand can be instructive. For example, in an article he wrote on Alma 30, Gerald Lund [^14] asks two questions about Mormon's editorial decisions: Why did Mormon include the incident of Korihor in the Book of Mormon, especially when a detailed story of an anti-Christ seems to go against Nephi's "mission statement" to engrave "that which is pleasing to God"? (2 Ne. 5:32). Why did Mormon specifically place the account of Korihor between the account of the sons of Mosiah and their missionary efforts to the Lamanites and the account of Alma's great mission to the Zoramites? Brother Lund's ensuing discussion of the role of foils (persons or incidents that set off or enhance another by contrast) in the scriptures and the power of the word have added a wonderful new layer to my understanding of this great chapter.

As another exercise in studying redaction, compare Matthew's placement and use of the incident of the stilling of the storm (Matt. 8:23-27) with that of Mark and Luke. [^15] What was Matthew trying to teach that led him, as an editor, to present the story differently from the way Mark and Luke presented it? Why did he include two short incidents (Matt. 8:18-22) that aren't found in Mark and don't come until a chapter later in Luke? Notice also Matthew's choice of words, for instance, in calling Christ "Lord" in contrast to Mark's and Luke's using the title "Master." Is there significance in that? In my study of these questions, I have come to feel that Matthew wants to emphasize the importance of turning to Christ during the trials that will invariably come as we, as Christ's disciples, leave behind the cares of the world and enter into the boat, symbolic for Matthew of Christ's church. Mark and Luke both have Jesus stilling the storm first and then questioning his disciples; Matthew reverses the order. First, he questions their faith, and then he attends to the storm. The faith of the disciples is the central topic in Matthew. Matthew wants his readers to understand the stilling of the storm as even more than the story of a miracle. He wants us to see it as symbolic of the trials of discipleship.

Asking questions about redaction—the editorial process of ordering events, selecting which details to include or exclude, and so on—can be very enlightening.

We have examined only two of many elements in a scholarly approach to the scriptures; we have barely scratched the surface. Not everyone can pack up and pursue graduate degrees in religious topics, of course, but other resources are available. We might be able to take language classes, as Joseph Smith did. Other resources—some on computer software—could help us add a scholarship dimension to our scripture study. Many books written for the nonacademic reader and readily available in bookstores and libraries teach about social context, redaction, and all the other wonders of a scholarly approach. The Lord commanded the Prophet Joseph to "seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom; seek learning, even by study and also by faith" (D&C 88:118). In learning by study and also by faith, we can use the scholarly approach to the scriptures as a wonderful aid to invite the Spirit to enlighten our understanding of these great texts.

NOTES

The Last to Remain and the First to Return

JENI BROBERG HOLZAPFEL and RICHARD NEITZEL HOLZAPFEL

When our young son Bailey was four years old, he was assigned to set the table for dinner. As he moved around the big kitchen table, carefully arranging the settings, he stopped briefly to ask me about the "dishes" Nephi was commanded to go and get in Jerusalem. I could see his mind working on the first line of the Primary song "Nephi's Courage":

The Lord commanded Nephi to go and get the plates

From the wicked Laban inside the city gates. [^16]

Plates, dishes—they were the same thing in Bailey's mind. What a curious story he must have made up in his head, imagining Nephi and his brothers returning to Jerusalem to get a stack of dishes!

We have found ourselves reading stories in the New Testament, thinking and visualizing one thing, only to find out later that we had the wrong image in mind. As with our son, the story made a lot more sense once we understood what was really going on. That is especially true when we study the women mentioned in the New Testament. To fully appreciate the lives and discipleship of these women, we must see them in their historical and social contexts and understand the attitudes and norms of the larger Greco-Roman world and of the Jewish subculture. [^17]

Greco-Roman Attitudes

First-century Greco-Roman attitudes about women originated in ancient Greece. They were a deep-rooted tradition that mandated that only male citizens of Athens had rights. One of the earliest known Greek poets, Hesiod, tells in Theogony the story of the creation of the first woman. Because Prometheus had stolen fire from the gods to give to humans, Zeus punished humans by sending them Pandora, the first woman. She had every gift—beauty, charm, grace, skill in women's work—but she was a "tempting snare" and a "nagging burden." Before she came to earth, men lived happily, untouched by troubles and disease. Pandora, whom Zeus made "to be an evil for mortal man," was she "from [whom] comes the fair sex; yes, wicked womenfolk are her descendants." [^18] Theogony became the standard Greek version of divine creation.

Greek parents often exposed (meaning abandoned without food or shelter) their unwanted newborn infants, mostly girls. Exposed children usually died of hunger or cold or both and became the lifeless prey of birds and dogs, unless they were found by someone—a mixed blessing because the children automatically became slaves subject to terrible humiliation, including sexual abuse, most often of the females.

A few hundred years later during the Hellenistic age (323-330 B.C.), profound changes in social and political life, influenced by philosophy and scientific ideas, transformed the Greek world. The legal status of women also changed, even though long-held beliefs and customs tended to thwart these advances.

When Rome dominated the ancient world, the women of the elite greatly increased their freedom and independence, but the relatively small number of women who benefited from the changes must be weighed against the harsh and difficult lives of most women during this period. Slavery continued on a wide scale and gave occasion to cruelty and sexual license, again especially with female household slaves.

Roman law required a father to rear all his male children but only his firstborn female. The words of the comic poet Posidippus are surely an exaggeration, but they contain a germ of truth: "A poor man brings up a son, but even a rich man exposes a daughter." [^19]

Obviously, we are emphasizing the worst treatment of women in these ancient cultures, which were both complex and diverse. Many women felt needed, loved, and appreciated. Yet, the number of harsh, negative statements about women in Greco-Roman sources vastly outweigh positive. Negative attitudes toward women were the norm.

The Jewish World

Jesus, of course, lived in the Jewish subculture of the Greco-Roman world. From what we glean from first-century Jewish sources, family and public life revolved around the free adult Israelite male. These men owned wives, children, land, slaves, livestock, and other possessions. Jewish women were generally excluded from public life and were often required to cover their heads or faces or both when in the presence of men. Men were cautioned about talking too much to women. In a court of law, a woman's testimony, except relating directly to a woman's issue, was not admissible evidence. Some rabbis saw the woman's role as God's punishment of Eve visited perpetually on all generations of women.

Women were discounted or excluded from many religious observances. Men, not women, were required to attend regular synagogue worship and the feasts at the temple in Jerusalem. Women were banned from the temple altogether during menstruation and to certain areas of the temple at other times. Women did not count toward the minimum number of people necessary for public prayer. Jewish men were expected to pray daily, wearing prayer shawls and phylacteries, and to wear fringes on their garments. Women were not simply exempt from this daily ritual and from wearing these religious articles; they were prohibited from taking part. Females could not be called upon to read the scriptures in the synagogue on the Sabbath. Many rabbis believed women should not be taught the Torah.

A Jewish woman, however, did have a respected role as "a mother of Israel." Despite social regulations that often excluded her, she had a sense of worth because Judaism assigned her rights and powers denied to non-Israelite ("Gentile") men. For instance, she could move beyond the "Court of the Gentiles" in the temple and enter the "Court of Women" and thus come closer to God's presence and witness the sacrifice offerings. Unlike the Gentile, the Jewish woman was an insider who, despite her limitations, possessed a defined status within Jewish society.

To be sure, Jews honored the memory of the "mothers of Israel": Sarah, Rachel, and Rebekah. They honored the prophetesses of old, especially Miriam, the prophetess, and Deborah, judge of the people. They revered the women who had freed the people of Israel, such as Esther, and such martyrs as the mother of the Maccabees. Yet not even the brilliance of these figures can blind us to this sweeping dismissal by Flavius Josephus: "Saith the Scripture, A woman is inferior to her husband in all things." [^20]

While Jewish women certainly experienced love and respect from their fathers, mothers, brothers, sisters, husbands, sons, and daughters, Jewish traditions restricted their participation in public activity and tended to demean their worth at home as well as in society. By Jesus' time, Jewish men might already have been praying three times each day this set prayer: "Blessed art thou . . . who hast not made me a heathen [Gentile], . . . who hast not made me a woman, and . . . who hast not made me a slave." [^21] Similarly, Greek men were thankful they were "born a human being and not a beast; next, a man and not a woman; thirdly, a Greek and not a barbarian." [^22] Thus, Jews were thankful for not being Greek Gentiles, and Greeks were thankful for not being Jewish barbarians—women, however, made both gratitude lists.

Those unfamiliar with Jewish Palestinian society at the beginning of the first century after Christ will miss certain important cultural details in the four Gospels. The unwritten part of the Gospels includes what the authors presume the audience already knows, what they can read between the lines of their story. Yet this unwritten part is often crucial to our understanding. Presumably the Gospel writers expected their readers would be first-century, eastern Mediterranean peoples who shared their social values and cultural understanding.

When Latter-day Saints read stories about women in the four Gospels, such as the young Mary betrothed to Joseph, we often see her as someone who lives in our own time with our own dreams and expectations. We filter the New Testament story through our distinctively modern American eyes. We could not be further from the reality of first-century Jewish Palestine.

Mary, the Mother of Jesus

The first disciple of the mortal Messiah was his mother. Mary's discipleship began when she was betrothed to Joseph. She lived in a small village with a population of not more than two hundred people. Typically, a young girl was between twelve and twelve and a half years old when she was betrothed. Mary, therefore, was a young girl just entering womanhood and living in a small isolated village when the angel Gabriel first appeared to her. Luke records: "And the angel came in unto her, and said, Hail, thou that art highly favoured, the Lord is with thee: blessed art thou among women." Mary was "troubled at his saying," but the divine messenger reassured her, "Fear not, Mary: for thou hast found favour with God," and then explained what God required of her. Mary responded, "Behold the handmaid of the Lord; be it unto me according to thy word" (Luke 1:26-38).

Accepting her call to discipleship, Mary went to visit her cousin Elisabeth in Judea.

Elisabeth knew as soon as Mary arrived and "the babe leaped in [her] womb for joy" that Mary's child was to be the promised Messiah. The record tells us that "Elisabeth was filled with the Holy Ghost: And she spake out with a loud voice, and said, Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb" (vv. 39-45). Elisabeth, a woman, stands beside Simeon, a man and aged Saint, as an early witness to Christ's divine mission.

The young but spiritually mature Mary praises the Lord for his goodness: "My soul doth magnify the Lord . . . for, behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed. . . . He hath put down the mighty from their seats, and exalted them of low degree" (vv. 46-52). For women to witness by the Holy Ghost as Elisabeth did and proclaim the purpose of God as Mary does in these verses was unusual. God had indeed "exalted them of low degree."

Some time after Jesus' birth, as was the custom, Mary and Joseph traveled to the holy city Jerusalem with the newborn infant. Before nightfall, Mary and Joseph probably visited one of the public pools, perhaps one of the forty-eight ritual immersion pools recently found alongside the temple esplanade in Jerusalem. The next morning, Joseph and Mary with the baby Jesus would have gone to the temple, entering through the eastern gate in the southern wall and emerging into the Court of the Gentiles, where the moneychangers located their tables for business each day.

The scriptures do not provide enough detail to give us precise information to know exactly where Joseph, Mary, and the infant were in the temple when Simeon found them. The scriptures simply inform us that the Holy Spirit led him into the temple and to the young couple and the baby. Simeon was a "just and devout" man who had waited all his life for this moment. He took the baby from his mother's arms and praised God: "Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word: For mine eyes have seen thy salvation . . . ; a light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel." Mary and Joseph "marvelled" at this prophecy from a man unknown to them. He next blessed the young couple who would be rearing this child of promise and then warned Mary of future heartache: "Behold, this child is set for the fall and rising again of many in Israel; and for a sign which shall be spoken against; (Yea, a sword shall pierce through thy own soul also,) that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed" (Luke 2:25, 29-35).

Elder Jeffrey R. Holland has written about this event: "There is a profound . . . message in the one this dear old man gave to sweet and pure Mary in that first Christmas season. He was joyously happy. He had lived to see the Son of God be born. He had held the child in his very arms. . . . But his joy was not of the superficial kind. . . . His joy had something to do with 'the fall and rising again' of many in Israel, and with this child's life—or at least his death—which would be like a sword piercing through his beloved mother's soul. . . . Surely such [an ominous warning] was untimely, even unseemly, at that moment—when the Son of God was so young and tender and safe, and his mother so thrilled with his birth. . . . [But] it was appropriate and important. . . . It is the life at the other end of the manger scene that gives this moment of nativity in Bethlehem its ultimate meaning. . . . wise old Simeon understood all of this—that the birth was ultimately for the death. . . . Lying among those gifts of gold, frankincense, and myrrh were also a crown of thorns, a makeshift royal robe, and a Roman spear." [^23]

So the beginning (Jesus' birth) is inextricably connected to the end (Jesus' death). And women were prominent among the witnesses at both times. During the last week of Jesus' ministry (Jesus' last fateful hours among his disciples), women are depicted as aware of what was to come and loyal to his impending call to suffer and die as the servant spoken of in Isaiah 53—the suffering Messiah. The many women at the cross and the burial contrast markedly with some of the disciples who deserted Jesus. Certainly they were in as much danger as the men (the Romans customarily killed the family and servants of political criminals). The small group of weeping but brave women stood "afar off," not out of trepidation but because the place of execution was cordoned off by the military. With faithful women watching, Jesus died an agonizing and painful death. These female disciples of Jesus were the last to remain at the cross and the first to return to the tomb early on the morning of the glorious resurrection. They were the first to remember Jesus words' about his death and resurrection.

The Unnamed Woman of Bethany

In Mark's narrative, three disciples play a major role in the story of Jesus' final week. The first two were members of the Twelve: Peter, who denied Jesus, and Judas, who betrayed him. The third disciple, a woman unnamed by Mark, anointed Jesus with precious ointment in preparation for his coming burial (see Mark 14:3-9).

While the parts played by Peter and Judas during Jesus' final days are well known, the woman who anointed Jesus is seldom recognized as the only disciple who understood both who Jesus was and that he was to die for us. Although Peter had declared Jesus to be both Messiah and Son of God, he took Jesus aside and rebuked him for teaching that he must "suffer many things . . . and be killed" (Mark 8:31-32).

Peter, and probably all the Twelve, fundamentally misunderstood Jesus' mission. Not one could bring himself to imagine that Jesus' mission might end with suffering and death. [^24] Fear seized Peter and the rest as they journeyed toward Jerusalem. [^25]

The woman of Bethany reacted differently. She anointed Jesus' head as a king, and she also understood the anointing to be in preparation for his coming suffering and death. It should be noted, however, that even this woman (and this seems to apply to all who followed Jesus from Galilee) did not understand that Jesus would be resurrected three days after his death.

John not only provided a name—Mary—for the unnamed woman of Matthew and Mark but also added to the story of what happened (see John 12:1-8). Between the raising of Lazarus and this story, John tells about the conspiracy to kill Jesus. His enemies were determined to capture him at the upcoming feast, knowing full well that Jesus would come to Jerusalem to worship and teach. [^26]

After his triumphal entry into Jerusalem and "six days before the passover [Jesus] came to Bethany, where Lazarus was which had been dead, whom he raised from the dead. There they made him a supper; and Martha served: but Lazarus was one of them that sat at the table with him" (John 12:1-2). The King James Version of the Bible states that Jesus and Lazarus "sat at the table," but the Greek text indicates that they followed Greco-Roman custom and "reclined," or lay, on a mat while leaning on the left arm, thereby keeping the right hand free for eating the food placed on a low table. [^27] Martha served the meal, Lazarus ate with Jesus, and Mary, who was mentioned last, was again at Jesus' feet (a position she took in each of the three stories in which she appears in the Gospels). [^28]

Mary took the flask of very expensive perfume, "ointment of spikenard," and poured it over the feet of Jesus, who was reclining beside her brother on the cushions round the table (John 12:3). All of the elements of devotion and worship are present in her service—respect, affection, and tenderness. And even that was not enough; she wiped away the dust and oil from Jesus' tired and dusty feet with her hair. That was the task of the lowliest slave: the custom was for the master at the table to wipe his dirty hands on a slave's hair.

Such service would be incomprehensible to many women today—she did what no man would do—and it may even have shocked Martha and Lazarus. John emphasizes that Mary's act was an extravagant one: "a pound of ointment of spikenard, very costly" (John 12:3). John underscored the cost by the comment that the entire "house was filled with the odour" of the perfume (John 12:3). This fragrant oil, made of pure nard, is derived from the root and spike (hair stem) of the nard plant, which grows in the mountains of northern India. The extravagance of her gift—the sweet smell of which filled the house—signified the depth of Mary's love for Jesus.

The disciples, with Judas as voice, protested the apparent extravagance and waste: "Why was not this ointment sold for three hundred pence, and given to the poor?" [^29] Mark's account emphasizes the anger of the disciples: "And there were some that had indignation within themselves, and said, Why was this waste of the ointment made? For it might have been sold for more than three hundred pence, and have been given to the poor. And they murmured against her" (Mark 14:4-5; emphasis added). The word translated murmured relates to the snort of horses, so in English the sense is of persons "snorting with inward rage or indignation." [^30]

"Then said Jesus, Let her alone: against the day of my burying hath she kept this. For the poor always ye have with you; but me ye have not always" (John 12:7-8). The Joseph Smith Translation adds to the story: "Then said Jesus, Let her alone; for she hath preserved this ointment until now, that she might anoint me in token of my burial" (JST John 12:7; emphasis added). [^31]

Jesus clearly rebuked those present for assuming that their spiritual understanding was greater than Mary's, and he showed them that in this case the opposite was true. As Jesus' words to Judas suggest, the anointing anticipated Jesus' death and burial because one did not normally anoint the feet of a living person but rather the feet of the deceased as part of preparing the whole body for burial.

One aspect of the anointing story, so important in both Mark and Matthew, is missing from John's—Jesus' bold and far-reaching declaration: "Verily I say unto you, Wheresoever this gospel shall be preached throughout the whole world, this also that she hath done shall be spoken of for a memorial of her" (Mark 14:9; see also Matt. 26:13). This actually happened in the early Church: Mary is introduced earlier in John 11: "It was that Mary which anointed the Lord with ointment, and wiped his feet with her hair, whose brother Lazarus was sick" (v. 2).

Despite differences among the accounts of Mark, Luke, and John, all three Gospels reflect the same basic story: a woman anoints Jesus. The incident causes objections, which Jesus rejects by approving of the woman's action. While John speaks of the anointing of the feet, Mark and Matthew speak of the anointing of the head. [^32] Did she anoint both his head and feet? Because, in the Old Testament, prophets anointed the head of the Jewish king, the anointing of Jesus' head may be seen as the prophetic recognition of Jesus as the Anointed (Messiah in English is equivalent to the Hebrew, and Christ in English is equivalent to the Greek for "anointed"). [^33]

When Jesus asked, "Who am I?" Peter answered, "You are the anointed one" (see Matt. 16:15-16) without understanding the implications of Jesus' calling. This woman's anointing of Jesus, however, clearly recognized that Jesus' messiahship involved death, not the overthrow of Roman rule and kingly glory that many Jews anticipated.

Women: Witnesses of the Resurrection

Luke's story of Jesus' burial and resurrection follows a particular line. [^34] When the Lord's body was taken from the cross, Joseph of Arimathaea "wrapped it in linen," a common burial cloth of the period made of flax from either Egypt or Jericho (Luke 23:53). The body was then taken to a new tomb, "hewn in stone, wherein never man before was laid" (v. 53). Luke continues, "And the women also, which came with him from Galilee, followed after, and beheld the sepulchre, and how his body was laid."

The women who followed and noted how Jesus' body was laid in the tomb did so because they planned to prepare "spices and ointments" to offer their final act of devotion to Jesus by anointing his body (Luke 23:56). According to the Gospel of John, who focuses exclusively on Mary Magdalene, she, with a total disregard for Mosaic regulations, wanted to find Jesus' body herself and planned to "take him away" if necessary.

Yet, when they returned after the Sabbath, they found the tomb empty. Surely these women were perplexed as they entered the tomb and found it empty. The women's perplexity seems to have lifted when "two men . . . in shining garments" appeared and spoke to them: "Why seek ye the living among the dead? He is not here, but is risen: remember how he spake unto you when he was yet in Galilee, saying, The Son of man must be delivered into the hands of sinful men, and be crucified, and the third day rise again. And they remembered his words" (Luke 24:5-8). Nothing in the text indicates that their confusion continued. The observation, "and they remembered his words," implies that they suddenly understood Jesus' prophecy and what had transpired at the tomb.

The two phrases, "remember how he spake unto you when he was yet in Galilee" and "they remembered his words," are a key theme of the story. The women, especially Mary Magdalene, had heroines' roles as the first to recall Jesus' words when he spoke about his pending suffering and death in the divine plan and as the first to grasp their fulfillment (see Luke 9:22-23). The women now had enough light to understand, seemingly for the first time, that Jesus not only had to suffer and die but that he also rose from the dead in fulfillment of his own words. Previously, Jesus' disciples, the women included, had not understood his instructions on these points. [^35]

Luke emphasized, in contrast to Mark's account, that the women reported "all these things unto the eleven, and to all the rest" (Luke 24:9). Their testimony was clearly important to Luke and the early Church.

When the women first reported their discovery to the apostles, however, they thought "their words seemed to them as idle tales, and they believed them not" (see Luke 24:10-11). Remember that in Jewish culture women could not be witnesses. [^36] Generally a woman's testimony, along with that of a slave, was not admissible evidence in court, unless it dealt with a "woman's issue." This was "on account of the levity and boldness of their sex." [^37] Finally, two others—Peter and the beloved disciple (John)—returned with Mary Magdalene to the site. Once they examined the tomb, Peter walked away "wondering" (Luke 24:12). Both Peter and John returned to "their own home" (John 20:10), but Mary remained at the tomb, puzzled and grief-stricken at not finding Jesus' body. The world before the resurrection could not make sense of an empty tomb. The "eleven" and "all the rest" remained incredulous (Luke 24:9).

John's Gospel, differing from that of Matthew, Mark, and Luke, then relates in detail the well-known story of Mary Magdalene and the risen Christ. Take special note that after Mary's recognition of the risen Lord, Jesus exhorted her: "Go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God" (John 20:17). Mary fulfilled messianic prophecy when she heeded Jesus' words and announced to the disciples, "I have seen the Lord." [^38] Remember that the Greek word for Lord (kyrios) is the same word rendered in the Greek Old Testament (Septuagint) for YHWH (Jehovah), which is the proper name of God. [^39]

Mary Magdalene became an "apostle to the apostles." The term does not mean a member of the Twelve, of course, but rather that she is "one sent forth" to witness the good news of Christ's resurrection. [^40] Mary Magdalene was the first witness of the resurrection in two important and significant ways. She was the first person to see the resurrected Messiah, and she was the first person to witness to others what she had seen. She was in a sense the first disciple of the risen Jesus.

According to Luke, the next event is the appearance of Jesus to two disciples (Luke 24:13-35). As the two walked "to a village called Emmaus, which was from Jerusalem about three-score furlongs [about seven miles]," Jesus "drew near, and went with them." [^41] Nowhere does the text state explicitly that the two travelers are men. Again, the Jewish customs about witnesses (and possibly our own way of looking at the New Testament) obscure the fact that for Jesus, women can and do act as legitimate witnesses of these events. Therefore, we should not assume that both travelers were men. One is named and clearly male; one, unnamed and probably female. [^42] The couple, who at first failed to recognize Jesus, may have been returning home to Emmaus that day, for when they arrived they invited Jesus to have dinner with them in their home (see Luke 24:29-30).

The two travelers had the women's report and yet were leaving Jerusalem and the assembled disciples, dejected and despondent (see Luke 24:17-24). Clearly they did not understand Jesus' identity and mission. They had lost hope because of his crucifixion, despite the women's report of "a vision of angels, which said that he was alive" (v. 23). These two disciples did not believe the report because of their poor understanding of the scriptures. The Hebrew scriptures should have prepared them for Christ's suffering, death, and resurrection. In conversation as they walked, Jesus patiently talked with them: "And beginning at Moses and all the prophets, he expounded unto them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself." They still did not recognize him until he accepted their invitation "to tarry with them" at their home in Emmaus before continuing on his journey. "And it came to pass, as he sat at meat with them, he took bread, and blessed it, and brake, and gave to them. And their eyes were opened, and they knew him; and he vanished out of their sight" (vv. 27-31).

On the road, their initial sadness had given way to joy as they eagerly listened to Jesus' explanation of the scriptures. Their "eyes were opened" fully at the breaking of bread, when once again he served the meal to them as of old (vv. 31, 35). "And they said one to another, Did not our heart burn within us, while he talked with us by the way, and while he opened to us the scriptures?" (v. 32). They heard, understood, and accepted this disclosure, and at the meal they recognized Jesus. The two, formerly dejected, now became harbingers of a joyful message. "And they rose up the same hour, and returned to Jerusalem, and found the eleven gathered together" (v. 33).

The testimony of these two travelers, the latest development reported to the eleven, corroborated what the entire congregation now knew and believed. Several independent witnesses, both men and women, now emerged among the followers of Jesus.

Women and Christ

The prominence of women in the early Christian church has long been acknowledged [^43] both by early Christian writers and their opponents. [^44] When the pagan critic Celsus denigrated Christianity in the second century as a religion of women, children, and slaves, he articulated a connection between women and early Christianity that has only recently received serious attention. [^45]

According to the four Gospels, Jesus' relations with women seem to have been remarkably open, given the reserve that Jewish culture and customs in his day required. It is certain that some of these women did not conform to the socially acceptable categories of virgin daughter, respectable wife, and mother of legitimate children. Many were unmarried or widowed.

Jesus broke down barriers in the most surprising ways. He rejected social customs, especially those of first-century rabbinic Judaism. Jesus dealt with the women he met during his ministry as individuals, treating women and men alike. Each could communicate with Jesus, follow him, be companions with him, minister to him, be ministered to by him, and love him. Although Jesus (and therefore the writers of the Gospels) in no way sought to deny or diminish the distinction between men and women, he emphasized their partnership; it is therefore difficult to find differences in Jesus' approach to women and to men.

In the end, a woman's qualification for discipleship was and is the same as a man's: all must accept him as their Lord and Master. Any person who truly accepts him consequently becomes a witness of him as the source of Living Water. As we now view these women of the four Gospels, sisters at the well—thirsty and weary, burdened with care and tradition, dropping their leather buckets into the well and drawing up unto themselves refreshment and strength—the parched ground bears fruit, and they turn to us with their clay jars filled with water. They witness to us of its goodness, through their model of discipleship, joining hands with the good men with whom they served.

Remember the prayer that was recited daily by devout Jewish men: "Blessed art thou . . . who hast not made me a heathen [Gentile], . . . who hast not made me a woman, and . . . who hast not made me a slave." [^46] Paul, who had said this prayer himself from the age of twelve until he met Jesus on the road to Damascus, changes, negates this prayer in response to a culture that was hostile to women, and in the book of Galatians, writes: "For ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus. For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ. There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus" (Gal. 3:26-28).

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1919), 290. Children's Songbook (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1989), 120.
[^2] Spencer W. Kimball, "Privileges and Responsibilities of Sisters," Ensign, November 1978, 102. For a full discussion of this topic, see Jeni Broberg Holzapfel and Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, Sisters at the Well: Women and the Life and Teachings of Jesus (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1993), 10-18.
[^3] Spencer W. Kimball, "The Role of Righteous Women," Ensign, November 1979, 102. Hesiod, Theogony, lines 550-601; see Hesiod, Theogony, Works and Days, Shield, trans. Apostolos N. Athanassakis (Baltimore: John Hopkins University Press, 1983), 27-28.
[^4] Bruce R. McConkie, The Millennial Messiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1982), 59. Posidippus, Hermaphr; as cited in Eva Cantarella, Pandora's Daughters: The Role and Status of Women in Greek and Roman Antiquity (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1987), 44, 195 n19.
[^5] I understand Peter to mean "unlearned and unstable" in spiritual matters. Flavius Josephus, Against Apion 2.202; see William Whiston, trans., Josephus: Complete Works (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Kregel Publications, 1972), 632.
[^6] See JS-H 1:16-17, 33-42, 54, 72; D&C 27:12; 76:22; 110:2, 11, 13. Babylonian Talmud, Menahoth 43b; see Tractate Menahoth 43b, vol. 23, in Isidore Epstein, ed., Hebrew-English Edition of the Babylonian Talmud.
[^7] Joseph Smith, The Papers of Joseph Smith, vol. 2, ed. Dean C. Jessee (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1992). See Friday 20th (November 1835) on page 87, Saturday 21st (November 1835) on page 87, Monday 23d (November 1835) on page 88, Friday 27th (November 1835) on page 90, Friday 4th (December 1835) on page 95, Saturday 5th (December 1835) on page 95, Monday 7th (December 1835) on page 97, Tuesday morning the 8th (December 1835) on page 97, Monday 14th (December 1835) on page 105, Wednesday 23d (December 1835) on page 120, Wednesday 30th (December 1835) on page 124, etc. Attributed to Plato or Thales, as quoted in Wayne A. Meeks, "The Image of the Androgyne: Some Uses of a Symbol in Earliest Christianity," History of Religions 13 (February 1974): 167.
[^8] For instance, his sermon on Gen. 1 is a classic. See Joseph Smith, Words of Joseph Smith, comp. and ed. Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook (Orem: Grandin Book, 1994), 350-51. Jeffrey R. Holland, Christmas Comfort [pamphlet] (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1996), 3-4.
[^9] Joseph Smith, The Personal Writings of Joseph Smith, comp. and ed. Dean C. Jessee (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1984), 161. See Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, "The Hidden Messiah," in A Witness of Jesus Christ: The 1989 Sperry Symposium on the Old Testament, ed. Richard D. Draper (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1990), 80-95.
[^10] Spencer W. Kimball, "The Blessings and Responsibilities of Womanhood," Ensign, March 1976, 72. See Mark 10:32-34.
[^11] The Family: A Proclamation to the World, read by President Gordon B. Hinckley in General Relief Society Meeting, 23 September 1995, in Ensign, November 1995, 102. The Synoptic tradition speaks of the house of Simon the leper—some have suggested that Simon was the father of Lazarus, Mary, and Martha, thus eliminating the seeming contradiction on the location of the event; see note 13, below.
[^12] See Joseph Smith, The Teachings of Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1938), 35-36; see also Orson F. Whitney, "Lives of Our Leaders—the Apostles: Lorenzo Snow," Juvenile Instructor 35 (1 January 1900): 3-4. See William F. Arndt and F. Wilbur Gingrich, A Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament and Other Early Christian Literature (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1957), 55.
[^13] I distinguish between "redaction" and "redaction criticism." The scholarly world uses the latter to indicate that later authors created stories and teachings of Jesus and incorporated them into the Gospel texts. I understand redaction as the Gospel writers using historical events and teachings to teach various principles of the gospel. John 12:3; see also Luke 10:39; John 11:32.
[^14] Gerald N. Lund, "An Anti-Christ in the Book of Mormon—The Face May Be Strange, but the Voice Is Familiar," in The Book of Mormon: Alma, The Testimony of the Word, ed. Monte S. Nyman and Charles D. Tate Jr. (Provo: Religious Studies Center, 1992), 107-28. John 12:4-5; see Matt. 26:8 and Mark 14:4 for the inclusion of the other disciples in this protest. Judas is here identified as the son of Simon, which may make him the brother of Martha, Mary, and Lazarus; see note 10 above.
[^15] For a full analysis of Matthew's redaction of this parable, see GÃ¼nther Bornkamm's article "The Stilling of the Storm," in GÃ¼nther Bornkamm, Gerhard Barth, and Heinz Joachim Held, Tradition and Interpretation in Matthew (Philadelphia: Westminister, 1963), 52-57. This article is foundational for the development of redaction criticism. See Max Zerwick and Mary Grosvenor, A Grammatical Analysis of the Greek New Testament (Rome: Biblical Institute Press, 1981), 154; and William F. Arndt and F. Wilbur Gingrich, A Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, 254.
[^16] See also JST Matt. 26:9-10; JST Mark 14:8.
[^17] See John 12:3; Mark 14:3; Matt. 26:7.
[^18] See Arndt and Gingrich, A Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, 895.
[^19] See Joseph Plevnik, "The Eyewitnesses of the Risen Jesus in Luke 24," The Catholic Biblical Quarterly 49 (January 1987): 90-103.
[^20] See Luke 9:45; 18:34. Luke is careful to identify these women as companion travelers with Jesus (see Luke 8:1-3) before Jesus makes his first prediction of his death to his disciples (see Luke 9:23).
[^21] Some have seen Luke's phrase "two men," an added description of the angels, as a device that underscores the fact that the two were legitimate witnesses; see also Luke 9:30; Acts 1:10.
[^22] Josephus, Antiquities 4.219; see Whiston, trans., Josephus, 97.
[^23] Greek text of John 20:18. In Psalms we find, "I will declare thy name unto my brethren: in the midst of the congregation will I praise thee" (22:22; emphasis added).
[^24] See Gottfried Quell, "Kurios," Theological Dictionary of the New Testament, ed. Gerhard Kittel, 10 vols. (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1982), 3:1058-81, in particular 1060-62.
[^25] See "Apostle," Bible Dictionary, LDS Edition of the King James Version of the Bible, 612.
[^26] Luke 24:13, 15; a furlong, a Greek measurement still used in Roman times, was about six hundred feet, the length of the racetrack at Olympia. This clue helps us identify the location of the village from several possible sites. In all likelihood, Emmaus Colonia, situated one or two hours' walking distance from Jerusalem is the probable location; for another possible identification see "Emmaus," LDS Bible Dictionary, 665.
[^27] "And the one of them, whose name was Cleopas" (Luke 24:18) is not to be confused, as often is the case, with Cleophas of John 19:25, whose name is of Semitic origin, whereas Cleopas is well attested as a Greek name (a shortened form of Kleopatros—"illustrious father"); see Robert F. O'Toole, "Cleopas," Anchor Bible Dictionary, ed. David Noel Freedman, 6 vols. (New York: Doubleday, 1992), 1:1063-64.
[^28] See Adolf von Harnack, The Mission and Expansion of Christianity During the First Three Centuries (London: Williams and Norgate, 1908), 64-84.
[^29] Averil Cameron, "Neither Male nor Female,'" Greece and Rome 27 (April 1980): 60-68.
[^30] Origen, Contra Celsus 3:49; see A. Cleveland Coxe, ed., "Origen against Celsus," The Ante-Nicene Fathers, 10 vols. (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1989), 4:484.
