Arthur Henry King

I used to listen to my father read the scriptures to us every day before breakfast. I can still hear him reading to me the parable of the prodigal son. My father was accidently killed when I was nine years old, but I had heard him read the scriptures for three or four years and those passages are still in my mind. That was the most important part of my education.

There is no substitute for the scriptures—and by "scriptures" I mean, of course, canonized scriptures, ancient and modern, as well as writings of the prophets of the Church, which, as we know, are also scripture. Reading about the scriptures, instead of reading from them, will not do; reading "simpler" versions will not provide scriptural milk, but merely someone else's milk and water.

Nor will it do to make the center of our reading any other version of the scriptures than that which the Church recommends. The Authorized Version of the Bible (the King James Version) is the one that English speakers should primarily use (though by all means use others cautiously as aids). Joseph Smith told us that the best version he knew was the one by Luther, which is available to German speakers. The Book of Mormon is translated into a style similar to that of the Authorized Version. the Doctrine and Covenants is written in several different styles; Joseph Smith's account of his own life is in still another style; but they are all consistent with the King James tradition.

So, there is no alternative to reading the scriptures themselves, which are written in a language that becomes more and more foreign to us, not simply generation by generation, but year by year. Still, we can comfort ourselves with the thought that we as children learned language mainly by hearing it constantly about us in contexts that enabled us to understand it. Our children, hearing the scriptures day by day and absorbing them from the very beginning of their lives, will be at home with the language of the scriptures. No other way of learning to read the scriptures is as good.

So, it is our duty to read the scriptures aloud daily with our children, no matter what age they may be. If we do not, they will never learn to read the scriptures half so well by themselves. The public schools will not teach them—they cannot teach them to read even contemporary language, let alone the language of the early seventeenth century. Besides, by an American manifestation very different from that of Providence, the public schools do not teach the scriptures. When I was brought up, my father's reading the scriptures aloud at home was supplemented later by scripture lessons at school; and, as I grew into my teens, by lessons about historical background, archaeology, and so on.

All this the Church has to do for itself, and of course it does it better than the public schools could, as it is no use teaching these things without faith. And, increasingly, the leaders of the Church are telling us that this instruction must be given in the family rather than at Church meetings, although it may be supplemented by instruction at such meetings. But if this instruction outside the family were not based upon instruction inside the family, our children would not grow to love and understand the scriptures as part of their deeper life, for the profound things grow in us from the family. We impede our children in their way to eternal life if we neglect this.

But this means that we must be prepared to answer our children's questions, and that may well be the greatest incentive we shall ever have to learn to read the scriptures properly ourselves. The scriptures are so important that they must be the center of all our education. From where else, except inspiration and the patient teaching of the Lord himself, did Joseph Smith derive his first-class education? The same absorption in the scriptures enabled John Bunyan to write his Pilgrim's Progress, and John Woolman to set down his Journal. Many of us today may think ourselves educated, but unless we are versed in the scriptures, we may be certain that those of our ancestors who were versed in the scriptures were better educated than we are.

Furthermore, the scriptures are a guide by which we may judge the value of all other literature. When we have learned to read the scriptures, we have learned to read from the right point of view anything and everything else, from Shakespeare to the newspaper. "In the beginning was the Word," and the Word is from Alpha to Omega. All good words lead toward the Word of words. Bad words, bad language of all kinds, lead us away.

The ultimate choices of our lives are always between good and evil. Only in the scriptures are those choices always shown as being that way. From the scriptures we can therefore learn to judge how far other literature accords with this ultimate choice between good and evil. We shall be able to see that the greatest writers are what they are because they came nearest to the values of the scriptures. We have a way of judging good from bad in literature. The rest of the world is losing or has lost it. Our way is thus of inestimable advantage to us. But, of course, it is only of that advantage if we learn to read the scriptures themselves and apply their standards to other good literature—and to the bad literature people so often use to entertain themselves. The scriptures enable us by contrast to recognize trash. My grandmother was quite an "uneducated" woman, but she was well versed in the scriptures and knew for herself what was trash: she had no interest in sentimental or violent literature and was always telling us children not to read it.

Nor does the influence of the scriptures end there. The greatest music and the greatest art in the past have sprung from and been devoted to the values of the gospel. The standards of the scriptures that we apply to other literature, we can also apply to the other arts. We can distinguish good from bad in art, in music, and in dance (including athletics and games). To live our lives with the scriptures means to lead better lives, whether it be by the objects we put in our homes or the things we listen to, the pictures we look at or the shows we go to.

Nor does it end even there. The judgments we base on the scriptures may be carried over into the assessment of specialist writing, whether on natural science, the life sciences, medicine, the social sciences, or law. Behind all these lie certain preconceptions, which a wise scientist or scholar may use as scaffolding, always knowing that these conceptions will change. A great scientist knows that the values of natural science have changed from epoch to epoch, and now change from generation to generation, just as he knows that he works with changing observations of facts, not with facts themselves. But the moral values of the gospel endure forever.

It is in the light of all this that I ask you to look at this book. It may open up ways of thinking and feeling for you that will, if they have not already been developed, set up within yourself, within your family, and among you and your friends and brethren and sisters, a dialogue that will never end—the profound dialogue of eternal progression.

Of course, this book is not the first, nor is it the final word. There will be other books from the same authors, and, we hope, many books from other writers that will help us all, with the aid of the Holy Ghost, to have a deeper, more total feeling for scripture as we read it from Moses or hear it from the lips of our living prophet.

This book should prove most useful for parents to share with their teenagers. Chapter 12, however, is specifically for parents who want to read the scriptures to their young children. In general, by reading and understanding this book, parents will find themselves able to make the scriptures more open and available to all their children. Our surrounding culture tempts us away to pleasures that prove boring and demand to be succeeded by ever more violent pleasures, which, in their turn, also prove boring. Our principal enemy is the idea that the scriptures are boring. The main reason our children may think so is not because the scriptures are boring, but because the false values of our surrounding culture tempt us to enjoy the fleeting, the frivolous, the easy, and the vain. Rightly interpreted, the scriptures are the most interesting of all writings, because they deal with life as it really is.

Application and patience are needed to acquire everything worthwhile. A boy will spend hours getting the ball into the net, a girl in practicing her dance steps. Such application and patience are fundamental to education. Let us try to give our children (and ourselves) what so-called education may have failed to give them (or us): the power to concentrate on a good thing—in this case reading the scriptures, our guide to eternal life.
