Sandra Packard, Dennis Packard, Feasting upon the Word ( 1981)

1

Some people love the scriptures. Anciently, Nephi declared, "My soul delighteth in the scriptures." (2

Nephi 4:15.) Today, Howard W. Hunter of the Council of the Twelve tells us that studying the scriptures "is the most profitable of all study in which we could engage." (Ensign, Nov. 1979, p. 64.) Jeffrey R. Holland, President of Brigham Young University, writes, "Surely the best of the 'best books' are the scriptures." (Ensign, Sept. 1976, p. 7.)

On the other hand, a dedicated Sunday School inservice teacher with a master's degree asks in a candid moment, "Why aren't the scriptures better written? They are so hard to understand." A stake leader warns her teachers, "You will have to use the scriptures for some of the lessons in the manual. There is no other way." A devoted father wonders, "Why should I read the scriptures if I live and teach the gospel principles?" Many good Latter-day Saints are comfortable in that same opinion. They prefer a one-sentence message on forgiveness to reading the parable of the prodigal son.

A sacrament meeting speaker, apparently concerned with putting people to sleep, apologizes for reading a verse of scripture. A yawn contagiously spreads throughout the tabernacle as a speaker in general priesthood meeting begins to read a passage from the Book of Mormon. A bishop in desperation urges his members at least to hold the scriptures once a day and see if perhaps the book will open and they will find themselves reading.

Obviously, active and faithful members of the Church do not always love the scriptures. We've asked ourselves why.

The Savior, after a lengthy discourse, told the Nephites they needed time to ponder and pray about his word: "I perceive that ye are weak, that ye cannot understand all my words which I am commanded of the Father to speak unto you at this time. Therefore, go ye unto your homes, and ponder upon the things

which I have said, and ask of the Father, in my name, that ye may understand." (3 Nephi 17:2-3.) He has repeated this counsel in our day: "My friends, I leave these sayings with you to ponder in your hearts, with this commandment which I give unto you, that ye shall call upon me while I am near—Draw near unto me and I will draw near unto you; seek me diligently and ye shall find me; ask, and ye shall receive; knock,

and it shall be opened unto you." (D&C 88:62-63.) So, when we don't enjoy the scriptures, when we don't understand and appreciate them, the Lord's counsel is to ponder and pray about them. What does it mean to ponder? It means "to weigh in the mind; to view with deliberation; to examine carefully; to consider attentively."

The Lord's advice is good, but perhaps we worry what will become of us if we take it seriously. For one thing, most of us are unaccustomed to pondering: "I hardly ever have to read anything with that much attention. It sounds like a lot of hard work." Perhaps we are also preoccupied with the cares and ways of the world: "I read the scriptures, but I can't really think about them—too many problems I've had to worry about. Besides, if I really start trying to understand the scriptures, I might start thinking I need to make changes in my life, and I am doing the best I can for now." Or maybe we don't trust ourselves to probe very deeply: "I'll start asking silly questions and feel stupid—I might even start asking weird questions that will just get me confused and make me think the scriptures can't hold up, and then I might become a heretic and lose my testimony." Or perhaps we haven't yet realized that we can discover something new in the scriptures: "I really don't know how the Lord let it happen, but the scriptures are usually boring—the same old thing over and over again—or else obscure. Maybe the Lord intended the boring parts for those who have to be told over and over, and the perplexing parts for the scriptorians, who like that sort of thing." But whatever the cause, the result of not thoughtfully, prayerfully considering the scriptures as we read them is the same: we endure them when we could delight in them. But why, we might ask, do the scriptures have to be pondered to be appreciated? After all, we don't need to ponder the newspaper. We understand it at first reading. What makes the scriptures different?

Perhaps an analogy will help. The scriptures seem to us like a symphony. The problem with a symphony, if it can be called a problem, is that there is so much going on at the same time that an inexperienced listener feels bewildered, not knowing what to listen for nor how to connect all the parts. But the music lover knows what to listen for. He will pick out a theme carried by the string section, compare it to a variation of that theme by the oboes, and hear the composer being playful or reflective or joyful. In short, the experienced listener, unlike the novice, hears and feels the effects of the details that give the symphony its power and impact.

The ability to notice and interpret details often distinguishes an expert from a layman. When an architect looks at a cathedral, a bridge, or a house, he sees more than most of us do, and not because he has better eyesight. What he sees is there for all to see. Rather, he knows what things to look for and he takes time to look for them. Likewise, a person who appreciates a painting looks at it differently than one who doesn't. His eyes move differently, stopping at different places, connecting new points, tracing previously unnoticed patterns. When most of us listen to someone speaking, we listen for the gist of his message. But when a man of discernment listens to someone, he notices the tone of voice, the expression on the face, and the choice of words, and he sees the man's soul. Brigham Young was such a man. Hugh Nibley writes: "A big black leather chair stood in Brigham Young's office by the Lion House; it faced the window on the opposite wall and the President's desk in the middle of the room. First-time visitors to the office were invited to sit on that chair, facing the strong light of day and the calm blue eyes of Brother Brigham, who sat there at his desk, his back to the window, quietly waiting for his guest to say something. After all, the man had come to see him, and it was only right to let him state his business: President Young, according to Grandfather [Charles W. Nibley], would never say a word for the first three minutes. And at the end of those first three minutes he always knew exactly the sort of man he was dealing with, and the nature—greedy, benign, or sinister—of his business. "And he never (here Grandpa smote the arm of his chair) had to change his mind!"—his psychoanalytical techniques, black leather couch and all, were deadly accurate . . . Brigham Young used to say that no man, if allowed to speak, could possibly avoid revealing his true character." (BYU Studies, Autumn, 1970, p. 61.)

Like symphonic music, cathedrals, paintings, and our own speech, the scriptures are rich with details that pondering helps us discover and appreciate. And it is precisely the richness of the scriptures, the intricately woven truths they contain, that makes them enduring, that makes us want to go back to them again and again. They aren't like most popular books or songs whose total content is exhausted in one quick reading or hearing. The scriptures are to feast upon, whenever we return to them, time after time.

What does one do, then, who wants to love the scriptures more? He ponders the scriptures, asking questions that help him see and understand the details of what he is reading. He is full of questions, good, sincere questions he asks himself, questions he asks others, questions he takes to the Lord in prayer. If he reads a verse that leaves him perplexed or bored, he doesn't put it aside or force himself to read on. He stops and ponders. If he isn't learning anything, he wonders what he has missed. If there is repetition, he looks for the reasons for the repetition. If there seems to be no connection between two verses, he tries to discover how the verses relate to each other. And if he is teaching a class and gets no response to a scripture, he doesn't proceed to new material. He discusses with the class the details of the passage.

In the remainder of this chapter, we ponder some passages of scripture, exploring details. First, we consider setting. We look at two passages and pose questions about their setting or context. Then we go on to other important and perhaps less familiar details in the scriptures, posing more questions in other areas besides setting.

We suggest you try to answer the questions before reading our answers. That way, instead of merely learning more of what we think, you'll learn more of what you think—more about pondering. Remember, the comments we make are simply our response to the scriptures, given our understanding, experience, and study. They aren't definitive in any way, doctrinally or otherwise. Your response is what's important for you, and your insights may change and grow each time you reread a passage of scripture.

The best questions to ask may vary from one verse of scripture to another. So, we end this chapter with a list of the study questions in various areas we've found most useful. (Note: We have added italics to many of the quotations in this book for emphasis. "Teachings" refers to Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, selected by Joseph Fielding Smith [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1938].)

Setting

The setting of a passage of scripture helps us better understand the passage. It might include the geography of the area, the customs of the people, or the past behavior of the individuals involved. Frequently, key aspects of the setting are found in the scriptures themselves. And it is often helpful to look further in history or reference books. Of course, to know what circumstances are relevant, we need to know something of the passage itself. The two work together: the more we understand the passage, the more we know what in the setting is relevant; and the more we know the relevant setting, the more we understand the passage. Following are some examples of trying to understand the setting of scriptural passages:

Nephi wrote a passage of scripture similar to the psalms of David; it is often called the Psalm of Nephi. (2

Nephi 4:17-35.) Nephi begins the psalm, "O wretched man that I am! Yea, my heart sorroweth because of my flesh; my soul grieveth because of mine iniquities." Question: Why is Nephi so disturbed?

Here is what we've found. Just before the psalm, Lehi dies and the older brothers become angry with Nephi. Just after the psalm, the family separates. Nephi must have wanted to keep the family together, for he had seen in vision what separation would mean—wars and contentions and ultimately the annihilation

of his people. (1 Nephi 12:1-3, 19.) But without Lehi, trying to keep the family united must have been so frustrating that Nephi calls himself "wretched." Before the psalm ends, however, Nephi has turned to the Lord and found peace, setting the example for us: we too can find peace in the Lord.

The story of David and Bathsheba marks a terrible transition in the life of David. (2 Samuel 11-12.) What

led to David's fall? (Hint: See verse 1 of chapter 11.)

Verse 1 says, "And it came to pass, after the year was expired, at the time when kings go forth to battle, that David sent Joab, and his servants with him, and all Israel; and they destroyed the children of Ammon, and besieged Rabbah. But David tarried still at Jerusalem." So, instead of leading his armies in battle, as other kings would have, David tarries at Jerusalem. The writer seems to be tactfully saying that King David's irresponsibility as commander of his armies led, in part, to his immoral behavior. We might have missed this connection between irresponsibility and immorality if we hadn't asked about the setting.

Meaning of Words and Phrases

Understanding the plain sense of a passage of scripture is obviously important. Dictionaries, concordances, and other translations of the Bible can help us understand the meanings of unfamiliar words and phrases in the scriptures. Here are some examples:

What is the meaning of the word "betimes" in the scripture that begins, "Reproving betimes with

sharpness, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost . . ."? (D&C 121:43.)

For this question, a dictionary is the most helpful reference book. According to the dictionary, "betimes" doesn't mean "at times," as is commonly supposed; it means "early, speedily, in due time, before it is too late." So, if we let our children's misbehavior pile up without saying anything and then end up exploding, we've done wrong; we've waited too long. Solomon wrote, "He that loveth [his son] chasteneth him

betimes." (Proverbs 13:24.) When Jesus asked John the Baptist to baptize him, he justified his request by explaining, ". . . for thus it

becometh us to fulfil all righteousness." (Matthew 3:15.) Wasn't Christ already righteous?

A dictionary will not help us with this question. A concordance, however, tells us that the phrase, "to fulfil

all righteousness," occurs also in 2 Nephi 31:5-7. In this passage, Nephi asks and answers our very question. Baptism is an outward witness of our willingness to be obedient in keeping the commandments. Christ, who was already righteous, still needed to give witness of his willingness to be obedient, thus showing that we, who are not so righteous, must do likewise. This is just one example of other scripture clarifying the meaning of a phrase from a biblical passage.

Matthew, describing John's baptism of Jesus, writes, "And Jesus, when he was baptized, went up straightway out of the water: and, lo, the heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God

descending like a dove, and lighting upon him." (Matthew 3:16.) Do the pronouns he, him, he, him, refer to

John or to Jesus? (Hint: See John 1:32-34.)

John's account illuminates Matthew's. It seems that the first and last of these pronouns refer to Jesus, who was baptized and on whom the Spirit descended, while the middle two refer to John, who witnessed the heavens opening and the Spirit descending on Christ. Pronouns are used frequently in the scriptures and can be confusing if we don't determine to whom or what they refer.

In the Word of Wisdom, the Lord says, "All grain is good for the food of man; as also the fruit of the vine;

that which yieldeth fruit, whether in the ground or above the ground." (D&C 89:16.) What does "fruit" mean in this passage, since fruit doesn't grow under the ground?

In the usual sense of the word fruit, there are no fruits under the ground. Hence, the Lord must be using fruit in the broader sense of produce, which includes vegetables. In the same way, when Christ

says, "Ye shall know them by their fruits" (Matthew 7:16), he means "by what they produce."

What did Jesus mean when he told the woman of Samaria, "Whosoever drinketh of this water shall thirst again: But whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst; but the water that I shall

give him shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life"? (John 4:13-14.)

Jesus was speaking of spiritual things in terms his listener would understand: as water is to the thirsty, so Christ is to man a source of life; but unlike the life that water gives, the life that Christ gives is enduring.

The scriptures are rich with figurative language that helps us understand the things of the Spirit through familiar things like rocks, bread, water, birth, death, and marriage. And as we come to comprehend spiritual things through familiar ones, we sense much of the beauty and power of the scriptures.

Speaker's Attitude

When someone speaks or writes for any length of time, he reveals his attitude toward his subject, his listeners, and himself. This is particularly true of speakers and writers in the scriptures, where the attitude or spirit conveyed is especially important.

What was Pilate's attitude towards Christ and the truth when he said to Jesus, "What is truth?" (John

18:38.)

We don't believe Pilate was sincerely asking about the truth. He seems cynical about anyone, including Christ, ever coming to know what truth is. Try asking Pilate's question cynically.

What was the attitude of the Lord when he said of the Saints' enemies, "Let them bring forth their strong

reasons against the Lord"? (D&C 71:8.) Did he really think they had strong reasons against him?

The Lord, it seems, was being ironic. By appearing to agree that they had "strong reasons," he was in effect saying how foolish it is to argue with him. Try saying this line ironically.

Isaiah speaks of Lucifer's fall from heaven, saying that Lucifer thought in his heart, "I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God: I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in

the sides of the north: I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like the most High." (Isaiah

14:13-14.) What is Lucifer's attitude here?

These words clearly show Lucifer's extreme pride. Five times he says, "I will," and ends up insisting he will be like God. Try saying Lucifer's words boastfully, as he might have.

When we study the attitudes of the speakers in the scriptures, we learn what they feel and how their language shows their feelings. As a result, we also learn to listen to each other more closely, to discern and evaluate more accurately the attitudes we all reveal, every day, in the way we use language.

Scriptural Comparisons

Many things in the scriptures can be compared—individuals, attitudes, events, reactions. When we make comparisons, we look for similarities and differences. In fact, we look for the similarities in light of the differences, and the differences in light of the similarities—both are instructive. Frequently in the scriptures, two comparable items—two things similar in important ways and different in other important ways—are placed side by side so we can better understand both of them. Often it also helps our understanding to compare events or individuals in the scriptures to those we are familiar with outside the scriptures.

In recounting the events preceding the First Vision, Joseph Smith describes both his reaction to the clergy

(Joseph Smith—History 1:8-9) and his reaction to the passage in James that begins, "If any of you lack

wisdom . . ." (Joseph Smith—History 1:12). How do these two experiences compare?

Joseph's experience with the clergy left him feeling confused and disturbed (verses 8 and 9); on the other

hand, the passage in James came with great power and force into every feeling of his heart (verse 12). The difference between these two experiences must have deeply affected Joseph. Having tasted the bitter, he could recognize and prize the sweet when he received it. This is how we all learn—by seeing and feeling contrasts.

When Adam and Eve are asked by the Lord if they've partaken of the forbidden fruit, they don't say simply, "We did." Instead, Adam says, "The woman thou gavest me, and commandest that she should remain with me, she gave me of the fruit of the tree and I did eat." Eve says, "The serpent beguiled me,

and I did eat." (Moses 4:18-19.) How are their answers similar?

Though Adam and Eve both admit they've eaten the forbidden fruit, they both want to place responsibility elsewhere, Adam on Eve, and Eve on the serpent. Today, we still look for "extenuating circumstances" when we feel guilty. When the scriptures describe two people in the same situation or the same person in two similar situations, comparing their behavior is often enlightening.

When Joseph Smith recalls his decision to ask God which of all the churches was right, he uses the words

"venture" and "attempt." (Joseph Smith—History 1:13-14.) Do these words remind you of any passage of scripture with similar words?

The words "venture" and "attempt" remind us of the word "experiment," which occurs in Alma's sermon on

faith: "Awake and arouse your faculties, even to an experiment upon my words." (Alma 32:27.) The Joseph Smith story is an example of faith exercised the way Alma said it should be. Joseph, having felt the words of James begin to enlarge his soul and enlighten his understanding, experimented upon the words by doing as James directed: asking God.

Implied Messages

The scriptures imply much more than they actually state. Hence, the more we learn to read between the lines, the more we'll learn from them.

In Doctrine and Covenants 20:5-6, the Lord says of Joseph Smith, "After it was truly manifested unto this first elder that he had received a remission of his sins, he was entangled again in the vanities of the world; But after repenting, and humbling himself sincerely, through faith, God ministered unto him by an holy angel, whose countenance was as lightning, and whose garments were pure and white above all other whiteness." What do these verses imply about the First Vision?

The angel with white garments must have been Moroni. (Compare Joseph's description of Moroni

in Joseph Smith—History 1:32.) So, before Moroni's visit, presumably at the First Vision, Joseph was told

that his sins were forgiven him. (Compare D&C 29:3.) This fact isn't recorded in the Pearl of Great Price account of the First Vision, though it is in other accounts. (See Milton V. Backman, Jr., Joseph Smith's First Vision [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1971].)

After the Lord sends down fire to consume Elijah's offering on Mount Carmel, and then wind and a great rain to end the drought that Elijah had earlier decreed on Israel, Elijah meets the Lord on Mount Horeb: "And, behold, the Lord passed by, and a great and strong wind rent the mountains, and brake in pieces the rocks before the Lord; but the Lord was not in the wind: and after the wind an earthquake; but the Lord was not in the earthquake: And after the earthquake a fire; but the Lord was not in the fire: and after the

fire a still small voice. And it was so, when Elijah heard it, that he wrapped his face in his mantle." (1 Kings

19:11-13.) What do you think all this implies about how the Lord deals with his children?

Those who are hardhearted, like the Israelites during Elijah's ministry, seem only to know the Lord when he speaks with the voice of wind and earthquake and fire. But to the righteous, like Elijah, the Lord speaks in a still small voice, apparently the way he prefers to speak.

What Is or Is Not Included

Frequently we expect to find something in a passage of scripture that isn't there. Or, we are surprised to find something there we hadn't expected. Whenever this happens, we should ask why that particular part was or wasn't included in the scriptures.

While journeying in the wilderness, Lehi dreams about a dark and dreary wilderness and a tree of life.

Nephi records this dream and Lehi's ensuing concern for his children in 1 Nephi 8, beginning with verse 2. But in verse 1 of the same chapter he records, "And it came to pass that we had gathered together all manner of seeds of every kind, both of grain of every kind, and also of the seeds of fruit of every kind." Why is the fact of the seed-gathering recorded here? It doesn't seem to have anything to do with Lehi's dream, or does it?

The gathering "of seeds of fruit of every kind" prepares our minds for the central symbol of Lehi's dream:

the fruit of the tree of life, a fruit "desirable above all other fruit" (verse 12); the "seeds" anticipate Lehi's

concern for his own "seed" (verse 3); and the repetition of "every kind" foreshadows the many kinds of people and paths in the dream. The gathering of the seeds also suggests that they were ready for a long journey that would take years, and that this was therefore the right time for Lehi to receive his historic vision.

According to Matthew, Christ said to his disciples, "Whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause

shall be in danger of the judgment." (Matthew 5:22.) But in the Book of Mormon, Christ tells the Nephites,

"Whosoever is angry with his brother shall be in danger of his judgment." (3 Nephi 12:22.) Why isn't the phrase "without a cause" in the Book of Mormon account?

First, we might ask ourselves what it means to be "in danger of the judgment." Other translations of this phrase are: "brought to judgment" (New English Bible) and "will answer for it before the court"(Jerusalem Bible). So it appears that an angry person isn't necessarily a sinful one—only that he had better be able to justify his anger. Christ seems to be saying, "If you are angry, watch out!" We know that the Lord himself becomes angry on occasion, but godly anger, like godly sorrow, must be quite different from worldly

anger, which, like worldly sorrow, works death, not repentance. (See 2 Corinthians 7:10.) And most human anger seems to us worldly, not godly. The phrase "without a cause" thus seems unnecessary. If you do have a just cause, and your answer "holds up in court," you won't be condemned. But if you don't, then you will be condemned. Too, it seems that the phrase "without a cause" would too easily allow anyone to excuse his anger: after all, who is ever angry without some kind of cause? TheJerusalem Bible translates the verse: "Anyone who is angry with his brother will answer for it before the court." This translation corroborates the Book of Mormon verse.

Organization

The scriptures aren't organized like a treatise, but this doesn't mean they aren't organized. Their organization is subtler and far richer than that of most things we are accustomed to reading. We need to look closely within and between verses at how things are ordered and how they relate to each other. Then the scriptures will have a more unified, powerful effect upon us.

The second chapter of 1 Nephi begins, "For behold, it came to pass that the Lord spake unto my father, yea, even in a dream . . ." In that dream, Lehi was warned to flee from Jerusalem and the Jews who sought his life. Why does Nephi begin the verse with "For behold"? What relationship is he implying between the material that goes before it and the material that comes after it?

At the end of the first chapter, we read, "I, Nephi, will show unto you that the tender mercies of the Lord are over all those whom he hath chosen, because of their faith, to make them mighty even unto the power of deliverance." Nephi then proceeds in the second chapter to do just that, showing how the Lord's mercy in warning Lehi made Lehi "mighty even unto the power of deliverance." So, Nephi wasn't using the words "For behold" out of mere custom or habit, but as a signal to the reader that he was about to explain how he knew the Lord supports those who place their trust in him. Connecting words like "for," "but," and "thus" imply relationships of explanation or contrast between passages. It's easy to miss these relationships, if we don't, as a matter of habit, ask ourselves why those particular connecting words are used.

What is the effect of having to wait until the very end of the following verse to find out what is going to happen? "And thus commandeth the Father that I should say unto you: At that day when the Gentiles shall sin against my gospel, and shall be lifted up in the pride of their hearts above all nations, and above all the people of the whole earth, and shall be filled with all manner of lyings, and of deceits, and of mischiefs, and all manner of hypocrisy, and murders, and priestcrafts, and whoredoms, and of secret abominations; and if they shall do all those things, and shall reject the fulness of my gospel, behold, saith

the Father, I will bring the fulness of my gospel from among them." (3 Nephi 16:10.)

Putting so much material at the beginning suspends the final clause, making us wait for it, thus emphasizing it by delaying it.

Repetition of Ideas, Words, and Sounds

A word, an idea, or a sound makes a more lasting impression when repeated. Little children delight in the repetition they hear in their favorite stories, for example, Little Red Riding Hood saying, "Oh, grandmother, what big eyes (ears, teeth) you have!" In the scriptures, repetition is an art. And when we become sensitive to it, we, like our children, will delight in it.

What phrases repeat the same ideas in the following instructions from the Lord to Martin Harris? "Therefore I command you to repent—repent, lest I smite you by the rod of my mouth, and by my wrath, and by my anger, and your sufferings be sore—how sore you know not, how exquisite you know not, yea,

how hard to bear you know not." (D&C 19:15.)

The phrases "by my wrath" and "by my anger," and "by the rod of my mouth" repeat the same idea, as do the three phrases "how sore you know not," "how exquisite you know not," and "how hard to bear you know not." This warning, after we hear it, is not easily forgotten; the drumming continues in our ears. Paul wrote that scripture is "profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness."

(2 Timothy 3:16.) Repetition helps to powerfully convey that doctrine, reproof, and instruction.

What words are repeated in James 1:6, which reads, "But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering. For he that wavereth is like a wave of the sea driven with the wind and tossed"?

"Wavering," "wavereth," and "wave" are all variations of the same root word.

How does this repetition make you feel?

These variations of the word "wave" create a feeling of instability and lack of direction—the wavering we avoid if we "ask in faith."

Quickly read the first twenty-two verses of Doctrine and Covenants 19, a section addressed to Martin Harris, and identify the words most frequently repeated.

The words repent, suffer, and punishment are repeated over twenty times. Try finding them.

What is the effect of this repetition?

It is sobering, to say the least. After hearing these words repeated again and again, Martin was probably more willing to listen to the Lord. Does the repetition have the same effect on you?

After warning Martin Harris in the first half of Doctrine and Covenants 19, the Lord entreats him in verse

23, "Learn of me, and listen to my words; walk in the meekness of my Spirit, and you shall have peace in me." What repeated sounds do you notice in this verse, and what is their effect?

We notice these sounds: l (learn, learn), m (me, my, meekness, my, me) and s (listen, meekness, Spirit, peace). These sounds bind the verse together and help convey the peaceful compassion of the Lord as he beckons to Martin and to us. Even young children who don't yet read can hear sounds like these and tell how the passage makes them feel. Now, with an awareness of the sounds, try rereading this verse aloud: "Learn of me, and listen to my words; walk in the meekness of my Spirit, and you shall have peace in me."

What sounds stand out in the following passage from Nephi's vision of the last days, and what is the effect? "And I also saw gold, and silver, and silks, and scarlets, and fine-twined linen, and all manner of

precious clothing; and I saw many harlots." (1 Nephi 13:7.)

We hear the l and s sounds. Can you pick them out? Notice how these sounds create in this verse a different effect than in the previous verse. Sounds support messages, and here the message is different. The repeated sounds in this verse build up to the last word, "harlots," emphasizing the wealth and depravity of the great and abominable church. Note how the rhyming word "scarlets" also reinforces "harlots."

What sounds are repeated in Isaiah 13:8, which reads, "And they shall be afraid: pangs and sorrows shall take hold of them; they shall be in pain as a woman that travaileth: they shall be amazed one at another; their faces shall be as flames"?

The long a sound is repeated in they, afraid, take, they, pain, travaileth, they, amazed, faces, and flames. The result: an ailing, moaning sound conveying the despair of those described by Isaiah. Throughout Isaiah, sounds help communicate the message. But, you might point out, we are reading a translation, and the sounds in the original were probably different. True, but depending on the quality of the translation, the overall message and effect should be similar. Try rereading this verse, with an awareness of the repeated sound.

Emphasis

Because the spoken word is richer than the written word, we better understand and appreciate the scriptures when we read them aloud, even in individual study. A major advantage of the spoken word is emphasis. That is, when we emphasize certain words as we read aloud, we better express the meaning and power of the scriptures.

Young Joseph Smith was deeply affected when he read the scripture from James which begins, "If any of

you lack wisdom, let him ask of God . . ." (James 1:5.) Read aloud Joseph Smith—History 1:12, emphasizing those words you think Joseph would emphasize if he were telling you the story.

We read the verse emphasizing the words we've italicized: "Never did any passage of scripture come with more power to the heart of man than this did at this time to mine. It seemed to enter with great force into every feeling of my heart. I reflected on it again and again, knowing that if any person needed wisdom from God, I did; for how to act I did not know, and unless I could get more wisdom than I then had, I would never know; for the teachers of religion of the different sects understood the same passages of scriptures so differently as to destroy all confidence in settling the question by an appeal to the Bible."

When this verse is read with understanding, with key words emphasized, the powerful effect that James

1:5 had on Joseph is easy to see. But when the verse is read flatly, without emphasis or understanding, we adjust our position on the chair, look at the clock, and proceed to another verse. When we read with understanding, without having to work at it or be dramatic, the emphasis comes out right. Proper emphasis is particularly important for children, who will understand or fail to understand a passage of scripture simply by how we read it.

Should the word "all" or the word "faith" be emphasized in the following verse from the Doctrine and

Covenants? "And as all have not faith, seek ye diligently and teach one another words of wisdom." (D&C

88:118.)

If the word "faith" is emphasized, the verse says that diligently seeking and teaching one another words of wisdom is the next best thing to having faith. But if "all" is emphasized, it says that diligently seeking and teaching one another words of wisdom is a way to help everyone gain faith. Changing the emphasis changes the meaning. Perhaps only one of these meanings is intended, perhaps both are.

After her husband's death, Ruth was encouraged by Naomi, her mother-in-law, to return home to her own

people. Read aloud Ruth's beautiful response (Ruth 1:16-17), emphasizing the words you think should be emphasized.

The passage could be read with emphasis as follows: "And Ruth said, Intreat me not to leave thee, or to return from following after thee: for whither thou goest, I will go; and where thou lodgest, I will lodge:thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God: Where thou diest, will I die, and there will I be buried: the Lord do so to me, and more also, if ought but death part thee and me." Emphasis in this passage carries the message, helping us feel the tremendous love and faith of this convert and ancestress of Christ.

Phrasing Pausing in the right places as we read aloud is one of the best and simplest ways of making the scriptures more understandable and interesting. Most important is where to take a full pause and catch a breath. As a general rule, take breaths at all punctuation marks except commas—at all periods, dashes, colons, semi-colons, exclamation marks, and question marks.

Read aloud the following passage and notice what is conveyed by taking breaths where marked: "Therefore, get ye straightway unto my land; (breath) break down the walls of mine enemies; (breath) throw down their tower, and scatter their watchmen. (breath) And inasmuch as they gather together against you, avenge me of mine enemies, that by and by I may come with the residue of mine house and possess the land. (breath) And the servant said unto his lord: (breath) When shall these things be? (breath) And he said unto his servant: (breath) When I will; (breath) Go ye straightway, and do

all things whatsoever I have commanded you (breath)." (D&C 101:57-60.)

Read this way, the Lord's instructions in the first sentence are emphatic. And when the Lord says "When I will," we hear him pointedly telling his servant to leave the Lord's coming up to the Lord and to do as commanded until then.

What is conveyed in the following passage by taking breaths according to the punctuation? "For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given: (breath) and the government shall be upon his shoulder:(breath) and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counseller, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of

Peace (breath)." (Isaiah 9:6.)

The last phrase conveys a fulness, an abundance, a sense of majesty.

Conclusion

President Kimball writes, "I am convinced that each of us, at some time in our lives, must discover the scriptures for ourselves." (Ensign, Sept. 1976, p. 4.) For us, the discovery of the scriptures has come through learning to ponder. We've found that when we ponder more, we learn more. We've made it a practice when teaching a family home evening lesson, an MIA class, or a priesthood or Sunday School class, to select a passage of scripture, prepare some questions like those in this chapter, and then with our family or class read the passage aloud, a portion at a time, and ponder what we read. It's simple. And the result is a closing prayer in which it is said, "We thank thee for the scriptures thou hast given us."

Study Questions for the Scriptures

Setting

Meaning of Words and Phrases

Speaker's Attitude

Scriptural Comparisons

banners" (D&C 5:14), rather than "powerful as an army with banners"?

Implied Messages 1. Does the passage imply something it doesn't directly say? Was the speaker or writer aware of the implication? If so, why did he say it indirectly?

example, when Sherem the anti-Christ says that no man can tell of things to come (Jacob 7:7) and then

that he knows there will never be a Christ (verse 9), what do we learn about his state of mind?

What Is or Is Not Included

Organization

to concrete (such as D&C 93, in which relevant doctrine is presented before specific instructions), or

question to answer (such as D&C 121, where Joseph's petition to the Lord is recorded before the Lord's answer)?

Repetition of Ideas, Words, and Sounds

Emphasis

Phrasing
