Sandra Packard, Dennis Packard, Feasting upon the Word ( 1981)

2

"The greatest temporal and spiritual blessings which always come from faithfulness and concerted effort, never attended individual exertion or enterprise." That is what the prophet Joseph Smith said. (Teachings, p. 183.) We believe it is true of scripture study. Put simplistically, two heads are better than one.

One way to learn how to ponder the scriptures, one of the best ways and in the end perhaps the only way, is by simply reading and discussing the scriptures together as a group or a family. In a family, the little children will learn from the older ones and from their parents. The older children and the parents will learn from each other and, if they are ready for it, from the little children. We think of a discussion brought on by a little girl. She was told how Heavenly Father saved baby Jesus from Herod's swords by warning his parents to flee. Her question, asked in all innocence, was, "Didn't Heavenly Father love the other babies, too?" It may take an adult to answer that question or even to attempt an answer, but it takes the simplicity of a child to ask it.

Thanks to a delightful piece written by Jeffrey R. Holland, president of Brigham Young University, we can look in on a father and his daughter discussing the Book of Mormon together. As you might expect from the last chapter, questions guide the discussion. While you read "Daddy, Donna and Nephi," list those questions. Most often they are followed by question marks. But sometimes they aren't, as when Daddy says, "And maybe there's another reason for having the Book of Mormon begin like this." The question he is asking is, of course, "Why does the Book of Mormon begin the way it does?" You might want to make two lists, one for the questions Daddy asks and one for those Donna asks, ignoring the questions listed in the right-hand margin—our list of all the questions—until you've finished.

An Excerpt from "Daddy, Donna and Nephi" by Jeffrey R. Holland (Ensign, Sept. 1976, pp. 8-10)

Let's take the first chapter

of the first book of Nephi.

This is probably the most

familiar material in the book

to most of us; and yet if we

are not alert, we will miss

much of its meaning, for it

was very carefully written

and must be read that way.

Let's assume that a father

is helping his twelve-year-

old daughter get started in

this first chapter. She is a

delightful, fun-loving girl

who has tried reading the

Book of Mormon a few times

but hasn't been able to get

too interested. We might

overhear a conversation

something like this:

Dad: O.K., sweetheart, let's

read the first chapter of the

first book of Nephi. It's only

twenty verses long, less than

two pages of print. Think about

it as you read. Ask yourself

questions.

Donna: What kind of

questions?

Dad: Oh, questions like Why should this be the first

"Why should this be the first chapter of the book?
