familiar to you? similar to?

Donna: I don't believe

so.

Dad: Think about it.

Donna: Well, it does sort of sound like Joseph

Smith's experience. Hey! It

sounds a lot like Joseph

Smith's experience. That's

neat. Why is that Daddy? Why are Joseph's and Lehi's

Dad: Terrific comments! experiences so similar?

It seems to me one

possible answer to your

question is that all prophets

usually have some very

similar experiences. In any

case one thing we know they

have in common is receiving

revelation from the Lord.

Joseph Smith once said that

revelation is the rock on

which the Church of Jesus

Christ will always be built

and there would never be

any salvation without it. I

think we're going to find,

Donna, that this whole book

will be one long revelation

about revelation. And Jesus

is going to be at the center of

it all. These first 20 verses

tell an awfully lot about what

is to follow. You can't do

much better than that in an

opening chapter.

And maybe there's Why does the Book of Mormon

another reason for having begin with the story of

the Book of Mormon begin Lehi?

like this. Maybe it helps in

its own way to teach that if

we accept Lehi and the Book

of Mormon, we surely have

to accept Joseph Smith as a

prophet of God. On the

other hand, when we accept

Joseph Smith as a prophet,

we must accept and faithfully live by the teachings

of this book which he helped

bring forth.

In a way, Donna, this

record is not only the

testimony of Nephi and

Alma and Mormon and

Moroni, but it is also the testimony of Joseph Smith

and Brigham Young and

Harold B. Lee and Spencer

W. Kimball. Maybe that's

why the Church wasn't even

organized until the Book of

Mormon was completely

translated and published.

The Prophet Joseph Smith

once called it "the keystone

of our religion," and I think

most of us do not yet understand

how essential the Book

of Mormon was to

everything that would happen

after Moroni handed

those plates over to the

seventeen-year-old Prophet.

When I think of what the

Church has become since

Joseph's first vision and the

delivery of this book I want

to shout with Lehi in verse

14: "Great and marvelous

are thy works, O Lord God

Almighty!" Donna, I love

this book with all my heart

and I know it's the word of

God.

Donna: Daddy, I've

never heard you talk like this

before.

Dad: Well, I've never

had my twelve-year-old daughter read the Book of

Mormon to me before.

Donna: Whillikers! It's

past 10:00! We've been talking

more than forty-five

minutes on one little

chapter. I've got to get to

bed. You're going to bean

me.

Dad: I doubt it. But

then I might. Scurry, Abish.

Donna: Abish? Who's Who's Abish? (Answer: See

Abish? Alma 19.)

Dad: Just someone I

read about once. Scoot!

Now! Pronto!

With a kiss and a hug for

her dad, Donna dashes off to

bed, more assuredly on her

way to a testimony of the

truthfulness of the Book of

Mormon and the reality of

the restoration than she

realizes.

Of course, what Donna's father knows—and what she

is about to find out—is that

every chapter is charged

with meaning, often many

meanings, and always

meanings that illuminate

and inspire.

Conclusion

Donna, we found, asked three questions in this story:

Donna didn't ask as many questions as her father, but hers were just as significant. It is easy to imagine a sequel to the story: The next night, Donna, still puzzled, asks her father again, "Who was Abish, anyway?"

Her father gives her a hint: "Try looking in the Book of Mormon index." She does; they start reading Alma

19; and one question leads to another, and then to another. Before long, Donna is full of questions, asking them and attempting to answer them.

We, too, can come to the scriptures with searching and illuminating questions. When we do, we will gain much and give much, for no two of us will ask just the same questions, nor find exactly the same answers. We each bring to and take from the scriptures something personal, yet something that can enrich the lives of our families and our brothers and sisters in the gospel.

The farmer, for instance, knows what it is like when a hen gathers her chickens under her wings and will ask himself why Christ used that particular metaphor. Parents will ask themselves what Christ meant when he said that unless we become as little children, we cannot enter the kingdom of heaven. A convert, studying the Joseph Smith story, will notice how Joseph felt as he went from church to church searching for the right one, and will compare his own feelings to Joseph's.

In reading the scriptures, as with the rest of the gospel, "the body is not one member, but many." (1

Corinthians 12:14.) Ours is a lay ministry, and if we all are scripturally literate, then "all may be edified of

all.' (D&C 88:122.)

Feasting upon the Word

Ours is a fast-paced age. We eat on the run, read on the run, even make friends and sometimes marriages on the run. There is so much to do, so much to buy, no time to waste. We are in a train rushing past houses and buildings, and the faster we go, the more everything begins to look alike. Nothing seems very good, nothing very bad, everything rather average.

And when we mistake the scriptures for a quick meal instead of a feast, we choke, trying to down something too rich too fast. The scriptures, like all "the things of God are of deep import; and time, and experience, and careful and ponderous and solemn thoughts can only find them out." (Teachings, p. 137.) In this section, we slow down, take our time with the scriptures, and feast. We ponder by asking the types of questions we have been discussing. As in the previous section, try to find your own answers to the questions before reading our answers.

A Father and His Two Sons-luke 15:11-32

Sandra Packard, Dennis Packard, Feasting upon the Word ( 1981)

3

What is the setting of this parable? What prompted Jesus to give it? (Hint: See the first part of chapter 15.)

We like what Joseph Smith writes about the setting: "While Jesus was teaching the people, all the publicans and sinners drew near to hear Him; 'and the Pharisees and scribes murmured, saying: This man receiveth sinners, and eateth with them.' This is the keyword which unlocks the parable of the prodigal son. It was given to answer the murmurings and questions of the Sadducees and Pharisees, who were querying, finding fault, and saying, 'How is it that this man as great as He pretends to be, eats with publicans and sinners?'" (Teachings, p. 277.)

In fact, the Lord answers the murmurings of the scribes and Pharisees with three parables. The first is the parable of the lost sheep; the second, the parable of the lost piece of silver; and the third, the parable of the prodigal son. About these first two parables, Joseph Smith, continuing, writes: "The hundred sheep represent one hundred Sadducees and Pharisees, as though Jesus had said, 'If you Sadducees and Pharisees are in the sheepfold, I have no mission for you; I am sent to look up sheep that are lost.' . . . He also gave them the parable of the woman and her ten pieces of silver, and how she lost one, and searching diligently, found it again, which gave more joy among the friends and neighbors than the nine which were not lost; like I say unto you, there is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth, more than over ninety-and-nine just persons that are so righteous; they will be damned anyhow; you cannot save them." (Teachings, pp. 277-78.)

How are these three parables the same, and how is this last one different?

When the lost sheep and the lost piece of silver are found, there is rejoicing, just as there is in heaven over the repentant sinner. The third parable continues the theme, with a father rejoicing over the return of his repentant son. But this parable is clearly more complex: besides the joy of the father, we have the repentance of the son (the lost sheep and piece of silver can't repent), the envy of the elder brother at his father's rejoicing, and the father's response to the envious brother. So, we see the Lord waiting until the third parable to show the Pharisees and scribes what they were up to: criticizing him for eating with sinners is just like criticizing one's father for receiving home a repentant younger brother.

11 And he said, A certain man had two sons:

12 And the younger of them said to his father, Father, give me the portion of goods that falleth to me. And he divided unto them his living.

13 And not many days after the younger son gathered all together, and took his journey into a far country and there wasted his substance with riotous living.

14 And when he had spent all, there arose a mighty famine in that land; and he began to be in want.

15 And he went and joined himself to a citizen of that country; and he sent him into his fields to feed swine.

16 And he would fain have filled his belly with the husks that the swine did eat: and no man gave unto him.

What do you think "divided unto them his living" means? (Verse 12.)

The father divides up his property, deciding what each of his sons will inherit. The younger son here asks and is generously allowed to receive his inheritance before the father dies. So now, all the father's remaining wealth, including its subsequent increase, goes to the elder son. We aren't told whether the elder son, like the younger, received any of his inheritance early. But given that the father is in charge of things throughout the rest of the parable, he must have retained control over the bulk of the remaining property.

What does "gathered all together" mean? (Verse 13.)

The son sells the property he received, converting it into cash.

What sound stands out in the phrase "and there wasted his substance with riotous living?" (Verse 13.) What word does the repeated sound emphasize?

We hear the s sound building up to the word "riotous": "and there wasted his substance with riotous living." Assuming we have a good translation, Jesus would also have emphasized the son's riotous living, though not necessarily through the repetition of s sounds.

What is emphasized by repeating the word "living" at the end of verses 12 and 13?

To us, it emphasizes the sinfulness of the son as he spends his inheritance in riotous living, using his wealth in ways his father would highly disapprove of.

In verse 15, the son "joins" himself to a citizen of the country. The word join suggests a rather indefinite arrangement, one that must have contrasted sharply with the family relationships the son had left. What do you think the "employer-employee" arrangements were between the citizen and the son?

Apparently the son, being destitute in a famine, puts himself under the care of the citizen and agrees to carry out his biddings for whatever the citizen chooses to give him, which certainly isn't much, as he becomes hungry enough to eat the food given to the pigs. The pigs are cared for better than he is.

What does his having to feed swine tell us about the condition of the son?

Ask one who has slopped hogs, and he will tell you that it is a distasteful chore; it is difficult to feed them without getting the slop splashed on you by the eager, hungry pigs. More importantly, to the Jews swine were unclean and so not fit to eat. Some Jews, in fact, actually get sick to their stomachs at the thought of eating pork. The younger son's task must have been particularly disgusting for a Jew. He had hit rock bottom.

What does "fain" mean? (Verse 16.)

Webster tells us that it means "willingly." The son would willingly have eaten husks, which were carob pods. (See the footnote in the LDS edition of the Bible.) But no one responded to his need.

What sounds are prominent in verses 15 and 16, and what do they emphasize?

The f, ee, and s sounds bind together verses 15 and 16 and serve to intensify the distress of the prodigal son: "And he went and joined himself to a citizen of that country; and he sent him into his fields tofeed swine. And he would fain have filled his belly with the husks that the swine did eat: and no man gave unto him." Notice that it's a little difficult to say "fields to feed swine." You have to say the phrase slowly, which emphasizes the last word, swine.

17 And when he came to himself, he said, How many hired servants of my father's have bread enough and to spare, and I perish with hunger!

18 I will arise and go to my father, and will say unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before thee,

19 And am no more worthy to be called thy son: make me as one of thy hired servants.

20 And he arose, and came to his father. But when he was yet a great way off, his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed him.

21 And the son said unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy son.

22 But the father said to his servants, Bring forth the best robe, and put it on him; and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet:

23 And bring hither the fatted calf, and kill it; and let us eat, and be merry:

24 For this my son was dead, and is alive again; he was lost, and is found. And they began to be merry.

What does "came to himself" mean? (Verse 17.)

These words, used to describe the son's repentance, suggest almost a return to consciousness— consciousness of his sinfulness and the dire circumstances it has put him in. The phrase reminds us of

Jacob saying to his brethren, "shake yourselves that ye may awake from the slumber of death." (Jacob

3:11.)

What sounds are significant in verse 17?

The younger son, thoroughly humbled by his circumstances, begins to repent of having left his family. We see him exhausted, hungry, heavy-hearted—all these feelings suggested by the repeated h sound: "How many hired servants of my father's have bread enough to spare, and I perish with hunger!" Try reading this softly, slowly, with weariness, slightly emphasizing the h sounds.

What words should be emphasized in verse 17?

Emphasizing the words "servants" and "perish" brings out the contrast between what the son now has and what even the servants of his father had.

Is the attitude expressed in verses 17 and 18 typical of repentance?

Elder Howard W. Hunter of the Council of the Twelve spoke about this parable, saying, "Repentance is but the homesickness of the soul." When we repent, we long for the "food"—the spirit of peace and love— experienced in our families, earthly or heavenly; and we resolve to arise and go back home.

There is an interesting paradox in the speech the son plans to give his father in verses 18 and 19. Can you pick it out?

He plans both to address his father as "father" and to say he isn't worthy to be the son of his father. He doesn't really feel like a servant toward his father.

In verse 21, the son starts into the speech he had planned even after his father's overwhelming

expression of forgiveness in verse 20. What does this tell you about him?

It seems to us that he was remorseful, and also nervous.

The fact that the father sees the son when "he was yet a great way off" (verse 20) implies what?

That his son was on his mind, that he was watching for him. Many times before, he must have looked at approaching figures, hoping to see his son.

Verse 20, which describes the father's initial response to his son, is beautiful. In the second sentence

of verse 20, part of the beauty comes from pairs and triples of words with repeated vowel sounds. For example, when yet; great way. Can you find others?

There are several others: off, saw; had compassion, ran; fell, neck; his, kissed him. These repeated sounds bind together the phrases in which they occur, creating a movement and beauty that conveys the father's intense joy at his son's return.

Now, with an awareness of these sounds, try reading the sentence aloud, allowing yourself to feel the father's joy.

"But when he was yet a great way off, his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed him."

What is conveyed by the rapid succession of active verbs—saw, had compassion, ran, fell, kissed?

This communicates a joy that couldn't be contained, that had to be expressed in action.

The verb phrases continue in verses 22 and 23. Can you pick them out?

Bring, put, put, bring, kill, let.

The son tells his father, "I . . . am no more worthy to be called thy son." (Verse 21.) Does his father reply to this?

The father replies not in words, but in action. He cuts short his son's speech, and gives directions for a great feast to celebrate his son's return. By this action he reaffirms the father-son relationship and rejects any idea of a master-servant relationship. The details of the celebration are significant: The Interpreter's Bible says that the best robe was reserved for distinguished guests on special occasions, and the ring and shoes were both signs of sonship—only slaves went without shoes. Notice also how the father says, "this my son," which is more emphatic than just saying "my son."

What is conveyed by the dead-alive and lost-found metaphors? (Verse 24.)

There are few contrasts of greater magnitude than the one between life and death, or between losing and finding. These metaphors seem to highlight the difference between the son's past and his present, emphasizing the importance of the present.

What doesn't the father do that other fathers in similar circumstances might have done?

The father doesn't probe into the past, demanding, "Where have you been all this time?"; nor into what led the son to return, asking "Have you learned your lesson?" All that seems important is that he has returned. Like the sheep, he was dead and is alive; and like the piece of silver, was lost and is found. Just as it would have been absurd to question the sheep or silver, so a cross-examination of the son is inappropriate.

25 Now his elder son was in the field: and as he came and drew nigh to the house, he heard musick and dancing.

26 And he called one of the servants, and asked what these things meant.

27 And he said unto him, Thy brother is come; and thy father hath killed the fatted calf, because he hath received him safe and sound.

28 And he was angry, and would not go in: therefore came his father out, and intreated him.

29 And he answering said to his father, Lo, these many years do I serve thee, neither transgressed I at any time thy commandment: and yet thou never gavest me a kid, that I might make merry with my friends:

30 But as soon as this thy son was come, which hath devoured thy living with harlots, thou hast killed for him the fatted calf.

Now the parable focuses on the elder son's reaction. This son is initially out "in the field." (Verse 25.) What does this tell us about him?

He must have been a hard worker.

When he approaches the house and hears the "musick and dancing" he calls one of the servants for an

explanation. (Verse 26.) Why does the elder son ask the servant what's happening instead of just going in himself to see?

He is perhaps already annoyed that a party is going on without his knowledge and wants to get all the facts to plan his response.

The elder son responds angrily to the servant's explanation. (Verse 28.) Do you think he would have been less angry had the servant said something like, "Thy brother is home! And he is safe and well! And thy father hath killed the fatted calf"? Would the servant have then shown a different attitude?

Put that way, the servant would have seemed glad and excited that the son had returned. As it is, his speech sounds to us rather studied, not spontaneous. Like a detached observer, he says, "Thy brother is come," and then shows how excited the father is. His speech ends with hissing s sounds: "Because he hath received him safe and sound." The servant seems to be meddling, feeling the elder son out, wondering how he'll react, construing events in a way so the son will feel his position and inheritance threatened. The elder son responds angrily, at least in part, because he seems to have lost face in front of the servant.

Try reading the servant's speech (verse 27) in a way that would make the elder son angry—as if the servant were saying, "Now what are you going to do?" Say the word "brother" with a teasing intonation.

What does the servant then do? (Verse 28.)

Apparently, the servant tries to encourage the elder son to go into the party, which would make the son lose face all the more; for the account says, "He . . . would not go in."

How does the father know the son is outside?

The servant must have gone in himself and reported the elder son's reaction to the father.

The father comes out to his elder son. (Verse 28.) What do you think most fathers in those days would have done?

We would expect the father, being the patriarch, to have summoned his son to him. It seems a great concession for him to go out to the elder son, even more of a concession than his going out to meet the younger one, which occurred under exceptional circumstances.

What does the father's coming out tell us about him?

We feel his love for his sons. In his concern for them, he disregards the deference due him. There is no holding back on the father's part, no waiting for his sons to make the first move. The younger son had to first "come to himself" before his father could go to him, but when he had repented, the father ran out to meet him. The father also goes out to meet his unrepentant elder son.

The elder son's speech seems to reveal his character; most obvious is his selfish disregard for his father

and brother. What sounds are prominent in the speech in verse 29 and what do they convey?

The elder son's "my" attitude comes through with the repetition of m and i sounds in verse 29: "Lo, these many years do I serve thee, neither transgressed I at any time thy commandment; and yet thou never gavest me a kid, that I might make merry with my friends."

The son begins his speech by saying "Lo." What does lo mean?

It is the equivalent of "see here"—a reproach to his father.

In verse 29, rather than saying "I served thee these many years; I neither transgressed thy commandment at any time," the elder son says, "these many years do I serve thee, neither transgressed I at any time thy commandment." The unusual word order emphasizes the phrases "these many years," "neither transgressed I," "at any time." Why does the son emphasize these phrases?

The elder son seems to be stressing his superiority to his younger brother.

What does the elder son's sureness that he had never transgressed his father's commandments tell us about him?

He must have interpreted his father's commands very mechanically or pharisaically, giving himself points for each act of obedience. Otherwise, it would be difficult for him to know that he hadn't transgressed.

Compare the elder son's speech in verses 29 and 30 with the younger son's speech in verse 21. How does each son feel toward his father?

Though the younger son doesn't feel worthy to be his father's son, he still comes to him and addresses him as "Father." The elder son, on the other hand, won't come to his father and doesn't address him at all. Further, he emphasizes his service to his father and his expectation of pay, concerns of a servant rather than a son. So he acts like a servant though he claims to be a son, whereas the younger son acts like a son though he is asking to be a servant. The younger son's actions clearly show respect; the elder son's do not.

How does the elder son refer to the younger son? (Verse 30.)

In verse 30 he says "thy son" instead of "my brother." This appears to be a rebuttal to the servant's "thy

brother" in verse 27. Apparently, the elder son would like to disown his brother.

Even though it appears the family had no word about the younger brother while he was away, the elder

son assumes the worst—"devoured thy living with harlots." (Verse 30.) What does this imply about the elder son?

Perhaps that is what he would have done. While the younger son—like one portion of humanity—indulged his unrighteous desires, the elder son—like the Pharisees—may have repressed his and felt superior for not giving in to those desires. If so, his outward behavior may have been "correct," but his heart wouldn't have been right.

Why does the elder son say that the father never gave him a kid (verse 29), rather than say that he never gave him a calf?

A kid is a young goat. The inference is, "You never gave me even a kid." Do you think the elder son's accusation was true?

It was probably untrue or true in some way that wronged the father. Maybe the elder son didn't like parties, which is why the father never gave him one. It seems the kind of thing one says in anger. The parable shows the father to be a generous person.

31 And he said unto him, Son, thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine.

32 It was meet that we should make merry, and be glad: for this thy brother was dead, and is alive again; and was lost, and is found.

The elder son has unjustly accused his father. But his father responds without recrimination. Why isn't he angry?

The father sees his son not as an enemy, but as a child who needs reassurance and a better understanding of his father's actions. Thus, he first reassures and then teaches.

How does the father reassure his son? (Verse 31.)

He addresses him as "Son" and tells him that all the remaining wealth is his inheritance—hence there is no need for him to feel threatened.

Does the phrase "all that I have is thine" remind you of anything else in the scriptures?

It reminds us of a part of the oath and covenant of the priesthood, in which the Lord says, "And he that receiveth my Father receiveth my Father's kingdom; therefore all that my Father hath shall be given unto

him." (D&C 84:38.) Apparently, in the heavenly scheme, all can be given to each, without diminishing what each receives.

What is significant about the way the father refers to the younger son in verse 32?

The father says "thy brother," as opposed to the elder brother's "thy son" in verse 30, reminding the elder son that the younger son is still his brother.

What does the father teach his son in verse 32?

Without argument, the father simply affirms the appropriateness of the celebration, saying, "It was meet that we should make merry, and be glad." And though it will use up part of the father's wealth — the elder son's inheritance—that is how their wealth should be used. It is a time for rejoicing, because the son "was dead and is alive, and was lost and is found." The repetition of this phrase helps us see even more how much his son's return means to the father. But the phrase also serves as a response to the elder brother's "devoured thy living with harlots." Again, what seems important is not the past sinful behavior, but the return home.

Here the parable ends. But we aren't told whether or not the elder brother joins in the celebration and accepts his brother back as a member of the family. Why not?

The omission is deliberate. The parable has come around at last to the accusation: "This man receiveth sinners, and eateth with them." The elder brother represents the Pharisees and their spiritual kin, and the parable is an appeal to them to receive the outcasts. Jesus was waiting for their decision.

Now, read the whole parable aloud, letting your increased understanding come through in the way you read.

Ask of God-joseph Smith-history 1:1-20

Sandra Packard, Dennis Packard, Feasting upon the Word ( 1981)

4

1 Owing to the many reports which have been put in circulation by evil-disposed and designing persons, in relation to the rise and progress of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, all of which have been designed by the authors thereof to militate against its character as a Church and its progress in the world—I have been induced to write this history, to disabuse the public mind, and put all inquirers after truth in possession of the facts, as they have transpired, in relation both to myself and the Church, so far as I have such facts in my possession.

2 In this history I shall present the various events in relation to this Church, in truth and righteousness, as they have transpired, or as they at present exist, being now the eighth year since the organization of the said Church.

3 I was born in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and five, on the twenty-third day of December, in the town of Sharon, Windsor county, State of Vermont. . . . My father, Joseph Smith, Sen., left the State of Vermont, and moved to Palmyra, Ontario (now Wayne) county, in the State of New York, when I was in my tenth year, or thereabouts. In about four years after my father's arrival in Palmyra, he moved with his family into Manchester in the same county of Ontario—

4 His family consisting of eleven souls, namely, my father, Joseph Smith; my mother, Lucy Smith (whose name, previous to her marriage, was Mack, daughter of Solomon Mack); my brothers, Alvin (who died November 19th, 1824, in the 27th year of his age), Hyrum, myself, Samuel Harrison, William, Don Carlos; and my sisters, Sophronia, Catherine, and Lucy.

Joseph begins his account with one long matter-of-fact sentence. In that sentence, he tells us why he is writing the account. What reasons does he give?

Joseph wants to "disabuse the public mind" and "put all inquirers after truth in possession of the facts." "Evil-disposed and designing persons" have "abused" the public mind, exciting it and filling it with falsehoods about the Church. Joseph, we'll see later, refers to his own mind as if it had been similarly abused while he searched for which church to join. These designing persons have also made it hard to find the truth, if one wanted to, among so many false reports. So, Joseph is "induced" to give us this account, not because of a particular fondness for making spiritual experiences public, but because the public mind must be disabused and those who want the truth must be given a chance to find it.

If you were Joseph and wanted to "disabuse the public mind, and put all inquirers after truth in possession of the facts," how would you present your account? Would you try to persuade people of what had happened to you, try to make them feel what you had felt, tell them who you approved or disapproved of? What would or wouldn't you do if you were Joseph?

Because Joseph wants to calm the agitated public, he gives what seems to us a cool, factual account. Rather than try to persuade us, he simply presents the facts. He doesn't try to make us feel what he felt, as it seems Oliver Cowdery is trying to do in his rather overdone account of the coming of John the Baptist at the end of the Pearl of Great Price, but instead, he carefully describes what happened. Even when he expresses his disapproval, we'll see that he does it indirectly and with a good deal of irony, so as to approach his readers with firmness but without anger, with courtesy but with clarity.

What do you think Joseph's attitude is toward his readers when he says at the end of verse 1, "so far as I have such facts in my possession"?

Joseph doesn't end the first verse saying heavy-handedly that he is going to give the reader the facts, but softens it by adding "so far as I have such facts." A writer's admission of his own limitations is a gesture of friendship.

In verse 2, Joseph tells us that he will present his account "in truth and righteousness"? Who is he contrasting himself with?

Joseph contrasts himself with those he mentioned in verse 1 who made reports on the Church from an

evil disposition and an ulterior design. In verse 3 he plunges into the facts.

5 Some time in the second year after our removal to Manchester, there was in the place where we lived an unusual excitement on the subject of religion. It commenced with the Methodists, but soon became general among all the sects in that region of country. Indeed, the whole district of country seemed affected by it, and great multitudes united themselves to the different religious parties, which created no small stir and division amongst the people, some crying, "Lo, here!" and others, "Lo, there!" Some were contending for the Methodist faith, some for the Presbyterian, and some for the Baptist.

6 For, notwithstanding the great love which the converts to these different faiths expressed at the time of their conversion, and the great zeal manifested by the respective clergy, who were active in getting up and promoting this extraordinary scene of religious feeling, in order to have everybody converted, as they were pleased to call it, let them join what sect they pleased; yet when the converts began to file off, some to one party and some to another, it was seen that the seemingly good feelings of both the priests and the converts were more pretended than real; for a scene of great confusion and bad feeling ensued—priest contending against priest, and convert against convert; so that all their good feelings one for another, if they ever had any, were entirely lost in a strife of words and a contest about opinions.

The account in verses 1-4 is matter of fact, without much expression of approval or disapproval. But

in verses 5-6, Joseph begins to express his disapproval, not directly, but by his choice of words. He tells us that an unusual religious excitement commenced, soon became general, and, indeed, seemed to affect the whole district. What image does this description bring to mind?

To us, it brings to mind the image of a contagious disease.

Verse 5 also seems to convey the feeling that something overdone and rather ridiculous was going on.

Read the last part of verse 5, emphasizing the words that convey this feeling.

". . .great multitudes united themselves to the different religious parties, which created no small stir and division amongst the people, some crying, "Lo, here!" and others, "Lo, there!" Some were contendingfor the Methodist faith, some for the Presbyterian, and some for the Baptist."

In verse 6, the ironic disapproval increases in another long, powerful sentence. Several phrases in this verse are ironic. Can you pick them out as you read?

We have put single quotation marks around the phrases that seem ironic to us: "For notwithstanding the 'great love' which the 'converts' to these different faiths expressed at the time of their 'conversion,' and the 'great zeal' manifested by the respective clergy, who were active in 'getting up and promoting' this 'extraordinary scene of religious feeling,' in order to have everybody 'converted,' as they were 'pleased' to 'call' it, let them join what sect they 'pleased'; yet when the converts began to 'file off,' some to one party and some to another, it was seen that the seemingly 'good feelings' of both the priests and the converts were more pretended than real; for a scene of great confusion and bad feeling ensued—priest contending against priest, and convert against convert; so that all their 'good feelings' one for another, if they ever had any, were entirely lost in a strife of words and a contest about opinions."

Do the phrases "getting up and promoting" and "filing off" bring any particular images to your mind?

"Getting up and promoting" sounds to us like advertising for a circus. "Filing off" sounds like the military, or perhaps like dividing up for a game of some kind.

Rather than use irony, why doesn't Joseph just come out and say that ridiculous, corrupt ministers were manipulating the people?

Such a direct statement, even if true, would no doubt inflame rather than calm an agitated public mind. By using irony, Joseph is able both to calm and to inform.

Joseph concludes verse 6 by calling the affair "a strife of words and a contest of opinions." Later, he calls

it a "war of words and tumult of opinions." (Verse 10.) From these phrases, what do you think Joseph found most objectionable in the religious discussions of the clergy?

The words "strife," "contest," "war," and "tumult" leave no doubt that Joseph was disturbed that the religious debate was so contentious. Surely alleged ministers of the Prince of Peace should engage in more peaceful discussion. Joseph also seems disturbed that the ministers had no power beyond mere "words" to resolve their differences of "opinion." He later speaks of "the powers of both reason and sophistry" used by the various denominations in trying to prove others in error. Where was the power of godliness—the power that would bring real understanding and certainty?

(If you'd like to read an interesting comparison to this portion of the Joseph Smith story, read aloud

Nephi's description of the last days, particularly 2 Nephi 28:3-6. Try to catch the ministers' attitude as you

read aloud verse 3.)

7 I was at this time in my fifteenth year. My father's family was proselyted to the Presbyterian faith, and four of them joined that church, namely, my mother, Lucy; my brothers Hyrum and Samuel Harrison; and my sister Sophronia.

8 During this time of great excitement my mind was called up to serious reflection and great uneasiness; but though my feelings were deep and often poignant, still I kept myself aloof from all these parties, though I attended their several meetings as often as occasion would permit. In process of time my mind became somewhat partial to the Methodist sect, and I felt some desire to be united with them; but so great were the confusion and strife among the different denominations, that it was impossible for a person young as I was, and so unacquainted with men and things, to come to any certain conclusion who was right and who was wrong.

9 My mind at times was greatly excited, the cry and tumult were so great and incessant. The Presbyterians were most decided against the Baptists and Methodists, and used all the powers of both reason and sophistry to prove their errors, or, at least, to make the people think they were in error. On the other hand, the Baptists and Methodists in their turn were equally zealous in endeavoring to establish their own tenets and disprove all others.

Joseph says in verse 7 that his family was "proselyted" to the Presbyterian faith. He doesn't say they joined the Presbyterian faith. What does the word "proselyted" imply about what took place?

Joseph seems to be emphasizing the pressure put on his family rather than their willingness to join.

The ministers probably tried to "proselyte" Joseph too, but unsuccessfully. What does this tell us about him?

It shows he was strong in resisting pressure to accept something he wasn't fully convinced of.

Joseph says nothing of his family "proselyting" him. What does this imply?

Joseph appears to have had complete religious freedom within his family.

Joseph uses the word great, or variations of it, five times in verses 8 and 9. Three times he uses it to describe what was going on outside of him ("time of great excitement," "so great were the confusion and strife," "the cry and tumult were so great") and twice to describe what was going on inside of him ("great uneasiness," "my mind at times was greatly excited"). What does Joseph convey by using the same word to describe the confusion outside and inside himself?

We feel the tumult of the times reverberating in Joseph's soul. Although cautious when it came to action, Joseph seems to have been sensitive mentally and emotionally. His mind was agitated and worked on by the clergy, and he appears at times to have been almost unnerved by the constant barrage of words.

In verse 11, Joseph describes himself as "laboring under the extreme difficulties" caused by the clergy

and in verse 13 as being in "darkness and confusion." In all this, Joseph shows how similar he was to many of his intended readers: he, like they, had been subjected to the propaganda of "evildisposed and designing persons."

In verse 8, Joseph tells us that in time he became "somewhat partial" to and had "some desire to be united with" the Methodists. Why didn't he join the Methodists?

A weak inclination must not have been sufficient for Joseph. Apparently, he wanted certainty, which he couldn't seem to get, given the great confusion among the sects and his inability to understand what these men were up to.

In verse 9, Joseph describes his current understanding of what the clergy was then doing. He says the clergy used all the powers of both reason and sophistry to prove the errors of other sects, or at least to make people think they were in error. What is the difference between reason and sophistry?

Sophistry is corrupted reason; it is reasoning that has a false look of genuineness or truth.

Why do you think the ministers used sophistry in addition to reason?

Reason alone couldn't establish which church was right. It hasn't the power to. So, the clergy had to use sophistry to make it appear that they had established the rightness of their churches. With "powers" we are introduced to a theme—namely, what powers men accept and what they use them for. Here we have men using their power of reason foolishly. In the next several verses we see Joseph using his power of reasoning in a fruitful way.

10 In the midst of this war of words and tumult of opinions, I often said to myself: What is to be done? Who of all these parties are right; or are they all wrong together? If any one of them be right, which is it, and how shall I know it?

11 While I was laboring under the extreme difficulties caused by the contests of these parties of religionists, I was one day reading the Epistle of James, first chapter and fifth verse, which reads: If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him.

12 Never did any passage of scripture come with more power to the heart of man than this did at this time to mine. It seemed to enter with great force into every feeling of my heart. I reflected on it again and again, knowing that if any person needed wisdom from God, I did; for how to act I did not know, and unless I could get more wisdom than I then had, I would never know; for the teachers of religion of the different sects understood the same passages of scripture so differently as to destroy all confidence in settling the question by an appeal to the Bible.

13 At length I came to the conclusion that I must either remain in darkness and confusion, or else I must do as James directs, that is, ask of God. I at length came to the determination to "ask of God," concluding that if he gave wisdom to them that lacked wisdom, and would give liberally, and not upbraid, I might venture.

In verse 10, Joseph asks himself, "Who of all these parties are right; or, are they all wrong together?" Why does he say, "all wrong together" rather than just "all wrong"?

"Together" implies a unity among the churches. Apparently, Joseph wonders if the churches, though violently at odds over particulars, are fundamentally more similar than dissimilar. The Lord later tells Joseph that they are: they each have a form of godliness, but they all deny the power thereof.

In verse 11, Joseph speaks of "the contests of these parties of religionists." This phrase is big-sounding, but actually ironical. Why?

"Contesting" is out of character for the truly religious. Also, the word "religionists' suggests a zealous, insincere religion.

While under the troublesome influence of these "religionists," Joseph finds in James an answer to his

confusion. Verse 12, which describes his reaction, is a beautiful verse, written in such a way that one

cannot miss the proper tone of voice or the proper emphasis. Read verse 12 aloud, emphasizing the words you think should be emphasized.

Never did any passage of scripture come with more power to the heart of man than this did at this time to mine. It seemed to enter with great force into every feeling of my heart. I reflected on it again andagain, knowing that if any person needed wisdom from God, I did; for how to act I did not know, and unless I could get more wisdom than I then had, I would never know; for the teachers of religion of the different sects understood the same passages of scripture so differently as to destroy all confidence in settling the question by an appeal to the Bible."

How does Joseph's reaction to the passage in James compare to what he had been feeling? (Verses

6 and 8.)

Joseph says that the scripture in James came to him with power and with great force into every feeling of his heart. This feeling must have been very different from the "religious feelings" of the clergy and

converts (verse 6), and the confused, anxious feelings he had labored under before (verse 8). It was substantial, something he could "reflect" on "again and again," until he reached the firm conclusion that if he didn't ask of God, he would have to remain in darkness, for without God, reason and scripture were insufficient, though they were important in leading him to seek God. "At length" (he must have reflected for some time), he decides to ask of God. If God will answer him without condemning him, he has nothing to lose and wisdom to gain. It all seems quite reasonable to him.

14 So, in accordance with this, my determination to ask of God, I retired to the woods to make the attempt. It was on the morning of a beautiful, clear day, early in the spring of eighteen hundred and twenty. It was the first time in my life that I had made such an attempt, for amidst all my anxieties I had never as yet made the attempt to pray vocally.

15 After I had retired to the place where I had previously designed to go, having looked around me, and finding myself alone, I kneeled down and began to offer up the desire of my heart to God. I had scarcely done so, when immediately I was seized upon by some power which entirely overcame me, and had such an astonishing influence over me as to bind my tongue so that I could not speak. Thick darkness gathered around me, and it seemed to me for a time as if I were doomed to sudden destruction.

16 But, exerting all my powers to call upon God to deliver me out of the power of this enemy which had seized upon me, and at the very moment when I was ready to sink into despair and abandon myself to destruction—not to an imaginary ruin, but to the power of some actual being from the unseen world, who had such marvelous power as I had never before felt in any being—just at this moment of great alarm, I saw a pillar of light exactly over my head, above the brightness of the sun, which descended gradually until it fell upon me.

17 It no sooner appeared than I found myself delivered from the enemy which held me bound. When the light rested upon me I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. One of them spake unto me, calling me by name and said, pointing to the other—This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him!

18 My object in going to inquire of the Lord was to know which of all the sects was right, that I might know which to join. No sooner, therefore, did I get possession of myself, so as to be able to speak, than I asked the Personages who stood above me in the light, which of all the sects was right—and which I should join.

19 I was answered that I must join none of them, for they were all wrong; and the Personage who addressed me said that all their creeds were an abomination in his sight; that those professors were all corrupt; that: "they draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me, they teach for doctrines the commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof."

20 He again forbade me to join with any of them; and many others things did he say unto me, which I cannot write at this time. When I came to myself again, I found myself lying on my back, looking up into heaven. When the light had departed, I had no strength; but soon recovering in some degree, I went home. And as I leaned up to the fireplace, mother inquired what the matter was. I replied, "Never mind, all is well—I am well enough off." I then said to my mother, "I have learned for myself that Presbyterianism is not true."

In describing his decision to ask God, Joseph uses the words "venture" (verse 13) and "attempt" (verse

14). Do these words remind you of anything else in the scriptures?

They remind us of the frame of mind described by Alma in the Book of Mormon: ". . . if ye will awake and

arouse your faculties, even to an experiment upon my words." (Alma 32:27.)

In verse 14, Joseph says, "It was the first time in my life that I had made such an attempt." He then gives the reason he hadn't made the attempt to pray vocally before. What is the reason?

It must have been that his anxieties had kept him from prayer. It is unlikely that the clergy would have told him to ask God, and whatever they did encourage him to do may well have kept him back from doing what he should have done and was now about to do.

Notice how carefully he relates the details in verse 15—he went to the place he had previously decided on, looked around, and finding himself alone, knelt down to pray. Is it significant that Joseph had previously decided on a place?

We think so. It tells us that Joseph had carefully thought out what he would do beforehand. Joseph seems serious in what he's doing.

Why did Joseph look around to see if he was alone?

Obviously, he didn't want an audience. This was a private matter, not one done for show. Again, we sense his inclination to keep spiritual experiences private: he's not telling this story for publicity.

Why doesn't Joseph tell us who the evil "power" or "being" was? (Verse 15.)

At the time, he probably didn't know who the evil power was. Joseph is relating the facts as he experienced them.

How does the evil power's influence over Joseph compare to the religionist's influence over him?

Both put him in darkness and keep him from prayer.

Why at the end of verse 15 doesn't Joseph simply say "Thick darkness gathered around me, and I felt doomed to sudden destruction"? After all, it would be more dramatic to leave out the phrase "it seemed to me for a time as if."

Joseph, we see, isn't trying to be dramatic, and he qualifies his sense of being doomed. The experience isn't of overriding importance.

Verse 16 is another long sentence. Just after the emotional climax of the sentence, "at the very moment when I was ready to sink into despair and abandon myself to destruction," Joseph inserts a parenthesized explanation, "not to an imaginary ruin, but to the power of some actual being," and then resumes with a less emotional phrase, "just at this moment of great alarm." What is the effect of this insertion?

It makes the account less dramatic; consequently, we don't feel Joseph is trying to work on our emotions. He is just carefully telling us what happened. And, of course, this makes the story all the more believable. From the way he writes, we sense this man is telling us the truth.

Does Joseph's experience with Satan remind you of anything else in the scriptures?

It reminds us of Moses' encounter with Satan. Moses, like Joseph, experienced the power of Satan, and

after calling upon God for deliverance, was visited by the Lord. (Moses 1:12-42.)

In verse 16, Joseph carefully describes the movement of the pillar of light as he remembers it, using the phrases "just at this moment," "exactly," and "gradually." What does this description tell us about his state of mind at the beginning of the vision?

Joseph wasn't swept away into some mystical ecstasy. He retained his rationality and his capacity for careful observation.

Why does Joseph use the phrases "two Personages," "one of them," and "the other" to refer to the Father

and the Son? (Verse 17.)

The phrase "two Personages" is matter-of-fact and yet seems respectful. Joseph doesn't say two "persons" or "men" or "beings" or "gods," but two "Personages." Given what he knew at the time, that was about all he could have called them. He refers to them individually as "One of them" and "the other." These are God the Father and the Son! But again, Joseph isn't trying to make us feel awe or reverence or fear. His object is just to explain what happened.

How does Joseph respond to the two Personages differently than another fourteen-year-old boy might have? (Verse 18.)

Joseph gets "possession of" himself in order to ask his question. He doesn't seem terror-struck. He was horrified with the power that seized him before, but he doesn't appear horrified now, though he still needs to get sufficiently in possession of himself to speak. And he does—a fourteen-year-old boy. You'd think he would be either so frightened that he couldn't say a word or so amazed that he would forget what he came to ask about. But no: Joseph calmly and rationally asks the question he came to ask.

In verse 19, the Lord tells Joseph to join none of the churches. He gives three reasons and then elaborates on them in reverse order. What are the reasons?

First, the churches were all wrong. Second, their creeds were an abomination. Third, their ministers were corrupt. In elaborating, the Lord says first that the ministers were corrupt as only their words drew near the Lord, not their hearts; second, their creeds were merely men's ideas taught as doctrine; and third, the churches were wrong in that they recognized only reason and scripture as sources of knowledge, denying the power of godliness, the power Joseph was experiencing.

In verse 20, Joseph describes finding himself lying on his back. There is nothing dignified about lying on ones' back, so why does Joseph mention such a detail?

Again, we see Joseph being matter-of-fact. He doesn't seem out to create a particular impression of himself, only to relate the facts.

After Joseph says he came to himself, he says, "When the light had departed, I had no strength." (Verse

20.) Does he mean the light departed after he came to himself and that he might have experienced part of the vision while he was unconscious?

We don't think so. Joseph is apparently telling us what happened earlier—when the light had departed. The sentence, "When the light had departed, I had no strength" explains why Joseph found himself lying on his back: after the light had departed, he had no strength and must have collapsed from exhaustion. Moses, too, was exhausted after his vision: "And the presence of God withdrew from Moses, that his glory was not upon Moses; and Moses was left unto himself. And as he was left unto himself, he fell unto the earth. And it came to pass that it was for the space of many hours before Moses did again receive his

natural strength." (Moses 1:9-10.)

Joseph, coming to himself, "soon" recovers sufficiently to go home. (Verse 20.) Notice that he doesn't struggle to get up or anything dramatic like that. Tired, though, he leans up to the fireplace. We picture him, head on his hand, arm on the mantle, probably reflecting. His mother asks him what's the matter. What would you then expect a boy of fourteen to tell his mother after an experience like the one Joseph had just had?

You'd think he would say something like, "Guess what just happened to me." But he doesn't. He is much more serious than that. He quickly brushes off any need to be concerned about his health and comes right out and tells his mother something of interest to her. He had learned for himself, not from the clergy, that Presbyterianism, the faith his mother had adopted, was not true. His singlemindedness in light of all that has happened to him is sobering. Through it all, he never loses touch with his desire to find the true church.
