A Wife for Isaac-genesis 24

Sandra Packard, Dennis Packard, Feasting upon the Word ( 1981)

5

1 And Abraham was old, and well stricken in age: and the Lord had blessed Abraham in all things.

2 And Abraham said unto his eldest servant of his house, that ruled over all that he had, Put, I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh:

3 And I will make thee swear by the Lord, the God of heaven, and the God of the earth, that thou shalt not take a wife unto my son of the daughters of the Canaanites, among whom I dwell:

4 But thou shalt go unto my country, and to my kindred, and take a wife unto my son Isaac.

5 And the servant said unto him, Peradventure the woman will not be willing to follow me unto this land: must I needs bring thy son again unto the land from whence thou camest?

6 And Abraham said unto him, Beware thou that thou bring not my son thither again.

7 The Lord God of heaven, which took me from my father's house, and from the land of my kindred, and which spake unto me, and that sware unto me, saying, Unto thy seed will I give this land; he shall send his angel before thee, and thou shalt take a wife unto my son from thence.

8 And if the woman will not be willing to follow thee, then thou shalt be clear from this my oath: only bring not my son thither again.

9 And the servant put his hand under the thigh of Abraham his master, and sware to him concerning that matter.

The story of Isaac and Rebekah begins, "And Abraham was old and well-stricken in age." "Old" and "well-stricken in age" mean essentially the same. Why is Abraham's age emphasized?

For all Abraham knew, he would soon die. Sarah had recently died. Isaac needed a wife, and if Abraham was to have any say in the matter, it was time to act.

How old was Abraham at this time? (See Genesis 21:5 and 25:20.)

The scriptures say, "Abraham was an hundred years old, when his son Isaac was born unto him"

(Genesis 21:5) and "Isaac was forty years old when he took Rebekah to wife" (Genesis 25:20). Thus, Abraham was 140 years old at this time. But he was far from being on his deathbed. He died when he

was 175 (Genesis 25:7-8), and in the meantime had another wife and six children (Genesis 25:1-2).

Abraham says in Genesis 15:2 that the steward of his house is Eliezer of Damascus. Unless Eliezer died in the meantime, he is probably the servant spoken of in this chapter. But he is never referred to by name. Why?

Perhaps he is supposed to be remembered not as a particular individual, but as a steward, or even more, as a good example for all stewards. One of the things to look for in this chapter is how a good steward acts.

Why does Abraham tell Eliezer to put his hand under Abraham's thigh while taking the oath? (Verse 2.)

The Interpreter's Dictionary of the Bible says the purpose of this custom was to relate the oath-taker to the source of life in the other person. Given the nature of Eliezer's task, this must have been an appropriate way to swear the oath: Eliezer was to make a journey to see that Abraham would have descendants under the covenant.

The Joseph Smith Translation changes the line, "Put, I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh" to "Put forth I pray thee thy hand under my hand." However, this change is not made later in Genesis when Israel says

to Joseph exactly what Abraham says to Eliezer, "Put, I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh." (Genesis

47:29) Perhaps the idea was for Abraham to hold Eliezer's hand under his hand and against his thigh.

Why does Abraham select his steward for the important mission of finding Isaac a wife? Why didn't he go himself to arrange the marriage?

The five-hundred-mile trip from the Beersheba-Hebron area to Haran was likely an arduous one, especially difficult for someone of Abraham's age—perhaps another reason why his age is emphasized at the beginning of the chapter.

Why doesn't Abraham want Isaac to take a wife from among the Canaanites? (Verse 3.)

For one thing, the Canaanites probably didn't possess the right to the priesthood. From Abraham 1, we learn that the right to the priesthood was partly a matter of lineage. It appears that Canaan, one of the sons of Ham, was cursed pertaining to the priesthood, and it was this same Canaan who settled the land

of Canaan. (Genesis 9:18-27; 10:6, 15-19; Abraham 1:21-22, 26-27.) One of Canaan's sons was Heth

(Genesis 10:15), and when Esau later married two of the daughters of Heth, those marriages "were a grief

of mind unto Isaac and to Rebekah." (Genesis 26:34-35.) Rebekah tells Isaac, "I am weary of my life because of the daughters of Heth: if Jacob take a wife of the daughters of Heth, such as these which are

of the daughters of the land, what good shall my life do me?" (Genesis 27:46.) Abraham would have been particularly aware of priesthood rights; he says, "The records of the fathers, even the patriarchs,

concerning the right of Priesthood, the Lord my God preserved in mine own hands." (Abraham 1:31.) At any rate, it is unlikely that a woman of Canaan, unless converted, would have raised Isaac's children to believe in Abraham's God. They might even have persuaded Isaac to believe in their gods. Abraham probably knew the fate of Lot and his children, some of whom had intermarried with the unbelieving

inhabitants of Sodom and were consequently destroyed with them. (Genesis 19:14.) He may also have felt that a woman separated from her kindred and culture was more likely to come under his and Isaac's influence than one living among her relatives.

Why does Abraham want to take Isaac a wife from among his own kin? (Verse 4.)

Perhaps his kin were the best available people that Abraham knew. Even though it appears that they were

idolatrous (Genesis 31:19), which was most likely the reason the Lord wanted Abraham to leave them in the first place, still it is likely that they had some understanding of the Lord and devotion to him.

(See Genesis 24:31.) Marrying next-of-kin wasn't imperative, however. Joseph married "Asenath the

daughter of Potipherah priest of On" (Genesis 46:20), and their son Ephraim received the birthright blessing. Another possibility is simply that the Lord told Abraham to take a wife for Isaac from among his own kin.

The servant responds to Abraham in verse 5. Immediately he anticipates a possible difficulty in fulfilling the oath he will make to Abraham, and further proposes a way to overcome the difficulty, namely, to bring Isaac along. What does this response tell us about him?

Eliezer's mind is quick and active in the exercise of his stewardship; in this, as in other incidents, he is the model of a good steward. He is also conscientious—he doesn't want to take an oath he might not be able to keep. And of course, he won't be able to keep it if the woman won't follow him. Abraham is sensitive to

Eliezer's unspoken wish not to make an oath he can't keep, and in verse 8 states the conditions that will free Eliezer from the oath.

Abraham's answer to his servant in verses 6 to 8 forms a "chiasmus." The following abbreviation of the speech shows the form:

a. Bring not my son

b. Lord's oath

c. Angel to go before

d. take a wife from thence

c. Woman to follow

b. Abraham's oath

a. Bring not my son

Notice the similar ideas in the a lines and the contrasting ideas in the b lines and in the c lines. In a chiasmus, once the ideas are stated, they are repeated again in reverse order. The center of the

chiasmus in verses 6 to 8 is: ". . . thou shalt take a wife unto my son from thence." This is the most important part, and so occurs in the middle. Why is Abraham's speech structurally formal? What does the formality emphasize?

The formality reinforces the significance and seriousness of what is being said. God's promise to Abraham, "Unto thy seed will I give this land," is linked with Eliezer's promise to Abraham that he will take a wife from his kindred for Isaac. For God's promise to be fulfilled, Eliezer had to fulfill his. It was a solemn occasion. Eliezer must have left feeling no uncertainty about the importance of his task.

In verses 6 and 8, when Abraham says, "Bring not my son thither again," is he implying that Isaac has been in Haran before?

"Thither again" probably means "back to the place we (Abraham and Eliezer) came from" and does not imply that Isaac was ever in Haran.

Why doesn't Abraham want Isaac to go with Eliezer? (Verses 5-6, 8.)

The length of the trip and the possible dangers along the way may account for why Abraham didn't send Isaac along. Even though Isaac was forty years old, Abraham was probably still a protective father; Isaac was his only son by Sarah, one for whom he had waited numerous years, and then had nearly lost at Moriah. Abraham may have also been concerned about how long Isaac would be away. Now that Sarah was gone, he must have especially wanted Isaac near.

How does Abraham know the Lord will send his angel before Eliezer? (Verse 7.)

We are not told. It may have been that the Lord specifically told Abraham he would; more likely, Abraham has faith that the Lord will do so in order to fulfill his promise about Abraham's seed. Eliezer probably doesn't know how Abraham knew either but he nevertheless trusts Abraham.

Eliezer takes the oath in verse 9, though he probably doesn't know yet how he will fulfill it. Why is he willing?

Eliezer apparently believes, as Abraham states, that the Lord will help him, and he acts on that faith.

10 And the servant took ten camels of the camels of his master, and departed; for all the goods of his master were in his hand: and he arose, and went to Mesopotamia, unto the city of Nahor.

11 And he made his camels to kneel down without the city by a well of water at the time of the evening, even the time that women go out to draw water.

12 And he said, O Lord God of my master Abraham, I pray thee, send me good speed this day, and shew kindness unto my master Abraham.

13 Behold, I stand here by the well of water; and the daughters of the men of the city come out to draw water:

14 And let it come to pass, that the damsel to whom I shall say, Let down thy pitcher, I pray thee, that I may drink; and she shall say, Drink, and I will give thy camels drink also: let the same be she that thou hast appointed for thy servant Isaac; and thereby shall I know that thou hast shewed kindness unto my master.

Beginning in verse 10, Eliezer proceeds to do what's needed to find Isaac a wife, without further instructions. Abraham completely turns over this important task to Eliezer just as he had previously put all his goods "in his hand." What does this tell us about Abraham and Eliezer's past relationship?

Eliezer was obviously a trustworthy steward who, by his past initiative and good judgment in managing Abraham's affairs, had gained Abraham's confidence. Abraham trusts his faithful steward, feeling no compulsion to hover over him like a mother hen, afraid to relinquish control. This is how a good servant-master relationship should be, including ours with the Lord. Remember, "for he that is compelled in all

things, the same is a slothful and not a wise servant."(D&C 58:26.) Notice how the words "servant" and

"master" are repeated in verses 9 and 10, drawing our attention to the relationship as a good example.

Verse 10 says the servant went to "Mesopotamia, unto the city of Nahor." Genesis 25:20 calls Rebekah's

father "Bethuel the Syrian of Padanaram." And in Genesis 28:10 we read that Jacob went "toward Haran" to find Laban. Where exactly did Abraham's kindred live?

A good Bible dictionary is helpful in unraveling this. We find that Mesopotamia (which included the country between the Tigris and Euphrates rivers) was a part of Syria, and that Padanaram was another name for Mesopotamia. Haran, the city in Mesopotamia where Rebekah lived, was the name of Abraham's brother

who died in Ur of the Chaldees. (Genesis 11:27-28.) Evidently the city of Haran was named for him. The probable reason it is also called the "city of Nahor" is that Nahor, Abraham's other brother and Rebekah's grandfather, settled there.

If we figure ten miles per day, the five-hundred-mile trip to Haran would have taken Eliezer about seven weeks—plenty of time to think. By the time he arrives in Haran, he has formulated a plan. He arrives in the evening when the women come out to draw water; then he proposes a plan to the Lord and asks for his help in making it successful. Eliezer tells the Lord, "This is what I propose to do. Please help me do it," not, "What shall I do?" Does this seem to you the right way to proceed?

Eliezer does the thinking and leaves it to the Lord to confirm or disconfirm. Elsewhere in the scriptures,

the Lords approves of this. (See D&C 9:7-8; 58:26-29.)

Why does Eliezer address the Lord as "Lord God of my master Abraham," and not just "Lord God"?

(Verse 12.)

Eliezer knows the Lord loves Abraham, so he addresses the Lord on behalf of Abraham, saying in effect that what the Lord does for Eliezer will be done for Abraham.

What does "good speed" (verse 12) mean?

"Good speed" means "a prosperous journey" or "success."

Eliezer begins and ends his prayer wanting the Lord to "shew kindness" to Abraham. (Verses 12 and 14.) What does this tell us about Eliezer's own feelings towards Abraham?

Eliezer himself feels kindly toward Abraham; perhaps he also feels protective, as he asks the Lord to show kindness to Abraham so that Abraham won't be disappointed.

Do you think Eliezer's plan for finding Isaac a wife was a good one?

There are several reasons to think it was:

of "draw water," "pitcher," and "drink" up through verse 20. Even though Abraham has expressed concern only about the girl's family, Eliezer seems to know that her character is also important to Abraham, and that character is perhaps the basic reason Abraham is interested in her family.

Did Eliezer propose too difficult a task for a young girl to perform?

The task was difficult, but it needed to be difficult to be selective. However, it may have been easier than we might think: The New English Bible uses the word "well" in verse 11 interchangeably with the word "spring," which means the water may have been on the surface rather than underground. This would have made the task considerably easier, though still difficult enough to be selective.

15 And it came to pass, before he had done speaking, that, behold, Rebekah came out, who was born to Bethuel, son of Milcah, the wife of Nahor, Abraham's brother, with her pitcher upon her shoulder.

16 And the damsel was very fair to look upon, a virgin, neither had any man known her: and she went down to the well, and filled her pitcher, and came up.

17 And the servant ran to meet her, and said, Let me, I pray thee, drink a little water of thy pitcher.

18 And she said, Drink, my lord: and she hasted, and let down her pitcher upon her hand, and gave him drink.

19 And when she had done giving him drink, she said, I will draw water for thy camels also, until they have done drinking.

20 And she hasted, and emptied her pitcher into the trough, and ran again unto the well to draw water, and drew for all his camels.

21 And the man wondering at her held his peace, to wit whether the Lord had made his journey prosperous or not.

22 And it came to pass, as the camels had done drinking, that the man took a golden earring of half a shekel weight, and two bracelets for her hands of ten shekels weight of gold;

23 And said, Whose daughter art thou? tell me, I pray thee: is there room in thy father's house for us to lodge in?

24 And she said unto him, I am the daughter of Bethuel the son of Milcah, which she bare unto Nahor.

25 She said moreover unto him, We have both straw and provender enough, and room to lodge in.

26 And the man bowed down his head, and worshipped the Lord.

27 And he said, Blessed be the Lord God of my master Abraham, who hath not left destitute my master of his mercy and his truth: I being in the way, the Lord led me to the house of my master's brethren.

28 And the damsel ran, and told them of her mother's house these things.

Why does the account say, "Behold, Rebekah came out" rather than just "Rebekah came out"? (Verse

15.)

The "behold" calls attention to the significance of the event, and also to Eliezer's excitement.

Rebekah's lineage is given in verse 15, and, more clearly, earlier in Genesis 22:20-23. Lineage was Abraham's main concern. What was Rebekah's relationship to Abraham?

She was the granddaughter of Abraham's brother, which would have made her a first cousin once removed to Isaac.

In Genesis 22:20-23, we find that someone told Abraham about the children and grandchildren of his brother Nahor. The only grandchild mentioned is Rebekah, except for Aram (who was significant because he was the father of the Syrians). Why do you think other grandchildren weren't mentioned?

The information may have come from Rebekah's relatives who had in mind a match with Isaac. But then, since Eliezer later tells Rebekah's family about Isaac's birth, they might not have even known about Isaac. Or perhaps Moses, who wrote Genesis, only recorded the genealogical information that seemed most relevant, omitting mention of Nahor's other grandchildren. Whatever actually happened, the message Abraham received was timely. It came after his trial at Moriah and the Lord's subsequent promise to

multiply his seed (which would be through Isaac, as we find from Genesis 21:12), and before the death of

Sarah—an event that probably increased Isaac's desire to take a wife. (Genesis 24:67.) It appears that for some time, the Lord had Rebekah in mind for Isaac, and events were working toward that end.

Besides family, what else about Rebekah is noted at this point?

In verse 16, her beauty and her virtue are noted, two characteristics that would be important to Isaac. Describing Rebekah's beauty, the Joseph Smith Translation says, "And the damsel being a virgin, [was] very fair to look upon, such as the servant of Abraham had not seen, neither had any man known the like

unto her. (Verse 16.)

In verse 14, the servant prays, "let it come to pass." Then verse 15 begins, "It came to pass." What does the repetition emphasize?

That Eliezer's request was fulfilled. The Lord had heard him.

Rebekah gives Eliezer a drink, waits for him to finish, offers to water the camels, and then does so. Notice

all the "hurry" words: in verse 17, the servant runs to meet Rebekah; in verses 18 and 20, Rebekah

hastens; in verse 20 she runs again; later, in verse 28, she runs once more; and in verse 29, Laban runs out. What does all this communicate?

Everyone seems intent on their tasks, Eliezer eager to find Isaac a wife, Rebekah self-forgetful and absorbed in her work, Laban excited because such visitors were probably infrequent and welcome in Haran.

Assuming that the water source was a spring rather than a well, why don't the camels drink directly from it? Was Rebekah asked to do unnecessary work?

We don't think so. The camels, if they had drunk from the spring, would have muddied the water, which was also used by the people living in Haran.

Up until verse 21, Eliezer is referred to as "the servant." Beginning in verse 21 and for the next several

verses, he is referred to as "the man." Toward the end of the story (verse 52) he once again becomes "the servant." Why the change?

Eliezer is referred to as "the man" until after he reveals his identity and mission beginning in verse 34. This gives us a feeling for the curiosity that Rebekah and her family must have felt about this "man," until he did tell them his purpose in coming.

The Joseph Smith Translation gives verse 21 as: "And the man, wondering at her, held his peace, pondering in his heart whether the Lord had made his journey prosperous or not." Rebekah's agreeing to water the camels wasn't enough; she had to do it. Eliezer may have kept quiet in order not to distract her from her task. What indicates that Rebekah did a good job watering the camels?

Rebekah doesn't just take the edge off the camels' thirst; she waits until they have "done drinking," as she

says she will in verse 19.

Why does Eliezer give Rebekah only one golden earring? (Verse 22.)

The ring was a nose-ring. (See footnote 47a in the LDS edition of the Bible.) In verse 47, Eliezer says he put it on her face. This gift and the bracelets were probably generous ones, as Laban takes special note

of them in verse 30.

Eliezer asks Rebekah if there's lodging for him and his men in her father's house. (Verse 23.) He is looking for lodging, but that's not the only reason he asks the question. Can you think of another?

It was a good excuse for asking whose daughter she was. Throughout this story, Eliezer is careful not to give offense.

Eliezer takes out the jewelry while Rebekah finishes watering the camels (verse 22), and then asks her

who she is (verse 23). Why does he take out the jewelry before he knows who she is?

By now, Eliezer is quite certain that Rebekah is the one for Isaac, and hence from the right family. He asks only to confirm it.

In verse 47, Eliezer reports to Rebekah's family that he asked her whose daughter she was before actually putting the jewelry on her. Why does he wait to put on the jewelry until after he's asked?

By first confirming that Rebekah belongs to the right family, Eliezer shows respect to her family, avoiding even the possibility of giving offense in a situation that requires tact and courtesy.

Rebekah offers Eliezer hospitality without consulting her family. (Verse 25.) Why?

Apparently her family expects that she will act hospitably, and she does.

Rebekah answers Eliezer's questions directly, saying no more than is needed, not even giving the additional information of her own name. What does this tell us about her?

She is obliging and modest, here and in all her conversation.

What is provender?

Dry feed for animals.

What is Eliezer's reaction when he finds out that Rebekah is from Abraham's family? (Verses 26-27.) What might have been his reaction?

Eliezer doesn't pat himself on the back for his cleverness, but worships the Lord, acknowledging his guidance. He also humbly acknowledges his position as Abraham's emissary, and the fact that the Lord has done it for Abraham, not for him.

Verses 26 and 27 are worshipful and beautiful. Part of this beauty comes from the phrases bound

together by repeated sounds. For example, in verse 26 the repeated ow and d sounds bind together the

phrase, "bowed down his head." Read verses 26 and 27 aloud and see if you can pick out other such phrases.

Here are several we noticed: worshipped the Lord; Blessed e; Lord God; my master Abraham; not left destItaltute my master; Lord led; house of my master's brethren. Note also how

the s sounds bind the whole of verse 27 together.

Now try rereading verses 26 and 27 aloud.

What does "I being in the way" mean? (Verse 27.)

"I, being in the vicinity" or "I, on the way here."

Instead of, "the man bowed down his head, and worshipped the Lord" (verse 26), the New English Bible says the man "bowed down and prostrated himself to the Lord." Rebekah could not but fail to notice

this. Further, it appears that Eliezer's praising of the Lord in verse 27, even though it sounds like a prayer, is intended for Rebekah's ears—the Lord is referred to in the third person, not the first. What must have been the effect of all this on Rebekah?

It must have raised her curiosity, excitement, and anticipation.

Why doesn't Eliezer here tell Rebekah all the details of what has just happened? (Verses 26-27.)

To do so would almost be like making the proposal to Rebekah, which would put her in an awkward position. By custom, the proposal was made to the family, usually the father.

Why does Rebekah leave Eliezer standing outside? (Verse 28.)

It must have been inappropriate to bring him into her mother's house unannounced. Apparently, the tradition was for the mother's house to be separate from the father's—not a bad idea in times when polygamy was practiced. We later find Isaac bringing Rebekah to his mother Sarah's tent.

29 And Rebekah had a brother, and his name was Laban: and Laban ran out unto the man, unto the well.

30 And it came to pass, when he saw the earring and bracelets upon his sister's hands, and when he heard the words of Rebekah his sister, saying, Thus spake the man unto me; that he came unto the man; and, behold, he stood by the camels at the well.

31 And he said, Come in, thou blessed of the Lord; wherefore standest thou without? for I have prepared the house, and room for the camels.

32 And the man came into the house: and he ungirded his camels, and gave straw and provender for the camels, and water to wash his feet, and the men's feet that were with him.

33 And there was set meat before him to eat: but he said, I will not eat, until I have told mine errand. And he said, Speak on.

34 And he said, I am Abraham's servant.

35 And the Lord hath blessed my master greatly; and he is become great: and he hath given him flocks, and herds, and silver, and gold, and menservants, and maidservants, and camels, and asses.

36 And Sarah my master's wife bare a son to my master when she was old: and unto him hath he given all that he hath.

37 And my master made me swear, saying, Thou shalt not take a wife to my son of the daughters of the Canaanites, in whose land I dwell:

38 But thou shalt go unto my father's house, and to my kindred, and take a wife unto my son.

39 And I said unto my master, Peradventure the woman will not follow me.

40 And he said unto me, The Lord, before whom I walk, will send his angel with thee, and prosper thy way; and thou shalt take a wife for my son of my kindred, and of my father's house:

41 Then shalt thou be clear from this my oath, when thou comest to my kindred; and if they give not thee one, thou shalt be clear from my oath.

42 And I came this day unto the well, and said, O Lord God of my master Abraham, if now thou do prosper my way which I go:

43 Behold, I stand by the well of water; and it shall come to pass, that when the virgin cometh forth to draw water, and I say to her, Give me, I pray thee, a little water of thy pitcher to drink;

44 And she say to me, Both drink thou, and I will also draw for thy camels: let the same be the woman whom the Lord hath appointed out for my master's son.

45 And before I had done speaking in mine heart, behold, Rebekah came forth with her pitcher on her shoulder; and she went down unto the well, and drew water: and I said unto her, Let me drink, I pray thee.

46 And she made haste, and let down her pitcher from her shoulder, and said, Drink, and I will give thy camels drink also: so I drank, and she made the camels drink also.

47 And I asked her, and said, Whose daughter art thou? And she said, The daughter of Bethuel, Nahor's son, whom Milcah bare unto him: and I put the earring upon her face, and the bracelets upon her hands.

48 And I bowed down my head, and worshipped the Lord, and blessed the Lord God of my master Abraham, which had led me in the right way to take my master's brother's daughter unto his son.

The events in verses 29-30 are related out of order. Verse 29 says that "Laban ran out unto the man," but

Laban didn't run out until after he'd seen and talked to Rebekah, as verse 30 points out. So why are we

told about Laban's running in verse 29?

The line "Laban ran out unto the man" introduces Laban with a before-the-fact comment on how eager he was. Also, the feeling of excitement is intensified by placing Laban's running right after Rebekah's running

in verse 28.

Why does Laban say, "Come in, thou blessed of the Lord," to Eliezer? (Verse 31.) How does he know Eliezer has been blessed of the Lord?

From verse 30 we learn that it was seeing the earring and bracelets on Rebekah and hearing her report that prompted Laban to go to Eliezer. Perhaps it was the earring and bracelets, signs that Eliezer had

wealth, that made Laban say Eliezer was blessed of the Lord. This fits with Eliezer's speech in verse 35, where he explains to Laban that the Lord had blessed not him, but Abraham, his master, with wealth. Or it

may have been that Rebekah told Laban of Eliezer's speech in verse 27, where Eliezer said he had been blessed of the Lord. In either case, it does seem a little strange for Laban, an idolator, to be saying, "blessed of the Lord." He apparently is trying to assume an intimacy that doesn't exist.

The rest of Laban's speech is also suspect. His invitation, "Come in . . . wherefore standest thou without?

for I have prepared the house, and room for the camels" is inappropriate under the circumstances. (Verse

31.) Why?

Eliezer is standing without because he hasn't been invited in. Further, it is unlikely that everything has been prepared, because of Laban's hurry to get out to the man. Laban is playing a part—that of the good host. And in doing so, he treats Rebekah unfairly, implying she should have invited Eliezer in. Laban's showiness and back-handedness contrast with Rebekah's modesty and directness.

Who does the first he in verse 32 refer to?

The he refers to Laban or, probably, his servants, who ungirded (or unburdened) the camels and supplied water to wash the feet of Eliezer and his men. The house Eliezer is invited to was probably a separate guest house or tent. Laban treats Eliezer hospitably.

Why won't Eliezer eat until he has told his errand? (Verse 33.)

By refusing to eat first, Eliezer emphasizes the importance of his errand to Rebekah's family. He's such a diligent servant that he won't think of his own comfort when there's work to be done.

Eliezer begins confidently. (Verse 34.) Why is he confident now?

He knows that the Lord approves of his plan and will stand behind him. He apparently speaks both to

Laban and Bethuel, Rebekah's father, although no mention is made of Bethuel until verse 50.

How does Eliezer emphasize Abraham's wealth? (Verse 35.)

He enumerates all of Abraham's possessions, and also repeats the word "great": "And the Lord hath blessed my master greatly; and he is become great . . ." In addition, he has the evidence of the camel train to support his word. Notice that Eliezer attributes Abraham's success to the Lord, although he, as Abraham's chief servant, probably had a lot to do with the accumulation of Abraham's wealth. We've also seen him attribute his success in finding Rebekah to the Lord.

Why, after emphasizing Abraham's wealth, does Eliezer say that all of Abraham's possessions will be

given to Isaac? (Verse 36.)

This is to imply that Rebekah will be well taken care of if she marries Isaac.

Eliezer further suggests that there is something special about Isaac, because Sarah bore him when she was old. How would this information affect Laban and Bethuel?

They would likely be flattered that Abraham had sent to them to find a wife for Isaac.

In verses 37-48, Eliezer recounts the preceding events of the chapter and is quite faithful to the original account. Nevertheless, there are some variations between the actual account and Eliezer's retelling of it, and these variations are quite instructive in light of Eliezer's task. Here are a list of differences. It is interesting to try to understand the reasons for each difference, saving to the last the question of whether Eliezer is being deceptive.

earth," only that Abraham made him swear (compare verse 3 and verse 37.) Why?

Mentioning "the Lord, the God of heaven, and the God of the earth" might have brought up the religious differences between Abraham and Rebekah's family.

house and to my kindred." (Compare verses 4 and 38.) Why?

Although Abraham's kindred in Haran and those of his father's house (or father's family) were the same group of people, "father's house" brings to mind the close family ties between Abraham and his kindred, which Eliezer wants to emphasize.

6, 8 and verses 39, 41.) Why?

This insistence might easily have been taken as a negative comment on Abraham's kindred.

subsequent covenant with Abraham. (Compare verses 7 and 40.) Why?

This information would have made Rebekah's family seem inferior to Abraham.

will not be willing to follow thee." (Compare verses 8 and 41). Why?

This change acknowledges the family's authority. It is likely that Rebekah had to consent too, but here Eliezer is trying to convince the family, and so emphasizes their authority.

details as the exact manner in which Rebekah gave water to him and to the camels. (Compare verses 11-

20 and verses 42-46.) Why doesn't he include more of the details?

Eliezer's retelling of the story is brief and succinct, so that the full impact of the story and the Lord's approval of Rebekah will be felt. By now Eliezer's story has almost taken the form of a ritual. It is the fourth time that the series of events in which Eliezer asks for a drink, the girl gives him a drink, and she offers also to water the camels, has been repeated. The series first occurs when Eliezer says, "Let it come to pass," second when it does come to pass, third when he says, "I said let it come to pass," and fourth when he says "it did come to pass." One can imagine people in an oral tradition enjoying this repetition, which would also help them better remember what happened. 7. Eliezer changes Rebekah's answer to the question, "Whose daughter art thou?" so that Bethuel's father

instead of his mother is mentioned first. (Compare verse 24 and verse 47.) Why the difference?

It may be that Eliezer is here showing sensitivity to the patriarch's position; however the New English Bible and the Jerusalem Bible don't show this difference between Rebekah's actual answer and how Eliezer reports it.

in verse 48 he says he blessed the Lord, who had led him "in the right way to take [his] master's brother's daughter unto [Isaac]." Why this change?

In verse 48, Eliezer says in effect that it is the Lord's will that Rebekah marry Isaac. This is the strongest he's stated his case, and stating it this way prepares Rebekah's family for the question he is about to ask.

Was Eliezer being deceptive in making the above changes?

The changes were too small to say he was being deceptive. Furthermore, most of the changes were made to avoid giving offense. And since Abraham intended no offense, Eliezer was true to the spirit of Abraham's instructions. If he had been true to the letter, mechanically repeating Abraham's exact words, he might have offended Rebekah's family and been untrue to the spirit. It is a pharisaical heart that demands rigid obedience to the letter at the expense of the spirit. This doesn't mean Eliezer would have been justified in making up an untrue story to flatter Rebekah's family, but only that the changes he made were reasonable under the circumstances. Eliezer was being diplomatic—sensitive and careful not to offend, yet forcefully making his case.

Why in verse 48 is Rebekah referred to as Abraham's brother's daughter? Wasn't she his granddaughter?

In the Bible, daughter often means any female descendent.

49 And now if ye will deal kindly and truly with my master, tell me: and if not, tell me; that I may turn to the right hand, or to the left.

50 Then Laban and Bethuel answered and said, The thing proceedeth from the Lord: we cannot speak unto thee bad or good.

51 Behold, Rebekah is before thee, take her, and go, and let her be thy master's son's wife, as the Lord hath spoken.

52 And it came to pass, that, when Abraham's servant heard their words, he worshipped the Lord, bowing himself to the earth.

53 And the servant brought forth jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment, and gave them to Rebekah: he gave also to her brother and to her mother precious things.

54 And they did eat and drink, he and the men that were with him, and tarried all night; and they rose up in the morning, and he said, Send me away unto my master.

55 And her brother and her mother said, Let the damsel abide with us a few days, at the least ten; after that she shall go.

56 And he said unto them, Hinder me not, seeing the Lord hath prospered my way; send me away that I may go to my master.

57 And they said, We will call the damsel, and enquire at her mouth.

58 And they called Rebekah, and said unto her, Wilt thou go with this man? And she said, I will go.

59 And they sent away Rebekah their sister, and her nurse, and Abraham's servant, and his men.

60 And they blessed Rebekah, and said unto her, Thou art our sister, be thou the mother of thousands of millions, and let thy seed possess the gate of those which hate them.

Having given his account, Eliezer will not be put off. In verse 49, he asks for an answer, saying, "And now if ye will deal kindly and truly with my master, tell me . . ." The words "kindly and truly" are a figure of speech: the line means, "if ye will deal with true kindness" or "steadfast kindness." Why does Eliezer say this instead of something like, "now, if you will do the right thing, tell me"?

Eliezer's purpose has been to convince Laban and Bethuel that agreeing to the marriage is the right thing. He doesn't act like an authority over them, telling them it's the right thing; he respectfully allows them to draw their own conclusions. Notice that Eliezer wants Laban and Bethuel to show kindness to Abraham, just as he previously wanted the Lord to show kindness to him.

What does "that I may turn to the right hand, or to the left" mean? (Verse 49.)

Eliezer seems to be saying that it won't matter much which way he goes if Rebekah doesn't come with him.

Verses 50 and 51 are the only verses in which Bethuel says anything. His consent is necessary, but even in giving it, Laban may have been the spokesman. (It's unlikely that they spoke in unison.) It appears that Eliezer's story has had it's impact—Laban and Bethuel acknowledge the hand of the Lord in what has transpired and give their permission for Rebekah to go with Eliezer. But they do it in an odd way, saying,

"We cannot speak unto thee bad or good" (verse 50), meaning, "We can say nothing for or against it." (New English Bible.) It's as if they don't believe they have a choice in the matter. Why do they act this way?

Perhaps they don't want to take responsibility for making the choice. Their situation reminds us of Abraham's being commanded to offer up Isaac as a sacrifice—they are being asked to give up their daughter and sister, in all likelihood never to see her again. But, while Abraham simply obeys, Laban and Bethuel act superstitiously, as if they are under the influence of a powerful god who, by the magic he has worked with Eliezer and Rebekah, has deprived them of choice—an irrational way to make a decision.

Where was Rebekah while Eliezer was talking to Laban and Bethuel?

In verse 51, Laban and Bethuel say to Eliezer, "Rebekah is before thee." Apparently, she also had been listening to Eliezer.

Whatever Laban and Bethuel's reasons, Eliezer is grateful things have worked out. Once again, he

worships the Lord, acknowledging the source of his success. (Verse 52.) Then he brings out the rest of

his gifts. (Verse 53.) "Jewels of silver and gold" means "things of silver and gold." (See the L. D. S. edition of the Bible.) Why does Eliezer wait until Laban and Bethuel have given their permission before bringing out the gifts?

If given earlier, the gifts would have looked like a bribe; as it is, they are a seal on the agreement. Laban and Bethuel can't back down now as easily as they could have before accepting the gifts.

The gifts are given to Rebekah, her mother, and Laban. Why aren't they also given to Bethuel?

We don't know the reason, but it's not likely to have been an oversight on Eliezer's part. He's been very sensitive up to this point.

Eliezer finally gets to eat in verse 54. Then he tarries "all night." Why is this an ironic line?

During the whole of this episode, Eliezer tarries very little, amazingly little. He is in and out of Haran, with Rebekah, in less than a day, not staying even a little longer to rest from his nearly two-month journey. So, saying how long he stayed—"all night," actually emphasizes how short his stay was.

In the morning, Laban and Rebekah's mother are reluctant to let her go (verse 55) and ask that she be allowed to stay at least ten days. (The Scott's Bible, a nineteenth century translation, says "days" could

also have been translated "months.") Eliezer replies quite strongly, "Hinder me not." (Verse 56.) Why does he respond so sharply?

Perhaps Eliezer would have been willing to let Rebekah stay longer if he hadn't been afraid that, given a little time for thought, Laban and Bethuel might have changed their minds, probably not an unfounded fear, remembering the way they had agreed in the first place. Future events showed Laban reluctant to let Jacob leave even after Jacob had worked fourteen years for Leah and Rachel and six additional years for flocks and herds.

In verse 58, Laban and his mother ask Rebekah, "Wilt thou go with this man?" Why do they refer rather distantly to Eliezer as "this man"?

They are probably not too happy with Eliezer's insistence on going so soon.

What does "Wilt thou go with this man?" mean? Is Rebekah just now being asked to give her consent?

Rebekah has likely already agreed to go. The purpose of the question is to see if she wants to go now.

What does Rebekah's willingness to go with Eliezer to a strange country, away from her family, to marry a man she has never seen, tell us about her?

Her willingness suggests a spirited disposition, an eagerness to better her position through a good marriage, and perhaps a growing faith in the Lord. It also suggests years of getting ready for the time she would consent to an arranged marriage.

Verse 60 says, "And they blessed Rebekah." Who was it that blessed her?

The referent of "they" isn't clear. From verse 55 "they" appears to refer to "her brother and her mother," but the line in the blessing, "Thou art our sister" wouldn't be appropriate coming from her mother. Laban probably blessed Rebekah because he fits both possibilities. But whoever did give the blessing, it wasn't Bethuel—this wasn't a father's blessing.

Why do you think Bethuel took such a backseat to Laban?

There are several possibilities: Bethuel was too old and infirm or was derelict in his responsibilities; Laban was just naturally more assertive or was usurping patriarchal authority; or Bethuel may even have been dead. According to some Bible scholars, Bethuel wasn't in earlier versions of this story and was put in by later scribes. (Interpreter's Bible.)

The blessing Rebekah is given in verse 60 is similar to the one the Lord gave Abraham: "In blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven, and as the sand which is

upon the sea shore; and thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies." (Genesis 22:17.) Why the similarity?

One possibility is that Eliezer told Laban the blessing that had been given to Abraham. This seems unlikely though, given that Eliezer has already once avoided telling Laban the Lord's promise to Abraham.

(Verses 7, 40.) Laban may have heard of the promise given to Abraham from another source, but again this seems unlikely—Abraham is not likely to have made the promise public, and communication between Abraham and his relatives appears to have been very limited. Another suggestion is that a common nuptial wish at that time was for a large posterity who would triumph over their enemies. Barrenness was, after all, a cause of great sorrow. If this latter suggestion is the correct one, then Laban's repetition to Rebekah of the Lord's blessing to Abraham is ironic, because Laban doesn't know that the blessing has already been given, and with much more authority than he could possibly give it. Finally, it's possible that Laban was, in some measure, inspired.

Notice that in giving the blessing, the Lord is metaphorical while Laban is not. The Lord says, "I will multiply thy seed as the stars of heaven, and as the sand which is upon the seashore," but Laban says, "Be thou the mother of thousands of millions." (The Joseph Smith Translation says, "Be thou blessed of thousands—of millions.") Is the Lord's attitude any different from Laban's?

The Lord is serious; Laban we're not so sure about. He appears to be exaggerating. Perhaps he's showing off. Perhaps his exaggeration shows his reluctance to see Rebekah go.

What is the meaning of "Let thy seed possess the gate of those which hate them"? (Verse 60.)

The New English Bible translates this as "May your sons possess the cities of their enemies." The connection is that "gate" refers to the gates of the cities.

61 And Rebekah arose, and her damsels, and they rode upon the camels, and followed the man: and the servant took Rebekah, and went his way.

62 And Isaac came from the way of the well Lahai-roi; for he dwelt in the south country.

63 And Isaac went out to meditate in the field at the eventide: and he lifted up his eyes, and saw, and, behold, the camels were coming.

64 And Rebekah lifted up her eyes, and when she saw Isaac, she lighted off the camel.

65 For she had said unto the servant, What man is this that walketh in the field to meet us? And the servant had said, It is my master: therefore she took a vail, and covered herself.

66 And the servant told Isaac all things that he had done.

67 And Isaac brought her into his mother Sarah's tent, and took Rebekah, and she became his wife; and he loved her: and Isaac was comforted after his mother's death.

Who were Rebekah's damsels? (Verse 61.)

A damsel is a young woman. These must have been Rebekah's servants. She will soon be married and with her change of status will come the need for servants.

Lahairoi (verse 62) was the well where an angel of the Lord appeared to Hagar. (Genesis 16:6-14.) It was located, according to Arab tradition, near Kadeshbarnea, south of Hebron and Beersheba, and hence was

in "the south country." (Genesis 24:62; 20:1.) There are enough events occurring by wells in this chapter for the wells to be symbolic. What might they be symbolic of?

As wells were the support of life in the desert, so from the union of Isaac and Rebekah would come seed that would give spiritual life to all the nations of the earth. Christ himself, the "well of water springing up

into everlasting life" (John 4:14), was a descendant of Isaac and Rebekah.

Since Isaac dwelt "in the south country," while Eliezer was coming from the northeast, Eliezer must have

deliberately bypassed Abraham, taking Rebekah first to Isaac. In verse 66 we also see him giving his report to Isaac, not to Abraham. Why?

Though Isaac responsibly manages Abraham's encampment in Lahairoi, he seems, in contrast to both Abraham and Jacob, quiet and unassertive. Eliezer's actions are thoughtful, apparently intended to show respect to Isaac and to build him up in Rebekah's eyes. It is through Isaac and Rebekah now, that the Lord's promise to Abraham must be fulfilled.

The first part of verse 63 says, "Isaac went out to meditate in the field." The New English Bible translates this as: "Isaac . . . had gone out into the open country hoping to meet them (or to relieve himself)." What if

the second part of verse 63 said simply, "and he saw the camels arriving"? What more is conveyed by saying, "and he lifted up his eyes, and saw, and behold, the camels were coming"?

As it is, verse 63 conveys Isaac's excitement. When read aloud, the excitement is intensified by pausing slightly at the commas and reading with an awareness of the repeated cs and ms in "camels" and "coming": "and he lifted up his eyes, (slight pause) and saw, (slight pause), and, (slight pause) behold, (slight pause) the camels were coming." When reading this line aloud, we find ourselves imagining the camels coming. Do you?

What difference would it have made if instead of saying Rebekah "lighted off the camel," verse 64 said that she "got off the camel"?

The word "lighted" suggests ease, quickness, eagerness, traits characteristic of Rebekah.

Isaac's response in verse 63 parallels Rebekah's in verse 64:

he lifted up his eyes, and Rebekah lifted up her eyes

and saw, and when she saw Isaac,

and, behold, the camels were coming. she lighted off the camel.

What does the similarity convey?

It's as if they were attuned to each other, a suggestion of the oneness that marriage brings.

Why, in verse 65, does the servant refer to Isaac as his master, when he had previously referred to Abraham as his master?

Again, the effect is to build up Isaac in Rebekah's eyes.

Why do you think Rebekah veils herself before Isaac (verse 65) when she hasn't been veiled before Eliezer and the other servants?

Apparently it was the tradition for the bride to be veiled before the bridegroom.

The story of Isaac and Rebekah is framed with references to Isaac's mother, Sarah. The previous

chapter, Genesis 23, is about Sarah's death and burial; and in the last verse of this chapter, she is mentioned twice. Sarah had been dead three years when Isaac married Rebekah. (She was ten years

younger than Abraham [Genesis 17:17] and would thus have been 130 when Isaac married Rebekah.

However, she died when she was 127 years old [Genesis 23:1].) Her death was likely an impetus for Abraham to find Isaac a wife. In what ways does Rebekah take Sarah's place?

First, Rebekah literally takes Sarah's place, living in her tent and probably taking charge of her

responsibilities at Lahairoi. (Genesis 25:11.) Rebekah also takes Sarah's place in Isaac's affection, at least as far as that is possible. Isaac and his mother were likely very fond of each other; it was Sarah who

guarded Isaac's birthright and protected him from disrespectful Ishmael. (Genesis 21:8-12.) So, to say Isaac was comforted after his mother's death is to emphasize how much he loved Rebekah. There is no account of Abraham's meeting Rebekah. It is possible that he performed the marriage ceremony.

Notice the order of events in the last verse: "she became his wife" and then "he loved her," not an uncommon order then, nor at the time of the King James translation, when marriages were still arranged. Why is the line "and she became his wife; and he loved her; and Isaac was comforted after his mother's death" a fitting conclusion for this story in which Eliezer has played such a central role?

We see here the result of Eliezer's faithful service: a wife that Isaac loves.
