I Have Trusted in Thee-2 Nephi 4:15-35

Sandra Packard, Dennis Packard, Feasting upon the Word ( 1981)

6

These verses from 2 Nephi are often called the Psalm of Nephi. What is the historical setting of this psalm? What happened just before the psalm and what happens just after?

This passage occurs at a crucial point in the Book of Mormon. Lehi has just died, leaving his sons without

his guidance. Under Lehi's authority, Nephi had become his brothers' "ruler" and "teacher." (2 Nephi 5:19.) But with Lehi gone, Laman and Lemuel are angry with Nephi, saying, "We will not have him to be our

ruler; for it belongs unto us, who are the elder brethren, to rule over this people." (2 Nephi 5:3.) Just after Nephi's psalm, we find Laman and Lemuel becoming increasingly angry with Nephi, "insomuch that they

did seek to take away [his] life." (2 Nephi 5:2.) The Lord warns Nephi to flee for his life into the wilderness,

just as He earlier warned Lehi to escape from those who sought his life. (2 Nephi 2:1-2.) Nephi does flee,

and the divided family eventually becomes two hostile nations. (See Genesis 50:15-21 for a quite different result among brothers when their father dies.)

15 And upon these I write the things of my soul, and many of the scriptures which are engraven upon the plates of brass. For my soul delighteth in the scriptures, and my heart pondereth them, and writeth them for the learning and the profit of my children.

16 Behold, my soul delighteth in the things of the Lord; and my heart pondereth continually upon the things which I have seen and heard.

Nephi begins verse 15, "And upon these I write the things of my soul." What are "these"?

"These" are Nephi's small plates, the ones on which he was commanded to make an account of "the

ministry of [his] people." (1 Nephi 9:3.)

Why, then, if these plates were for an account of his ministry, does Nephi here record on them "the things of his soul"?

The things of Nephi's soul, the things he delights in and ponders continually, are the scriptures and the things of the Lord he has seen and heard. And, of course, these he uses in teaching and ministering to his people. As you continue reading, ask yourself why Nephi thought this passage would help him minister to his people and his children. What would it teach them?

What did the plates of brass contain? (Verse 15.)

They contained the five books of Moses, a record of the Jews down to the commencement of the reign of

Zedekiah, and the writings of the prophets. (1 Nephi 5:10-13.) So, Nephi must have had much of what is

in our Old Testament and more besides, for he speaks of prophets whose writings we don't have. (1

Nephi 19:10.) As you read, look for the Old Testament phrases Nephi uses.

Notice how many times Nephi repeats "my soul" and "my heart" in verses 15 and 16. Why does he say "my soul" and "my heart" rather than just "I"?

These phrases emphasize his feelings instead of other aspects of his personality.

17 Nevertheless, notwithstanding the great goodness of the Lord, in showing me his great and marvelous works, my heart exclaimeth: O wretched man that I am! Yea, my heart sorroweth because of my flesh; my soul grieveth because of mine iniquities.

18 I am encompassed about, because of the temptations and the sins which do so easily beset me.

19 And when I desire to rejoice, my heart groaneth because of my sins; nevertheless, I know in whom I have trusted.

Notice the "nevertheless" at the beginning of verse 17 and the one near the end of verse 19. What do these two occurrences of "nevertheless" signal?

They signal a change of mood. In verses 15 and 16 Nephi feels delight, rejoicing, and gratitude; in verses

17 to 19 he is despondent; in the verses that follow, he once again rejoices. Nephi seems divided, torn between moods, needing to resolve and unify his feelings.

What does "wretched" mean? (Verse 17.)

The first definition the dictionary gives is "deeply afflicted." This fits with Nephi's later talk of "affliction."

(Verses 26, 29.)

In verses 17 to 19, the lines "my heart sorroweth because of my flesh," "my soul grieveth because of mine iniquities," "I am encompassed about because of the temptations and the sins which do so easily beset me," and "my heart groaneth because of my sins" all repeat essentially the same idea. This repetition emphasizes Nephi's despondency. Why do you think Nephi was feeling so depressed? What might his sins have been?

Nephi must have been weighed down both with sorrow at his father's death and with the responsibility of keeping his family together. His sins probably included self-pity and anger toward his hostile brothers. We sympathize with Nephi. Who hasn't had similar feelings with less provocation? Nephi, unable to reconcile his family, must have felt anxious, knowing as he did from vision the ultimate destruction that awaited his

people at the hands of his brother's people. (1 Nephi 12:1-3.) This knowledge weighs heavily on him, for he writes, "And it came to pass that I was overcome because of my afflictions, for I considered that mine

afflictions were great above all, because of the destructions of my people, for I had beheld their fall." (1

Nephi 15:5.) Nephi may have hoped to avoid that terrible fall by a reconciliation. But if so, his desire to take matters into his own hands was contrary to the purposes of the Lord, as was Alma's when he wished to "speak with the trump of God, with a voice to shake the earth, and cry repentance unto every people." Alma says, "But behold, I am a man, and do sin in my wish . . . for I know that [God] granteth unto men

according to their desire, whether it be unto death or unto life" (Alma 29:1-4), implying that men must be allowed their free agency. If Laman and Lemuel wanted to rebel, God would allow them that privilege, and so must Nephi.

20 My God hath been my support; he hath led me through mine afflictions in the wilderness; and he hath preserved me upon the waters of the great deep.

21 He hath filled me with his love, even unto the consuming of my flesh.

22 He hath confounded mine enemies, unto the causing of them to quake before me.

23 Behold, he hath heard my cry by day, and he hath given me knowledge by visions in the nighttime.

24 And by day have I waxed bold in mighty prayer before him; yea, my voice have I sent up on high; and angels came down and ministered unto me.

25 And upon the wings of his Spirit hath my body been carried away upon exceeding high mountains. And mine eyes have beheld great things, yea, even too great for man; therefore I was bidden that I should not write them.

26 O then if I have seen so great things, if the Lord in his condescension unto the children of men hath visited men in so much mercy, why should my heart weep and my soul linger in the valley of sorrow, and my flesh waste away, and my strength slacken, because of mine afflictions?

27 And why should I yield to sin, because of my flesh? Yea, why should I give way to temptations, that the evil one have place in my heart to destroy my peace and afflict my soul? Why am I angry because of mine enemy?

Nephi now speaks of the Lord's past goodness to him. (Verses 20-25.) Most of the events he mentions are recorded earlier in his history. He first speaks of his "afflictions in the wilderness"—the wilderness in

which he wandered for eight years. (Verse 20.) Nephi uses the word "afflictions" many times in his record,

and in fact begins his book saying, ". . . having seen many afflictions in the course of my days." (1 Nephi

1:1.) How did the Lord preserve Nephi "upon the waters of the great deep"?

First, the Lord guided Nephi and his family over the ocean all the way to the promised land. But more specifically, he preserved Nephi when Laman, Lemuel, and the sons of Ishmael rebelled at sea and the

ship almost went under. (1 Nephi 18:9-21.)

When did the Lord fill Nephi with his love, even to the consuming of his flesh? (Verse 21.)

This may refer to the time when Nephi was so filled with the power of God that his brothers, who had

wanted to throw him into the sea, couldn't even touch him. (1 Nephi 17:48.) On that occasion he said, "Touch me not, for I am filled with the power of God, even unto the consuming of my flesh." If this is the

occasion referred to, it is interesting that verse 21 equates the love of God and the power of God. On that

same occasion, the Lord confounded Nephi's brothers and shook them (1 Nephi 17:54)—probably the

event referred to in verse 22. In this verse, Nephi calls his brothers "his enemies," which unfortunately they were, by their choice, not his.

Do you remember any times when the Lord heard Nephi's prayers? (Verse 23.)

There are several occasions Nephi specifically mentions: first, when he desired to know the truth of his

father's words and the Lord softened his heart that he did believe (1 Nephi 2:16); second, when he prayed

in behalf of Laman and Lemuel, and the Lord spoke to him about them (1 Nephi 2:18-19); third, when Laman and Lemuel bound him with cords intending to leave him in the desert to die and the Lord gave

him strength to break his bonds (1 Nephi 7:17-18); and fourth, in the land Bountiful when the Lord showed

him how to build the ship (1 Nephi 18:1-3).

When did Nephi receive "knowledge by visions in the nighttime" (verse 23), which means knowledge gained through dreams?

What this refers to isn't clear. Perhaps Nephi didn't record all of his spiritual experiences. And, in fact, he

says he didn't, in verse 25.

When did angels minister to Nephi? (Verse 24.)

We know of two occasions: once to rescue him from his brothers who were beating him (1 Nephi 3:28-30),

and another time to interpret a vision he had seen (1 Nephi 11:1).

These references show us Nephi remembering the Lord's past goodness to him. Do these occasions have anything in common? What does Nephi seem most grateful for?

Nephi appears particularly grateful to the Lord for protecting him from his enemies and for giving him knowledge.

In the above verses, Nephi paints a vivid picture using contrasts, for example, "wilderness" then "waters"

(verse 20), and "day" then "nighttime" (verse 23). What other contrasts do you notice?

We find three others: "consuming" then "confounding" (verse 21 and 22); "voice sent up" then "angels

coming down" (verse 24); "exceeding high mountains" then "valley of sorrow" (verses 25 and 26). Now, below, read aloud Nephi's account of the Lord's goodness, taking care to breathe only at the places indicated.

20 My God hath been my support; (breath) he hath led me through mine afflictions in the wilderness; (breath) and he hath preserved me upon the waters of the great deep. (breath)

21 He hath filled me with his love, even unto the consuming of my flesh. (breath)

22 He hath confounded mine enemies, unto the causing of them to quake before me. (breath) Behold),

23 He hath heard my cry by day, and He hath given me knowledge by visions in the nighttime. (breath)

24 And by day have I waxed bold in mighty prayer before him; yea, my voice have I sent up on high; and angels came down and ministered unto me. (breath)

25 And upon the wings of his Spirit hath my body been carried away upon exceeding high mountains. (breath) And mine eyes have beheld great things, yea, even too great for man; therefore I was bidden that I should not write them. (breath) O then,

26 if I have seen so great things, if the Lord in his condescension unto the children of men hath visited men in so much mercy, (quick breath) why should my heart weep and my soul linger in the valley of sorrow, and my flesh waste away, and my strength slacken, because of mine afflictions? (breath) And

27 why should I yield to sin, because of my flesh? (breath) Yea, why should I give way to temptations, that the evil one have place in my heart to destroy my peace and afflict my soul? (breath) Why am I angry because of mine enemy? Now, what did you notice as you read this passage aloud?

What's most obvious is how the distance between breaths gradually increases from verse 20 to the long

sentence in verse 26, then rapidly decreases again, ending with the short question, "Why am I angry because of mine enemy?"

Did you also notice that in these verses some of the clauses are similar in structure and others different?

The first few clauses are similar, most of them beginning with "he hath." Then, in verse 24, they break out of any rigid pattern. Finally, at the end of the passage, the clauses become more patterned again, most of them beginning with "why should." As the distance between breaths increases, there is more variety in structure; as it decreases, the structures become more uniform.

What is the emotional effect of all this?

Nephi's emotion seems, at first, contained; but then it gradually builds in intensity, reaching its height

in verse 26, where Nephi feels the Lord's goodness so totally that his sorrow and wretchedness begin to be swept away.

Notice in verse 26, at the height of his gratitude, Nephi speaks of the Lord's condescension to the children of men. What is the condescension of God?

This question brings to mind the angel's query to Nephi: "Knowest thou the condescension of God?" (1

Nephi 11:16.) In answer, Nephi was shown the birth, ministry, and death of the Savior, the supreme manifestation of God's love.

In verses 26 and 27, Nephi questions himself. He asks, for example, "Why should I yield to sin?" rather than saying, as he did earlier, "I am encompassed about, because of the temptations and the sins which

do so easily beset me." (Verse 18.) What was Nephi's attitude toward his sinning in verses 17 to 19, and

what is it now in verses 26 and 27?

Earlier, Nephi felt helpless and discouraged because of his sins. He seems to have thought "they'd gotten the better of him." But now he assumes responsibility for his sins; he has given in to them, but needn't continue to do so.

What sin is Nephi describing when he says, "Why should my heart weep and my soul linger in the valley

of sorrow, and my flesh waste away, and my strength slacken, because of mine afflictions"? (Verse 26.)

It seems Nephi had been feeling sorry for himself. The sin he describes is self-pity. Notice the feeling of

powerlessness in the words "linger," "waste away," and "strength slacken" in verse 26 and "yield" and

"give way" in verse 27.

The word "flesh" has occurred several times so far: "My heart sorroweth because of my flesh" (verse 17);

"He hath filled me with his love, even unto the consuming of my flesh" (verse 21); "Why should . . . my

flesh waste away, and my strength slacken" (verse 26); and "Why should I yield to sin, because of my

flesh" (verse 27). What does "flesh" mean?

"Flesh" seems to mean something like "limited ability." Nephi sins because of his flesh or inability to control the situation. And, in sinning, even his limited abilities dwindle away. But when the Lord is with him, his flesh or limitations are consumed, seeming to vanish away.

Until verse 27, Nephi says things like "my heart sorroweth," "my soul grieveth," "my heart weeps," and "my soul lingers," talking about his heart and soul as if they were sorrowing more or less independently of him. Nephi seems to have a split personality. This seems especially obvious in the line, "And when I desire to

rejoice, my heart groaneth." (Verse 19.) He wants to go one way, his heart another. But inverse 27, we see a change: Nephi admits that he is making the trouble for his heart and soul, saying, "Why should I give way to temptations, that the evil one have place in my heart to . . . afflict my soul?" What is

happening in verse 27?

Nephi's personality is beginning to come together. He is beginning to be a whole person rather than a divided one. He's no longer deceiving himself by saying, "I really want to rejoice, but, you see, I have these problems."

Nephi, up until verse 26, speaks in generalities about his sins. But in verses 26 and 27 he acknowledges them: self-pity and anger. Why does he wait till this point to acknowledge his sins?

When a person acknowledges or confesses his sins, he has begun to repent, to see his situation as the Lord sees it. Before that, he feels frustrated but doesn't exactly know the source of his frustration. This appears to have been Nephi's state. And when he finally acknowledges his sins, he is ready to change— he is, in fact, already changing.

28 Awake, my soul! No longer droop in sin. Rejoice, O my heart, and give place no more for the enemy of my soul.

29 Do not anger again because of mine enemies. Do not slacken my strength because of mine afflictions.

30 Rejoice, O my heart, and cry unto the Lord, and say: O Lord, I will praise thee forever; yea, my soul will rejoice in thee, my God, and the rock of my salvation.

Nephi begins verse 28 saying to his soul, "Awake . . . !" Has he been asleep?

Nephi's "Awake!" is reminiscent of Lehi's last words to Laman and Lemuel: "O that ye would awake; awake from a deep sleep, yea, even from the sleep of hell, and shake off the awful chains by which ye are

bound." (2 Nephi 1:13-14.) That Nephi would use the same word in speaking to himself implies that no matter what the degree of sin, the same processes are at work. In sinning, we lose consciousness and perspective. To use another metaphor, we blind ourselves; we see neither our sins nor their consequences in our lives. Recall the prodigal son. Christ described the son's repentance, saying, "When

he came to himself," implying that he had been, as it were, unconscious. (Luke 15:17.)

Try to imagine a person drooping in sin. (Verse 28.) What does he look like?

We picture a person with head down, slouching, shuffling along. "Droop" means to hang or incline downward, to sink gradually, to become depressed or weakened.

Have you ever felt droopy?

We have.

In verse 28, Nephi speaks of the "enemy" of his soul; in verse 29, of his "enemies." Is he speaking of the same person or persons?

In verse 28, the enemy of Nephi's soul is "the evil one" or Satan; while in verse 29, "mine enemies" are probably Nephi's brothers.

In verses 26 and 27, Nephi confesses his self-pity and anger. He does so again in verses 28 and 29,

saying he's been drooping in sin (verse 28), giving place to the enemy of his soul (verse 28), angering

(verse 29), and slackening his strength (verse 29). Is it reasonable that a person would feel anger and self-pity at the same time?

It seems so to us. We feel the angriest when we're dwelling on our sense of weakness and frustration. If Nephi had felt stronger, more in control of the situation, he likely wouldn't have been angry.

Nephi begins, in verse 28, talking to his heart and soul, rather than about them. He admitted in verse

27 that he was causing their distress. Now, in verse 29, he encourages them to be strong. Finally, inverse

30, Nephi's heart and soul become one with him again; they do the same thing he does, namely, rejoice in the Lord. Nephi praises the Lord with his heart and soul, saying, "O Lord, I will praise thee forever; yea, my soul will rejoice in thee, my God, and the rock of my salvation." What has happened to Nephi?

He is no longer torn and divided, but whole again. And his wholeness comes as he prays to the Lord for the first time since he's started to ponder his wretchedness. His pondering has prepared him for prayer.

The word "rejoice" occurs a number of times in verses 28 to 30. Why is rejoicing so important to Nephi?

That is what he wants to do, as he says in verse 19. Pondering the things of the Lord makes him feel like rejoicing, but he has let his sins keep him from rejoicing.

Nephi says the Lord is the "rock" of his salvation (verse 30). In what ways is the Lord like a rock?

A rock is strong and steadfast—characteristics Nephi also finds in the Lord.

31 O Lord, wilt thou redeem my soul? Wilt thou deliver me out of the hands of mine enemies? Wilt thou make me that I may shake at the appearance of sin?

32 May the gates of hell be shut continually before me, because that my heart is broken and my spirit is contrite! O Lord, wilt thou not shut the gates of thy righteousness before me, that I may walk in the path of the low valley, that I may be strict in the plain road!

33 O Lord, wilt thou encircle me around in the robe of thy righteousness! O Lord, wilt thou make a way for mine escape before mine enemies! Wilt thou make my path straight before me! Wilt thou not place a stumbling block in my way—but that thou wouldst clear my way before me, and hedge not up my way, but the ways of mine enemy.

34 O Lord, I have trusted in thee, and I will trust in thee forever. I will not put my trust in the arm of flesh; for I know that cursed is he that putteth his trust in the arm of flesh. Yea, cursed is he that putteth his trust in man or maketh flesh his arm.

35 Yea, I know that God will give liberally to him that asketh. Yea, my God will give me, if I ask not amiss; therefore I will lift up my voice unto thee; yea, I will cry unto thee, my God, the rock of my righteousness. Behold, my voice shall forever ascend up unto thee, my rock and mine everlasting God. Amen.

From verse 31 to the end of the chapter, Nephi continues the prayer he began in verse 30. He stops

praying only for a brief interlude at the end of verse 34 and the beginning of verse 35. The following

chiasmus shows the form of his prayer, beginning with verse 30:

a. I will praise thee, my God, the rock of my salvation (verse 30)

b. Wilt thou redeem me (verse 31)

c. Deliver me from my enemies (verse 31)

d. Make me shake at the appearance of sin (verse 31)

e. Shut the gates of hell (verse 32)

e. Don't shut the gates of righteousness (verse 32)

d. Encircle me in the robe of righteousness (verse 32)

c. Deliver me from my enemies (verse 33)

b. I will trust thee (verse 34)

a. I will cry unto thee, my God, the rock of my righteousness (verse 35)

Notice the b lines in the chiasmus: "Redemption" and "trust" are counterpointed, suggesting that they are reciprocal activities. That is, for the Lord to redeem Nephi, Nephi must trust the Lord. Nephi prays for redemption. What else does he desire of the Lord?

He prays for deliverance from his enemies and from sin. Repeatedly he asks, "O Lord, wilt thou . . . ?" realizing that he is dependent on the Lord for strength. Deliverance from sin is particularly important to him; he places his request for this at the center of the chiasmus (lines d and e). Note that while all the

sentences in verses 31 to 33 are phrased as questions, the ones in verses 32 and 33 end with exclamation points rather than question marks. Question marks were used until the 1920 edition.

Nephi asks the Lord to make him shake at the appearance of sin (verse 31). Notice the rhyme of "make" and "shake," which emphasizes the word "shake." Why is the "shaking" image a vivid one for Nephi?

In all likelihood, he was remembering his brothers shaking before him when he was filled with the power

of God. (1 Nephi 17:54.) He seems to want that same fear of sin.

Nephi asks, "May the gates of hell be shut continually before me, because that my heart is broken and my

spirit is contrite!" (Verse 32.) What is Nephi saying? Does he mean "Since my heart is broken and my spirit contrite, will you Lord shut the gates of hell before me?", or, "Will you Lord help me to have a broken heart and a contrite spirit, so that the gates of hell will be shut before me?"

Probably the latter. Nephi also prays in these verses to be kept from sin, so it seems doubtful that he was sure his heart was broken and his spirit contrite. The latter reading also suggests that a broken heart and a contrite spirit themselves shut the gates of hell.

Nephi speaks of a broken heart and a contrite spirit. (Verse 32.) But earlier he paired "heart" with "soul."

(Verses 15-17.) Why does he now put "heart" with "spirit"?

The phrases "broken heart" and "contrite spirit" occur elsewhere in the scriptures. (See Psalm 34:18.) Nephi had probably read the psalms on the plates of brass. No doubt he was also remembering the recent words of his father: "Behold, he offereth himself a sacrifice for sin, to answer the ends of the law, unto all those who have a broken heart and a contrite spirit; and unto none else can the ends of the law

be answered." (2 Nephi 2:7.) A broken heart and a contrite spirit suggest a willingness to accept the will of the Lord, to lay aside one's pride and one's own desires.

What is Nephi asking of the Lord when he says, "Wilt thou not shut the gates of thy righteousness before

me, that I may walk in the path of the low valley, that I may be strict in the plain road!"? (Verse 32.)

Nephi wants to walk in the "path of the low valley"—the path without rough places, not the rocky mountainous paths; he wants to be strict in the plain road—to stay in the unobstructed way. He doesn't want sin to keep him from the Lord; he desires forgiveness and mercy—an open gate.

In verse 33, Nephi asks the Lord to encircle him in the robe of his righteousness. What has Nephi been encircled in?

Earlier, Nephi said that he was "encompassed about" by temptation and sin. (Verse 18.) In contrast, Lehi

earlier spoke of being "encircled about" eternally in the arms of the Lord's love. (2 Nephi 1:15.) Nephi, too, desires this. The words of his dying father seem to linger with him.

At the end of verse 33, Nephi again speaks of paths. And again he desires an unobstructed one. Is he

making the same request that he did in verse 32?

Previously, Nephi didn't want sin to block off his way; this time he doesn't want his enemies—his brothers—to block his way.

What does "hedge" mean?

"Hedge" means to obstruct.

Nephi wants the Lord to obstruct his brothers' way. Why?

There may have been other reasons, but at least one is obvious: his brothers were out to kill him.

We have seen Nephi, in verses 32 and 33, compare his future course to an actual journey, using metaphors such as "gates," "walk," "path," "road," "stumbling block," and "way." Why does Nephi use journey metaphors?

Nephi has just completed a long journey and may be thinking it's time for another one. Indeed, in the next chapter, the Lord warns Nephi to flee into the wilderness. He does, and he and his company "journey in

the wilderness for the space of many days." (2 Nephi 5:7.)

Nephi says he will trust in the Lord rather than in the arm of flesh. (Verse 34.) What is the arm of flesh?

An arm, like a rock, is a symbol of strength. The arm of flesh, then, is the strength of man.

What, then, does "maketh flesh his arm" mean? (Verse 34.)

It means, "maketh man his strength."

Nephi temporarily stops praying in verses 34 and 35 to say he will trust in the strength of the Lord, not in the strength of man. How will trusting in the Lord help him solve his problems?

We in the western world like to think happiness will come if we can just get what we want. The trouble is, we might not have the strength or ability to get what we want, and so we simply end up frustrated. Or, even if we have the strength, we may find that getting what we want doesn't really make us happy, because we may have been wanting the wrong things. In the Orient, the idea is that peace comes when we stop wanting. But it's hard to imagine how anyone could exist at all without wanting something. Nephi's message seems to be neither of these: we should want, but we must want what the Lord wants. Trusting him, we'll want the right things, we won't ask "amiss," and the Lord will give liberally.

The lines, "I will lift up my voice unto thee"; "I will cry unto thee, my God, the rock of my righteousness"; and "Behold, my voice shall forever ascend up unto thee, my rock and mine everlasting God"; are

successively stronger statements of the same idea. (Verse 35.) How does Nephi feel here?

We're left sensing Nephi's renewed confidence and strength in the presence of God.

Throughout this psalm, Nephi uses phrases, particularly metaphors, that have their origin in earlier

scripture. Examples are: visions in the night (2 Nephi 4:23; Job 4:13, 20:8, 33:15; Isaiah 29:7); "the rock of

my salvation" (2 Nephi 4:30; Psalm 89:26); "gates open or shut continually" (2 Nephi 4:32; Isaiah 60:11);

"gates of righteousness" (2 Nephi 4:32; Psalm 118:19); "valley" used metaphorically (2 Nephi

4:26,32; Psalm 23:4); "plain" way or road (2 Nephi 4:32; Isaiah 40:4); "stumbling block" (2 Nephi

4:33; Isaiah 57:14); "hedge" (2 Nephi 4:33; Proverbs 15:19; Psalm 89:40); trusting in the Lord, not in man

(2 Nephi 4:34; Psalm 118:8); "arm of flesh" (2 Nephi 4:34; 2 Chronicles 32:8 2 Chronicles 32:8); "maketh

flesh his arm" (2 Nephi 4:34; Jeremiah 17:5); and "my rock" (2 Nephi 4:35; 2 Samuel 22:2; Psalm 18:2). Why does Nephi so frequently use other scripture in his own writing?

Nephi began this passage, "For my soul delighteth in the scriptures." (Verse 15.) The scriptures fill him and are a part of him, so they come out in his own writing—and not mechanically; they flow from him.

There are also phrases in this passage that are not found in the Old Testament but that echo the New

Testament: "gates of hell" (2 Nephi 4:32; Matthew 16:18) and God giving liberally to him that asketh (2

Nephi 4:35; James 1:5). Obviously, Nephi didn't have access to New Testament writings. Why does he then use New Testament phrases?

Perhaps Nephi and the New Testament writers shared common sources, either inspiration or Old Testament sources we no longer have. Or it may have been that New Testament phrases were used in translating Nephi's words.

Looking back over the whole twenty-one verses now, notice what has happened: Nephi has progressed

from statements contrasting his joy with his sorrow (verses 15-25) to questions asking why he should be

unhappy (verses 26-27) to imperatives to repent (verses 28-30) to questions calling on the Lord for help

(verses 31-33) to, at the end, statements again. The statements at the end, though, express a resolution rather than a conflict. What has been resolved?

Nephi's soul. He is no longer a split person, vacillating between rejoicing and sorrowing. Now he is wholly rejoicing.

Notice also that the words I, me, my, and mine have occurred over one hundred times in these twenty-one verses. This passage is a very personal entry on the small plates. How do you think it might have helped Nephi's children and thus been useful in his ministry?

Nephi's children would undoubtedly experience some of the same frustrations that he did. They would suffer affliction in the wilderness of America and abuse by their brethren the Lamanites. Jacob, Nephi's younger brother, later records, "The time passed away with us, and also our lives passed away like as it were unto us a dream, we being a lonesome and a solemn people, wanderers, cast out from Jerusalem, born in tribulation, in a wilderness, and hated of our brethren, which caused wars and contentions;

wherefore, we did mourn out our days." (Jacob 7:26.) Nephi's children would have many temptations to anger and self-pity. But Nephi here sets the example: remember the goodness of the Lord, trust in him, rejoice in him and cry to him forever; then you will be strong in him, and the weakness that gives occasion for anger and self-pity will vanish. Then there will be no need to strike out at the world or to withdraw from it out of a feeling of frustration or weakness—only the need to be patient and get on with the work of the Lord.

Thou Art the Man-2 Samuel 11-12

Sandra Packard, Dennis Packard, Feasting upon the Word ( 1981)

7

When does the Jewish year end?

The Jewish new year begins in September, so that "the year was expired" (verse 1) about the time the harvests were in and the cool season was coming on.

David couldn't have sent "all Israel" to war. What does this phrase mean?

David didn't literally send "all Israel," but men from all over Israel. This figurative way of speaking emphasizes that the war was a major enterprise and that David was negligent in not participating. Elsewhere in these two chapters "Israel and Judah," "the people," and "all the people" are used to refer to

the army, with similar effect. (2 Samuel 11:11; 12:28, 29, 31.)

The "But" at the end of verse 1 signals a contrast. What is being contrasted?

Kings going forth to battle and King David staying home.

Why is the contrast made?

It emphasizes David's idleness, indicating that something was amiss with him from the very beginning of this story. In later chapters, we see David fighting in battle, ignoring his men's pleas that he "go no more

out with us to battle" lest he be killed and "quench . . . the light of Israel." (2 Samuel 21:16-22.) But in this chapter he tarries still at Jerusalem.

Why is the historian so indirect in the way he points out David's idleness and negligence?

David is a much-loved biblical figure. Directly attacking him would no doubt arouse antagonism, perhaps making us unwilling to listen to the rest of the story. By being indirect, the historian allows us to draw our own conclusions from the facts he presents.

2 And it came to pass in an eveningtide, that David arose from off his bed, and walked upon the roof of the king's house: and from the roof he saw a woman washing herself; and the woman was very beautiful to look upon.

3 And David sent and enquired after the woman. And one said, Is not this Bath-sheba, the daughter of Eliam, the wife of Uriah the Hittite?

4 And David sent messengers, and took her; and she came in unto him, and he lay with her; for she was purified from her uncleanness: and she returned unto her house.

5 And the woman conceived, and sent and told David, and said, I am with child.

David's idleness is even further emphasized in verse 2. How?

David arises from off his bed in the "eveningtide." Although it may not have been uncommon at the palace to take an afternoon "siesta," it is certain that Joab and the army didn't have the leisure for one.

Why might David have been walking on the roof? (Verse 2.)

This probably wasn't unusual. It was a way to catch the breeze after the heat of the day.

How much might David have known about the woman he saw?

Although David didn't know who the woman was, he must have known whose household she belonged to, as the house was close to the palace.

In verse 3, the one who was sent to inquire after the woman gives his report in the form of a question: "Is not this Bathsheba?" Why?

This was the proper way to speak to the king. For the sake of appearances, a servant wouldn't want to tell the king something the king didn't already know—hence, he asks a question. Notice this question is the first quotation in the story. The narrative of this story consists of two things: quotations and descriptions of events, the alternation between the two giving variety.

Uriah is frequently referred to as Uriah the Hittite. (Verse 3.) Why is the fact that he was a Hittite emphasized?

Because Uriah was a Hittite, a foreigner dwelling among the Israelites, David should have been especially careful not to abuse or afflict him. The Lord's commandment to Israel was, "Thou shalt neither vex a

stranger, nor oppress him: for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt" (Exodus 22:21), and "The stranger that dwelleth with you shall be unto you as one born among you, and thou shalt love him as thyself."

(Leviticus 19:34.) And Uriah was an especially deserving stranger. The way he shows reverence for "the

ark" in verse 11 and the fact that he was fighting in Israel's army suggest that he was a convert to the Lord and probably strong in the faith, as was the convert Ruth, the Moabitess. "Uriah" means, as we learn from the LDS edition of the Bible, "Jehovah is my light." We also know that Uriah was a man of estimation in

Israel. His house was close to the King's, and he is listed as one of thirty honorable men in Israel. (2

Samuel 23:39.)

David commits adultery with Bathsheba. (Verse 4.) How much choice did she have in the affair?

The historian doesn't say, though he does say several messengers were sent and "took" her. The historian's concern is with David's responsibility, not Bathsheba's.

What does it mean to be purified from uncleanness. (Verse 4.)

According to Jewish law, people and things could become "unclean" and had to be ritually purified, which

usually required a waiting period and some kind of cleansing agent—sometimes fire (Numbers 31:19-24),

sometimes blood (Leviticus 14:25), often water (Leviticus 15:27). A woman, after her menstrual flow, was

considered unclean for seven days. (Leviticus 15:19-27.)

The fact that Bathsheba was purified from her uncleanness is given as a reason for David's lying with her. This doesn't make much sense. What sense can you make of it?

Perhaps Bathsheba had been purifying herself when David saw her washing, and the historian is telling us that the rites of purification had been completed when David took her. If this is the case, the account should probably read, ". . . and she was purified from her uncleanness," rather than ". . . for she was purified from her uncleanness." An alternative translation is found in The New English Bible: "When she came to him, he had intercourse with her, though she was still being purified after her period, and then she went home." If this translation is correct, the fact that she wasn't purified worsened David's sin.

Does it appear the affair was kept secret?

With several messengers having been sent to take Bathsheba, word might well have gotten around.

Servants whisper among themselves, as they do later when Bathsheba's child dies. (2 Samuel 12:19.) David seems to be taking no great pains to keep the affair a secret, so we might expect Joab and Uriah to

have found out about it "through the grapevine," even before David sent for Uriah. (Verse 6.) There was, for one thing, open communication between the palace and the camp of Israel. There was also enough time, since it would have taken Bathsheba about two months to know she was pregnant. Then, too, when Bathsheba found out about her condition, she "sent and told David"—via a messenger, no doubt. Once again, word was likely to get around.

Why do you think Bathsheba told David she was with child? (Verse 5.)

Her message, short and to the point, seems a plea for help. With her husband away, she was liable by

Jewish law to be stoned to death for adultery. (Leviticus 20:10.)

6 And David sent to Joab, saying, Send me Uriah the Hittite. And Joab sent Uriah to David.

7 And when Uriah was come unto him, David demanded of him how Joab did, and how the people did, and how the war prospered.

8 And David said to Uriah, Go down to thy house, and wash thy feet. And Uriah departed out of the king's house, and there followed him a mess of meat from the king.

9 But Uriah slept at the door of the king's house with all the servants of his lord, and went not down to his house.

What do you think Joab thought when David sent for Uriah? (Verse 6.)

If he didn't already know, Joab must have wondered what business David had with Uriah, a subordinate. It would have been in keeping with Joab's character, as we shall see, for him to have made secret inquiries to find out.

Why does David ask Uriah about Joab and the war? (Verse 7.) After all, David was apparently in constant correspondence with Joab.

Here it seems that David, needing a pretense for calling Uriah home from the battlefield, makes small talk, pretending to check up on Joab by getting Uriah's report.

The historian makes David's speech to Uriah (verse 7) seem insincere. What makes David's speech sound that way?

David's speech seems perfunctory—he's really not interested in Joab, the people (the army), or the war, and the short phrases with the repeated hows and dids help convey this. Notice we aren't told Uriah's answers. They don't matter to David.

David tells Uriah to go down to his house and wash his feet. (Verse 8.) He dares not be more specific than this. What does he really want Uriah to do?

David's plan to cover his sin seems simple enough: get Uriah to sleep with Bathsheba so the child will appear to be Uriah's.

Why does David send a "mess of meat" after Uriah? (Verse 8.)

David's intent, it seems, isn't to feed Uriah but to make sure that he goes home. The unusual word order in the sentence points to this. The normal construction would be, "A mess of meat from the king followed him." The act of following is emphasized by placing the phrase "followed him" at the beginning of the clause "and there followed him a mess of meat from the king."

Why does Uriah spend the night with the servants of the king rather than with his wife? (Verse 9.)

Perhaps Uriah knows what's going on and doesn't want any part of it.

Verses one through eight of this chapter begin with and; verse nine begins with but. What does the but here signal?

It tells us that Uriah's refusal to go home is significant: David's plan has gone awry. Even Bathsheba's pregnancy seems less problematic than this turn of events.

It's unlikely that Uriah slept with all of David's servants. Why this poetic license?

The "all" suggests that enough of the servants were there to tell Uriah whatever David's servants might have heard about the affair and to confirm anything Uriah might have already heard. It also emphasizes that there were many witnesses to Uriah's not going home.

10 And when they had told David, saying, Uriah went not down unto his house, David said unto Uriah, Camest thou not from thy journey? why then didst thou not go down unto thine house?

11 And Uriah said unto David, The ark, and Israel, and Judah, abide in tents; and my lord Joab, and the servants of my lord, are encamped in the open fields; shall I then go into mine house, to eat and to drink, and to lie with my wife? as thou livest, and as thy soul liveth, I will not do this thing.

12 And David said to Uriah, Tarry here to day also, and to morrow I will let thee depart. So Uriah abode in Jerusalem that day, and the morrow.

13 And when David had called him, he did eat and drink before him; and he made him drunk: and at even he went out to lie on his bed with the servants of his lord, but went not down to his house.

The servants tell David that Uriah didn't go down to his house. (Verse 10.) Why do they make a point of telling David this seemingly insignificant fact?

The servants must have known what David was up to. They probably enjoyed their role in the intrigue, implying, "What are you going to do now?" when making their report to the king.

David asks Uriah why he didn't go down to his house (verse 10), thereby making too much of the fact to maintain his innocent front. What does this tell us about David's state of mind?

David is getting more desperate. The pretense isn't working. He probably suspects that Uriah knows, and asks the question to probe more deeply.

Does Uriah answer David? (Verse 11.)

Uriah doesn't confront David directly with his knowledge. But he nevertheless answers David when he says, ". . . shall I then go into mine house, to eat and to drink, and to lie with my wife?" This response must have shaken David.

Interesting variations on the triad, "to eat, and to drink, and to lie with my wife," recur throughout this story.

In verse 13, Uriah eats and drinks before David, but lies on his bed with the servants. In 12:3, the lamb in

Nathan's parable eats of the poor man's own food, drinks of his own cup, and lies in his bosom. In 12:16,

David abstains from eating and drinking and lies on the earth. Then, in 12:20, David first eats (the drinking is implied) and then lies with Bathsheba. What does the repetition emphasize?

It emphasizes David's indulgence and, by contrast, Uriah's sacrifice. While Uriah is on the battlefront serving his king, David is home, not only eating, drinking and lying with his wives (presumably), but also with Uriah's wife. The sin is all the worse because it has been by the joint occurrence of Uriah's allegiance to David and David's neglect of duty that the adultery has so easily taken place. If Uriah had been less dutiful, he could have been home watching out for his wife.

In verse 11, Uriah says that the ark, Israel, Judah, Joab, and the servants of Joab are at the battlefront, implying, in short, that everything of importance is there. Why does he make a point of this?

David should be out there too, and this is what Uriah seems to be telling him.

Uriah doesn't say the armies are fighting, but says they "abide in tents" and "are encamped in the open fields." Why?

He seems to be drawing a contrast between where he has been sleeping and where David has been sleeping.

Why does Uriah refer twice to Joab as his lord?

It's as if he's saying that his place is with Joab, not at the palace covering up for David.

Uriah tells David, "As thou livest, and as thy soul liveth, I will not do this thing." (Verse 11.) The phrases "as thou livest" and "as thy soul liveth" mean essentially the same. Elsewhere in scripture "as thy soul liveth" is translated "as sure as you live," "as you live," "by your life," "on your life." (See the New English

Bible and Jerusalem Bible translations of 1 Samuel 1:26 and 1 Samuel 17:55.) Uriah's oath seems repetitious. The normal way to swear the oath seems to have been "as the Lord liveth, and as thy soul

liveth." (See 1 Samuel 20:3; 1 Samuel 25:26; 2 Kings 2:2; 2 Kings 4:30.) Uriah seems to be emphasizing the sureness of David's life, perhaps even its exaltedness. Why?

Perhaps Uriah is pointing to the difference between his own life and David's. It is probably clear to Uriah that by defying the king he has placed his own life in jeopardy, though justly, the king's life, not Uriah's, should be in jeopardy. Also, there's irony in Uriah's swearing the oath with David in place of the Lord. David has acted very unlike the Lord, and swearing the oath this way seems to emphasize that fact.

Why does David tell Uriah to "tarry"? (Verse 12.)

He apparently wants more time to make his plan work and so tells Uriah to "tarry" as he himself has been tarrying. Then, in a last-ditch effort, he gets Uriah drunk, hoping that he'll then go home to his wife.

Verse 13 says that Uriah ate and drank "before" David. Does this mean David didn't eat with him?

It's not clear. But if David did eat with Uriah, his betrayal was so much the worse, because at that time, if you had eaten with someone, you were especially obliged to treat him as a friend. The implication of Christ's statement, "He that eateth bread with me hath lifted up his heel against me," seems to be that Judas's betrayal was worse because he had eaten with Christ. If David didn't eat with Uriah, though, this wouldn't necessarily have seemed strange. Kings frequently ate by themselves, even at banquets, as a precaution against poisoning.

Verse 13 says, "and at even he went out to lie on his bed with the servants of his Lord." Does this statement seem humorous to you?

It's funny that Uriah's bed with the servants should be called his bed. It's the historian's way of saying David's ploys are getting a bit old in the face of Uriah's steadfastness. Uriah's insistence on sleeping with the servants must have shown David that it wasn't for a whim or for an over-zealous loyalty that he wasn't going down to his house.

14 And it came to pass in the morning, that David wrote a letter to Joab, and sent it by the hand of Uriah.

15 And he wrote in the letter, saying, Set ye Uriah in the forefront of the hottest battle, and retire ye from him, that he may be smitten, and die.

16 And it came to pass, when Joab observed the city, that he assigned Uriah unto a place where he knew that valiant men were.

17 And the men of the city went out, and fought with Joab; and there fell some of the people of the servants of David; and Uriah the Hittite died also.

David has Uriah carry his own execution order. (Verse 14.) Why?

This was probably David's way of saying Uriah had forced his hand and left him no choice. Uriah may well have guessed the contents of the letter, but he makes no attempt to resist or flee, and David seems almost to know that he won't read the letter. Uriah has acted with integrity, and death is the consequence. Perhaps death, especially an honorable death in battle, was an easier alternative than facing the shame that would otherwise come upon him and Bathsheba.

What does the letter tell you about David's attitude towards Uriah? (Verse 15.)

David appears without sympathy, vicious and vengeful. Uriah has thwarted his attempts to protect Bathsheba and himself, and Uriah must pay.

Does Joab follow David's instructions? (Verses 15-17.)

No.

Why?

To have done so would have made him obviously responsible for the death of Uriah and aroused the wrath of the army. If David had given the matter any thought, he would have realized that a commander just doesn't desert a man in the heat of battle. Perhaps David wasn't thinking, being too busy covering his sin to think clearly; perhaps he wanted Joab to take the blame to draw attention away from himself; perhaps he didn't care; perhaps all three. What Joab does is to put Uriah in a place where valiant men of the enemy are, sacrificing a number of men to make Uriah's death seem more natural. If David won't look out for Joab, Joab will look out for himself. Nevertheless, Joab does the job, helping the king cover up a sin whose evil consequences are multiplying. Joab, unlike Uriah, acts as an accomplice.

Verse 17 says, "And the men of the city went out, and fought with Joab." Does this mean Joab put himself in the same death trap that he put Uriah in?

No, only a fool would have done that. Here "Joab" must mean "some of Joab's men."

18 Then Joab sent and told David all the things concerning the war;

19 And charged the messenger, saying, When thou hast made an end of telling the matters of the war unto the king,

20 And if it so be that the king's wrath arise, and he say unto thee, Wherefore approached ye so nigh unto the city when ye did fight? knew ye not that they would shoot from the wall?

21 Who smote Abimelech the son of Jerubbesheth? did not a woman cast a piece of millstone upon him from the wall, that he died in Thebez? why went ye nigh the wall? then say thou, Thy servant Uriah the Hittite is dead also.

22 So the messenger went, and came and shewed David all that Joab had sent him for.

23 And the messenger said unto David, Surely the men prevailed against us, and came out unto us into the field, and we were upon them even unto the entering of the gate.

24 And the shooters shot from off the wall upon thy servants; and some of the king's servants be dead, and thy servant Uriah the Hittite is dead also.

25 Then David said unto the messenger, Thus shalt thou say unto Joab, Let not this thing displease thee, for the sword devoureth one as well as another: make thy battle more strong against the city, and overthrow it: and encourage thou him.

Why does Joab instruct the messenger so elaborately in verses 20 and 21? What is he up to?

Joab is likely angry at David for having put him in an awkward position. His instructions to the messenger seem calculated to put David in his place. Joab's apparently stupid move is really David's fault, but Joab wants David first to condemn it before he lets the responsibility be known. This foreshadows Nathan's parable in chapter 12. Nathan, too, relates an incident calculated to arouse David's wrath without letting David know that he himself is the one to be condemned.

You can read the incident about Abimelech in Judges 9:50-54. Besides its similarity to the military maneuver that killed Uriah, why does this incident seem appropriate to Joab?

David's downfall, like Abimelech's, was because of a woman, and nothing, apparently, could be more disgraceful to a soldier.

Does the messenger carry out Joab's instructions? (Verses 22-23.)

It appears from the King James Version that the messenger isn't crafty enough to wait for David's angry response before telling him of Uriah's death. However, in other versions, the New English Bible and theJerusalem Bible, for example, the servant does wait, and David repeats the anticipated questions before hearing that Uriah is dead. The effect is to emphasize David's gullibility and Joab's ability to manipulate him.

We might expect David to be angry with Joab for allowing so many soldiers to be killed. Why isn't he

angry that Joab didn't carry out his specific instructions and allow only Uriah to be killed? (Verse 25.)

Perhaps he is so relieved at Uriah's death that he chooses to overlook it. He may also have felt uneasy about having put Joab in such a bad position, not because of any moral qualms, but because Joab was a person to be reckoned with—he was in charge of the army.

From what he says to the messenger (verse 25), what attitude does David take toward Joab?

David plays the magnanimous monarch, treating Joab as a well-meaning but blundering child in need of encouragement. His condescending attitude may have been calculated to arouse Joab's wrath, in return for Joab's design to arouse his.

26 And when the wife of Uriah heard that Uriah her husband was dead, she mourned for her husband.

27 And when the mourning was past, David sent and fetched her to his house, and she became his wife, and bare him a son. But the thing that David had done displeased the Lord.

Does Bathsheba really mourn for her husband, or is the mourning merely perfunctory?

There is no indication in the narrative of how she felt toward Uriah, or toward David, for that matter. Perhaps in her situation, affection was only a secondary consideration. The New Bible Commentary says the period of mourning would have been seven days.

David "fetches" Bathsheba to his house. (Verse 27.) What does the word "fetch" suggest?

Like the word "took," it suggests Bathsheba had little to say about the matter.

The last line of chapter 11 is: "But the thing David had done displeased the Lord." This line starts with another significant but. Why is it significant?

It indicates that David's plans are about to go awry as they did following the previous but when Uriah refused to go down to his house. The entire next chapter is an elaboration of just how awry David's plans go.

The Lord's displeasure in verse 27 stands in direct contrast to Joab's displeasure in verse 25. Why is the contrast drawn?

The historian seems to be saying that David should have been more concerned about displeasing the Lord than displeasing Joab.

Do you think "displeased" is the right word to describe the Lord's feelings?

"Displeased" is not a strong word, but the Lord's feelings must have been strong—the severe punishment that Nathan later pronounces upon David attests to that. The line "But the thing David had done displeased the Lord" is an ironic understatement, saying more by saying less.

1 And the Lord sent Nathan unto David. And he came unto him, and said unto him, There were two men in one city; the one rich, and the other poor.

2 The rich man had exceeding many flocks and herds:

3 But the poor man had nothing, save one little ewe lamb, which he had bought and nourished up: and it grew up together with him, and with his children; it did eat of his own meat, and drank of his own cup, and lay in his bosom, and was unto him as a daughter.

4 And there came a traveller unto the rich man, and he spared to take of his own flock and of his own herd, to dress for the wayfaring man that was come unto him; but took the poor man's lamb, and dressed it for the man that was come to him.

5 And David's anger was greatly kindled against the man; and he said to Nathan, As the Lord liveth, the man that hath done this thing shall surely die:

6 And he shall restore the lamb fourfold, because he did this thing, and because he had no pity.

The parable that Nathan tells David is a disguised version of the events of chapter 11. What parallels can you draw between the characters and circumstances of Nathan's parable and those of the David and Bathsheba story?

The rich man is David; the poor man, Uriah; the ewe lamb, Bathsheba. The rich man's many flocks and herds are David's numerous wives and concubines. The lamb was unto the poor man as a daughter; the father-daughter relationship suggests the strong feelings of love and tenderness that Uriah probably felt toward Bathsheba. The traveler is probably a passing fancy or sexual mood of David's. Note that the parable doesn't add that somehow the poor man was uncooperative and so the rich man saw to it that he was killed. That would have been too obvious.

What does the fact that Bathsheba is represented by a lamb imply about her?

It suggests her innocence.

Why does David respond angrily to Nathan's story? (Verse 5.)

Obviously, David takes the story as an actual case and not as a parable. Perhaps Nathan had come in before with stories of injustices for David to rectify. His great anger may also have been a way to appear just before Nathan.

In the King James Version, David says, "the man that hath done this thing shall surely die." (Verse 5.) But, the footnote says, "or, is worthy to die." Similarly the New English Bible says "deserves to die." If the latter translations are correct, what was David's judgment against the rich man?

The judgment was that the man should "restore the lamb fourfold." That the rich man also deserved to die was David's opinion, not part of his actual judgment.

7 And Nathan said to David, Thou art the man. Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, I anointed thee king over Israel, and I delivered thee out of the hand of Saul;

8 And I gave thee thy master's house, and thy master's wives into thy bosom, and gave thee the house of Israel and of Judah; and if that had been too little, I would moreover have given unto thee such and such things.

9 Wherefore hast thou despised the commandment of the Lord, to do evil in his sight? thou hast killed Uriah the Hittite with the sword, and hast taken his wife to be thy wife, and hast slain him with the sword of the children of Ammon.

10 Now therefore the sword shall never depart from thine house; because thou hast despised me, and hast taken the wife of Uriah the Hittite to be thy wife.

11 Thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will raise up evil against thee out of thine own house, and I will take thy wives before thine eyes, and give them unto thy neighbour, and he shall lie with thy wives in the sight of this sun.

12 For thou didst it secretly: but I will do this thing before all Israel, and before the sun.

13 And David said unto Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord. And Nathan said unto David, The Lord also hath put away thy sin; thou shalt not die.

14 Howbeit, because by this deed thou hast given great occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, the child also that is born unto thee shall surely die.

"Thou art the man" is the climax of the story. (Verse 7.) How do you think David felt when Nathan uttered these words?

David must have been cut to the quick. He had condemned himself and could no longer deceive himself about the seriousness of his sin.

A very strong rebuke prefaced by "Thus saith the Lord God of Israel" follows. It is the judgment of God

against David. What aspect of David's sin most concerns the Lord? (Verses 7-12.)

The Lord seems concerned, first of all, with how David has treated him, with the gross ingratitude he has shown. He reminds David of all he has done for him and then asks why David has despised him in return. "Despise" is a strong word, one the Lord uses more than once. The first time, he says David has "despised the commandment of the Lord"; the second time, he says David has despised him. In despising his commandments, David has despised the Lord himself.

Doesn't the Lord care about Uriah?

Part of David's ingratitude to the Lord is the ingratitude he showed to Uriah. The Lord says, "Inasmuch as

ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me." (Matthew 25:40.) This seems to apply here.

What does "thy master's house" in verse 8 refer to?

This refers to the house of Saul, who was king before David. Saul's house included both his family ("thy master's wives") and his kingdom ("the house of Israel and Judah").

The punishment the Lord pronounces is a fitting one. Why?

Because David has destroyed Uriah's house with murder ("thou has killed Uriah the Hittite with the sword") and adultery ("and hast taken his wife to be thy wife"), his own house will be plagued in like manner with murder ("the sword shall never depart from thine house") and adultery ("I will take thy wives before thine eyes, and give them unto thy neighbor, and he shall lie with thy wives in the sight of this sun"). Notice that the Lord says he will "take" David's wives, just as David has taken Uriah's. The words "give" and "take" recur throughout the narrative. At first the Lord gave, but when David started to take from others, the Lord took from him.

The word "sun" occurs in verse 11 and again in 12. What does the repetition emphasize?

The public nature of David's punishment.

Why is a public punishment necessary?

In all likelihood, many people had heard of David's sin, so to counteract the bad effects of his example on the people, the Lord's displeasure had to be made obvious to everyone. David had publicly shamed the Lord; the punishment is a humiliation to David in kind. The rest of David's life is a fulfillment of Nathan's judgment against him. His problems begin when his son Amnon rapes his half-sister Tamar, and Absalom, her brother, takes vengeance by killing Amnon. Then Absalom rebels against his father, David,

and as part of his rebellion becomes the "neighbor" spoken of in verse 11 to lie with his father's wives in

the sight of the sun. (See 2 Samuel 16:20-22.) And because David is king and ruler over the house of Israel and Judah, the damage doesn't stop at his own doorstep. The rebellion of Absalom was a political event that affected all Israel.

Did the Lord engineer all this trouble in order to punish David?

The trouble that followed David to the end of his life was according to the pronouncement of the Lord, but it was also the expected consequence of his own bad example before his children and people.

David's condemnation is so absolute that he has nothing to say about it. He only acknowledges his sin,

saying, "I have sinned against the Lord." (Verse 13.) How does the confession, "I have sinned against the Lord," show a sensitivity to Nathan's pronouncement?

Nathan emphasized David's ingratitude to the Lord. David responds to this, saying not simply, "I have sinned," but "I have sinned against the Lord." (Compare this with the prodigal son's confession, I have sinned against Heaven.")

Joseph Smith changed the line "The Lord also hath put away thy sin" (verse 13) to "The Lord also hath not put away thy sin." The New English Bible translation of this line is: "The Lord has laid on another the consequences of your sin." These latter two translations make more sense. Why?

The Lord has just told David that the sword will never leave his house, and he is about to tell him that Bathsheba's child will die. This is inconsistent with the Lord's having put away his sin. Who was the "other" on whom the Lord laid the consequences of David's sin?

The child. David was the one who deserved to die; the child was the one who actually died.

Two other translations of verse 14 are: "Because in this you have shown your contempt for the Lord, the boy that will be born to you shall die" (New English Bible) and "Because you have outraged Yahweh by doing this, the child that is born to you is to die" (Jerusalem Bible). Does it seem right that the Lord should take the child instead of David?

It may have been that if the child had lived, others would have died spiritually. David himself may not have fully realized the seriousness of his sin and begun to repent of it if the child hadn't died. Then, too, the very existence of the child would have been a painful reminder of David's sin—a reminder that others might have used to justify their own sins: "David did it, and he's the Lord's chosen, so it can't be too bad if we do it too." By the child's death, the Lord showed his displeasure with David for all to see. As for the child, the Lord doubtless took him to his bosom, sparing him from what might have been a very difficult life.

What are the similarities between David's pronouncement against the rich man in Nathan's parable

(verses 5 and 6) and the Lord's pronouncement against David (verse 13)?

The Lord implies that David deserves to die, just as David said the rich man deserved death. And just as David's actual judgment against the rich man was in lieu of death, so is the Lord's judgment against him. Unfortunately, David cannot restore fourfold to Uriah that which he has taken, because Uriah is gone. It is

interesting in this light, though, to read D&C 132:39, which says that in the next life David will lose his wives—just as the rich man did his sheep.

15 And Nathan departed unto his house. And the Lord struck the child that Uriah's wife bare unto David, and it was very sick.

16 David therefore besought God for the child; and David fasted, and went in, and lay all night upon the earth.

17 And the elders of his house arose, and went to him, to raise him up from the earth: but he would not, neither did he eat bread with them.

18 And it came to pass on the seventh day, that the child died. And the servants of David feared to tell him that the child was dead: for they said, Behold, while the child was yet alive, we spake unto him, and he would not hearken unto our voice: how will he then vex himself, if we tell him that the child is dead?

19 But when David saw that his servants whispered, David perceived that the child was dead: therefore David said unto his servants, Is the child dead? And they said, He is dead.

20 Then David arose from the earth, and washed, and anointed himself, and changed his apparel, and came into the house of the Lord, and worshipped: then he came to his own house; and when he required, they set bread before him, and he did eat.

21 Then said his servants unto him, What thing is this that thou hast done? thou didst fast and weep for the child, while it was alive; but when the child was dead, thou didst rise and eat bread.

22 And he said, "While the child was yet alive, I fasted and wept: for I said, Who can tell whether God will be gracious to me, that the child may live?

23 But now he is dead, wherefore should I fast? can I bring him back again? I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me.

24 And David comforted Bathsheba his wife, and went in unto her, and lay with her: and she bare a son, and he called his name Solomon: and the Lord loved him.

25 And he sent by the hand of Nathan the prophet; and he called his name Jedidiah, because of the Lord.

Why, in verse 15, does the historian refer to Bathsheba as Uriah's wife?

David's responsibility in the death of the child is emphasized by doing this.

Why is the incident of the child's death gone into at such great length?

The incident provides clues to David's state of mind following Nathan's visit.

Why does David grieve so much while the child is sick?

Of course, any parent would grieve for a dying child. But in David's case, the child was dying because of him. Then, too, the child's imminent death foreshadowed the ruin of his whole house. Nathan's words must have weighed heavily on David's mind.

David surprises his servants by apparently ceasing to grieve after the child dies. (Verses 20 and 21.) Others in his immediate situation might have grieved most intensely at that time. What is behind David's actions? Has he stopped grieving?

We don't think so. By the time the child had died, David must have been emotionally spent. After a seven-day fast he was probably close to death himself. His grief, though past tears, appears to be real and particularly poignant in the statement, "I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me."

The servants question David directly in verse 21 instead of circumspectly, as would be expected. What does this indicate?

The barriers of station seem temporarily down, indicating a self-forgetfulness brought on by an exhausting emotional experience.

David explains in verses 22 and 23 that he stopped fasting and weeping when the child died because, in short, there was no more purpose in it. Does this mean that he took a pragmatic, calculated approach to the whole situation, showing grief as long as the Lord might concede?

This seems unlikely given that one of the first things David does after the child dies is to worship. A pragmatist would have been angry that his plan had failed. Apparently, David was hoping the Lord would change his mind, but when he sees that there is no hope, he reconciles himself to the Lord's will.

Do you think that David, at this point, has repented of his sin?

David is sorrowful, but there isn't much evidence that he has repented. True, he has acknowledged his

sin, but that's just a beginning. Psalm 51, written by David "when Nathan the prophet came unto him, after

he had gone in to Bathsheba," contains another open acknowledgment of his sin. Verse 10 of this psalm says, "Create in me a clean heart, O God; and renew a right spirit within me," implying that, though David recognized his sin, his heart was not yet clean, nor his spirit right. In the Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith we read, "David sought repentance at the hand of God carefully with tears, for the murder of Uriah; but he could only get it through hell." (P. 339.) Part of this hell is indicated in later psalms, which show little

of the optimism of Psalm 51. For example, Psalm 102:9-10 reads, "For I have eaten ashes like bread, and mingled my drink with weeping, Because of thine indignation and thy wrath: for thou hast lifted me up, and cast me down."

In verse 24, David comforts Bathsheba "his wife." Why is she here called "his wife" rather than "Uriah's

wife" as she was previously called? (Verse 15.)

Comforting Bathsheba is David's first unselfish act toward her in this story. A husband should comfort his wife, and so it seems appropriate here that she be called his wife. Bathsheba must have needed comfort: she has apparently been seduced, her husband has been killed, she has been perfunctorily remarried, and she has lost the child conceived in the seduction—all in about a year's time.

Much is made of the second child's name (verse 25), but nothing was said of the first child's name. Why?

The name of a child is supposed to be an indication of its future, so it is appropriate that the first child is nameless. But Solomon is to have a great future.

Whom do the two hes in verse 25 refer to?

The first he refers to the Lord; the second to Nathan: the Lord sent by the hand of Nathan, and Nathan called his name Jedidiah. Solomon is called Jedidiah because the Lord loves him: Jedidiah means "beloved of the Lord." David also must have loved Solomon; either that or he felt guilty for all he'd done to Bathsheba, because at some time—we don't know when—he promises

Bathsheba that Solomon will be his successor. (1 Kings 1:17.) Later, we find Nathan coaching Bathsheba

in how to see that the promise is fulfilled. (1 Kings 1:1-14.)

26 And Joab fought against Rabbah of the children of Ammon, and took the royal city.

27 And Joab sent messengers to David, and said, I have fought against Rabbah, and have taken the city of waters.

28 Now therefore gather the rest of the people together, and encamp against the city, and take it: lest I take the city, and it be called after my name.

29 And David gathered all the people together, and went to Rabbah, and fought against it, and took it.

30 And he took their king's crown from off his head, the weight whereof was a talent of gold with the precious stones: and it was set on David's head. And he brought forth the spoil of the city in great abundance.

31 And he brought forth the people that were therein, and put them under saws, and under harrows of iron, and under axes of iron, and made them pass through the brick-kiln: and thus did he unto all the cities of the children of Ammon. So David and all the people returned unto Jerusalem.
