The war frames this story of David's sin—showing us, as we've seen, David's state of mind before he sinned, and here his state of mind after. These last events seem a reminder that the comfort David felt from Nathan's second visit wasn't to last. David's punishment, pronounced by Nathan, had just begun.

What is the city of waters Joab refers to in verse 27?

The New English Bible says "the King's Pool" instead of the "city of waters." This refers to the city's water supply, without which the city couldn't last long.

What is Joab's attitude toward David in verses 27 to 28?

Joab treats David like a subordinate, ordering him around. He lets David know that he [Joab] deserves the glory, but for the sake of appearances David had better get to it. Having acted as David's accomplice in sin, Joab feels entitled to lord it over David. David follows Joab's instructions, but resentfully, as the next few verses show.

Verse 30 says that David "took their king's crown from off his head, the weight whereof was a talent of gold with the precious stones: and it was set on David's head." The crown would have weighed close to 100 pounds—too much for either the Ammonite King or David to carry on his head. Several other translations say that the crown was from off the head of the Ammonite idol Milcom, and that only the precious stone from it was set on David's head. But the Lord's instructions, to the contrary, were: "Ye shall utterly destroy all the places, wherein the nations which ye shall possess served their gods, upon the high mountains, and upon the hills, and under every green tree: And ye shall overthrow their altars, and break their pillars, and burn their groves with fire; and ye shall hew down the graven images of their gods, and

destroy the names of them out of that place." (Deuteronomy 12:2-3.) What do you conclude about David from this incident?

It's not clear just how blasphemous this act was. At least it shows a reckless disregard for appearances— perhaps David's way of slapping Joab (who's been so concerned about appearances) in the face, as if he were saying, "I'll do what I darn well please." David seems to be asserting himself, showing how great and exalted he is, perhaps to compensate for his lack of involvement in the war.

David then makes slaves of the conquered Ammonites. The New English Bible clarifies the details: "He took its inhabitants and set them to work with saws and other iron tools, sharp and toothed, and made them work in the brick-kilns." Why does the historian emphasize the harsh details of David's treatment of the conquered Ammonites?

David may not have been unusually harsh for his time, but he was harsh nevertheless, perhaps for a token of bravery to compensate for his irresponsible leadership in the war, or perhaps as a general reaction to the frustration he was feeling. David's salvation was yet to be worked out.
