Endless Punishment-d&amp;c 19

Sandra Packard, Dennis Packard, Feasting upon the Word ( 1981)

8

This revelation is addressed to Martin Harris. Martin took an early interest in Joseph Smith, financially assisting the Prophet. He certified the Book of Mormon characters with Charles Anthon and then acted as scribe for the translation of the first 116 pages, only to lose them. He didn't act as scribe again but became one of the three witnesses. Seven months before this revelation, using his farm as collateral, he contracted to pay $3,000 for the printing of 5,000 copies of the Book of Mormon, payment due eight months after the start of printing.

1 I am Alpha and Omega, Christ the Lord; yea, even I am he, the beginning and the end, the Redeemer of the world.

2 I, having accomplished and finished the will of him whose I am, even the Father, concerning me— having done this that I might subdue all things unto myself—

3 Retaining all power, even to the destroying of Satan and his works at the end of the world, and the last great day of judgment, which I shall pass upon the inhabitants thereof, judging every man according to his works and the deeds which he hath done.

4 And surely every man must repent or suffer, for I, God, am endless.

5 Wherefore, I revoke not the judgments which I shall pass, but woes shall go forth, weeping, wailing and gnashing of teeth, yea, to those who are found on my left hand.

Christ begins by introducing himself. What do "alpha" and "omega" mean? (Verse 1.)

"Alpha" and "omega" are the first and last letters of the Greek alphabet, so "alpha and omega" means "the first and the last," which is simlar to "the beginning and the end."

What does Christ mean by saying he is "the beginning and the end"? (Verse 1.) (Hint: The earlier 1833 and 1835 versions of the Doctrine and Covenants end verse 1 with a colon rather than a period, the "I" at

the start of verse 2 referring back to the subject of verse 1, which is Christ. Verses 2 and 3 may be, then,

an explanation of verse 1.)

First, notice all the words that relate to "end" in verses 2 and 3: "accomplished," "finished," "end of the world," "last great day of judgment." Christ is the "end," it seems, because he completed the will of the Father and because his power extends to the end of the world. We also know that he was "in the

beginning" with the Father (John 1:2), the creator as well as judge of the world, though this fact isn't so

much emphasized in Section 19.

Why might Christ here be emphasizing the extent of his obedience and power? (Verse 2.)

These enable Christ to redeem the world by subduing all things unto himself. And Martin Harris needs to know this; he, like each of us, is in need of repentance and redemption. Also, Christ's obedience to the Father sets the example for Martin: Martin needs to be obedient to Christ, as Christ is to the Father.

When had Christ "accomplished and finished the will" of the Father concerning him? (Verse 2.)

He seems to have done so at the time of his crucifixion. John says that on Calvary, Christ knew "that all

things were now accomplished, that the scripture might be fulfilled." (John 19:28.) And before he died,

Christ said, "It is finished." (John 19:30.)

What does "subdue" in verse 2 mean?

There are two meanings that seem relevant: first, to conquer and bring into subjection; second, to bring under cultivation, as in "subdue the earth"—more generally, to tame. Elsewhere in the scriptures we read

that Christ shall subdue "all enemies under his feet." (D&C 76:106.) This is consistent with "conquering";

and so is verse 3 of this section, where we read that Christ will destroy Satan and his works at the end of the world. Satan is, of course, the enemy of all righteousness. The second meaning, "to tame," also seems appropriate, as "taming" is what Christ does to Martin Harris in this section. The prophet Micah says that God "will turn again, he will have compassion upon us; he will subdue our iniquities; and thou

wilt cast all their sins into the depths of the sea." (Micah 7:19.) Christ subdues each of us by working with us to bring about our repentance. He is our Redeemer from sin.

What are "the works" of Satan? (Verse 3.)

In Section 76 we read, "And this is the gospel, the glad tidings, which the voice out of the heavens bore record unto us—That he came into the world, even Jesus, to be crucified for the world, and to bear the sins of the world, and to sanctify the world, and to cleanse it from all unrighteousness; That through him all might be saved whom the Father had put into his power and made by him; Who glorifies the Father, and saves all the works of his hands, except those sons of perdition who deny the Son after the Father

has revealed him." (D&C 76:40-43.) Apparently, then, the works of Satan, the things Satan has fashioned, are the sons of perdition, who suffer destruction with Satan, everyone else being finally redeemed. Of their punishment and destruction Christ says, "And the end thereof, neither the place thereof, nor their

torment, no man knows." (D&C 76:45.) The works of Satan are also destroyed, in another sense, when men repent—which all but the sons of perdition will do by the end of the world, for Christ will deliver his

kingdom "spotless" to the Father. (D&C 76:107.)

Notice in verses 2 and 3 all the words ending in -ing: having, concerning, having, retaining, destroying, judging, according. What is conveyed by all these "ing" words?

They make us aware of Christ's power to act and to fulfill his words.

In verse 1, Christ says that he is the beginning and the end, and then in verse 4 he says that he is endless. How might this paradox be resolved?

End seems to be used in two different ways. "End" in verse 1 has to do with the end of Christ's work.

Presumably "endless" in verse 4 means unchanging, since it is used in the explanation of why men must repent or suffer: repentance or suffering has been previously decreed. Since the Lord is endless and will not revoke that decree, men must repent or suffer.

Why does the Lord use this paradox?

Paradoxes get our attention, making us realize we don't understand as much as we thought we did. The Lord is subduing us with this paradox, helping us become teachable.

What sounds are prominent in verse 5's description of the torment of the unrepentant?

The w, o, e, and ing sounds emphasize the groans of those in torment: "Woes shall go forth, weeping, wailing and gnashing of teeth."

Who will be found on Christ's left hand? (Verse 5.)

Recall the parable of the sheep and the goats. (Matthew 25:31-46.) The goats—those who will be found on Christ's left hand—are those who haven't cared for the needy. More generally, they are the unrepentant.

6 Nevertheless, it is not written that there shall be no end to this torment, but it is written endless torment.

7 Again, it is written eternal damnation; wherefore it is more express than other scriptures, that it might work upon the hearts of the children of men, altogether for my name's glory.

8 Wherefore, I will explain unto you this mystery, for it is meet unto you to know even as mine apostles.

9 I speak unto you that are chosen in this thing, even as one, that you may enter into my rest.

10 For, behold, the mystery of godliness, how great is it! For, behold, I am endless, and the punishment which is given from my hand is endless punishment, for Endless is my name. Wherefore—

11 Eternal punishment is God's punishment.

12 Endless punishment is God's punishment.

Verses 6 through 12 continue the discussion of the word endless. We are told that "endless punishment" doesn't mean "punishment without end," which initially seems as odd as saying that a meatless diet isn't a diet without meat. The effect is again an intellectual dislocation, a feeling that we cannot be very sure of ourselves and that we'd better listen. What is the meaning of endless punishment?

The Lord says that endless punishment is his kind of punishment and not necessarily punishment that doesn't end. This doctrine shouldn't surprise us, for in the Book of Mormon we find that Alma the Younger was "racked with eternal torment" and "encircled about by the everlasting chains of death" for three days.

(Alma 36:12, 18.) But the Lord's explanation resolves any confusion we might have had and we feel rewarded for having listened. Something has happened here that we'll see again at the end of the section: after listening to the Lord, we have cause to be glad and to rejoice.

Do the meanings of "endless" and "eternal" differ? (Verses 6, 7, 11, 12.) If not, why are both words used?

Both words are used interchangeably in this section; at least they seem to be in verses 6 and 7, which

say, ". . . it is written endless torment. Again, it is written eternal damnation"; and in verses 11 and 12, which say, "Eternal punishment is God's punishment. Endless punishment is God's punishment." In each case the thought is repeated and the feeling builds because of the repetition. Having two words similar in meaning allows a thought to be repeated and thus emphasized without having to use exactly the same words.

In verse 7, what does "express" mean?

Here, "express" seems to mean "designed for or adapted to its purpose." The Lord uses the words "eternal" and "endless" to describe his punishment, even though the punishment is not "eternal" and "endless" in the familiar sense. He does this so that "it might work upon the hearts of the children of men."

(Verse 7.)

Isn't this a little deceptive?

Perhaps for those who haven't experienced God's punishment, mistakenly believing that it will last forever gives them a better idea of how terrible it is than if the punishment were just called God's punishment, an incorrect idea in this case being closer to the truth than no idea at all. Nevertheless, those who believe incorrectly are not "one" with the Lord; that is, they need to have a different belief than the Lord about how long the punishment lasts in order to have a similar belief about how terrible it is.

In verse 8, what does "this mystery" refer to?

It refers to "the mystery of godliness" (verse 10), which includes the mystery of why Christ calls his punishment endless.

What is a religious mystery?

It is a religious truth that men can only know through revelation or that cannot be fully understood by men. The Lord says, "For, behold, the mystery of godliness, how great is it!" He means that it is a great mystery—one not easily understood by men. Mystery also refers to the specialized practices and knowledge peculiar to a group of people. Only those who are "chosen in this thing" will have the mystery revealed to them.

Do we know when Christ explained "the mystery of godliness" to his Apostles? (Verse 8.)

When the Twelve asked Christ why he spoke in parables, he answered, "Unto you it is given to know the mystery of the kingdom of God: but unto them that are without, all these things are done in parables."

(Mark 4:11; see also Matthew 13:10-11, Luke 8:9-10.) Perhaps he explained "the mystery of godliness" on an occasion like this one.

What does the Lord mean when he says he speaks to those chosen "even as one"? (Verse 9.)

This probably means that he speaks "even as one with them." He speaks directly to their understanding,

that they may enter into his rest or have peace in him (verse 23) and no longer be confused or unsettled. Christ must unsettle the wicked in order to subdue them, but to the righteous he brings peace.

Why is Martin Harris one of the chosen? Hadn't he been pretty bad?

Though disobedient, Martin was apparently still righteous enough to have this mystery explained to him without it being to his detriment; he could receive it in the way the Lord intended.

At this point, how much do we know about the nature of endless punishment?

We know only its source, not what it's like, though we certainly feel it must be terrible.

13 Wherefore, I command you to repent, and keep the commandments which you have received by the hand of my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., in my name;

14 And it is by my almighty power that you have received them;

15 Therefore I command you to repent—repent, lest I smite you by the rod of my mouth, and by my wrath, and by my anger, and your sufferings be sore—how sore you know not, how exquisite you know not, yea, how hard to bear you know not.

16 For behold, I, God, have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent;

17 But if they would not repent they must suffer even as I;

18 Which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit—and would that I might not drink the bitter cup, and shrink—

19 Nevertheless, glory be to the Father, and I partook and finished my preparations unto the children of men.

20 Wherefore, I command you again to repent, lest I humble you with my almighty power; and that you confess your sins, lest you suffer these punishments of which I have spoken, of which in the smallest, yea, even in the least degree you have tasted at the time I withdrew my Spirit.

21 And I command you that you preach naught but repentance, and show not these things unto the world until it is wisdom in me.

22 For they cannot bear meat now, but milk they must receive; wherefore, they must not know these things, lest they perish.

In verse 13, the Lord tells Martin to keep the commandments he has received from the hand of Joseph Smith. What commandments were these?

It seems likely that these were commandments given in earlier revelations written "by the hand" of Joseph

and received by the "almighty power" of God. (See Sections 5 and 17.)

In the first half of Section 19 there are twenty-one occurrences of the words repent, suffer, and punishment, besides several occurrences of judgment and torment. In addition, three times the

Lord tells Martin, "I command you to repent." (Verses 13, 15, 20.) Apparently, like many of us, Martin was

slow to listen, so the Lord emphasizes his instructions by repeating them. In verses 13-22, he uses

parallel phrases to emphasize just how bad the Lord's punishment is, for example, in verse 15, the phrases "by the rod of my mouth," "by my wrath," and "by my anger." Can you find other groups of such phrases?

Also in verse 15, we find the phrases "how sore you know not," "how exquisite you know not," "how hard

to bear you know not"; then, in verse 18, "to tremble because of pain," "to bleed at every pore," and "to

suffer both body and spirit"; finally in verse 20, "repent, lest I humble you with my almighty power," and "confess your sins, lest you suffer these punishments of which I have spoken."

All of this leaves no doubt about the intensity of the suffering. We are also given clues to the kind of punishment the Lord administers. What kind of punishment is suggested by the phrase, "the rod of my

mouth"? (Verse 15.)

This phrase suggests a rebuke. Remembering childhood, people sometimes say a deserved rebuke from their parents was worse than a spanking. In the Book of Mormon, Alma the Younger was "racked with

eternal torment" at the angel's rebuke. (Alma 36:12.) Apparently, the suffering can also result from the Lord playing a more passive role—withdrawing his Spirit and leaving us to our own devices. The time the Lord withdrew his Spirit from Martin may have been sometime after he had lost the 116 manuscript pages of the Book of Mormon.

In verse 16, we feel the compassion of the Lord. He suffered these things that we might not suffer if we repent. But we must suffer even as Christ, if we do not repent. The inevitability of suffering for the

unrepentant is emphasized by the chiasmus in verses 16 and 17:

a. I, God, have suffered these things for all,

b. that they might not suffer

c. if they would repent;

c. But if they would not repent,

b. they must suffer

a. even as I

Which ideas are similar and which contrasting in this chiasmus?

The a lines are similar; the lines and the c lines are opposites and tell us our alternatives. Christ has already suffered for us; whether or not we suffer is up to us. Notice the repeated short i sounds in the phrase: "to suffer both body and spItalrItalt —and would that I

might not drItalnk the bItaltter cup, and shrItalnk." (Verse 18.) The sound almost leaves a bitter taste in one's mouth. Notice also the rhyme of "drink" and "shrink." What does "shrink" here describe, and why after this word is the sentence cut off with a dash?

At the time Christ drank from the cup of suffering, he shrank from doing it. The cut-off sentence suggests that the suffering was beyond what Christ here wishes to reveal, which makes it all the more forbidding.

Christ gives glory to the Father that he was able to partake of the bitter cup and thereby finish his

preparations unto the children of men. (Verse 19.) What did his preparations prepare him to do?

(See verse 2.)

To subdue all things unto himself and thereby redeem mankind.

The Lord says he will "humble" Martin Harris with his "almighty power" if he doesn't repent. (Verse 20.) A year earlier, the Lord said of Martin, "Behold, I say unto him, he exalts himself and does not humble himself sufficiently before me; but if he will bow down before me, and humble himself in mighty prayer and faith, in the sincerity of his heart, then will I grant unto him a view of the things which he desires to see."

(D&C 5:24.) At that time, Martin desired to be one of the three witnesses. Now the Lord is telling Martin that if he doesn't humble himself, the Lord will humble him. Why is humility emphasized here? Could Martin repent without it?

A proud man will not confess or acknowledge his sins and so can't even begin to repent. Humility and

confession are associated in verse 20 and also in Section 6, where the Lord says of Martin, "Except he humble himself and acknowledge unto me the things that he has done which are wrong . . . he shall have

no such views." (D&C 5:28.)

The Lord tells Martin to "preach naught but repentance." (Verse 21.) Wasn't he supposed to talk about the Book of Mormon or Joseph Smith?

In preaching the gospel, the aim is crucial. Nothing should be taught that doesn't aim at bringing about repentance. Though the topics may vary, the aim should not. The Lord seems to be setting the example in this section; he speaks of endless punishment to bring about Martin's repentance.

The Lord tells Martin to "show not these things unto the world." (Verse 21.) What "things" is he talking about?

Earlier, the Lord spoke of those who were chosen to have the mysteries explained to them. (Verse 9.) It's likely that the things the world mustn't know are those same mysteries—specifically, the mystery of godliness, which includes the Lord's explanation of "endless punishment."

If, then, the mysteries shouldn't be shown to the world, but only repentance should be preached, why does the Lord speak of the mysteries to Martin when calling him to repentance?

Those of the world are not likely to see the mysteries in the context of the first principles of the gospel— particularly repentance—while those of the kingdom should be able to see them in the correct perspective.

In verse 22, the Lord says, "For they cannot bear meat now, but milk they must receive." In verse 8, he says, "Wherefore, I will explain unto you this mystery, for it is meet unto you to know even as mine apostles." What is the purpose of this word play between "meat" and "meet"?

It calls attention to the fact that for some it is both meat (not milk) and meet (appropriate rather than inappropriate) that they learn about endless punishment, while for others it is not.

Why might those of the world perish on hearing the doctrine of endless punishment? (Verse 22.)

Perhaps there are people who, on learning that God's punishment will not last forever, would say, "Eat, drink, and be merry; nevertheless, fear God—he will justify in committing a little sin; yea, lie a little, take the advantage of one because of his words, dig a pit for thy neighbor; there is no harm in this; and do all these things, for tomorrow we die; and if it so be that we are guilty, God will beat us with a few stripes, and

at last we shall be saved in the kingdom of God." (2 Nephi 28:8.) This kind of attitude is hardly conducive to repentance.

23 Learn of me, and listen to my words; walk in the meekness of my Spirit, and you shall have peace in me.

24 I am Jesus Christ; I came by the will of the Father, and I do his will.

25 And again, I command thee that thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's wife; nor seek thy neighbor's life.

26 And again, I command thee that thou shalt not covet thine own property, but impart it freely to the printing of the Book of Mormon, which contains the truth and the word of God—

27 Which is my word to the Gentile, that soon it may go to the Jew, of whom the Lamanites are a remnant, that they may believe the gospel, and look not for a Messiah to come who has already come.

28 And again, I command thee that thou shalt pray vocally as well as in thy heart; yea, before the world as well as in secret, in public as well as in private.

29 And thou shalt declare glad tidings, yea, publish it upon the mountains, and upon every high place, and among every people that thou shalt be permitted to see.

30 And thou shalt do it with all humility, trusting in me, reviling not against revilers.

31 And of tenets thou shalt not talk, but thou shalt declare repentance and faith on the Savior, and remission of sins by baptism, and by fire, yea, even the Holy Ghost.

Beginning with verse 23, the feeling of this section changes. How?

We no longer find a preponderance of words like repent, suffer and punishment. Instead we find words like meekness, humility, gladness, rejoicing, and free.

Verse 23 is beautiful. What sounds do you notice in this verse?

The m, s, l, and e sounds are prominent: "learn of me, and lItalsten to my words; walk in the meekness of my Spirit, and you shall have peace in me.

How does this verse make you feel?

It makes us feel peaceful and inclined to turn to the Lord.

In verse 24, why does Jesus talk about his own obedience to the Father?

He seems again to be reminding Martin and us of the example he set, implying that just as he obeys the Father, we should obey him.

The Lord prefaces his commandments to Martin in verses 25, 26, and 28 with "And again, I command thee. . ." Why?

This repetition is continuous with the three "I command you to repent" imperatives in verses 13, 15,

and 20, and also with the imperative, "I command you that you preach naught but repentance" in verse

The Lord tells Martin not to covet his neighbor's wife or seek his neighbor's life. (Verse 25.) From what you know of Martin, did he have any reason to commit such sins?

Martin's unbelieving wife had nagged and harrassed him while he helped with the translation of the first 116 pages of the Book of Mormon and may have conspired in their eventual loss. There must have been others involved in the loss too. It's likely that Martin was at least angry with his wife and possibly with others he may have suspected. He may also have been using their wickedness as an excuse for his own,

maintaining his anger against them to avoid fully confessing his own sins. (See verse 20.) However, it may be that the Lord is simply telling Martin, "Just as you know that you shouldn't covet your neighbor's wife nor seek his life, I now tell you not to covet your own property," the point being to show the continuity between previous commandments like the Ten Commandments and the present one about his property.

The Lord commands Martin not to covet his own property. (Verse 26.) How can a person covet his own property?

You covet something when you want what you don't own and shouldn't own. But you also covet when you want to hold on to something you feel you should let go of. That must have been Martin's situation. He apparently wanted to hold back property he felt he should impart for the printing of the Book of Mormon.

(See verses 34-35.) Martin was to impart the property "freely," not begrudgingly, not wanting to hold onto it.

Why, in verse 27, does the Lord talk about the mission of the Book of Mormon?

To inspire Martin so he'll "freely" assist in its publication. The Lord explains how important the Book of Mormon is: it contains the truth and the word of God; and its influence will be far-reaching—it will go to the Gentiles, the Jews, and the Lamanites. Martin's privilege will be to help bring it forth. The line ". . . and look not for a Messiah to come who has already come" touches us as it must have Martin.

We learn from the Book of Mormon that the Lamanites were descendants of Joseph, not Judah. (1 Nephi

5:14.) Why, then, does the Lord in verse 27 call them a remnant of the Jews?

One definition of Jew is "a member of the tribe of Judah"; but another is "an Israelite." In this case, the appropriate definition must be the second one; the Lamanites are a remnant of the Israelites, Israel being Joseph's father.

In verse 28, the Lord tells Martin, "Pray vocally as well as in thy heart"; then he reiterates, "before the world as well as in secret, in public as well as in private." Why do you think the Lord repeats these instructions to Martin?

Martin probably hesitated to pray in public, perhaps because of fear or pride.

There is a feeling of rejoicing in verse 29. The sentence builds from "declare" to "yea, publish" to "upon the mountains, and upon every high place, and among every people." How does the Lord want Martin to feel about missionary work?

He wants Martin to feel eager and joyful about publishing the good tidings, to act not just from a sense of duty but from a love of the work. Notice that the Lord talks about the people Martin will be "permitted" to see. Preaching the gospel to these people will be a privilege. After the Lord tells Martin to publish the glad tidings upon the mountains and high places, he then tells him

to be humble. (Verse 30.) There is a contrast here between the high and the low. What is the point of the contrast?

In exalting the gospel of Jesus Christ, we shouldn't also exalt ourselves. A sense of self-importance will get in our way, perhaps leading us into the next two sins the Lord speaks of: reviling and talking of tenets.

What are tenets? (Verse 31.)

These are the beliefs or doctrines peculiar to various churches or other organizations. The doctrine of endless punishment is a tenet.

Why shouldn't tenets be discussed?

As every missionary knows, discussing tenets leads too easily to contention, giving occasion for revilers to revile, especially when there is no agreement on even fundamental principles. The first principles—faith, repentance, baptism by immersion, and the Holy Ghost—must be the foundation on which all else is built.

32 Behold, this is a great and the last commandment which I shall give unto you concerning this matter; for this shall suffice for thy daily walk, even unto the end of thy life.

33 And misery thou shalt receive if thou wilt slight these counsels, yea, even the destruction of thyself and property.

34 Impart a portion of thy property, yea, even part of thy lands, and all save the support of thy family.

35 Pay the debt thou hast contracted with the printer. Release thyself from bondage.

36 Leave thy house and home, except when thou shalt desire to see thy family;

37 And speak freely to all; yea, preach, exhort, declare the truth, even with a loud voice, with a sound of rejoicing, crying—Hosanna, hosanna, blessed be the name of the Lord God!

38 Pray always, and I will pour out my Spirit upon you, and great shall be your blessing—yea, even more than if you should obtain treasures of earth and corruptibleness to the extent thereof.

39 Behold, canst thou read this without rejoicing and lifting up thy heart for gladness?

40 Or canst thou run about longer as a blind guide?

41 Or canst thou be humble and meek, and conduct thyself wisely before me? Yea, come unto me thy Savior. Amen.

In verse 32, what does the "great and last commandment" refer to? What does "this matter" refer to?

Apparently, the "great and last commandment" is the whole of this revelation, including the specific counsel in the next verses. However, the referent of "this matter" isn't clear; the specific events that led to this revelation are not known.

Why might the Lord have told Martin "This shall suffice for thy daily walk, even unto the end of thy life"?

(Verse 32.)

Perhaps Martin was too quick to ask Joseph for revelations from the Lord and not diligent enough in keeping the commandments he had already received through Joseph. The Lord here tells Martin that he doesn't need to ask for more revelation "concerning this matter." The Lord tells Martin that misery and destruction await him if he slights the counsels he has received.

(Verse 33.) Where else in this section has the Lord talked about destruction, and what light does the former verse shed on this one?

In verse 3, the Lord spoke of his power to destroy Satan and his works at the end of the world. Here, the Lord seems to be telling Martin that he may be destroyed with Satan at the last day if he isn't obedient.

How was Martin to pay the debt he had contracted with the printer? (Verse 35.)

Verse 34 suggests that he was to pay the debt by selling a portion of his property. Shortly after this revelation, Martin sold 151 acres of his farm and paid the printer.

Why is Martin told to sell all save the support of his family, assuming he didn't need to sell this much to

pay the printer? (Verse 34.)

Without excess property, Martin could devote more time to preaching the gospel.

Why is he told to leave his house and home? (Verse 36.)

So he can preach the gospel.

How is verse 37 like verse 29?

Both verses are a joyful call to declare the glad tidings, meant to inspire Martin with a love of the Lord's

work. Both verses build in emotional intensity, the high point of verse 37 being, "Hosanna, hosanna, blessed be the name of the Lord God!" The word "hosanna" is what Martin shouted when, as one of the three witnesses, he beheld the angel and the plates. The Lord apparently wants him to preach with the same excitement he felt then. Both verses also build by using the word yea ("Speak freely to all; Yea, preach . . ." and "declare glad tidings, yea, publish . . ."), and by using triads ("preach, exhort, declare" and "upon the mountains, and upon every high place, and among every people").

How does saying "We should be engaged in missionary work" compare to these two verses?

Not very well. Next to the words of the Lord, this line sounds dull and lifeless.

The Lord promises to bless Martin with his Spirit if he is prayerful. (Verse 38.) Where else in this section has the Lord spoken of his Spirit?

In verse 20, the Lord spoke of the punishment Martin suffered when the Lord withdrew his Spirit. The Lord's blessing is an abundance of the Spirit; his punishment, withdrawal of the Spirit.

What is the Lord's attitude toward the treasures of the earth in verse 38, and what is he telling Martin about them?

The Lord equates the treasures of the earth with corruptibleness, in effect telling Martin that they really aren't important, likely because Martin attaches too much significance to them. The Spirit of the Lord is the great blessing, not the treasures of the earth. "Corruptibleness" is reminiscent of the Lord's instructions to his disciples, "Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust doth corrupt, and

where thieves break through and steal." (Matthew 6:19.)

What does "to the extent thereof" mean? (Verse 38.)

"To the extent of the earth," as many corruptible things as can be gotten.

The Lord ends by asking Martin three questions that Martin must answer in his own heart. With what

attitude is each question asked? (Verses 39, 40, 41.)

The first question seems to be asked hopefully: "Behold, canst thou read this without rejoicing, and lifting up thy heart for gladness?" True, the Lord has given Martin a stiff warning, but he doesn't want him to be

gloomy about it; the promise in verse 38 is a glorious one. The second question seems pointed and sharp: "Or canst thou run about longer as a blind guide?" meaning "Are you still going to run about as a blind guide?" Christ called the scribes and Pharisees blind guides during his earthly ministry. They were supposed to be the spiritual leaders, but didn't know the way themselves. The final question seems to be entreating: "Or canst thou be humble and meek, and conduct thyself wisely before me?"

Try reading each of these three questions in a way that reflects the Lord's attitude.

The Lord ends, "Yea, come unto me thy Savior." Why do you think "Savior" is used here instead of another of the Lord's names?

The Lord will save Martin if Martin will allow it. He has suffered for all men and has the power to save them from all their sins and follies. We're left thinking of the Lord as our Savior, and ourselves as needing a savior.
