When Shall the Earth Rest?-moses 7:20-69

Sandra Packard, Dennis Packard, Feasting upon the Word ( 1981)

9

20 And it came to pass that Enoch talked with the Lord; and he said unto the Lord: Surely Zion shall dwell in safety forever. But the Lord said unto Enoch: Zion have I blessed, but the residue of the people have I cursed.

21 And it came to pass that the Lord showed unto Enoch all the inhabitants of the earth; and he beheld, and lo, Zion, in process of time, was taken up into heaven. And the Lord said unto Enoch: Behold mine abode forever.

22 And Enoch also beheld the residue of the people which were the sons of Adam; and they were a mixture of all the seed of Adam save it was the seed of Cain, for the seed of Cain were black, and had not place among them.

23 And after that Zion was taken up into heaven, Enoch beheld, and lo, all the nations of the earth were before him;

Enoch says, "Surely Zion shall dwell in safety forever." (Verse 20.) Is he making a statement or asking a question?

The Lord responds as if Enoch had asked a question, answering, "Zion have I blessed."

Why does the Lord then add, ". . . but the residue of the people have I cursed?"

Enoch's heart seems to be with Zion. By the power of his righteousness and the righteousness of his people, and the great mercy of the Lord, Zion has been built, defended, and made glorious. We read that "the fear of the Lord was upon all nations, so great was the glory of the Lord, which was upon his people."

(Moses 7:17.) By saying, ". . . the residue of the people have I cursed," the Lord is drawing Enoch's attention to the people Enoch must not have sufficiently considered: those not part of Zion.

The Lord uses the word residue several times, also mixture. (Verses 20 and 22.) What do these words suggest about the people they refer to?

They suggest that these people are the dross, the impurities; and in fact, they are the "leftovers" from Enoch's great missionary efforts. Yet, as the unfolding vision shows, they are greatly loved by the Lord.

How does the Lord's answer, "Zion have I blessed, but the residue of the people have I cursed" (verse

20), relate to what Enoch sees in the next three verses?

Enoch sees what he has just heard: first, Zion blessed by being taken up to heaven, where it becomes the

"abode" of the Lord, to dwell in safety forever (verse 21), as Enoch desired; and then the residue, "all the

nations of the earth" (verses 22 and 23).

24 And there came generation upon generation; and Enoch was high and lifted up, even in the bosom of the Father, and of the Son of Man; and behold, the power of Satan was upon all the face of the earth.

25 And he saw angels descending out of heaven; and he heard a loud voice saying: Wo, wo be unto the inhabitants of the earth.

26 And he beheld Satan; and he had a great chain in his hand, and it veiled the whole face of the earth with darkness; and he looked up and laughed, and his angels rejoiced.

27 And Enoch beheld angels descending out of heaven, bearing testimony of the Father and Son; and the Holy Ghost fell on many, and they were caught up by the powers of heaven into Zion.

What does it mean that Enoch was in the bosom of the Father and of the Son of Man? (Verse 24.)

The bosom of the Father is mentioned six times in Enoch's account (verses 24, 30, 31, 47, 63, 69), usually in the context of something being taken to the Father's bosom. In this context, the meaning of bosom that seems most appropriate is "a close relationship marked by affection and protectiveness." Taken to the bosom of the Father and of the Son of Man, Enoch is taken into their inner circle; he becomes on intimate terms with them, seeing into their hearts, coming to better understand how they think and feel, and eventually coming to think and feel that way himself.

What thing is most obvious to Enoch from the vantage point of eternity, and what does this imply about the way the Lord sees things?

Enoch sees the power of Satan upon all the face of the earth. Even a hopeful sign, angels descending out of heaven, is quickly followed by a portent of evil, a loud voice saying, "Wo, wo be unto the inhabitants of

the earth." (Verse 25.) The Lord sees Satan as a great threat to the welfare of his children.

What is Satan's chain symbolic of? (Verse 26.)

A chain is a symbol of slavery and bondage. Satan is still about the business he began before the

creation: to destroy the agency of man. (Moses 4:3.)

Try and picture the great chain in the hand of Satan veiling the earth with darkness. Why does the chain make the earth dark?

It blocks the light of the sun, casting a shadow on the earth.

What does this suggest about the way Satan destroys man's agency?

Satan tries to block the source of light, or the Lord's influence with his children, and by cutting off the source of light, limit the choices of those under his influence.

What is the significance of Satan's looking up and laughing? (Verse 26.)

He laughs with derision in the face of God, as if to say, "You thought these were your children, but now you see they are mine."

What people do the angels bear testimony to? (Verse 27.)

Speaking of these people, the Lord later says to Enoch, "These which thine eyes are upon shall perish in

the floods." (Verse 38.) This tells us that the angels were bearing testimony to Noah's wicked contemporaries, so that not only did they reject Noah's testimony, but even the testimony of angels.

What must these people have been like?

They must have been a very hard-hearted people, entrenched in their wickedness, to reject the Lord's heavenly ministers as well as his earthly one.

28 And it came to pass that the God of heaven looked upon the residue of the people, and he wept; and Enoch bore record of it, saying: How is it that the heavens weep, and shed forth their tears as the rain upon the mountains?

29 And Enoch said unto the Lord: How is it that thou canst weep, seeing thou art holy, and from all eternity to all eternity?

30 And were it possible that man could number the particles of the earth, yea, millions of earths like this, it would not be a beginning to the number of thy creations; and thy curtains are stretched out still; and yet thou art there, and thy bosom is there; and also thou art just; thou art merciful and kind forever;

31 And thou hast taken Zion to thine own bosom, from all thy creations, from all eternity to all eternity; and naught but peace, justice, and truth is the habitation of thy throne; and mercy shall go before thy face and have no end; how is it thou canst weep?

Enoch sees the God of heaven weep over these hardened people. (Verse 28.) And three times Enoch

asks variations of the question, "How is it thou canst weep?" (Verses 28, 29, 31.) What does this tell us about Enoch's reaction to the Lord's sorrow?

He is amazed.

Enoch exclaims, "How is it that the heavens weep, and shed forth their tears as the rain upon the

mountains?" (Verse 28.) Why, at this time, is the comparison "as rain upon the mountains" particularly appropriate?

It is as if the flood of rain soon to fall in torrents upon the earth was literally tears of sorrow shed by the heavens over unrepentant mankind.

In verse 29, Enoch asks the Lord, "How is it thou canst weep?" and without waiting for an answer,

proceeds into a lengthy speech about why he is so puzzled. (Verses 29-30.) Why does he feel the need to explain himself?

Apparently he wants the Father to know that his question isn't a matter of idle curiosity. He shows respect to the Father, approaching him only about his real concerns. It reminds us of Joseph Smith saying, "It is a great thing to inquire at the hands of God, or to come into His presence; and we feel fearful to approach Him on subjects that are of little or no consequence." (Teachings, p. 22.)

The formality of Enoch's speech also shows his respect for the Father. How is the speech formal?

First, it is a chiasmus:

a. How is it that thou canst weep? (Verse 29.)

b. Thou art holy. (Verse 29.)

c. Thou art from all eternity to all eternity. (Verse 29.)

d. Thy creations are great. (Verse 30.)

e. Thy curtains are stretched out still. (Verse 30.)

f. Thou art there. (Verse 30.)

f. Thy bosom is there. (Verse 30.)

e. Thou art just, merciful and kind forever. (Verse 30.)

d. Thou has taken Zion from all thy creations. (Verse 31.)

c. Thy creations are from all eternity to all eternity. (Verse 31.)

b. Peace, justice, truth, and mercy are thine abode. (Verse 31.)

a. How is it thou canst weep? (Verse 31.)

Second, much of his speech is cast in scriptural language. The phrase "all eternity to all eternity," which

occurs twice in Enoch's speech (verses 29 and 31), also appears several times in the Book of Mormon

and the Doctrine and Covenants. (Mosiah 3:5; Alma 13:7; Moroni 8:18; D&C 39:1.) It probably means

something similar to the phrase "without beginning of days or end of years." (See Moses 6:67.) And Enoch's statement "And were it possible that man could number the particles of the earth, yea, millions of

earths like this, it would not be a beginning to the number of thy creations" (verse 30) is reminiscent of the

Lord's statement earlier in the book of Moses, "Worlds without number have I created." (Moses 1:33.)

Much of the scriptural language is figurative. The line "thy curtains are stretched out still" (verse 30) is a metaphor, one that occurs in the Old Testament. David says, "O Lord my God, thou art very great . . . who

stretchest out the heavens like a curtain." (Psalm 104:1-2.) And Isaiah asks, "To whom then will ye liken God? or what likeness will ye compare unto him? . . . It is he . . . that stretcheth out the heavens as a

curtain, and spreadeth them out as a tent to dwell in." (Isaiah 40:18, 22.) A curtain in Biblical times was a panel of cloth that tents were made from.

So what does "thy curtains are stretched out still" mean?

Enoch appears to be saying that the heavens and all the Lord's creations are still as he made them; things haven't fallen into chaos because the Lord packed up his tent and moved on.

The statement ". . . and naught but peace, justice, and truth is the habitation of thy throne; and mercy shall

go before thy face and have no end" (verse 31) is very similar to a verse from the psalms of David:

"Justice and judgment are the habitation of thy throne: mercy and truth shall go before thy face." (Psalm

89:14.) Notice the figures of speech: Enoch treats "peace, justice, and truth" as if they were a location, the habitation of the Lord's throne; and "mercy" he personifies, treating it as if it were a person going before the Lord's face.

Enoch, in his speech, points out the Lord's greatness and his goodness. Why should these characteristics of the Lord make Enoch surprised at his sorrow?

Enoch seems to imply, "How can you feel so sorry for these creatures when they are only an infinitesimal part of your creation and you've given them every chance they deserve and more besides, and they've still rejected you?" Enoch is baffled but open about showing his confusion. He doesn't feel like weeping, so why does the Father?

32 The Lord said unto Enoch: Behold these thy brethren; they are the workmanship of mine own hands, and I gave unto them their knowledge, in the day I created them; and in the Garden of Eden, gave I unto man his agency;

33 And unto thy brethren have I said, and also given commandment, that they should love one another, and that they should choose me, their Father; but behold, they are without affection, and they hate their own blood;

34 And the fire of mine indignation is kindled against them; and in my hot displeasure will I send in the floods upon them, for my fierce anger is kindled against them.

35 Behold, I am God; Man of Holiness is my name; Man of Counsel is my name; and Endless and Eternal is my name, also.

36 Wherefore, I can stretch forth mine hands and hold all the creations which I have made; and mine eye can pierce them also, and among all the workmanship of mine hands there has not been so great wickedness as among thy brethren.

37 But behold, their sins shall be upon the heads of their fathers; Satan shall be their father, and misery shall be their doom; and the whole heavens shall weep over them, even all the workmanship of mine hands; wherefore should not the heavens weep, seeing these shall suffer?

38 But behold, these which thine eyes are upon shall perish in the floods; and behold, I will shut them up; a prison have I prepared for them.

39 And that which I have chosen hath plead before my face. Wherefore, he suffereth for their sins; inasmuch as they will repent in the day that my Chosen shall return unto me, and until that day they shall be in torment;

40 Wherefore, for this shall the heavens weep, yea, and all the workmanship of mine hands.

The Lord begins his answer to Enoch, saying, "these thy brethren." (Verse 32.) Why does he choose to say this rather than "these people" or "these my children"?

The Lord seems to be gently reminding Enoch, "These, too, are your brothers, Enoch, not just those in Zion." The repeated th sounds in this phrase slow it down and thus emphasize it: "these thy brethren."

We might expect the Lord next to say something like, "They are also my children." But he doesn't. He speaks instead of the relationship between a creator and his creation, saying, "They are the workmanship

of mine own hands." (Verse 32.) Why does he do this?

The Lord speaks in terms Enoch will respond to. Apparently the thing most dear to Enoch at this time was Zion —a city Enoch helped create.

The Lord next emphasizes that man is an agent, using the parallel sentences, "I gave unto them their

knowledge, in the day I created them" and "In the Garden of Eden, gave I unto man his agency." (Verse

32.) Why does the Lord talk here about man's agency?

Knowledge and agency have made the current wickedness possible. It's not that man was created wrong, but that he went wrong of his own accord.

The Lord continues, "Unto thy brethren have I said, and also given commandment. . ." (Verse 33.) In other words, "I not only told them, but I also commanded them." Why does the Lord here make a point of telling Enoch that he instructed men in righteousness?

The Lord is again telling Enoch that men are responsible for their own wickedness. They were shown the right way.

The two commandments that the Lord gives men are: "That they should love one another" and "that they

should choose me their Father." (Verse 33.) Notice the similarities in form between the two commandments: both are simple sentences beginning with "they should," both have the same number of syllables, and both end with the same sound (another, Father). What does the form help convey about the commandments?

The similarity and simplicity of form helps convey the simplicity, directness, and reasonableness of the commandments—traits that make worse the wickedness of transgressing them.

Particularly reasonable is the commandment "that they should choose me their Father"; the Lord, after all, is their Father. How do you think the Lord feels here?

The Lord doesn't say that being rejected by his children has hurt him, but his grief is apparent, perhaps all the more because it is understated.

Continuing, the Lord says, "But behold, they are without affection, and they hate their own blood." (Verse

33.) The implication is, "they are even without affection and hate their own blood." What's the difference between affection and love?

Affection brings to mind feelings of warmth and tenderness, though it is a more moderate, less intense attachment than love. The Lord grieves because his children don't even feel the natural affection toward each other that we often see animals showing toward their kind.

What does "they hate their own blood" mean?

It could mean either that they hate their own kindred or that they hate their own lives. If the latter interpretation is correct, it brings to mind Mormon's description of his fallen people: "They did curse God,

and wish to die." (Mormon 2:14.)

It is the Lord's sadness that Enoch, up to this point, has seen. Now he sees his anger, conveyed by the

image of "burning." How many words related to burning do you find in verse 34?

The word fire occurs once, kindled twice, and hot once. And the anger is pointed: note the phrases

"against them," "upon them," and "against them" at the end of the three successive lines in verse 34.

In the context of the "burning" image, what might the purpose of the floods have been?

To extinguish the fire or wrath of God. The image of the floods quenching the fire parallels the image of the rain as tears of sorrow. Sorrow and anger are both there, the sorrow intensifying the anger and the anger the sorrow. The Lord at this point seems very human, the most human, in fact, that he will appear for the remainder of the vision.

After seeing the Lord's humanity, Enoch next sees his godliness. (Verse 35.) Why does the Lord here want Enoch to see his godliness?

Earthly parents, when they see their children go astray, often feel helpless and torn between sorrow and anger. Not the Lord. Though he feels these emotions, he isn't at their mercy. He will not be swept into unrighteous anger or self-pitying sorrow; "Man of Holiness" is his name. He knows what to do with his children when they sin; "Man of Counsel" is his name. His righteousness and purpose are constant and unchanging; "Endless and Eternal" is his name also. Note that the Lord says, "Man of Holiness," "Man of Counsel." God is not so different from man that we cannot eventually learn to think and feel as he does.

How does the repetition of "is my name" make you feel about the Lord?

It makes us feel his power and authority and makes us inclined to reverence him.

The Lord says that because he is God, he can "hold" all his creations. (Verse 36.) What does this mean to you?

To us it means that the Lord can still "work upon" the workmanship of his hands. The image of a fine craftsman comes to mind. The shaping of human souls didn't end in the Garden of Eden, but continues through all of man's wickedness.

What does "mine eye can pierce them also" mean? (Verse 36.)

This suggests that the Lord can see into the minds and hearts of his children. He knows them with a perfect knowledge, far better than they know themselves. And because he knows them, he states there has not been so great wickedness among all the workmanship of his hands as among Enoch's brethren. What a damning judgment, especially remembering Enoch's statement that "were it possible that man could number the particles of the earth, yea, millions of earths like this, it would not be a beginning to the

number of thy creations." (Verse 30.) The phrase "so great wickedness" is emphatic; each word is stressed and each successive word stressed more.

What does the phrase "their sins shall be upon the heads of their fathers" mean? (Verse 37.)

We have seen the Father feeling sorrow for his wicked children. But he hasn't felt guilty, because he has given his children agency and taught them righteousness. Not so with the earthly fathers of Enoch's wicked brethren. These fathers must have contributed to their children's sinning, and so bear guilt and responsibility for the sins of their children. Perhaps they will have to repent for their children's sins, as if those sins were their own.

Does this mean the children won't have to repent?

Even those who die without law or who ignorantly sin must repent before they can be heirs of salvation.

(See D&C 138:32-33.) Still, repentance must be easier for those who have sinned ignorantly than for those who have sinned knowingly.

In what way will Satan be the father of the wicked? (Verse 37.)

Children tend to follow their parents and to become like them. Similarly, the wicked follow Satan and become like him. "Misery shall be their doom" because Satan teaches them to live miserably, so that "all

men might be miserable like unto himself." (2 Nephi 2:27.)

The Lord uses the word father two different ways in verse 37, first literally in "their sins shall be upon the heads of their fathers" and then figuratively in "Satan shall be their father." Why?

For one thing, it helps us see that earthly fathers are like Satan when they lead their children into sin and misery. It also sharpens the contrast between God as the true father and Satan as the usurper who takes his place.

The Lord, in verse 37, says "The whole heavens shall weep over them, even all the workmanship of mine hands." Does he mean that all his workmanship will be wept over, or that all his workmanship will weep?

Not all are wicked, so all won't be wept over. The line must mean that all will weep—the wicked because

they suffer and the righteous because they see the wicked suffer. Verse 40 makes it clear that all will weep: "For this shall the heavens weep, yea, and all the workmanship of mine hands." Shortly after this, Enoch weeps, and later, even the earth mourns.

After the emotion of verse 37, verse 38 seems calm and matter-of-fact. The Lord will do what has to be done; he will cut the wicked off and shut them up in prison. But feeling is still there, a feeling of deep sadness, of resignation to what must be done. The feeling comes through in part because of the sounds. What repeated sounds bind this verse together?

"But behold, these which thine eyes are upon shall perItalsh in the floods, and behold, I will shut them up; a prison have I prepared for them."

Why does the Father cut off his sinful children? Isn't he merciful?

He is, but "no unclean thing can dwell . . . in his presence." (Moses 6:57.) Moroni gives us some insight into this when he says, "Behold, I say unto you that ye would be more miserable to dwell with a holy and just God, under a consciousness of your filthiness before him, than ye would to dwell with the damned souls in hell. For behold, when ye shall be brought to see your nakedness before God, and also the glory

of God, and the holiness of Jesus Christ, it will kindle a flame of unquenchable fire upon you." (Mormon

9:4-5.) The Lord acts mercifully in cutting the wicked off; otherwise they would be in greater torment.

The Lord says, "a prison have I prepared for them." (Verse 38.) What does the word "prepared" tell you about the prison? For what purpose might it have been prepared?

"Prepared" suggests that the prison isn't just some place that the Father happened to find convenient at the time. Rather, it seems to be a place or condition especially suited to the prisoners. In the Doctrine and Covenants we read, "And after this another angel shall sound, which is the second trump; and then cometh the redemption of those who are Christ's at his coming; who have received their part in that prison which is prepared for them, that they might receive the gospel, and be judged according to men in the

flesh." (D&C 88:99.) Their experience in prison helps prepare the wicked to receive the gospel.

Why does the Lord say, "that which" I have chosen, rather than "he whom" I have chosen? (Verse 39.)

By saying "that which" instead of "he whom" the Father distances himself from the Son and the cause he is pleading—the cause of sinful mankind. He will not grant the Son's request just because he loves him, though he will listen to Christ, because Christ is his "Chosen."

What does "plead" mean? (Verse 39.)

"Plead" here probably doesn't mean "beg," but instead something like "to argue a case or cause in a court

of law." Christ is our "advocate" with the Father. (D&C 29:5.)

What is the relationship between Christ's pleading and his suffering? (Verse 39.)

"Wherefore" is similar to "therefore." Christ has pled for them; therefore he suffers for them. It's as if he suffers in order to strengthen his case. In the Doctrine and Covenants, Christ says, "I am Christ, and in mine own name, and by virtue of the blood which I have spilt, have I pleaded before the Father for them."

(D&C 38:4.)

Verse 39 reads more easily if the last sentence is punctuated as follows: "Wherefore, he suffereth for their sins, inasmuch as they will repent in the day that my Chosen shall return unto me; and until that day they shall be in torment . . ." What does "inasmuch" mean?

The definition that best fits is "to the degree that." Christ's suffering for their sins is efficacious "to the degree that" those sins are repented of.

When did the Chosen return to the Father, and what happened "the day" he returned? (Verse 39.)

This must have been the time of Christ's ascension. Shortly before that time, between his crucifixion and resurrection, Christ went to the spirit world and sent the righteous spirits to preach to the wicked who had

been destroyed in the flood. (See D&C 138.) Because of the suffering of Christ for the wicked, those who repented were released from prison and torment. We later learn that these repentant spirits "came forth,

and stood on the right hand of God." (Verse 57.)

41 And it came to pass that the Lord spake unto Enoch, and told Enoch all the doings of the children of men; wherefore Enoch knew, and looked upon their wickedness, and their misery, and wept and stretched forth his arms, and his heart swelled wide as eternity; and his bowels yearned; and all eternity shook.

42 And Enoch also saw Noah, and his family; that the posterity of all the sons of Noah should be saved with a temporal salvation;

43 Wherefore Enoch saw that Noah built an ark; and that the Lord smiled upon it, and held it in his own hand; but upon the residue of the wicked the floods came and swallowed them up.

44 And as Enoch saw this, he had bitterness of soul, and wept over his brethren, and said unto the heavens: I will refuse to be comforted; but the Lord said unto Enoch: Lift up your heart, and be glad; and look.

45 And it came to pass that Enoch looked; and from Noah, he beheld all the families of the earth; and he cried unto the Lord saying: When shall the day of the Lord come? When shall the blood of the Righteous be shed, that all they that mourn may be sanctified and have eternal life?

46 And the Lord said: It shall be in the meridian of time, in the days of wickedness and vengeance.

47 And behold, Enoch saw the day of the coming of the Son of Man, even in the flesh; and his soul rejoiced, saying: The Righteous is lifted up, and the Lamb is slain from the foundation of the world; and through faith I am in the bosom of the Father, and behold, Zion is with me.

Enoch began by asking, "how is it thou canst weep?" (Verse 29.) How has the Lord answered his

question? (Verse 41.)

By getting Enoch to weep.

Verse 41, the description of Enoch's sorrow, is beautiful and powerful. What makes us feel so keenly Enoch's sorrow?

We notice several things. First, the words "arms," "heart," and "bowels" convey a sorrow so intense that it is actually physical; second, the words "stretched" and "swelled," show the sorrow to be so great that Enoch's body can't contain it; third, the feeling builds in intensity through the verse as short, descriptive phrases follow each other. Particularly descriptive are the verbs "looked," "wept," "stretched," "swelled," "yearned." Next, the repetition of eternity emphasizes the vastness of the sorrow. Then, in the line "all eternity shook," the emotion reaches its height as Enoch's sorrow becomes one with the sorrow of the heavens, his sorrow reverberating with theirs until all creation shakes. Finally, repeated sounds throughout the verse bind the passage together, emphasizing Enoch's sorrow:

"And it came to pass that the Lord spake unto Enoch, and told Enoch all the doings of the children of men; wherefore Enoch knew, and looked upon their wickedness, and their misery, and wept and stretchedforth his arms, his heart swelled wide as eternity; and his bowels yearned; and all eternity shook."

Try reading the phrase "all eternity shook," emphasizing the word "eternity." Now try reading it again, emphasizing "all" and "shook." Which way is better?

"Eternity" was emphasized in the line "his heart swelled wide as eternity," so it shouldn't be emphasized again here. The phrase should be read "all eternity shook," with "shook" emphasized even more than "all." Note the sound repetition in "looked" and "shook," which further emphasizes "shook." We are left with a vivid image of shaking.

The last line of verse 41 doesn't read "all eternity shook with great sobs." Would that have been a better way of putting it?

That would have been sentimental. Deep emotion is felt most intensely when it is conveyed through well-chosen words and form—not through over-done description.

The account next says that Enoch saw Noah (verse 42), but Noah hasn't yet been introduced in this vision. How did Enoch learn about Noah?

We don't know. Perhaps the Lord told Enoch more about Noah in this vision than is recorded. Or perhaps Enoch learned about Noah previous to this vision, though there is no record of it in the Book of Moses.

Why does the Lord show Enoch Noah's salvation (verse 42) before showing him the destruction of the

wicked (verse 43)?

We can't help but think the Lord wanted to soften the blow, giving Enoch hope in Noah before showing him the end of the wicked.

How else has the Lord helped to soften Enoch's grief?

The Lord told Enoch the wicked would perish (verse 38) before actually showing him their destruction

(verse 43), thus giving the bitter medicine in small doses. He also told Enoch that Christ would redeem the

wicked if they repented. (Verse 39.)

What does it mean that the posterity of Noah "should be saved with a temporal salvation"? (Verse 42.)

In context, this means they would escape death in the flood. Notice, though, the "a"; it is just "a" temporal salvation; they wouldn't escape death forever.

What earlier line does the line "the Lord . . . held it in his own hand" (verse 43) remind you of?

Earlier the Lord said, "I can . . . hold all the creations I have made." (Verse 36.) One way the Lord "holds" his creations is by protecting the righteous like Noah.

Imagine the Lord holding the ark in his hand and smiling upon it. Do the words "smile" and "hold" bring any other images to your mind?

We picture a parent holding and smiling upon his child.

Earlier, the Lord said he would shut the wicked up. (Verse 38.) Now Enoch sees the floods swallow them

up. (Verse 43.) What is conveyed by the phrases "shut them up" and "swallowed them up"?

The awful, final state of the wicked, cut off from the presence of God.

What is "bitterness of soul?" (Verse 44.)

In the scriptures, bitterness of soul comes from sin. Alma the Younger, realizing his guilt, cried out in his heart, "O Jesus, thou Son of God, have mercy on me, who am in the gall of bitterness, and am encircled

about by the everlasting chains of death." (Alma 36:18.) Alma later tells his son Corianton, "Behold, an awful death cometh upon the wicked; for they die as to things pertaining to things of righteousness; for they are unclean, and no unclean thing can inherit the kingdom of God; but they are cast out, and consigned to partake of the fruits of their labors or their works, which have been evil; andthey drink the

dregs of a bitter cup." (Alma 40:26.) And when Moses encountered Satan, he "began to fear exceedingly;

and as he began to fear, he saw the bitterness of hell." (Moses 1:20.) Notice that just as Enoch

understands the Lord's sorrow by feeling it himself (verse 41), he understands the misery of the wicked by

feeling it himself (verse 41), he understands the misery of the wicked by feeling their bitterness of soul

(verse 44).

Enoch isn't a wicked man, though. Why does he feel bitterness of soul as the wicked do?

Enoch now sees the wicked as "his brethren." (Verse 44.) He suffers, it seems, because he takes their burden —the burden of sin—upon himself. Out of love, Christ took our sins upon himself, and in so doing,

partook of the "bitter cup." (D&C 19:18.)

Is Enoch's expression, "I will refuse to be comforted" (verse 44) an expression of weakness or of strength?

Of both, really. Of weakness, because Enoch, unlike Christ, couldn't bear the misery of the wicked and doubts he'll ever find comfort again. The burden just seems too heavy. But also of strength, because Enoch is feeling the love of God for his brothers.

In the depths of Enoch's sorrow, the Lord tells him to lift up his heart and be glad. (Verse 44.) Then the

Lord shows Enoch all the families of the earth. (Verse 45.) Why should this make Enoch glad?

After death, there is comfort in new life, just as there is in spring's renewal of life after winter.

Enoch doesn't respond to the scene by being comforted, but instead asks, "When shall the day of the

Lord come?" (Verse 45.) Why is he anxious for Christ to come?

Enoch has just said he will refuse to be comforted, and though he eventually is comforted, it seems to take more than the vision of Noah's children to do it. He is still mourning, but apparently in the midst of suffering, he recalls the redemptive power of Christ. He had earlier taught his people of Christ, saying, "Ye must be born again into the kingdom of heaven, of water, and of the Spirit, and be cleansed by blood, even the blood of mine Only Begotten; that ye might be sanctified from all sin, and enjoy the words of

eternal life in this world, and eternal life in the world to come, even immortal glory." (Moses 6:59.) But now that he knows the depth of suffering that sin brings, Christ's coming seems more urgent to Enoch.

Wicked people can mourn, but in their sins they can't be sanctified and have eternal life, so who are "all

they that mourn"? (Verse 45.)

A mourner sorrows because a loved one has died. Maybe for Enoch "they that mourn" are the righteous who sorrow over the spiritual destruction of their loved ones.

What does it mean to be sanctified? (Verse 45.)

The phrase "sanctified from all sin" suggests that sanctified means something like cleansed.

If "all they that mourn" are righteous, why must they be sanctified from sin?

The easy answer is that no one is righteous—except Christ. Enoch refers to Christ as "the" Righteous.

(Verse 45.) But there appears to be more going on here. Enoch has been troubled over the sins of the wicked, not his own sins. Here he seems to feel in need of cleansing, as if the sins of the wicked have somehow tainted him. To one degree or another, we all share in the blood and sins of our own generation and need to be sanctified or cleansed from those sins.

Christ is to come in "the days of wickedness and vengeance." (Verse 46.) Whose vengeance?

In verse 60, the "last days" are also called "the days of wickedness and vengeance." The vengeance spoken of, in both cases, may be the vengeance of Christ on the wicked. In the meridian of time, vengeance was clearly taken on the wicked in America. It appears that in the last days, it will be universal. Christ says, "And it shall come to pass, because of the wickedness of the world, that I will take vengeance

upon the wicked, for they will not repent." (D&C 29:17.)

In verse 45, Enoch asks, "When shall the blood of the Righteous be shed?" Then in verse 47 he says, "The Righteous is lifted up . . ."—this must mean "lifted up on the cross"—and "the Lamb is slain from the foundation of the world." Why this emphasis on blood and death instead of the resurrection?

Enoch is interested in sanctification (verse 45), and from the Book of Remembrance kept by Adam, he

learned that sanctification was made possible through the shedding of blood—Christ's blood. (Moses

6:59-60.)

How is it that Christ was slain "from the foundation of the world"? (Verse 47.) What does this mean?

It must mean that Christ's atonement was ordained from the foundation, or beginning, of the world.

Enoch speaks of future events as if they were present, saying, "The Righteous is lifted up," "the Lamb is

slain," "through faith I am in the bosom of the Father," and "Zion is with me." (Verse 47.) Why does he speak this way?

Using the present tense to describe future events must have seemed appropriate to Enoch; he was, after all, seeing future events as if they were present.

Enoch says that he is in the bosom of the Father "through faith." What does this mean? Wasn't he actually with the Father right then?

Here, Enoch may be distinguishing between his present state, which actually is in the bosom of the Father, and the future state he looks forward to in faith, in which he will again be in the bosom of the Father.

48 And it came to pass that Enoch looked upon the earth; and he heard a voice from the bowels thereof, saying: Wo, wo is me, the mother of men; I am pained, I am weary, because of the wickedness of my children. When shall I rest, and be cleansed from the filthiness which is gone forth out of me? When will my Creator sanctify me, that I may rest, and righteousness for a season abide upon my face?

49 And when Enoch heard the earth mourn, he wept, and cried unto the Lord, saying: O Lord, wilt thou not have compassion upon the earth? Wilt thou not bless the children of Noah?

50 And it came to pass that Enoch continued his cry unto the Lord, saying: I ask thee, O Lord, in the name of thine Only Begotten, even Jesus Christ, that thou wilt have mercy upon Noah and his seed, that the earth might never more be covered by the floods.

51 And the Lord could not withhold; and he covenanted with Enoch, and sware unto him with an oath, that he would stay the floods; that he would call upon the children of Noah;

52 And he sent forth an unalterable decree, that a remnant of his seed should always be found among all nations, while the earth should stand;

53 And the Lord said: Blessed is he through whose seed Messiah shall come; for he saith—I am Messiah, the King of Zion, the Rock of Heaven, which is broad as eternity; whoso cometh in at the gate and climbeth up by me shall never fall; wherefore, blessed are they of whom I have spoken, for they shall come forth with songs of everlasting joy.

Why, just when Enoch is feeling comforted, does the Lord show him something else that makes him

sorrowful: the earth mourning? (Verse 48.)

It seems there is still more for Enoch to see. His moment of comfort and rejoicing was apparently a needed break from the sorrow he had been feeling, but not an end to it. Having seen the suffering of the wicked and the sorrow of the heavens, he now must see the suffering earth. Experiencing this "fulness of sorrow" seems to prepare him for the "fulness of joy" that will come at the end of the vision.

Does the earth really speak, or is this all figurative? (Verse 48.)

We once heard a lively Sunday School class discussion about this question. One sister said the earth has intelligence and so is capable of thought and speech. A brother replied, "But how can rocks and dirt talk?" There may be both a literal and figurative interpretation of this passage. The scriptures make it clear that the earth literally has intelligence: "And again, verily I say unto you, the earth abideth the law of a celestial kingdom, for it filleth the measure of its creation, and transgresseth not the law—Wherefore, it shall be sanctified; yea, notwithstanding it shall die, it shall be quickened again, and shall abide the power by

which it is quickened, and the righteous shall inherit it." (D&C 88:25-26.) But whether the earth has the kind of intelligence needed to think and speak is hard to say. Figuratively, the mourning earth, in need of sanctification, seems a symbol of "all they that mourn." Earlier, Enoch asked, "When shall . . . all they

that mourn be sanctified and have eternal life?" (Verse 45.) Now Enoch hears "the earthmourn" and ask,

"When will my Creator sanctify me?" (Verse 48.) The repetition points to the symbolism. Notice also the similarity between the weeping heavens and the mourning earth. Just as the heavens wept when torrents of rain fell on the earth, so also the earth mourns, shaking, when Christ is crucified and again before his

second coming. (Verses 56, 61.) And while the weeping heavens (verse 37) seemed to stand for "the weeping hosts of heaven," the mourning earth similarly seems symbolic of "the mourning inhabitants of the earth."

Why does the earth call herself the "mother of men" and speak of the filthiness which is "gone forth" out of her, as if in birth?

This reminds us of the creation: "And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground." (Genesis 2:7.) The earth is the mother of men, it seems, because they were formed from her elements. Also, the mourning of a righteous mother over the wickedness of her children suggests the deepest kind of grief experienced by any righteous mourner. And the need to be sanctified seems clearer in a family context than in any other; family members share more in each other's sins and are more burdened by them than any other group of people.

Enoch hears the voice from the bowels of the earth, as if from the very core of her being, and is grieved at

her sorrow. (Verse 48.) What repeated words, sounds, and ideas give the earth's speech its emotional effect?

Here are the repeated words and sounds;

Wo, wo is me, the mother of men;

I am pained,

I am weary,

because of the wickedness of my children.

When shall I rest,

and be cleansed from thefilthiness which is gone forth out of me,

When will my Creator sanctify me,

that I may rest, and

righteousness for a season abide upon my face?

The repeated ideas are: the need for rest ("I am weary," "When shall I rest," "that I may rest"), the need for cleansing ("When shall I . . . be cleansed," "When will my Creator sanctify me"), and the wickedness of men ("the wickedness of my children," "the filthiness which is gone forth out of me").

Can you sympathize with the earth's need for rest?

We once saw a television series about the personal lives of several of the Roman emperors. Each succeeding episode showed more murder, treachery, and infidelity, until we began to feel weary just watching. No doubt only God could come away still clean, pure, and alive from a hundred million such real-life episodes, knowing more than we could the tragedy of each one. Notice how little the earth asks: only for "a season" of rest, like a parent of young children hoping for one good night's sleep.

Now Enoch weeps again. (Verse 49.) By this time he must be sorely in need of rest himself. He asks two questions: "O Lord, wilt thou not have compassion upon the earth?" and "Wilt thou not bless the children of Noah?" He asks about the earth because he's been weeping over her, but why does he ask about the

children of Noah, whom he hasn't said anything about since he first saw them in verse 45?

Now that the flood has destroyed everyone but Noah and his children, they are the only ones left to give the earth grief. Enoch wants the Lord to bless Noah's children, it seems, so that the earth won't have so much to grieve over.

How, specifically, does Enoch want the Lord to bless Noah's children?

He asks the Lord to bless them by staying the floods. (Verse 50.)

Why does the way they die matter to Enoch? Aren't there worse ways to die?

Enoch may not be worried so much about drowning as about wholesale destruction. Perhaps drowning to him was the only conceivable way for everyone to be destroyed at once. The Lord responds as if total destruction were Enoch's concern, promising him that "a remnant of his seed should always be found

among all nations, while the earth should stand." (Verse 52.) This promise should comfort a generation that lives with nuclear nightmares; the Lord will not let us utterly blow ourselves off the face of the earth.

Why would it be worse for everyone to die at once, in a flood, for example, than for them to die separately.?

Total destruction means "the end of all flesh" (Moses 8:30), not just the end of various individuals. Gone is any hope for mankind—no new life, no rising generation to redeem the old.

How is it that staying the floods will comfort the earth, who mourns over the wickedness of her children?

Staying the floods and calling upon the children of Noah seem to go hand in hand. That is, the alternative to destruction is repentance, brought about by God calling on men to repent. If the Lord never gives up calling on the children of Noah, then there is hope they will eventually repent and righteousness for a season will abide upon the face of the earth. But if the Creator destroys men, then hope for them in the flesh is gone—and of course the flesh is what the earth is mother of. She would be left desolate, mourning that the great wickedness of her children led to their total annihilation.

Why is it that "the Lord could not withhold" granting Enoch's request? (Verse 51.)

One reason is found earlier in the Book of Moses where the Lord says, "If thou wilt turn unto me, and hearken unto my voice, and believe, and repent of all thy transgressions, and be baptized, even in water, in the name of mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth, which is Jesus Christ, the only name which shall be given under heaven, whereby salvation shall come unto the children of men, ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, asking all things in his name, and whatsoever ye shall ask, it shall be

given you." (Moses 6:52.) Enoch has asked in the name of the Son and presumably filled the other conditions of the promise, so the Lord cannot withhold. We don't think this was necessarily perfunctory, though; we picture the Lord moved with compassion at Enoch's request.

What phrases emphasize that the Lord really will stay the floods and call upon the children of Noah?

(Verse 51.)

The phrases, "He covenanted with Enoch" (verse 51), "[he] sware unto him with an oath" (verse 51), and

"he sent forth an unalterable decree" (verse 52). There can be no mistake that the Lord will fulfill his oath.

How does the Lord's statement "Blessed is he through whose seed Messiah shall come" (verse 53) relate to what's gone before?

The Lord appears to be saying that one reason he will bless Noah, preserving his children, is that he, Jesus Christ, will be of Noah's seed.

Who does the "he" refer to in the phrase "for he saith"? (Verse 53.)

This must refer to Christ.

Read aloud the line "I am Messiah, the King of Zion, the Rock of Heaven." (Verse 53.) What creates the rhythm of this line?

Several things: each of the phrases is five syllables in length; the last two phrases have the same number of words, with the same number of syllables in corresponding words; the last two phrases end in the same sound: Zion, Heaven,; finally, the pattern of emphasis is the same at the end of each of the three phrases:

I am Messiah

the King of Zion

the Rock of Heaven

The phrase "broad as eternity" (verse 53) reminds us of the earlier line "his heart swelled wide as eternity"

(verse 41). Does this similarity suggest anything to you?

To us it suggests that Christ's power is great enough to heal Enoch's sorrow. And indeed, as the next metaphor shows, it's great enough to heal any sorrow: "Whoso cometh in at the gate and climbeth up by

me shall never fall." (Verse 53.)

What is "the gate"? (Verse 53.)

We remember what Nephi said: "For the gate by which ye should enter is repentance and baptism by

water; and then cometh a remission of your sins by fire and by the Holy Ghost." (2 Nephi 31:17.)

Who are "they of whom I have spoken"? (Verse 53.)

Apparently, these are they who come in at the gate and climb up by Christ.

Do you know of other scriptures that might tell you why the righteous "shall come forth with songs of

everlasting joy." (Verse 53.)

This phrase and similar ones are found in scriptures that describe the joy of the righteous coming to Zion. One scripture is in Isaiah: "And the ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to Zion with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads: they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee

away." (Isaiah 35:10.) Try to imagine how you would feel coming to Zion, a society that encourages rather than discourages righteousness. What would it be like? No depressing headlines, locked doors, or fear of violence, no poverty, no guilt because you eat while others don't.

54 And it came to pass that Enoch cried unto the Lord, saying: When the Son of Man cometh in the flesh, shall the earth rest? I pray thee, show me these things.

55 And the Lord said unto Enoch: Look, and he looked and beheld the Son of Man lifted up on the cross, after the manner of men;

56 And he heard a loud voice; and the heavens were veiled; and all the creations of God mourned; and the earth groaned; and the rocks were rent; and the saints arose, and were crowned at the right hand of the Son of Man, with crowns of glory;

57 And as many of the spirits as were in prison came forth, and stood on the right hand of God; and the remainder were reserved in chains of darkness until the judgment of the great day.

The Lord makes some glorious promises to Enoch in verses 51 to 53. But again, Enoch isn't immediately

comforted. He asks, "When the Son of Man cometh in the flesh, shall the earth rest?" (Verse 54.) The Lord's promise to stay the floods must have given Enoch hope that some day the earth would rest. We know also he had faith that through the "blood of the Righteous" "all they that mourn" would be "sanctified

and have eternal life." (Verse 45.) What more does Enoch want here?

Enoch seems to want firsthand knowledge. He asks, "I pray thee, show me these things." (Verse 54.) It appears that Enoch can't or won't be comforted until he sees the earth at rest.

Why does Enoch think the earth might rest when Christ comes?

Enoch knows that the earth must be sanctified before she can rest (verse 48), that sanctification will come

through Christ (verse 45), and that Christ will come in the flesh (verse 47). So perhaps he wonders if the earth will rest when Christ does come in the flesh.

How does the Lord answer Enoch? (Verse 55.)

He shows Enoch Christ's crucifixion, at which the earth groans and all the creations of God mourn. No rest for the earth then!

What is it that occurs "after the manner of men"? (Verse 55.)

The lifting up is after the manner of men. Men don't lift up like God does. Men lift up to destroy, God to heal.

Enoch hears a loud voice and sees the heavens veiled. (Verse 56.) Earlier in his vision, before the flood,

he also heard a loud voice and saw the heavens veiled. (Verses 25 and 26.) At that time a loud voice

said, "Wo, wo be unto the inhabitants of the earth" (verse 25), and the heavens were veiled with darkness

(verse 26). How might Enoch have reacted to the similarity between these two occasions?

The earlier portents were signs of impending doom for Noah's contemporaries. Now Enoch sees the ominous signs for Noah's children as well. He must have been glad for the Lord's promise that he would stay the floods and call upon the children of Noah, but also more anxious to know when the promise would be fulfilled. And in fact, shortly after this, he asks the Lord, "Wilt thou not come again upon the

earth?" (Verse 59.)

At the time of Christ's crucifixion, was the loud voice actually heard and the veil seen, or were these only spiritually discerned?

At least in America, the signs were seen by all: "And it came to pass that there was thick darkness upon all the face of the land. . . And . . . there was a voice heard among all the inhabitants of the earth, upon all the face of this land, crying: Wo, wo, wo unto this people; wo unto the inhabitants of the whole earth

except they shall repent." (3 Nephi 8:20, 9:1, 2.)

What makes verse 56 so powerful?

We think it's partly the short descriptive phrases, which have the most effect when punctuated with breaths as follows:

And he heard a loud voice; (breath)

and the heavens were veiled; (breath)

and all the creations of God mourned; (breath)

and the earth groaned; (breath)

and the rocks rent; (breath)

and the saints arose, and were crowned at the right hand of the Son of Man, with crowns of glory (breath).

This way of breathing emphasizes the last and longest line, which describes the rising of the Saints. The power also comes from the pervasive feeling of mourning. Besides "mourned" and "groaned," the words "loud voice," "veiled," and "rent" also suggest mourning. In the Old Testament, mourners often cried with loud voices, covered themselves, and rent their clothes. For example, during a time of "great mourning

among the Jews" (Esther 4:3), "Mordecai rent his clothes, and put on sackcloth with ashes, and went out

into the midst of the city, and cried with a loud and a bitter cry" (Esther 4:1). (See alsoEzekiel 24:17; 2

Samuel 15:30, 32; 2 Samuel 19:4.) In verse 56, the heavens and the earth mourn, sharing in a grief so pervasive that it extends even to inanimate creation. Sound repetitions are also important in this verse. You might want to try picking out the repeated sounds. Notice the image created by placing the line "the saints arose" after the line "the rocks were rent." It seems the rocks rend in order to deliver up the saints from the earth.

What are "crowns of glory"? (Verse 56.)

In the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord, speaking of the earth, says, "For after it hath filled the measure of its creation, it shall be crowned with glory, even with the presence of God the Father; That bodies who

are of the celestial kingdom may possess it forever and ever." (D&C 88:19-20.) It appears that the Saints are crowned with the presence of God the Father, implying that they inherit the celestial kingdom.

"And as many of the spirits as were in prison came forth, and stood on the right hand of God." (Verse 57.) What does this line mean?

This line must mean that there were as many prisoners that came forth as there were Saints. It couldn't mean that all the spirits in prison came forth, because we next read that some were reserved in chains of

darkness. (Verse 57.)

How are the Saints who arise like and unlike the prisoners who come forth?

Both Saints and former prisoners end up at the right hand of Christ, which means they have all been

cleansed by Christ and have taken upon themselves his name. (Mosiah 5:8-10; Alma 5:58.) However, the prisoners who rejected Christ in the flesh, though they afterward received him, are heirs of a terrestrial

glory, while the Saints receive a celestial glory. (D&C 76:71-74.)

What's the difference between those who come forth out of prison and those who are reserved in chains

of darkness? (Verse 57.)

In Joseph F. Smith's Vision of the Redemption of the Dead, we read, "And the chosen messengers went forth to declare the acceptable day of the Lord and proclaim liberty to the captives who were bound,even

unto all who would repent of their sins and receive the gospel." (D&C 138:31.) The prisoners who came

forth were the repentant ones. (See also Moses 7:39.)

When is "the judgment of the great day"? (Verse 57.)

In the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord says, "The residue of the wicked have I kept in chains of

darkness until the judgment of the great day, which shall come at the end of the earth." (D&C 38:5.)

58 And again Enoch wept and cried unto the Lord, saying: When shall the earth rest?

59 And Enoch beheld the Son of Man ascend up unto the Father; and he called unto the Lord, saying: Wilt thou not come again upon the earth? Forasmuch as thou art God, and I know thee, and thou hast sworn unto me, and commanded me that I should ask in the name of thine Only Begotten; thou hast made me, and given unto me a right to thy throne, and not of myself, but through thine own grace; wherefore, I ask thee if thou wilt not come again on the earth.

60 And the Lord said unto Enoch: As I live, even so will I come in the last days, in the days of wickedness and vengeance, to fulfil the oath which I have made unto you concerning the children of Noah;

61 And the day shall come that the earth shall rest, but before that day the heavens shall be darkened, and a veil of darkness shall cover the earth; and the heavens shall shake, and also the earth; and great tribulations shall be among the children of men, but my people will I preserve;

62 And righteousness will I send down out of heaven; and truth will I send forth out of the earth, to bear testimony of mine Only Begotten; his resurrection from the dead; yea, and also the resurrection of all men; and righteousness and truth will I cause to sweep the earth as with a flood, to gather out mine elect from the four quarters of the earth, unto a place which I shall prepare, an Holy City, that my people may gird up their loins, and be looking forth for the time of my coming; for there shall be my tabernacle, and it shall be called Zion, a New Jerusalem.

63 And the Lord said unto Enoch: Then shalt thou and all thy city meet them there, and we will receive them into our bosom, and they shall see us; and we will fall upon their necks, and they shall fall upon our necks, and we will kiss each other;

64 And there shall be mine abode, and it shall be Zion, which shall come forth out of all the creations which I have made; and for the space of a thousand years the earth shall rest.

Now knowing that the earth won't rest when Christ comes in the flesh, Enoch persistently asks again,

"When shall the earth rest?" (Verse 58.) Does his persistence resemble that of anyone else you are familiar with in the scriptures?

We think of Joseph Smith deciding to ask God which church was right, remembering what to ask when the Lord appeared and telling his mother the answer. Joseph and Enoch weren't easily distracted when

they wanted answers. It's interesting that in Section 78 the Lord calls Joseph Smith by the name Enoch.

Up until verse 59, "the Lord" appears to be "the Father." (See verses 33, 39, 47, 50.) But beginning

in verse 59, when Enoch asks if he will come again upon the earth, "the Lord" appears also to be the Son. How do you explain this?

Probably this is and has been Jesus speaking for the Father. We think of Section 29, which begins with Jesus introducing himself, saying, "Listen to the voice of Jesus Christ, your Redeemer, the Great I am"

(verse 1), but later has Jesus speaking for the Father, saying, "I, the Lord God, gave unto Adam and unto his seed, that they should not die as to the temporal death, until I, the Lord God, should send forth angels to declare unto them repentance and redemption, through faith on the name of mine Only Begotten Son."

(Verse 42.) The son speaks for the Father because they are one, and his doing so helps us sense their

oneness. (See also Revelations 22:6-9 for an example of an angel speaking for Christ.)

In verse 59, to whom does Enoch call, the Son of Man he sees ascending, the Father, who is also in the vision, or "the Lord" he has been talking to?

The question "Wilt thou not come again upon the earth?" suggests that this is the Son, as does the fact that Enoch calls as if the person were going away from him. But then Enoch says, "Thou hast . . . commanded me that I should ask in the name of thine Only Begotten," which suggests he is talking to the Father. Then again, the account says he calls to "the Lord"—the person he's been talking with all along. Again, this blurring of individuals is probably intentional. Here Enoch seems almost to step into the vision, no longer a passive witness but an active participant who encourages Christ to come again upon the earth. Previously, he asked, "When the Son of Man cometh in the flesh, shall the earth rest?"

talking about Christ. (Verse 54.) Now he talks to Christ, saying, "Wilt thou not come again upon the

earth?" (Verse 59.)

Why does Enoch ask the Lord if he will come again? Hasn't the Lord already promised that he would call on the children of Noah?

Enoch may be wondering if the promise was fulfilled when Christ came in the flesh and if men had lost their chance because they rejected him when he came.

Looking at Enoch's speech to the Lord in verse 59, how does Enoch feel about asking the Lord to come again upon the earth?

Just as in verses 29 to 31, Enoch here seems hesitant to ask the Lord his question without explaining himself. He tells the Lord why he asks and why he feels it's right for him to ask, not wanting to be disrespectful.

Notice how he softens his request in verse 59: he says, "thou hast sworn unto me," omitting what it is the Lord has sworn, instead of saying, "thou hast sworn unto me that thou would call upon the children of Noah"; and he says, "thou hast . . . given unto me a right to thy throne, and not of myself, but through thine own grace," instead of just, "thou hast . . . given unto me a right to thy throne." Why doesn't he speak more to the point?

We think he doesn't want to be demanding. He's not trying to browbeat the Lord with the equivalent of the child's "But you promised."

Enoch seems to feel he's asking a great favor of the Lord. Why?

He's just seen what happened to the Lord the first time he came. Asking him to come back after an experience like that must have taken a lot of courage! Still, Enoch appears to feel justified in asking.

The Lord promises Enoch that he will come in the last days and swears it, saying, "as I live." (Verse 60.) Why does he so strongly state the promise?

The Lord's firmness seems a response to Enoch's uncertainty. He reassures Enoch: he will not cease calling on men; his oath is for all time.

In verse 61 and again in verse 64, Enoch is told, finally, that the earth shall rest. This must have been a great comfort to him. But he also sees the great tribulation that will precede the coming of Christ. A picture

of this tribulation is created in the following lines from verse 61:

the heavens shall be darkened, and

a veil of darkness shall cover the earth; and

the heavens shall shake, and also

the earth [shall shake];

What repetition do you find in these lines, and what does the repetition emphasize? Heavens and earth are repeated, as are the images of darkness and shaking. The repetition of heavens and earth emphasizes the extent of the tribulation; the repetition of darkness and shaking emphasizes the fearfulness of it.

Verse 61 seems an abbreviated version of other accounts of the last days. What other accounts are you reminded of?

We think of Christ teaching his disciples what the signs of his second coming would be. (Matthew

24; Mark 13; Luke 21; Joseph Smith 1.) In the various accounts, we read of "great tribulation" (Matthew

24:21), of "great earthquakes" (Luke 21:11), and that the sun shall be "darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken"

(Matthew 24:29). Verse 66 of Moses 7 also describes the tribulation of the last days, and is the only other

verse in Moses 7 that does. This verse describes the sea being troubled and men's hearts failing them, reminding us most of Luke's account of the last days, in which we read about "the sea and the waves

roaring" (Luke 21:25) and "men's hearts failing them for fear" (Luke 21:26).

In earlier verses of Moses 7, much was said about the suffering of the wicked at the time of the flood. Why is so little said about the suffering of the wicked in the last days?

Perhaps by now Enoch has learned what the Lord wanted him to learn about the suffering that sin brings, so there is no need to go into more detail. Like Christ, Enoch's bowels are filled with compassion for the wicked and for the righteous who mourn because of them, and he is now ready for the Lord to show him what he has to look forward to and rejoice about. The suffering, it seems, has prepared him to receive the joy.

What is emphasized by saying "My people will I preserve" (verse 61) instead of "I will preserve my people"?

What is emphasized is that the people of the Lord, not the wicked, will be preserved.

From what verse 62 says, how will the Lord call on the children of Noah?

To us, the line "righteousness will I send down out of heaven" suggests heavenly messengers, and the line "truth will I send forth out of the earth" suggests the Book of Mormon, which did come forth from the earth. The Book of Mormon bears testimony of Christ, his resurrection, and the resurrection of all men; heavenly messengers at the time of the Restoration also bore testimony of these things.

The feeling in verse 62 builds in intensity with the repetition of "righteousness" and "truth"; these the Lord

will cause to sweep the earth "as with a flood." Try reading verse 62 and notice how the feeling builds. (Breathe according to the punctuation—at the semicolons and, if needed, after "an Holy City.") Why is the simile "as with a flood" particularly appropriate here?

Instead of a flood of waters, the Lord will send a flood of "righteousness and truth." The two are alternatives, reminding us of the Lord's earlier promise to Enoch that he would stay the floods and call

upon the children of Noah. (Verse 51.)

Who are the elect of God? (Verse 62.)

The elect of God are those who hear his voice, believe in him, and harden not their hearts. (D&C

29:7, 33:6.) Christ says, "They . . . shall see me, and shall not be asleep, and shall abide the day of my

coming; for they shall be purified, even as I am pure." (D&C 35:21.)

What are the four quarters of the earth? (Verse 62.)

Elsewhere in the scriptures, we read about "the four corners of the earth." (2 Nephi 21:12.) In reference to the earth, "quarters" and "corners" seem to mean the same. Both words refer to the extremities or ends of the earth—its remotest parts. The four quarters are the four ends or directions from which the wind blows. Some scriptures say the gathering will be "from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other."

(D&C 133:7; Joseph Smith 1:37.) The gospel, in other words, will be preached in all the earth. We are reminded of another scripture: "And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a

witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come." (Matthew 24:14.)

What does "grid up their loins" mean? (Verse 62.)

One reference book tells us that the Hebrews wore girdles when traveling or working, girding or fastening their clothes about them to ensure free movement of their limbs. To "gird up their loins" means, then, to prepare for action. Apparently, coming to Zion won't mean rest. In the Doctrine and Covenants we read, "They shall be gathered in unto one place upon the face of this land, to prepare their hearts and beprepared in all things against the day when tribulation and desolation are sent forth upon the wicked."

(D&C 29:8.) The emphasis here on preparation also suggests action.

In the following lines of verse 62, what do "there" and "it" refer to: ". . . for there shall be my tabernacle, and it shall be called Zion, a New Jerusalem"?

Both "there" and "it" apparently refer to the Holy City. Christ's tabernacle will be in the Holy City, and the City will be called Zion, a New Jerusalem.

What is Christ's tabernacle? (Verse 62.)

We see two possibilities: (1) his temple; in the Holy City shall be his temple; and (2) his dwelling place; the Holy City shall be his dwelling place. Both statements are true.

Enoch lived a long time before Old Jerusalem was built. What meaning would the phrase "a New

Jerusalem" have for him? (Verse 62.)

It may be that Enoch had seen Old Jerusalem in vision and knew it by name. Or it may be that Enoch knew the Holy City by another name, which was translated "New Jerusalem" for our benefit.

Why, like Enoch's city, is the Holy City to be called Zion? (Verse 62.)

Both cities are cities of holiness. The earlier Zion was called "the City of Holiness" (Moses 7:19); this Zion

is called "the Holy City" (verse 62.)

Verse 63 is another verse expressing deep emotion. A scene of joyful reunion is vividly described. Does this scene remind you of any others in the scriptures?

Strikingly similar are the reunion scenes of the father and the prodigal son, and of Jacob and Esau. The first reads, "But when he was yet a great way off, his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and

fell on his neck, and kissed him" (Luke 15:20); and the second, "And Esau ran to meet him, and embraced

him, and fell on his neck, and kissed him: and they wept" (Genesis 33:4).

Why do you think the emotion is so strong when the two cities meet? What is the bond between them?

For the father and the prodigal son, and for Jacob and Esau, the bond was kinship. For the two Zions, the bond is spiritual brotherhood. Though separated by millennia, by language and custom, the two Zions are fundamentally one—one in Christ.

Why is the line "and they shall see us" (verse 63) significant?

The account doesn't say "and we shall see them" because "we" have been seeing "them," behind the veil,

for a long time, eagerly awaiting the day "which was sought for by all holy men." (D&C 45:12.) What's new is that "they," their brothers in Christ, shall see "us." Try to imagine yourself in that scene, weeping for joy, that the long-awaited day has finally come.

The first lines of verse 64 are quite similar to the last lines of verse 62. Verse 62 says, ". . . for there shall

be my tabernacle, and it shall be called Zion"; verse 64 says, "And there shall be mine abode, and it shall be Zion." Why does Christ emphasize the fact that he will dwell in Zion?

This is Christ's fulfillment of his promise to Enoch that he would come again upon the earth and call upon the children of Noah. With the Restoration, the promise began to be fulfilled; with the establishment of Zion and the millennial reign of Christ, it comes to glorious fruition.

The Lord tells Enoch, "and it shall be Zion, which shall come forth out of all the creations which I have

made," (verse 64) echoing an earlier line of Enoch's, "And thou hast taken Zion to thine own bosom, from

all thy creations." (Verse 31.) What's the significance of Zion's coming forth out of all the creations the Lord has made?

The idea seems to be that Zion is one of the creations, out of all the creations, that will come forth and be an abode of the Lord. Out of the millions of seeds that were planted, Zion is one that grows, and in fact grows in rather barren soil, coming forth clean out of greater wickedness than the wickedness of any other of the Lord's creations. Remember that the Lord said to Enoch, "Among all the workmanship of mine

hands there has not been so great wickedness as among thy brethren." (Verse 36.) Just as there is great joy when the lost sheep is found, there is great joy when a pure people comes forth from a lost world like ours.

65 And it came to pass that Enoch saw the day of the coming of the Son of Man, in the last days, to dwell on the earth in righteousness for the space of a thousand years;

66 But before that day he saw great tribulations among the wicked; and he also saw the sea, that it was troubled, and men's hearts failing them, looking forth with fear for the judgments of the Almighty God, which should come upon the wicked.

67 And the Lord showed Enoch all things, even unto the end of the world; and he saw the day of the righteous, the hour of their redemption; and received a fulness of joy;

68 And all the days of Zion, in the days of Enoch, were three hundred and sixty-five years.

69 And Enoch and all his people walked with God, and he dwelt in the midst of Zion; and it came to pass that Zion was not, for God received it up into his own bosom; and from thence went forth the saying, ZION IS FLED.

Just as Enoch was first told about the flood (verse 38) and then shown it (verse 43), he now sees what he

has just been told about the last days (verse 65). Why do you think the Lord first tells Enoch about these events, then shows them to him?

The Lord, by first telling, seems to prepare Enoch for the things he will be shown, interpreting what he will see, directing his attention to the things most important for him to understand, and helping him not to be overwhelmed.

The fact that the earth will finally have a season of rest is emphasized by the two lines "for the space of a

thousand years the earth shall rest" (verse 64) and "to dwell on the earth in righteousness for the space of

a thousand years" (verse 65). What this will be like for the earth is beautifully described in D&C 84:101:

The earth hath travailed and brought forth her strength;

And truth is established in her bowels;

And the heavens have smiled upon her;

And she is clothed with the glory of her God;

For he stands in the midst of his people.

How does the earth's state here compare to what it was in verse 48?

Here the earth has brought forth her strength—her righteous children; earlier the filthiness of her children weighed her down. Earlier the voice from the bowels of the earth was one of pain and fatigue; now truth is established in her bowels. Before, she desired sanctification; now she is clothed with the glory of her God. Then she wished righteousness for a season to abide upon her face; now it does.

In verse 67, we read of "the end of the world," "the day of the righteous," and "the hour of their redemption"? When do each of these events take place?

Apparently, "the end of the world" is at the end of the Millennium. (D&C 43:30-31.) The "day of the

righteous" must be the Millennium. (We know that "one day is with the Lord as a thousand years" [2 Peter

3:8], and that during the Millennium Christ's people shall be redeemed and reign with him on earth [D&C

43:29-30].) The "hour of their redemption," we are told, will be the time of the first resurrection, which

comes at the beginning of the Millennium. (D&C 88:95-99.)

Like the earth, Enoch comes from deep grief to a fulness of joy. (Verse 67.) But we are told no more about

his joy. The sorrow Enoch earlier experienced was described in detail (verse 41), so why isn't his joy?

Perhaps the intent of Moses 7 is to give us a better understanding of the misery that wickedness brings and a greater compassion for those who suffer under the burden of sin. Joseph Smith said, "The nearer we get to our heavenly Father, the more we are disposed to look with compassion on perishing souls; we feel that we want to take them upon our shoulders, and cast their sins behind our backs." (Teachings, p. 241.) Perhaps only with that compassion can we really know "good and evil" and consequently "the joy of

our redemption" (Moses 5:11), and no amount of description can otherwise communicate it.
