Let No Man Think Me a Fool-2 Corinthians 11:16-33

Sandra Packard, Dennis Packard, Feasting upon the Word ( 1981)

10

Alleged ministers of Christ had begun to corrupt the minds of the Corinthian Saints. (2 Corinthians

10; 11:3.) These false apostles, as Paul calls them (11:13), were commending themselves by criticizing

Paul (10:12). Granted, they say, Paul's letters are "weighty and powerful" (10:10), still "his bodily presence

is weak" (10:10)—Paulus means little—and his "speech contemptible" (10:10). Joseph Smith confirms this description of Paul: "He is about five feet high; very dark hair; dark complexion; dark skin; large Roman nose; sharp face; small black eyes, penetrating as eternity; round shoulders; a whining voice, except when elevated, and then it almost resembled the roaring of a lion." (Teachings, p. 180.) Besides his contemptible appearance and speech, Paul, they say, has offended the Corinthians; he wouldn't accept money from them when he was there and in need, but instead accepted money from brethren who came

up from the church in Macedonia. (11:9.) No doubt the false apostles were practiced orators, fine in voice, speech, and appearance and quite willing to accept money.

How might Paul respond to this criticism? How do you think he should respond?

Paul, though living among worldly ways, won't try to defend himself after the ways of the world (10:3) by commending himself or boasting: "He that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord. For not he that commendeth

himself is approved, but whom the Lord commendeth." (10:17-18.) He writes, "The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds; Casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God, and bringing into

captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ." (10:4-5.) The weapon he then uses is irony; he parodies the false apostles, parrots them, imitates them, showing by his example how foolish it is to blow one's own trumpet. He writes that he refused to accept the money so as to cut off "those superlative

apostles" (New English Bible 11:5) who desired occasion (11:12) to "boast" that they were "no different from" Paul (Knox translation) in receiving money and he ironically asks "What is it wherein ye were inferior

to other churches, except it be that I myself was not burdensome to you? forgive me this wrong." (12:13.)

16 I say again, Let no man think me a fool; if otherwise, yet as a fool receive me, that I may boast myself a little.

17 That which I speak, I speak it not after the Lord, but as it were foolishly, in this confidence of boasting.

18 Seeing that many glory after the flesh, I will glory also.

19 For ye suffer fools gladly, seeing ye yourselves are wise.

20 For ye suffer, if a man bring you into bondage, if a man devour you, if a man take of you, if a man exalt himself, if a man smite you on the face.

21 I speak as concerning reproach, as though we had been weak. Howbeit whereinsoever any is bold, (I speak foolishly,) I am bold also.

Paul says he's going to boast a little. (Verse 16.) Does he? Is his boasting sinful?

Paul begins by asking the Saints not to think of him as a fool, as weak and contemptible; but he quickly adds that if they insist on it, then they should allow him to play the part of the fool and boast a little as other fools do, the other fools being the false apostles who had been foolishly criticizing him. He proceeds

as it were to speak foolishly, boasting, reminding us in verse 17 that such speaking, taken at face value, isn't of the Lord. But Paul isn't really boasting; he's pretending to boast, using irony to teach a lesson. And

because he's teaching a lesson, he is speaking after the Lord, as he explicitly states he is in12:19: "We speak before God in Christ: but we do all things, dearly beloved, for your edifying."

What does suffer mean in verses 19 and 20?

In verse 19, "suffer" means "allow." Paul is saying that the Corinthian Saints willingly allow or tolerate

fools, since they are so wise that they don't need to worry about being wronged by them. But then in verse

20, "suffer" can have either of two meanings. If "suffer" is taken in its ordinary sense, then Paul is saying

in verse 20 that the Saints endure hardships if a man brings them into bondage, devours them, takes of them, exalts himself, or smites them on the face—an obvious truth. But if taken in the sense of "allow," as

in verse 19, verse 20 says that they allow or tolerate men bringing them into bondage, devouring them,

taking their money, and so on—the kinds of things the false apostles are doing to them. Thus, verse

20 can be taken in two ways and is an ironic statement of just how "wise" they are in tolerating the fools.

Paul says, "I speak as concerning reproach, as though we had been weak." (Verse 21.) Other translations of this line are: "And we, you say, have been weak! I admit the reproach" (New English Bible); and "I am quite ashamed to say that I was not equal to that sort of thing!" (Moffatt). What is the sort of thing Paul is not equal to?

He isn't equal to the Corinthian's endurance; they tolerate much more readily than he would all the abuse of the false apostles. Given all the things the Corinthians endure, Paul is willing to admit he is weak—he wouldn't endure them!

Paul then begins his parody, saying that in terms of boldness, he is as bold as the best. Parenthetically,

he again reminds us that speaking so is speaking foolishly. (Verse 21.) Why the reminder?

He wants us to remember that this is pretended boasting, not serious boasting.

22 Are they Hebrews? so am I. Are they Israelites? so am I. Are they the seed of Abraham? so am I.

23 Are they ministers of Christ? (I speak as a fool) I am more; in labours more abundant, in stripes above measure, in prisons more frequent, in deaths oft.

24 Of the Jews five times received I forty stripes save one.

25 Thrice was I beaten with rods, once was I stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night and a day I have been in the deep;

26 In journeyings often, in perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in perils by mine own countrymen, in perils by the heathen, in perils in the city, in perils in the wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils among false brethren;

27 In weariness and painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness.

28 Beside those things that are without, that which cometh upon me daily, the care of all the churches.

Who does the pronoun "they" in verses 22 and 23 refer to?

Paul is speaking of the false apostles.

How, in verse 22, does Paul make his "boasting" seem ridiculous?

Apparently, the false apostles made much of their lineage, so Paul, as they, claims descent from Abraham, but he overdoes it, three times saying, "so am I," showing how silly such boasting is. The

Joseph Smith translation adds a fourth "so am I" instead of the "I am more" in verse 23, making the speech seem even more ridiculous.

Paul's "boastful" speech is excessively repetitious. What other overdone repetition do you find?

The repetitiveness begins in verse 22 and reaches its peak in verse 26, where "in perils" is repeated eight times. His speech was probably not unlike the false apostles' boastful speeches, labored and excessive. By imitating their overworked rhetoric, he shows how foolish their boasting is.

Paul says that he's been "in deaths oft." (Verse 23.) Obviously, he hadn't died more times than the false apostles, though he was more than once near death, and once, after being stoned, was even left for dead. Why does he say this?

The phrase is an ironic exaggeration, used to show what extremes such boasting leads to.

Why do you think Paul says "forty stripes save one" instead of "thirty-nine stripes" in verse 24?

The Jews were allowed to give only forty lashes (Deuteronomy 25:3), and so to be quite sure they didn't exceed the limit, they always stopped at thirty-nine.

Paul says he suffered shipwreck three times. (Verse 25.) How many shipwreck accounts do we know of?

We only have the account of one. (Acts 27.) The record must be incomplete.

Paul melodramatically tells about all the perils he has been in, saving for last, the position of most

importance, the peril of being among false brethren. (Verse 26.) Is he still being ironic when he mentions false brethren?

He is and he isn't. While maintaining the ironic tone, he points here to his real concern—the harm false

brethren are doing to the church at Corinth. In verse 28, he generalizes this expression of concern to "all the churches."

29 Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is offended, and I burn not?

30 If I must needs glory, I will glory of the things which concern mine infirmities.

31 The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is blessed for evermore, knoweth that I lie not.

A modern translation of verse 29 is: "Who is weak, but I share his weakness? Who is caused to fall, but I burn with indignation? (Conybeare.) The Joseph Smith Translation reads, "Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is offended, and I anger not?" What is Paul "boasting" of here?

Paul is probably saying that he had felt anger toward those false ministers who were causing the Saints in Corinth to fall, his reaction being, "Are they leading you astray? Then I am furious!" This is the kind of

boasting some might engage in, vaunting their sympathy for others. But in verse 30, we see that Paul regards his anger as a real weakness; by glorying in it, he has been glorying in an infirmity or weakness. A Christian shouldn't suffer offense when others suffer offense. To feel the wrong way for someone else is as wrong as feeling it for oneself. In becoming upset at wrongs suffered by others, one is not being

virtuous. You might compare Nephi's sorrow over his anger in 2 Nephi 4:15-35.

In verse 31, Paul says he has been telling the truth and the Lord knows it. What has he been telling the truth about?

One possibility is that he has been telling the truth about all the hardships he has suffered. But

perhaps verse 31 refers more specifically to what he has just indirectly admitted in verses 29 and 30, namely, that he wrongfully got upset. He is then saying that the Lord knows he regards his reaction as a weakness, probably because his anger has been a matter of concern he has been taking to the Lord.

32 In Damascus the governor under Aretas the king kept the city of the Damascenes with a garrison, desirous to apprehend me:

33 And through a window in a basket was I let down by the wall, and escaped his hands.

The incident in verses 32 and 33 goes back to Paul's idea of glorying in his infirmities. How is it an example of glorying in infirmity?

In these verses, we're given an example of Paul being saved in a very unheroic way. It was a great thing that the Lord rescued him, but the rescue itself was humiliating; he was let down from a wall in a basket. The sort of thing to be put in a basket is an ape, not a man. The Corinthians had been saying that Paul shouldn't be so humble, so weak, so little, and here Paul is showing that with just those attributes he was able to be saved. If that is the way the Lord will take care of Paul, it is fine with him. And if Paul has to play the part of a fool to save the Corinthians from the garrison of false apostles, he is willing to do that too. Thus, even while he plays the fool, we still see the truth about Paul—his humility, as well as the great number of hardships he has suffered for Christ. And in this we see that the false apostles, in trying to compare themselves favorably to Paul, were doubly foolish—first because boasting is foolish in itself, and second because they couldn't hope to compete with Paul.

Do you know anyone else who, out of love, has parodied sinful behavior in a way that shows how foolish it is?

Like Paul, Joseph Smith used parody as a means of instruction. Here are two incidents that occurred during Zion's camp.

We crossed the Embarras river and encamped on a small branch of the same about one mile west. In pitching my tent we found three massasaugas or prairie rattlesnakes, which the brethren were about to kill, but I said, "Let them alone—don't hurt them! How will the serpent ever lose his venom, while the servants of God possess the same disposition, and continue to make war upon it? Men must become harmless, before the brute creation; and when men lose their vicious dispositions and cease to destroy the animal race, the lion and the lamb can dwell together, and the sucking child can play with the serpent in safety." The brethren took the serpents carefully on sticks and carried them across the creek. I exhorted the brethren not to kill a serpent, bird, or an animal of any kind during our journey unless it became necessary in order to preserve ourselves from hunger.

I had frequently spoken on this subject, when on a certain occasion I came up to the brethren who were watching a squirrel in a tree, and to prove them and to know if they would heed my counsel, I took one of their guns, shot the squirrel and passed on, leaving the squirrel on the ground. Brother Orson Hyde, who was just behind, picked up the squirrel, and said, "We will cook this, that nothing may be lost." I perceived that the brethren understood what I did it for, and in their practice gave more heed to my precept than to my example, which was right. (History of the Church, vol. 2, pp. 71-72.)

The following is from Heber C. Kimball's journal:

When we had all got over [the Mississippi], we camped about one mile back from the little town of Louisiana, in a beautiful oak grove, which is immediately on the bank of the river. At this place there were some feelings of hostility manifested again by Sylvester Smith, in consequence of a dog growling at him while he was marching his company up to the camp, he being the last that came over the river. The next morning Brother Joseph told the camp that he would descend to the spirit that was manifested by some of the brethren, to let them see the folly of their wickedness. He rose up and commenced speaking by saying, "If any man insults me, or abuses me, I will stand in my own defense at the expense of my life; and if a dog growls at me, I will let him know that I am his master." At this moment, Sylvester Smith, who had just returned from where he had turned out his horses to feed, came up, and hearing Brother Joseph make those remarks, said "If that dog bites me, I'll kill him." Brother Joseph turned to Sylvester and said, "If you kill that dog, I'll whip you," and then went on to show the brethren how wicked and unchristianlike such conduct appeared before the eyes of truth and justice. (History of the Church, vol. 2, p. 83.)

What was Joseph showing to be foolish in these two stories?

In the first, killing animals for sport; in the second, hostility.

Now try reading 2 Corinthians 11:16-33 aloud again, this time with the tone of voice you think Paul would use.

Reflections and Refinements

As a result of science and technology, we are continually learning more about ourselves and the world around us. Unfortunately, at the same time we are also forgetting more and more. With the decline of classical education and the emphasis on scientific and pseudo-scientific jargon, we are losing our sensitivity to the language that is our common heritage. We don't understand the scriptures, largely because we don't understand the language of the scriptures, a language as suited to the Lord's purposes as the language of mathematics is to science.

When the Lord speaks, he doesn't intend merely to inform us, but to change us, to open our minds and hearts, to unstop our ears and to break down our pride. Consequently, when we understand how scriptural language serves these purposes, we don't read solely for information, combing the pages for doctrine, settling for simple paraphrases, missing altogether the power of the scriptures to change our attitudes and soften our hearts. Nor do we become sentimental and read into the scriptures our own emotional preconceptions. An understanding of scriptural language helps us develop a more disciplined, sensitive response to the scriptures.
