Sandra Packard, Dennis Packard, Feasting upon the Word ( 1981)

12

Sometimes brothers and sisters, parents and children, even husbands and wives live together for years without ever getting to know each other. That's been our experience with the scriptures; we've been acquainted for a long time, but friends only recently. Our earliest memories are of Sunday School and Primary classes where we learned stories from the scriptures, stories most often retold in someone else's words. We had scripture books for children—books with stories again told in someone else's words. They were interesting, but without, as we see now, the life, the power, the richness of the scriptures themselves. Later, we learned principles abstracted from the scriptures, doctrines from this verse and that, here and there a verse used to support someone's point, and more stories, again all told in someone else's words. We grew up pretty much at arm's length from the scriptures.

As adults, married, with several children, we came to love the scriptures. And the more we did, the more we wanted our children to hear the scriptures and come to love them too. Our first attempt at scripture reading, though, wasn't very promising. We started somewhere in the Book of Mormon, reading a few verses each day. Nobody seemed to enjoy it much, particularly us—it took such an effort just to keep everyone quiet. We let our attempt simply fade away, and it was some time before we tried again. We had to learn a few things first.

Now, at last, we're reading the scriptures to our children and enjoying it. We're not, mind you, reading simplified scriptures (can anyone enjoy thistles after they've had figs?). Nor have we gone to playing them a stranger's voice on a tape. We are reading to them the standard works, the real thing. And, fortunately, our children are still young, six and under, still like sponges, absorbing everything they hear.

Our children, like most, enjoy choosing—meals, clothes, even punishments—whether they'll go to their room for ten minutes or clean up for their brother or sister they've hurt. So, we let our children choose the scriptures they want to hear. For our family, the best time to read the scriptures is at dinner, right before dessert. (Before dinner, everyone is too hungry to be patient. After dessert, they're all too eager to go back to work or play.) We go around the table, everyone getting their turn to choose the passage of scripture they want to hear. The children choose their favorites, and when it comes time for dad or mom to choose, we introduce new passages. Our children look forward to their turn.

One of their favorite passages is "David and Goliath," and our children know it so well that they've memorized a good deal of it. We've seen our two-year-old (who often chooses "David and Goliath") sitting by herself, playing with her toys, repeating in a taunting tone of voice, "Come to me," Goliath's "come-on" to David. Our oldest son, six years old, sometimes likes to say the words along with us as we read. And all the children like to fill in the words if we stop reading in mid-sentence. They may not have breadth of scriptural understanding, but at least in places they'll have the beginnings of a depth, and this, to us, seems important, especially when they're ready for that understanding. Our children are no different from us. They learn line upon line, precept upon precept, and they know, often better than we, the line or precept they're ready for. We think of our six-year-old saying along with his father, "Then said David to the Philistine, Thou comest to me with a sword, and with a spear, and with a shield: but I come to thee in the name of the Lord of hosts, the God of the armies of Israel, whom thou hast defied. This day will the Lord deliver thee into mine hand; and I will smite thee, and take thine head from thee; and I will give the carcases of the host of the Philistines this day unto the fowls of the air, and to the wild beasts of the earth; that all the earth may know that there is a God in Israel. And all this assembly shall know that the Lord

saveth not with sword and spear: for the battle is the Lord's, and he will give you into our hands." (1

Samuel 17:45-47.) The more he chooses that story, the more those words become a part of him, almost as if he senses that on some unknown battlefield of the future, he'll be facing a Goliath. Knowing that our children are likely to choose a passage several times keeps us from anxiously trying to do the impossible: we don't have to "make sure they understand it all" the first time they hear it. The passage will come up again, so we can talk about it a little at a time, letting them (and us) discover gradually what all the words mean and what the passage is saying. One night, for instance, we might tell them what "fowls of the air" and "beasts of the field" are, and on another night how a sling works; on still another, one of them might ask, "What's a shield?"

Most often, our children pick familiar passages. Sometimes, though, they want to hear about something new we've talked about during the day. For example, all our children, at one time or another, worry about "naughty people," from neighborhood bullies to witches, monsters, and babysnatchers (especially babysnatchers!). One day when "naughty people" seemed to be their concern, we told them about Zion— the place where the wicked won't dare come. It had great appeal to them, and when it came time for scripture reading, they insisted we read to them about Zion.

These days, we're choosing fairly short passages of scripture, passages a minute or two long. When our children are older and their sense of continuity is stronger, we'll no doubt choose longer ones, maybe a whole book, like the book of Mosiah, reading a portion each night. We'll continue, of course, letting our children take turns choosing. And, for now, we are doing all the reading. As soon as they're able, we'll let them take turns doing that, too.

We keep several things in mind as we choose what to read. We select passages we particularly like, ones that say something to us. We look for passages we can give easily remembered names to, often stories and sometimes passages on particular topics, especially those topics we want our children to learn about at their ages. We pick stories that have elements children enjoy, such as animals, children, and repetition.

We try not to let preconceptions about what children should or shouldn't hear get in our way. Many "experts" think children shouldn't be exposed to violence. We agree about TV violence, but violence in the scriptures is there for a reason, for us and our children to learn something from. How can our children understand goodness without understanding evil? What can faith and courage mean to them if we don't let them see how good men face danger?—"David hasted, and ran toward the army to meet the

Philistine." (1 Samuel 17:48.) How can they desire righteousness without seeing the effects of sin, or feel compassion without witnessing suffering?—"Then Herod ... was exceeding worth, and sent forth, and slew all the children that were in Bethlehem, and in all the coasts thereof, from two years old and under .... Then ... was there a voice heard, lamentation, and weeping, and great mourning, Rachel weeping for her

children, and would not be comforted, because they are not." (Matthew 2:16-18.) Children can understand these things, and they need to understand them.

Here are some of our children's favorite passages with the names we use:

A Time for Everything Ecclesiastes 3:1-8

Baby Jesus Luke 2:1-19

David and Goliath 1 Samuel 17:44-51

Enos Enos 1-8

Hosanna Mark 11:1-10

Jesus and the Children 3 Nephi 17:11-25

Joseph Smith in Jail D&C 121:1-11

King Benjamin Mosiah 4:9-15

King Herod Matthew 2:1-18

Mary Luke 1:26-38

Samuel, the Boy Prophet 1 Samuel 3:1-18

The Boy Who Ran Away Luke 15:11-32

The Good Samaritan Luke 10:25-37

The Loaves and the Fishes Matthew 15:29-38

The Sheep and the Goats Matthew 25:31-46

Zion D&C 45:64-71

When one of our children chooses "Mary" or "Baby Jesus" or "King Benjamin" or "Joseph Smith in Jail" and is sitting there listening, we want to read the passage well, never stumblingly or haltingly or in a way that will be confusing. We want our children to hear what the passage is saying. So we're trying to learn how to read the scriptures aloud. And, as we see it, that means simply listening to how we read and trying to do better the next time. It's like repentance; there is no repentance until we finally see our behavior as not good enough. We must see that what we have been doing is less than what we could be doing.

So, we ask ourselves after we've read a passage of scripture whether or not we like the way we read it. Usually we like some things and not others—there are many things to listen for. For example, when we read aloud, we try to read in phrases, not like a robot, one word at a time. We say a phrase, pause and take a breath, and then say another phrase, maybe longer, maybe shorter. That means we have to consider where we take breaths. For example, how does the following passage sound, taking breaths at these places?

O then despise not, and wonder not, but hearken unto the words of the Lord, (breath) and ask the Father in the name of Jesus for what things soever ye shall stand in need. (breath) Doubt not, but be believing, and begin as in times of old, and come unto the Lord with all your heart, (breath) and work out your salvation with fear and trembling before him. (breath) Be wise in the days of your probation; strip yourselves of all uncleanness; (breath) ask not, that ye may consume it on your lusts, but ask with a firmness unshaken, (breath) that ye will yield to no temptation, but that ye will serve the true and living God. (breath) See that ye are not baptized unworthily; see that ye partake not of the sacrament of Christ unworthily; (breath) but see that ye do all things in worthiness, and do it in the name of Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God; (breath) and if ye do this, and endure to the end, ye will in nowise be cast out. (breath) Behold, I speak unto you as though I spake from the dead; for I know that ye shall hear my

words. (breath) (Mormon 9:27-30.)

Or how does the passage sound read this way?

O then despise not, and wonder not, but hearken unto the words of the Lord, and ask the Father in the name of Jesus for what things soever ye shall stand in need. (breath) Doubt not, but be believing, and begin as in times of old, and come unto the Lord with all your heart, and work out your own salvation with fear and trembling before him. (breath) Be wise in the days of your probation; (breath) strip yourselves of all uncleanness; (breath) ask not, that ye may consume it on your lusts, but ask with a firmness unshaken, that ye will yield to no temptation, but that ye will serve the true and living God. (breath) See that ye are not baptized unworthily; (breath) see that ye partake not of the sacrament of Christ unworthily; (breath) but see that ye do all things in worthiness, and do it in the name of Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God; (breath) and if ye do this, and endure to the end, ye will in nowise be cast out. (breath) Behold, I speak unto you as though I spake from the dead; (breath) for I know that ye shall

hear my words.(breath) (Mormon 9:27-30.) Which sounds better? Which makes more sense? Read the first way, the passage seems rather boring, the distances between breaths too close to the same, no long ones, no short ones. Without long distances, long thoughts get broken up; and without short ones, short, important thoughts go unemphasized. Read the second way, we begin to hear Moroni's words, almost as if he were here speaking to us now. Notice how this second way follows the punctuation; breaths come at all punctuation marks except commas (which is a rule-of-thumb we generally like to follow). There is more variety and more interest this way. Long thoughts cohere so we understand them easier. And there's time to savor the short ones.

It's a simple thing to read in phrases according to the punctuation. And for us, it has made the scriptures much more understandable and enjoyable.

Besides phrasing, we also listen for words we emphasize more than others. Our voices resist sounding monotone. English is a "stress" language, and our voices are always varying, a heavy stress on one syllable, a light stress on another. And as we read, we're constantly choosing words to emphasize, some possibilities equally good (each one showing something about what the passage is saying), but some possibilities definitely worse.

For example, how do you say "... great treasures of knowledge, even hidden treasures"? Which of these two sounds better?

"... great treasures of knowledge, even hidden treasures."

"... great treasures of knowledge, even hidden treasures."

(Note that we use italics to indicate emphasis, which is quite common. In the Bible, though, italics are used to indicate uncertainty in translation rather than emphasis.) Now, which sounds better? We like the second. Having emphasized treasures once, it needn't be emphasized again. What's new should be emphasized-the new word is hidden. Similarly, in the verse "I say unto you, be one; and if ye are not one ye are not mine," we'd emphasize one and not the first time they occur, but not the second.

Here is a longer example—the Beatitudes. How do you say these verses?

Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted. Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth. Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall be filled. Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy. Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God. Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God. Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness' sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad: for great is your reward in heaven: for so persecuted they the prophets

which were before you. (Matthew 5:3-12.)

Some people, various clergymen for example, would begin like this, emphasizing key repeated words over and over: "Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are they thatmourn: for they shall be comforted. Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth. . ." That reading illustrates the so-called frozen style, a very high register of language. We prefer a more natural reading emphasizing the new words and phrases so the sense of the passage comes through:

Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted. Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth. Blessed are they which dohunger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall be filled. Blessed are the merciful; for they shall obtain mercy. Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God. Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God. Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness' sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad: for great is your reward in heaven: for so persecuted they the prophets which were before

you. (Matthew 5:3-12.)

There is a lot to be understood in that passage. But even young children can begin to understand a passage like this if it's read often and well, with the new words and phrases emphasized. Then the passage becomes stirring to them, and hopefully becomes something they'll want to think about and talk about.

Proper phrasing and reasonable emphasis—these are some of the things we listen for as we read the scriptures aloud. We also watch for other, more obvious things, like whether we're reading too fast or too slow. And all these details are parts of a whole we listen for—the Spirit with which we read.

In the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord tells us, "These words... are given by my Spirit unto you, and by my power you can read them one to another . . . Wherefore, you can testify that you have heard my voice,

and know my words." (D&C 18:34-36.) When we read the scriptures aloud by his power, it "shall be the

voice of the Lord, and the power of God unto salvation." (D&C 68:4.)

That is a sobering thought. Our voices, as we read with inspiration, become the voice of the Lord. That means, of course, that we'll do more than read "correctly." Our spirit will be right. We'll avoid the condescending, sing-song, baby-talk tone of voice common in reading to children. We won't speak theatrically, trying to show off our reading ability. We'll have to ask ourselves, how would this sound if the Lord were saying it to us for the first time? How would Jesus say it? When would his voice be "a voice of

warning" (D&C 1:4), when "a voice of gladness" (D&C 128:19), a voice of "rebuke" (D&C 112:9) or a

"voice of mercy" (D&C 43:25).

This sounds almost impossible. It isn't. There have been times when we're reading a familiar passage, one we've read frequently enough that we don't have to worry about the phrasing or the emphasis, times when we're relaxed and peaceful inside, when we're self-forgetful, not trying to be fancy or trying to impress anyone, when we're filled with the desire to hear what the Lord wants to say. It is then that we open our mouths to read and out comes the voice of the Lord. Everyone becomes very quiet, eyes wide, ears open, listening to the voice speaking to us.

Those times should come more often. They don't because we're not humble enough, not thoughtful enough, not prayerful enough. And we don't listen carefully enough to each other, telling each other what we hear, helping each other improve. But the promise is there, and we know it.
