Language, Scripture, and the Heart

Sandra Packard, Dennis Packard, Feasting upon the Word ( 1981)

13

Sandra Bradford Packard

Most people who know me would undoubtedly say, if given a choice, that I'm more "harmless as a dove" than "wise as a serpent." And as far as I can tell, they'd be right. I can only be grateful that the Lord has blessed my well-intentioned ignorance; I've had good friends and now an eternal companion with whom I am very happy. But I know others less fortunate, who, influenced by so-called friends, have suffered intensely. Now I am a mother. I'm responsible, with my husband, for four of our Father's children, and I'd like to teach them while they are young to be discerning. Then perhaps they won't suffer needlessly when they are older. I want them to live their lives less haphazardly, with more awareness, than, to this point, it seems I have lived mine.

But you can hardly teach something you don't understand yourself. And so I have turned to the scriptures. What I have found is that, according to the scriptures, you can see into a person's heart by the language he uses.

After some rather foolish but wicked criticism from the Pharisees, Jesus rebuked them, saying, "O generation of vipers, how can ye, being evil, speak good things? for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh. A good man out of the good treasure of the heart bringeth forth good things: and an evil man out of the evil treasure bringeth forth evil things. But I say unto you, That every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of judgment. For by thy words thou shalt be

justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned." (Matthew 12:34-37.) What this scripture says to me is that a person's character will always be manifest in his language, at least to those with ears to hear. An evil heart can never be concealed beneath a flawless exterior; it always shows, one way or another, in one's language. James puts it this way: "If any man offend not in word, the same is a perfect man, and

able also to bridle the whole body." (James 3:2). The implication is, of course, that if a man is imperfect, he will offend in word. Brigham Young used to say that no man, if allowed to speak, could possibly avoid revealing his true character. (BYU Studies, Autumn 1970, p. 61.)

The first thing, then, for me to teach my children, if I want them to be discerning, is simply to listen to the many ways language is used around them. Easy as that sounds, listening is, for most people, difficult. Particularly when I feel ill at ease, I find myself thinking about how I'm coming over and what I'm going to say next, rather than listening to what's being said. In this, I belong to that group of people who "seeing, see not" and "hearing, hear not," who are so preoccupied with justifying themselves that they have blinded their eyes and stopped up their ears. This is, of course, no small group of people. The Lord, in the Doctrine and Covenants, repeatedly says to his people, "Hearken, and listen" or "hearken and hear" or "hearken ye and give ear." And when they still don't listen, he changes his tone of voice. This is what Nephi said to his brothers: "Ye are swift to do iniquity but slow to remember the Lord your God. Ye have seen an angel, and he spake unto you; yea, ye have heard his voice from time to time; and he hath spoken unto you in a still small voice, but ye were past feeling, that ye could not feel his words; wherefore, he has spoken unto you like unto the voice of thunder, which did cause the earth to shake as if it were to

divide asunder." (1 Nephi 17:45.) What must be the frustration of the Lord when his children will not listen, no matter how he tries to get through to them. This is what he says in the Doctrine and Covenants: "O, ye nations of the earth, how often would I have gathered you together as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, but ye would not! How oft have I called upon you by the mouth of my servants, and by the ministering of angels, and by mine own voice, and by the voice of thunderings, and by the voice of lightnings, and by the voice of tempests, and by the voice of earthquakes, and great hailstorms, and by the voice of famines and pestilences of every kind, and by the great sound of a trump, and by the voice of judgment, and by the voice of mercy all the day long, and by the voice of glory and honor and the riches of

eternal life, and would have saved you with an everlasting salvation, but ye would not!" (D&C 43:24-25;

see also D&C 88:88-90.)

Difficult as it may be, I need to teach my children to listen to the Lord, and to other people with discernment. The place to begin, it seems to me, is in the home. When my children don't hear me, what I learn from the scriptures is that I, too, must be willing to change my way of speaking. Sometimes when my children don't listen to me, I am prompted, "Listen to them first." At other times, when they seem to me willfully disobedient, they have just tuned me out and become "mother deaf." Then I ask them to repeat back to me the instructions I have given them, to make sure they have heard. Still other times, I, like the Lord, must speak sharply. But it has to be done in the Lord's way. I cannot be thinking in the back of my mind, as I've sometimes caught myself doing, "I really shouldn't be getting angry, but I'm so busy that I don't have time to give this child the attention he needs." When this happens, my feelings of guilt show and the rebuke is ineffective. But when the rebuke is for the sake of the child—not an expedient for me when I've reached the end of my rope—then I have a chance of reaching my child.

I have also come to realize that when a child, or an adult for that matter, stops hearing others, he frequently quits hearing himself too, and needs to be shown what he sounds like. On one occasion, my husband was questioning my six-year-old about a certain infraction. My son quickly denied any responsibility, but then seeing a knowing look on my husband's face and figuring a lie would only make matters worse, said instead, "I mean, I did do it." I could see what he was doing, and simply told him what his verbal acrobatics sounded like. He was so uncomfortable listening to me that he ran out of the room— but he had gotten the message.

I believe that half the battle will be won if I can teach my children to listen. What remains after that is helping them discern what the people they hear every day are doing with language. I know a father who points out to his children how TV advertisers use language to manipulate them, which of course makes his children determined not to be manipulated. I like that way of teaching. It's not enough to tell children, or adults for that matter, not to be disrespectful or quarrelsome or sneaky, or on the other hand to tell them to be honest or polite or kind. For these words to mean anything to them, they need examples—from literature, especially the scriptures, as well as day-to-day, commonplace ones. And then they need to see for themselves the good or evil in the examples, to feel it, to experience it. Teachers and parents can help, but children must see the good or evil themselves. Our children are innocent because they haven't had enough experience to judge between good and evil, just as Adam and Eve were innocent because of their lack of experience. Only by experiencing good and evil—not necessarily by doing wrong, but by coming to see situations in moral terms—will children come to love good and hate evil.

Nephi, I believe, if he lived today, would also have said something about the language of TV advertisers. He was interested in people's language, and he writes to us as if we shared that interest. He records what people say and then tells us the actions they performed by speaking as they did. For example, "After this

manner was the language of my father in the praising of his God..." (1 Nephi 1:15); "... after this manner of

language did I persuade my brethren" (1 Nephi 3:21); "And after this manner of language had my

mother complained" (1 Nephi 5:3); "And after this manner of language did my father, Lehi, comfortmy

mother, Sariah ..." (1 Nephi 5:6); "And after this manner of language did my father prophesy..." (1 Nephi

10:15). Would that my children were as aware of the many voices they hear and as able to see them for what they are.

But where to begin? Evil has many faces, and I'd like my children to recognize them all-no small task. The place to start, I've decided, is with those evil ways of speaking that people I know, myself included, are particularly susceptible to. Two such evils are murmuring and flattery, both exaggerated ways of speaking, the one over-doing the negative, the other the positive. Fortunately, goodness is not so many faced. I've found that plainness is probably the term most frequently used in the scriptures to describe the kind of language my children should be attracted to. I like the word "murmur." It sounds like what it means. But my liking doesn't go beyond the sound of the word. True, there are examples in the scriptures of justified, or at least uncondemned, complaining. When, in the Book of Mormon, for instance, unbelievers persecuted the Church, the Church complained to Alma.

(Mosiah 27:1.) And when prophets of the Lord were secretly put to death by unrighteous judges

"a complaint came up unto the land of Zarahemla." (3 Nephi 6:24-25.) Job, King David, and the childless Hannah all had their complaints, and one can't help feeling for them in their sorrows. But there are other complainers, a large group of them, that I hope my children will be wary of—those whose murmuring, grumbling spirit seems to color their whole outlook, attitude, and personality. Their spirit, from my experience, is highly contagious, the kind I would like somehow to "immunize" my children against. Fortunately for me, the scriptures talk a lot about these complainers.

The two classic groups of murmurers are the children of Israel under Moses and Nephi's rebellious brothers in the Book of Mormon. The similarities between these groups are remarkable. They were both wandering around in a wilderness, waiting to enter a promised land. (Actually, that's what we're all doing, as Lehi's dream with the dark and dreary wilderness suggests.) And both groups had prophets leading them to their promised lands—Moses and Aaron in the first case, Lehi and Nephi in the second. And both imputed bad motives to their prophet leaders.

This brings me to something I've noticed about murmurers in the scriptures: They like to impute bad motives to their leaders. For example: "And Moses sent to call Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab: which said, We will not come up: Is it a small thing that thou hast brought us up out of a land that floweth with milk and honey, to kill us in the wilderness, except thou make thyself altogether a prince over us?"

(Numbers 16:12-13.) Of Laman and Lemuel, Nephi says, "Yea, they did murmur against me, saying: Our younger brother thinks to rule over us; and we have had much trial because of him; wherefore, now let us slay him, that we may not be afflicted more because of his words. For behold, we will not have him to be

our ruler; for it belongs unto us, who are the elder brethren, to rule over this people." (2 Nephi 5:3.) And also, "... for behold they did murmur in many things against their father, because he was a visionary man, and had led them out of the land of Jerusalem, to leave the land of their inheritance, and their gold, and

their silver, and their precious things, to perish in the wilderness." (1 Nephi 2:11.) Both groups of murmurers accuse their leaders of trying to lord it over them and also of trying to bring them to ruin and death. This is a bit inconsistent. After all, Moses and Nephi could hardly have gloried over being kings of corpses. Being unrighteous and seeking dominion themselves, these murmurers seem quite unable to understand what motivates their prophet leaders.

Notice also how the murmurers paint the past unrealistically rosy. Egypt was not a land flowing with milk

and honey, at least not for the Israelites. And the Jews at Jerusalem were not "a righteous people" (1

Nephi 17:22) as Laman and Lemuel claimed even after those same Jews had tried to kill Lehi. Something else that is unrealistic: the murmurers speak of their "fears" for the future as if they were certainties. Laman and Lemuel say, ". . . and after all these sufferings we must perish in the wilderness with

hunger." (1 Nephi 16:35.) When Sariah takes on the complaining spirit, she says, "Behold thou hast led us

forth from the land of our inheritance, and my sons are no more, and we perish in the wilderness." (1

Nephi 5:2.) Note how she uses the present rather than the future tense. The children of Israel, on learning that the promised land was inhabited by giants, say, "Would God that we had died in the land of Egypt! or would God we had died in this wilderness! And wherefore hath the Lord brought us unto this land, to fall

by the sword, that our wives and our children should be a prey?" (Numbers 14:2-3.) They don't qualify their fears in the least, even after all the miracles they have seen. Theirs is an example of extreme faithlessness. Not to be outdone, though, Laman and Lemuel, just after being promised by an angel of the Lord that Laban would be delivered into their hands, say, "How is it possible that the Lord will deliver Laban into our hands? Behold, he is a mighty man, and he can command fifty, yea, even he can slay fifty;

then why not us?" (1 Nephi 3:31.)

Perhaps the most frightening thing about murmurers is that they continue murmuring even in the face of over-whelming evidence that their complaints are unjustified. They almost seem, in a perverse way, to enjoy their role. Laman and Lemuel, on at least two occasions, could have returned to Jerusalem if they had wanted to. But they preferred to be the tag-along grumblers. The children of Israel, when the Lord wanted them to enter the promised land, threatened to return to Egypt—that is, until the Lord changed his mind because of their faithlessness and commanded them not to enter. Then they changed their minds too, and wanted to enter. Moses incredulously asks them, "Wherefore now do ye transgress the

commandment of the Lord?" (Numbers 14:41.) It's as if they felt obligated, no matter what the Lord might do, to find something to do or say against it.

These murmurers are one extreme. Their opposites are the good and great people of the scriptures who murmur only when there is nothing else left to do. They are reluctant to complain, and avoid it whenever possible. Captain Moroni was such a person. In censuring Pahoran for his apparent neglect in not sending provisions and reinforcements to the Nephite armies, Moroni says, "And now behold, I say unto you that myself, and also my men, and also Helaman and his men, have suffered exceeding great sufferings; yea, even hunger, thirst, and fatigue, and all manner of afflictions of every kind. But behold, were this all we had suffered we would not murmur nor complain. But behold, great has been the slaughter among our people; yea, thousands have fallen by the sword, while it might have otherwise been if ye had rendered unto our armies sufficient strength and succor for them. Yea, great has been your neglect towards us."

(Alma 60:3-5.) Helaman was of a similar spirit. Needing reinforcements too, he tries to think of all the possible reasons why he hasn't received them—maybe Moroni has been unsuccessful and needs all the troops, or maybe there is some faction in the government—and adds that if Moroni needs the troops, then he (Helaman) doesn't want to murmur. How different their spirits are from those of Laman and Lemuel and the Israelites.

Why are good people reluctant to murmur? Perhaps part of the answer can be inferred from King Mosiah's instructions to his people: "And many more things did king Mosiah write unto them, unfolding unto them all the trials and troubles of a righteous king, yea, all the travails of soul for their people, and also all the murmurings of the people to their king; and he explained it all unto them. And he told them that these things ought not to be; but that the burden should come upon all the people, that every man might

bear his part." (Mosiah 29:33-34.) What this tells me is that irresponsibility goes hand in hand with murmuring. It is easier to complain about the government, about the Church, about one's spouse or children, than to help bear the responsibility for them. Responsible people look to themselves before complaining.

This much learned, I need to teach my children about murmuring—from the scriptures as they are able to understand them, and from day to day situations as they experience them, even if that means telling them on occasion when "mama has been complaining and shouldn't have." I also need to show them the positive side—when someone didn't complain but could have; what good people do instead of complain; and how they complain when they must.

I'd always thought that "flattery" meant "insincerely praising someone in order to get favors from him." As a result, I've never understood its use in the scriptures. Actually, "flattery" has several different but related meanings, and the meaning that I think fits best most often in the scriptures is "portraying something too favorably." Flatterers in the scriptures portray sin and sinners, themselves especially, too favorably. They misrepresent with fair speeches and specious reasoning, subtly appealing to the base, carnal desires of their listeners in order to fulfill their own base, carnal desires. These are just the kind of people, particularly because of their subtlety, that I want my children to be wary of.

In the Bible, Solomon tells of the flattery of an adulterous woman who says to a youth, "I have peace offerings with me; this day have I payed my vows. Therefore came I forth to meet thee, diligently to seek thy face, and I have found thee. I have decked my bed with coverings of tapestry, with carved works, with fine linen of Egypt. I have perfumed my bed with myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon. Come, let us take our fill of love until the morning: let us solace ourselves with loves. For the goodman is not at home, he is gone a long journey: He hath taken a bag of money with him, and will come home at the day appointed."

(Proverbs 7:14-20.) Notice how, by speaking of her vows and offerings, the woman flatters herself, pretending to be more holy than she is. She also flatters the youth, saying she has sought him "diligently," as if he were some hard-to-find dignitary. Then she speaks of the beauty of her bed, diverting attention from the ugliness of her betrayal, as if to say, "Morality? I have said nothing about morality." She continues, ". . . let us solace ourselves with loves," flattering herself and him that they are poor put-upon creatures who deserve the comfort of love, though illicit. Finally, she sends two different messages in the last line. First, she explains why she needs solace: her husband has gone on a long journey, leaving her all alone, no doubt in a big house. How sad! At the same time, of course, she's telling the youth they needn't worry about getting caught. Solomon concludes, "With her much fair speech she caused him to yield, with the flattering of her lips she forced him. He goeth after her straightway, as an ox goeth to the slaughter, or as a fool to the correction of the stocks; Till a dart strike through his liver; as a bird hasteth to

the snare, and knoweth not that it is for his life." (Proverbs 7:21-23.)

The typical Book of Mormon flatterer, as Samuel the Lamanite describes him, is one who is received as a

prophet because he speaks flattering words to the people and tells them that all is well. (Helaman 13:28.) Such was Sherem, the anti-Christ, of whom Jacob wrote, "He was learned, that he had a perfect knowledge of the language of the people; wherefore, he could use much flattery, and much power of

speech, according to the power of the devil." (Jacob 7:4.) Jacob gives us an example of Sherem's speech - to me, a scriptural gem. Here is the speech. The italicized words need to be read with emphasis in order to bring out Sherem's craftiness. The comments in parentheses spell out the subtleties and innuendos, as I see them.

Brother Jacob,

(Notice folks, the great brotherly affection I feel for people, even for a wretched blasphemer like Jacob.)

I have sought much opportunity that I might speak unto you;

(I want you all to realize that I just wouldn't have spent so much of my valuable time and effort trying to track Jacob down if what I had to tell him wasn't really important.)

for I have heard and also know that thou goest about much, preaching that which ye call the gospel, or the doctrine of Christ.

(You see, I act on knowledge. But Jacob, here, and his kind, let their imaginations get the better of them— "Christ" indeed!)

And ye have led away much of this people that they pervert the right way of God, and keep not the law of Moses which is the right way;

(You see everybody, it can't be both Moses and Christ. I'm for Moses. If you follow old freethinking Jacob, you'll end up a heretic.)

and convert the law of Moses into the worship of a being which ye say shall come many hundred years hence.

(The law of Moses is tried and true, something solid we've had for years. Are you going to abandon it for a whim, a ridiculous figment of Jacob's imagination? Very tricky, that Jacob - conjures up a mysterious superman who he then tells us won't be around till we're long gone. Can you beat that?)

And now behold, I, Sherem, declare unto you that this is blasphemy;

(Note it well, everybody, that I, the great Sherem, authority of things religious, upholder of the right way, foe of all who seek to lead people astray, I unequivocably state that this is blasphemy.)

for no man knoweth of such things; for he cannot tell of things to come. (It's blasphemy to speak of God without knowledge. And when Jacob speaks of God, that's what he does. He can't know what is to come. So you see, Jacob is a blasphemer. And believe me, there isn't anything worse than that.)

(Jacob 7:6-7.)

Poor Sherem—exerting all his powers of subterfuge and slander to make himself look important. It is ironic, but true to form, that Sherem should accuse Jacob of what he himself is guilty of—blasphemy and perverting the right way of God. His guilt and lack of knowledge about the things of God become obvious in his conversation with Jacob. He contradicts himself twice: first by saying that he knows there will never

be a Christ (verse 9), just after having said that no man can know of things to come; second by denying

the Christ but saying he believes the scriptures which testify of Christ (verses 10-11). In an expression of humility so at odds with Sherem's speech, Jacob tells us how he was able to confound Sherem. He writes, "Behold, the Lord God poured in his Spirit into my soul, insomuch that I did confound him in all his words."

(Verse 8.) The power of God in a humble prophet confounds the "power of the devil" (verse 4) in an arrogant anti-Christ.

There are, of course, many other flatterers in the scriptures—Korihor, another Book of Mormon anti-Christ, for one, and the arch-flatterer himself, Satan, for another. No doubt today's world is even richer than the scriptures with examples of flattery. One evening, for example, in trying to understand flattery better, I asked my husband to flatter me a little (in the scriptural sense). He appeared lost in thought for so long that I forgot what I'd asked him and started doing something else. Then he said, "You know, Sandy, I don't think you should worry so much about getting angry with the kids. After all, it's only a natural reaction." My immediate feeling was one of relief, because I'd been concerned about that. I even thought, "Well, maybe I'm doing all right after all," before I realized that this was the flattery I had asked for. I was amazed I had bought it so quickly, just after having talked about it. I realized at that moment how much of what we hear from popular "preachers" today is flattery, appealing as it does to our desires to be justified in what we do. "I'm O.K. You're O.K." we tell each other soothingly, and continue our eating, drinking, and merrymaking. Now, this is not to say that I have all the answers-no one (I think) knows this better than I do. But I do think the answer lies closer to "Lord, be merciful to me, a sinner," than to "Sin is only natural." At any rate, I am convinced that if I and my family can just learn to see flattery for what it is, which I expect will take many examples and a lot of thought and prayer, then it will be relatively easy to avoid falling prey to it.

At the conclusion of his conversation with Jacob, Sherem asks for a sign and is given one; he is struck down by the power of God for his blasphemy. Then, on the verge of death, Sherem asks to speak to the people. At this point, Jacob draws a contrast which I find very instructive. He says, "... and he [Sherem] spake plainly unto them and denied the things which he had taught them, and confessed the Christ, and

the power of the Holy Ghost, and the ministering of angels." (Jacob 7:17.)

Contrary to the language of all sin - whether it be "optimistic" flattery or "pessimistic" murmuring or contention or boasting or lying or whatever—is the language of plainness. Jacob continues, "And he spakeplainly unto them, that he had been deceived by the power of the devil. And he spake of hell, and of eternity, and of eternal punishment. And he said: I fear lest I have committed the unpardonable sin, for I have lied unto God; for I denied the Christ, and said that I believed the scriptures; and they truly testify of him. And because I have thus lied unto God I greatly fear lest my case shall be awful; but I confess unto

God." (Jacob 7:18-19.) How different this speech of Sherem's is from his previous one. It is simple, sincere, straightforward, with nothing hidden, nothing oblique.

When the Lord speaks, he speaks plainly. Nephi says, "The Lord ... doeth nothing save it be plain unto the

children of men." (2 Nephi 26:33.) The angel in Nephi's vision of the last days speaks of "the plainness

which is in the Lamb of God" (1 Nephi 13:29) and describes the scriptures as "plain and pure, and most

precious and easy to the understanding of all men" (1 Nephi 14:23). What are the characteristics of plain speech? Well, first of all, it tells the truth. Jacob says, "The Spirit . . . speaketh of things as they really are, and of things as they really will be; wherefore, these things are

manifested to us plainly, for the salvation of our souls." (Jacob 4:13.) Also, it speaks to our understanding. In his introduction to the Book of Commandments, the Lord says, "These commandments are of me, and were given unto my servants in their weakness, after the manner of their language, that they might come

to understanding." (D&C 1:24.) This means to me that the Lord takes account of our weaknesses and our limited understanding when he speaks to us (like a parent carefully choosing his language when explaining to a four-year-old why we don't fall off the earth if it's round), and that he would probably speak to us differently if we had greater understanding. In the Doctrine and Covenants, for instance, the Lord

tells a group of elders that "the first shall be last, and the last shall be first" (D&C 29:30) and then qualifies this, saying, "... speaking unto you that you may naturally understand; but unto myself my works have no end, neither beginning; but it is given unto you that ye may understand, because ye have asked it of me

and are agreed" (D&C 29:33). Another example is Jesus speaking in parables during his earthly ministry because the people were hardened and would not understand more direct forms of speech. Paul says, "Let your speech be alway with grace, seasoned with salt, that ye may know how ye ought to answer

every man." (Col. 4:6.) This combination of speaking the truth and speaking it in a way that will be understood is no easy task. It requires taking people from their present understanding to a better one, neither talking down to them and giving them what they want to hear but what isn't true, nor talking above them and giving them things they can selfrighteously go around saying without understanding.

Plain speech aims at our improvement, our edification and enlightenment. In the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord gives a pattern for discerning between men who are of God and those who aren't: "He that speaketh, whose spirit is contrite, whose language is meek and edifieth, the same is of God if he obey

mine ordinances." (D&C 52:16.) On the one hand, then, are those speaking plainly for our edification; on the other are those whose spirits are not contrite and whose language is not meek—those using their speech to vaunt themselves, to flatter and to please themselves. "And I taught them because they were

pleasing unto the carnal mind," says Korihor of his blasphemies. (Alma 30:53.) Paul says, "We speak; not

as pleasing men, but God, which trieth our hearts." (1 Thessalonians 2:4.) The truth is in Christ and so, to speak it, one cannot turn inward, magnifying one's own importance and in a thousand different ways saying, "Look at me." Then one's speech is not plain. It aims at something other than what it purports to, and comes out twisted and distorted.

I hope my children will come to recognize and love words of plainness, particularly, and this is the test, when those words speak against their own misconduct. Laman and Lemuel were good at misinterpreting Nephi's plainness. Lehi says to them, "And ye have murmured because he hath been plain unto you. Ye say that he hath used sharpness; ye say that he hath been angry with you; but behold, his sharpness was the sharpness of the power of the word of God, which was in him, and that which ye call anger was the truth, according to that which is in God, which he could not restrain, manifesting boldly concerning your

iniquities." (2 Nephi 1:26.)

How do I teach my children to seek out and to listen to those who speak plainly? Since Babel, the languages of the earth have been confounded, and not only in the literal sense. I believe that the confusion that occurred at Babel is a type of a more insidious confusion that exists when people use language unrighteously. There was a time when the languages of the earth were not confounded in either sense. This is what Moses says about that time: "And God revealed himself unto Seth, and he rebelled not, but offered an acceptable sacrifice, like unto his brother Abel. And to him also was born a son, and he called his name Enos. And then began these men to call upon the name of the Lord, and the Lord blessed them; And a book of remembrance was kept, in the which was recorded, in the language of Adam,for it was given unto as many as called upon God to write by the spirit of inspiration; And by them their children were taught to read and write having a language which was pure and undefiled. Now this same

Priesthood, which was in the beginning, shall be in the end of the world also." (Moses 6:3-7.) This says to me that both the Adamic language and the priesthood are names for the language and spirit of inspiration. This is the language Nephi referred to when he said that after a person is baptized by fire and the Holy

Ghost, he can speak "with a new tongue, yea, even with the tongue of angels." (2 Nephi 31:13-14.) This is what the prophet Zephaniah foresaw when he said, "For then will I turn to the people a pure language,

that they may all call upon the name of the Lord to serve him with one consent." (Zephaniah 3:9.)

The children of Adam were taught to read and write from a book of remembrance kept by inspired men— their fathers. They must have become very familiar with the language and spirit of inspiration. May my children become familiar with it, too—by reading the scriptures, by hearing the prophets, and hopefully by listening to their parents—so familiar, that they will perceive discord in the ugly voices they hear, just as easily as they perceive it when their father plays one of their favorite Primary songs with one note deliberately wrong.
