Sandra Packard, Dennis Packard, Feasting upon the Word ( 1981)

Arthur Henry King

The scriptures are the greatest writing. But there is an important difference between scripture and other great writing, and that is something we need to hold on to because it gives us the interpretation of all writing. That is, the scriptures always tell the truth, and no other writing always does. The rest of great writing tells a great deal of truth, but does not tell the truth all the time. What the scriptures have in common with all great writing, that of Homer, Virgil, Dante, Shakespeare, and Goethe, is that they offer us a profound comment on human life and its destiny.

The scriptures tell us the truth about the people they describe. They do not idealize, but show us people as they are, not better, not worse. "Thou art the man," said the prophet Nathan to David when he had caught him in the net of a parable. We too are the men and women. What the scriptures say about others is true of us. Human virtues and vices are still the same as they were when the scriptures were written. Let us never read the scriptures under the impression that we know better; we do not, nor shall we. We read the scriptures to find out what they, as writings above us, have to tell us. There is no question of naivete, of primitivism, of coarseness, of insufficiency, of inappropriateness, about the scriptures. A cultured person, like the man who wrote the history of the court of David, knew exactly why he left something out, put something in, or placed things where he did. This inspired genius was as "civilized" as Henry James and much more deeply certain about right and wrong.

If it's in the scriptures, we had better accept it, because if we don't, we are going to lose something. There are some people in the scriptures, like Joshua or Ruth, whose faults we know nothing of, and we do not need to know. Others, like Sarah or David, have faults that we are told of for our own good. We are meant to see their virtues and vices and to learn from both. "Don't read that chapter, it's not very nice." Who

would dare speak of the word of God in that way? The word of God is the history of Tamar (2 Samuel 13) as well as the first chapter of Genesis. There is only one perfect person in the scriptures, the Lord himself.

Now the truths we find in the scriptures are not couched in the prose appropriate to a scientist announcing a discovery to the world for the first time and trying to persuade other people to believe it. The language of the scriptures is the language of the whole man, emotive language, which, like the language of other great writing, not merely tells us the truth, but enables us to feel the truth and exhorts us to follow the truth.

Scriptural language, unlike scientific language, makes use of the various figures of speech commonly found in great writing. In the past, the schoolboy knew the names of at least fifty such figures and could cite you examples of each. The important thing is to be able to feel their impact. But I never realized until I went to stay with an uncle who was a botanist how much more I could enjoy flowers when I knew their names. A rose by any other word would smell as sweet; but Juliet had her Romeo to make the rose do that. I don't believe that a rose without a name would smell as sweet. When we know the names of flowers, we know the flowers better, we can identify them better, we know more about them.

I do not want to involve you in fifty terms. But here are twenty or so fairly important ones:

Cry unto him when ye are in your fields, yea, over all your flocks. Cry unto him in your houses, yea, over all your household, both morning, mid-day, and evening. Yea, cry unto him against the power of your enemies. Yea, cry unto him against the devil, who is an enemy to all righteousness. Cry unto him over the

crops of your fields, that ye may prosper in them. (Alma 34:20-24.)

know not, yea, how hard to bear you know not. (D&C 19:15.)

Tarry ye, tarry ye in this place, and call a solemn assembly, even of those who are the first laborers in

this last kingdom. (D&C 88:70.)

Wo unto them that call evil good, and good evil, that put darkness for light, and light for darkness, that

put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter! (2 Nephi 15:20.)

And if men come unto me I will show unto them their weakness. I give unto men weakness that they may be humble; and my grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong

unto them. (Ether 12:27.)

But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering. For he that wavereth is like a wave of the sea driven with the

wind and tossed. (James 1:6.)

And we talk of Christ, we rejoice in Christ, we preach of Christ, we prophesy of Christ, and we write according to our prophecies, that our children may know to what source they may look for a remission of

their sins. (2 Nephi 25:26.)

She stretcheth out her hand to the poor; yea, she reacheth forth her hands to the needy. (Proverbs

31:20.)

He that findeth his life shall lose it: and he that loseth his life for my sake shall find it. (Matthew 10:39.)

And the first fruits of repentance is baptism; and baptism cometh by faith unto the fulfilling the commandments; and the fulfilling the commandments bringeth remission of sins; and the remission of sinsbringeth meekness and lowliness of heart; and because of meekness and lowliness of heart cometh the visitation of the Holy Ghost, which Comforter filleth with hope and perfect love, which love endureth by diligence unto prayer, until the end shall come, when all the saints

shall dwell with God. (Moroni 8:25-26.)

. . . for the letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life. (2 Corinthians 3:6.)

commandments; and the fulfilling the commandments bringeth remission of sins. (Moroni 8:25.)

Ask, and it shall be given unto you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. (3

Nephi 14:7.)

And above all things, clothe yourselves with the bond of charity, as with a mantle, which is the

bond of perfectness and peace. (D&C 88:125.)

O LORD my God, in thee do I put my trust. (Psalm 7:1.)

Why hidest thou thyself in times of trouble? (Psalm 10:1.)

All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way; and the Lord hath laid

on him the iniquity of us all. (Isaiah 53:6.)

They shall build, and another shall not inherit it [13 syllables]; they shall plant vineyards, and they

shall eat the fruit thereof [13 again]. Even so. Amen. (D&C 101:101.)

Then Agrippa said unto Paul, Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian. (Acts 26:28.)

Behold, I am God; give heed unto my word, which is quick and powerful, sharper than a two-edged

sword, to the dividing asunder of both joints and marrow; therefore give heed unto my words. (D&C

6:2.)

And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of Man be lifted up. (John

3:14.)

. . . and every tongue shall confess, while they hear the sound of the trump . . . ["tongue" is used for

"person"]. (D&C 88:104.)

God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord . . . ["the cross" is used for the "the

atonement"]. (Galatians 6:14.)

They are walking in darkness at noon-day. (D&C 95:6.)

Clearly, then, the language of the scriptures, like that of other great writing, is rich with details. And so, like great writing in general, much can be gained by reading the scriptures aloud. There are two habits that have developed in our time—they're not very old, either of them. One is rapid reading, and one is silent reading. I have nothing against speed-reading, provided that it's kept to the valueless material for which it is valuable. But when we study great writing, we must study, not as quickly as possible, but as slowly as possible; because the more quickly we read, the fewer our thoughts will be. But the more slowly we read, the more thoughts will come thronging in. It's not the speed at which we read, but the speed at which thoughts come that counts.

Those who fail regularly to read aloud great writing and the greatest of all, the scriptures, are losing something inestimable. It was the practice in the ancient world to read aloud to oneself as well as to other people, and it was a general practice in Britain and other countries to do so until the nineteenth century. It is only inferior stuff that does not gain by being read aloud.

Our voices have wisdom—they know things that we don't know they know. They have been with us all our lives and they have undertaken a lot of things. When we use our voices, we may be aware of some of the things we are doing, but most of what we are doing we are not in the least aware of, just as when we are speaking we often say things that we think have some meaning that other people may share a part of, but there may be another part they pick up that we weren't thinking of but that is nevertheless there. We must therefore trust our voices to be able to tell us things that we wouldn't know if we didn't use our voices. Practiced readers may not need to see a text beforehand to give it a correct reading. In some mysterious way, the voice immediately picks up and goes ahead with the eyes. If we listen to our voices, we shall learn things that we wouldn't get in any other way. The voice carries us, the voice sums up and coaches us in terms of our lives. It is the carrier to us of inflections, feelings, all sorts of things coming from our inside from moment to moment, things we have not planned for.

If we are not in the habit of listening to our voices, we should tape ourselves and play ourselves back. It is quite something to find out how we ourselves speak. I do not try to teach people to read aloud. Often they can read rather well. But I do try to show them that when they are reading aloud, they are over and over again making choices about the simplest things. A verse of scripture, for example, can have a number of different meanings or shades of meaning according to the stress we choose to give it. One outstanding example is the first verse of the Gospel of John: "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. The same was in the beginning with God." That is one way of doing it, a way in which we are thinking mainly about getting the plain sense, the plain antithetical sense out of that verse. There is another way of doing it, which we might almost call worship. It would go like this: "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. The same was in the beginning with God." Now that is what I call a rhetorical stress intended to convey the supreme importance of the Deity. It is a very different way of reading from the first. The possibility of reading it either way is there in the Greek too. The point about it is not that one or the other is the correct reading, but that they are doing slightly different jobs; we have one experience when we read it one way, and another when we read it another way. And both of those experiences are valid. But if we just read it to ourselves without reading it aloud or hearing it read aloud, those differences will not be clear. Reading aloud, then, is one of the ways—one of the best ways—for stimulating thought, one of the best ways for seeing that scripture is a shimmering jewel that will show different lights according to the way in which the light plays upon it, and not just a plain piece of dull stuff.

That is what we can gain by monitoring ourselves and seeing where we are putting stress. Perhaps most important is that we read to one another regularly, particularly as families, listening to each other and telling each other what we are hearing. And we need to begin when our children are as young as possible. We need to help each other learn to read sufficiently well, not merely to be understood, but to convey some sense of what is there to be conveyed, which is, after all, not simply plain sense, but high emotion, too. Great writing is intended to appeal to the whole of us and not simply to our reason or to our power to solve a puzzle.

Conveying the emotions is important. How are we going to do it? When I was at Cambridge, there were two opposing schools. One school said, "Read to make yourself clear but don't read in such a way as to impose your emotions on other people. Let them have their reactions to the thing." The other school said, "Read with your whole soul; put into it whatever feelings you can find to put into it." But alas, those who do that may readily degenerate into second- or third-rate actors. It's one thing to read with a feeling that you genuinely have, but it is another thing to read in order to make other people feel; it seems to me that that is manipulation and a sin, except in an actor. To make other people feel, without feeling yourself—there is something profoundly wrong with that. When I was an undergraduate at Cambridge, I held to the other school, which was "Read as well as you can, read warmly if you will, but allow other people to have their emotions for the thing and don't impose what you affect to be your own." There's a great deal to be said for that. Moreover, we must remember, if we go back to what I said about the voice just now, that the voice carries us, that the voice knows more than we know. Let us leave it to our voice to be sincere; let's not manipulate that either. There's all the difference in the world between speaking straightforwardly and manipulating or attitudinizing. So, rather than trying to put feeling into our reading, let us just read and then after look to see what feelings came out.

If I had to summarize the difference between the language of the scriptures and that of science, it would be this: science conveys truth as information; the scriptures convey truth as experience. The scriptures are not abstract writing. They may be parables, like the parable of the prodigal son (or, as I prefer to call it, the parable of a father and his two sons). We do not need to argue about the significance of the forgiveness or repentance—or even envy—in this parable. Its aim is to make us feel like forgiving, feel like repenting, dislike envy. This is the greatest short story in the world, and it has been made for us in order that we may experience forgiveness and repentance. It's the experience that counts. How are we to forgive unless we feel forgiveness? How are we to repent, unless we feel repentance? If we miss those experiences, we've missed the point of the parable.

The same is true of a story like the life of David. The lessons are embedded in the story without our needing to pull them out and argue about them. After all, Nathan was better able to convey his message to King David through a parable than by argument or any other means.

When the Lord uttered the Beatitudes, he did not say, "Blessed is peace," but "Blessed are the peacemakers." He did not speak of guilelessness, but said, "Blessed are the pure in heart." He did not say, "Blessed is persecution," but "Blessed are ye when men shall revile you." The ultimate reality is not peace, but peacemakers, and peace exists only in peacemakers. The ultimate reality is not mercy, but people with mercy in their hearts.

Even when Paul is talking about apparently abstract "concepts," he does not define them or argue about them, but makes a poem about them, as he does in the thirteenth chapter of the first book of Corinthians about "charity."

It is not "concepts" with which we are concerned in scriptural writings. We must not lose the great traditions of our forefathers, who knew how to handle and respond to the language of scripture but would have raised their eyebrows at "concepts." Unless we become as little children, we shall not be able to read the scriptures properly; we shall see or try to see all sorts of intellectual things, reading into the scriptures the philosophies of men when we should be responding to what the scriptures themselves have to give us.

When Jupiter and Mercury left the hospitable cottage of Baucis and Philemon, they gave the old couple the gift of an inexhaustible pitcher; however much was poured out of it, the pitcher remained full. The scriptures are like that pitcher; however much they have given us, they have more to give. We drink them for life; we shall drink them forever. The scriptures speak directly to us. They can be understood by all who will listen. They are not written for philosophers, historians, or literary men; they are written for us all. They are eternal.
