P a g e | 6

Week 1

• Thank you for joining me over the next 12 weeks to study the book of John. -‐-‐ I'm really excited!  • We will meet on _[Thursday]_ every week for the next 12 weeks from _[7:00a -‐ 8:30a]_. Shoot me an email

if you see any conflicts ahead with scheduling and we'll adjust that week if possible to accommodate. We will start on time and end on time to be considerate of everyone's schedules.

• Go around the table and discuss: who you are, what you do, your family, your faith, and what's going on in

your life right now.

• What did you think about _[Mark Cahill's]_ book _[One Heartbeat Away]_?

o [10 out of 10 people do what?]

o [So when you die, where will you go?]

o [Why do you think you will go there?]

o [What does it take to get to where you want to go? We will learn in the book of John…]

• Bible

o Everyone have a copy of the NLT Translation? Facilitator, if someone does not have a copy of the NLT

Translation; please get them one so that the whole group will be reading from the same translation…

o Bring a pen. Highlight, underline, make notes in your Bible. Don't be shy. Facilitator, if you write in

your Bible, show them...

o The Bible is yours. Use it. It's OK to write in it.

o We will study the Book of John, one of the four Gospels. Gospel means "Good News".

• As we study the book of John, keep these questions in mind:

o Who is Jesus?

o What did Jesus call Himself? What names? What is the significance of each? o What is Jesus' relationship with God the Father?

o What does Jesus say about eternal life?

• Moving forward we will study 2 chapters a week. Prepare by reading the Chapters ahead of time. Really

think about what you are reading. How does it apply to the questions we are keeping in mind? What additional questions does it raise for you? What other thoughts do you have?

• We will have a weekly memory verse.

• After our study we will go as a group with our spouses to [some event/dinner/etc]. Facilitator should go

ahead and get scheduled and planned...

• Any conflicts in scheduling for next week?

• We will close in prayer each week. I'll close us today.

A day or two after the first week’s study, send everyone an email just to say thanks for being a part of the weeks ahead. A sample Follow-‐up Email to Week 1 of Bible Study is provided in the appendix.

P a g e | 7

Week 2

• Good morning, how has everyone been? -‐-‐ Get people talking... • Open in prayer. Go around the table one by one and pray. The Facilitator should start... • Chapter 1

o Read through the chapter, each person reading 5 verses aloud at a time, going around the table. o Questions to jump start the discussion. Your group will most likely run with more...

 Someone reread 1:1. Why is "Word" capitalized?

• As we continue through our study, watch for more capitalized words.

 Someone reread 1:14. What does this mean?

• Became human? Home among us? Unfailing love? Seen His glory? The Father's one

and only Son?

 Someone reread 1:17. What is the law?

 What words were used to describe Jesus? Discuss each.

 Questions from others...

 Who is Jesus?

o Memory Verses

 John 1:14

• Chapter 2

o Read through the chapter, each person reading 5 verses aloud at a time, going around the table. o Questions to jump start the discussion. Your group will most likely run with more...

 Someone reread 2:3 -‐ 2:8. What are your thoughts about Jesus' first miracle?

• What commandment does it demonstrate?

 Someone reread 2:16 -‐ 2:17. Angry? Why was Jesus angry? Thoughts?  Someone reread 2:20. …in Three days I will raise it up. Thoughts?  Someone reread 2:23 -‐ 2:24. Man’s heart… Human nature... Trust… What are your thoughts?

What do you know? Who do you trust?

 Questions from others...

 Who is Jesus?

• Any scheduling conflicts for next week? Do we need to adjust the day? • Close in prayer. Facilitator should ask Who will close us in prayer?
