Book of Mormon Central

http://bookofmormoncentral.org/

Type: Book Chapter

Orson Pratt's Works: A Series of Pamphlets on the

Doctrines of the Gospel

Author(s): Orson Pratt

Published: Salt Lake City; George Q. Cannon & Sons, 1891

Abstract: The labors of the late respected and beloved Orson Pratt, some of whose writings we herewith present to the public, are too well known to require any extended comments from us. His voice has been heard in various parts of the earth bearing a faithful testimony to the truth of the gospel, and in many places where he never was seen, his precious writings have been perused with pleasure and profit by the honest in heart. Thus has his name become familiar and honored amongthe people of God.

The first edition of his “Works,” published in England, have, of late years, been very scarce, and this is one reason why we have been led to republish them. We trust that this book will find a place in every home and be studied by both old and young, so that all may see the beauty of the truths therein explained.

That the Spirit of God may enlighten the minds of those into whose hands this work may come so that they may comprehend and heed its teachings, and that Brother Pratt, though dead, may yet live in the hearts of the people, are the sincere desires of The Publishers.

- * 3

ON THE

BY THE LATE

ELDER ORSON PRATT.

»»

One of the Twelve Apostles of the Church of Jesus Christ of.

Lattpr-day Saints.

GEORGE Q. CANNON & SONS COMPANY,

PUBLISHERS,

SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH :

189I.

PREFACE.

^p'HE labors of the late respected and “beloyed Orson Pratt,

A some of whose writings we herewith present to the public,

are too ’ well known to require any extended comments from

us. His voice has been heard in various parts of the earth

bearing a faithful testimony to the truth of ‘the gospel, and in

many places where he never was seen, his precious writings

have been perused with pleasure and profit by' the honest in

heart. Thus has his name become familiar and honored

among the people of Hod.

The first edition of his ‘‘Works,” published in England,

have, of late years, been very scarce, and this is one reason

why we have been led to republish them. We trust that this

book will find a place in every home and be studied by both

old and young, so that all may see the beauty of the truths

therein explained.

That the Spirit of Hod may enlighten the minds of those

into whose hands this work may come so that they may com

prehend and heed its teachings, and that Brother Pratt,

though dead, may yet live in the hearts of the people, are the

sincere desires of • .

The Publishers.

DIVINE AUTHORITY.

OR THE QUESTION,

WAS JOSEPH SMITH SENT

OF GOD?

BY ORSON PRATT,

ONE OF THE TWELVE APOSTLES OF THE CHURCH OF JESUS

CHR IST OF LATTERY SAINTS.

A FEW days since, Mrs. Pratt and myself, together with Some others, were kindly invited to take tea with a very respectable gentleman of this town . (Liverpool), who, though not connected with our Church, yet was, with his family sincerely enquiring after the truth. They seemed to be fully convinced in relation to the most important features of our doctrine, and were desirous of extending their investigations still further. We hope that their researches may happily result in a full conviction of the truth, and that they.may obtain that certainty, so much to be desired, as to the divine authority of the great and important message-now revealed from heaven—a message which must assurdly prove a savor of

l

8 DIVINE AUTHORITY, OR,

life or death to the generations now living. Uhis message is beginning to ■ awake the attention of the honest, virtuous and upright among all classes of society. Uhey seem to be aroused from the slumber of ages.

A message of simple truth, when sent from God—when

published by divine authority, through divinely inspired men, penetrates the mind like a sharp two-edged sword, and cuts asunder the deeply-rooted prejudices, the iron-bound sipews of ancient error -and tradition, made sacred by age and rendered popular by human wisdom. It . severs with undeviating exact ness between truth and falsehood—between the doctrine of Christ and the doctrines of men; it levels with the most per fect ease every argument that human learning may array against it. Opinions, creeds ■invented by uninspired men, and doctrines originated in schools of divinity, all vanish like the morning dew—all sink into insignificance when compared with a message direct from ■ heaven. Such a message shines upon the understanding like the splendors of the noon-day sun; it whispers in the ears of mortals, saying, “Uhisis the way, walk ye in it.” Certainty and assurance are its constant companions; it is entirely unlike all plan's or systems ever invented by human authority, it has no alliance, connection or fellowship with any of them ; it speaks with divine authority, and all nations, without’ an exception, are required to obey.

• He that receives the message and endures to the end will be

saved; he that rejects it will be damned. It matters not what his former righteousness may have been—none can be excused.

As a specimen of the anxious inquiry which now pervades

the minds of many in relation to this Church, wc publish the- following extract from a letter, which was kindly read to us during our afore-mentioned visit, by the gentleman who received it from his friend in London. We were struck with the apparent candor, the sound judgment, and the correct con clusions of the author of the letter, and earnestly solicited the privilege of publishing it. Permission was granted on condi tion that we would withhold names. We here present it to our readers, and shall endeaVor, in the same spirit of candor, to answer the all-important inquiries contained in it.

WAS 0 JOSEPH SMITH SENT OF GOD?

July I 5di 1848.

My Dear Sir:—I have been expecting, time, after time, . to

be able to return you the “Letters” you so kindly left with, me. As I informed you in my last, I cursorily read through the letters, and then handed the book to Mr.--------. With

him it is at the present time. The impression made thereby on his mind is very remarkable, and he requests me to inform you, that if you will allow him, he means to keep the book, if you will please to let him know the price thereof. IJe and I concur in our views of “Mormonism” at present. Do you inquire what those views are? I will then proceed to state them. We consider that the proofs which “Mormonism” gives of the apostasy are, without question, clear and demonstrative; we entirely concur also in the personal appearance and reign .of our Lord; we are persuaded that all the preachers and teachers of the 'day .are without authority—that their teachings and interpretations are uncertain as to the truth—that the transla tions of the scripture, being done without inspiration, are also uncertain. All is uncertain! melancholy thought, a deplora ble picture but a true one!—the different teachers doing the best they can!—all jarring--all contending! The result— division, multiplied division! And they have a right if they think properto dividefrom an authority merely human. But their multiplied division is a multiplied proof that they are wrong— that they are without that spirit who guides into truth, and truth is ONE.

My. dear sir, the Saints have made out a strong and

irrefragable ease to show that ‘authority to teach” is nowhere, if not with them ; but the proposition that they have author ity/ to teach, interpret, etc., is one that at present does not create a conviction in Mr.-------- or my mind . WTe admtt that it is very reasonable to suppose that, under such circumstances, God would raise up and send one invested with authority. Whether Joseph Smith was such a .one is the all-important question. I also admit, that so far as I am acquainted with his history, there is something very remarkable about him: perhaps I should be fully convinced if I .were more fully read in writings relating to him. I wish I lived near to you. and then I would read more fully on the subject . I confess my mind is much concerned to arrive at a clear conclusion upon the point.

Mr.--------wsshes mrou . if you wllI be sogood . to seHec. a few'

books that you think clearly prove the divine mission of Joseph Smith, and send them in a parcel to him with the prices, .lie will feel much obliged, and will send you a post-office .order for the amount; he believes vour selection will be a judicious one. I have heard Mr. Banks twice since I saw you, and other

10 DIVINE AUTHORITY, OR,

individual teachers also. There is much in .their public services I approve. -I am struck with the simplicity of their celebra

tion of the ordinances. * *-One result of my conversation with you and Banks, and perusing the letters, is, that 1 can be no longer connected with any sect. So far as I see, I can with out difficulty confound in argument—plain scriptural argument —any into whose company I am at any time thrown. The Methodist system. I am convinced is the worst, because its pre tensions are highest. I stand, therefore, fully alone. I declare I should be glad to’be convinced that “Mormonism’’ is what it professes to be; 1 would join it to-day if my mind could be convinced that its Elders bad- authority to baptize me for the remission of sins, and lay hands on mefor the gift of the Holy

Ghost. These sacred ordinances I wrould -obey gladly, if I

knew men- having authority to administer them. To have these-ordinances administered without divine authority is mere child’s play. Thus you see my position. A Methodist leader, an old friend, said to me the other day, “Are you connected with the church of Christ now?—I hear you are not with us now.” 1 answered, Where is the church of Christ?” He replied it is found among the different sects. 1 then inquired, “Are you in the church of Christ? for if you are> you must be a member of all the sects. '•' This rather puzzled him. I then asked him “Show me the sect that resembles the church -at the beginning; does any one of them, or do they all put together resemble the church at the beginning?” He said certainly not. I enquired why. not. He was shrewd enough to be. silent and to See that his own mouth must condemn - Eis sect and all the sects. Observe, in the absence of the1 spirit, men must do as well as they can. This 1 am trying to do, only

T confess that I am poor, and blind, and naked, bereft of the

glory of the certainty of the authority and truth of the. church of Christ,. The sects, however, are satisfied, though “poor, blind, and naked, ” to boast of increase of goods, chapels, rich friends, preachers, etc., etc. So much for my present view s and standing. I suppose by-this time you have acted on your, convictions, aqd are joined to the Saints ; in all honesty you ought, I confess. The moment the conviction - that divine authority and certainty of teaching is with them, that moment

(will I join them. * * * Farewell. My respectful regards

’to Mrs.-------a m e evei- believe m e} rnd dear sir,-uours very

truly,

First.—The author of the above ^letter has carefully

examined the present state of the world, and declares himself fully convinced of the awful apostasy'which now so universally prevails. He unhesitatingly admits that all authority to teach —to administer ordinances—to 'build up the church 'of Christ,

WAS JOSEPH SMITH SENT OF GOD? 11

has entirely ceased from the-earth—that “all is uncertain.” He - also admits that “it is very reasonable to suppose that Under such circumstances, God would raise up and send on£. invested with authority. Whether Joseph Smith was such a one is the all-important question.” Yes,, indeed, it is ?n important question, and one that involves the fate of the present generation. If Joseph Smith was not sent of God, this. Church cannot be the Church of God, and the tens of thousands who have b'een baptized, into this Church are yet in their sins, and no better off than the millions that have gone before them. The frmi-without the power and author!tyT3 is no better than the hundreds of human forms that have no resemblance to the ancient pattern ; indeed, it is more danger ous, because better calculated to deceive. Other churches do not profess to have inspired apostles, prophets, prophetesses, evangelists, etc., hence we know, if the New Testament be; true, that they cannot be the church of God. But the Latter-day Saints profess to have all these officers •and gifts among them, and profess to have authority to administer i n every form, ordinance and blessing of the ancient church; hence we know, that so far as the officers, doctrines, ordinances, and cere monies are evidence, this Church can exhibit a perfect pattern. In these things, then, both ancient and modern Saints are exactly alike. By the New Testament then we cannot be con demned.

If the Latter-day Saints are not what they profess to be,

one thing is certain, that no one ever will be able to confute their doctrine by the scriptures; however, imperfect the people may be, their doctyne is infallible. Can this be said of any other people who have existed on the eastern hemisphere during the last 1700 years? No. Their doctrines have been a heterogenous mixture of truth and error, that would not stand the test one moment when measured by a pattern of inspiration; some disparity could be seen and pointed out- some deviation cither in the organization or i n the ordinances of the gospel could be.shown to exist. And now after so many centuries have elapsed, and when human wisdom has been exerted to its utmost strength, and the most exalted and gigan tic talents displayed to lay a stable foundation whereon to

12 • DIVINE AUTHORITY, OR,

build, we awake and behold all an empty bubble—a vain show

—a phantom of man’s creation, with scarcely a vestige of the

ancient/orm, to say nothing of the power. In the midst of all

this thick darkness, a young, illiterate, obscure and inexperi

enced man announces a message from heaven, before which

darknesB flees away; human dogmas are overturned; the tradi

tions of ages are uprooted; all forms of church government

tremble liko an aspen leaf at its approach, and the mighty

fabric of popular sectarianism is convulsed and shaken to its very foundation. How happens all this?' ' If Joseph Smith were an impostor, whence his superior wisdom? What power inspired his mind' in laying the foundation of a church accord ing to the ancient order? How could an impostor so far sur pass the combined wisdom of seventeen centuries as to origin ate a system diverse from every other system under heaven, and yet harmonize with the system of Jesus and His apostles in every particular? What! an impostor discover the gross darkness of -ages, and publish a doctrine perfect in every respect, against which not one scriptural argument can be adduced ! The idea is perposterous-d The purity and infal libility of the doctrine of this great modern prophet is a pre sumptive evidence of no small moment in favor of his divine mission.

We do not pretend that a perfect doctrine is an infallible

evidence in favor of the divine authority of the one who teaches it. We can conceive it possible, though not probable, for a man to teach a doctrine unmixed with error, and yet be without authority to administer its. ordinances. Swedenborg,

Irving and many others, taught, doctrines in. some respects true, in other respects false: hence their authority should be rejected, even though they should perform miracles. We have no examples on the records of history, of a doctrine perfect in every respect, being taught • by any person or persons, unless they were inspired with divine authority. If Joseph Smith taught a doctrine in any respect false, he should be rejected as an impostor, though he should, like the magicians of Egypt, turn rivers of water into blood, or create frogs in abundance, or even raise the dead like the witch of Endor. On the other hand, if he taught a true and perfect doctrine, he might be

* WAS JOSEPH SMITH SENT OP GOD? 13

Sent of God, though he himself should perform no miracle, like John the. Baptist, or the Prophet Noah, or many, other prophets of the Old Testament. ; In ancient times, many great prophets were sent of God, and we have no record of their doing miracles, yet their respective messages were of infinite importance, and could not he rejected without condemnation. Where is there a man, no matter ‘ how great his attainments, that can show Mr. Smith’s doetrine'to be false? Did the ancient saints teach baptism to the penitent believer for the remission of sins? So did Mr. Smith. Did they teach the laying on of hands ■for the gift of the Holy , Spirit? So did Mr. Smith. Did the former-day saints teach that apostles, prophets, evangelists, pastors, teachers, deacons, bishops, elders, etc., ■ all inspired of God, were necessary in the church? So did Mr. Smith.. Did the ancient saints teach that dreams, visions, new ■ revelations, ministering of angels, healings, tongues, interpretations, and all other spiritual gifts were necessary in the church? So did this modern prophet. Where, then, is the discrepancy between the ■ ancient and modern teachings? Nowhere. The teaching of ■ the one is as perfect as the other; and we again assert that this perfect coincidence in teaching, in every point, is' a strong presumptive evidence that Mr. Smith was sent of God.

Second —In what manner does Joseph Smith declare that

a dispensation of the gospel was committed unto him? He testifies that an angel of God, whose name was Moroni, appeared unto him; that this angel was formerly an ancient prophet among a remnant of the tribe of Joseph on the con tinent of America. He testifies that Moroni revealed ■ unto him where he deposited the sacred records of his nation some four teen hundred years ago; that these records contained the “everlasting gospel” as it was anciently taught and recorded by this branch of Israel. He gave . Mr. Smith power to reveal the contents of those records to the nations of the earth. Now how does this testimony of Joseph Smith agree with the book of John’s prophecy given on the Isle of Patmos? John testi- -fies that when the dispensation of the gospel is again committed to the nations,-it shall be through the medium of an angel from heaven. Joseph Smith testifies that a dispensation of. the 14 D J VINE AUTHORITY, OR,

gospel for all nations lias been committed to him by ail angel. The one uttered the prediction ; the other.testifies its fulfill ment. Though Mr. Smith had taught a perfect doctrine, yet if he had testified that his doctine was not restored by an 'angel, all would at once have known him to be an impostor. How

came Mr. Smith, if an impostor, to not only discover 'a ' perfect doctrine, but also to discover the precise medium through which that doctrine should be restored to. the earth? .Did

• Swedenborg, Irving, Wesley, or any other person, not only

teach a pure system, but at the same time did they declare that it was committed to them by an angel from heaven? If not, however pure and holy their teaching, they were not divinely authorized to administer in ordinances. If Mr. Smith had professed to have accidentally discovered those records, and that he was inspired to reveal their contents through the Urim and Thummirn; or if he had professed to have received a message of the gospel through the inspiration of the Holy

Ghost, or the Urim and Thummim, or in any other way but that of the ministering of an angel, we should, without further inquiry, have-known him to be without authority. .How came Mr. Smith, if a deceiver, to think of all this ? Did Martin

Luther, Wesley, Whitfield, Swedenborg, or Irving think of this ? Whence his superior intellect—bis depth of underi standing—his extensive foresight—that-he should-so far sur pass all former impostors for 1700 years ? John testifies that when the everlasting gospel is restored to the earth . it shall be by an angel. Mr. Smith testifies that it ‘was restored by an angel, and in no other way. This is another presnptwc evidence that he was sent of God.

Thirb. —A revelation and restoration to the earth of the

everlasting gospel through the angel Moroni would be of no benefit to the nations, unless some one should be ordained with authoriry to preach it and administer its ordinances. Moroni might reveal a book containing a beautiful and glorious system of salvation, but no one could obey even its first principles without a legally authorized administrator, ordained to preach', baptize, lay on hands for the.gift • of the Holy Ghost, etc. Did

Moroni ordain Mir. Smith to the apostleship, and compand him to administer ordinances? No, he did not. But why not

WAS JOSEPH SMITH SENT OF GOD? 15-

confer authority by ordination, as well as reveal the everlasting gospel ? Because in all probability he had not the right so to do. All' angels have not the same authority—they do not all hold the same keys. Moroni was a prophet, but we- have no account of his holding the office of an apostle; and if not, he had no right to ordain Mr. Smith to. an office which lie . himself never possessed. He no doubt went as-far as he was author ised, and that was to reveal the “stick of Ephraim”—the record of his fathers containing the “eyerlasting gospel.” How then did Mr. Smith obtain the office of an apostle, if Moroni had no authority to ordain him ' to such office? Mr. Smith testifies that Peter, James and John came to him in the capa

city of ministering angels, *and by the laying on of hands ordained him an apostle, and commanded him to preach, bap tize, lay on hands.for the gift of the Holy Ghost, and admin ister all other ordinances of the gospel as they themselves did in ancient days. Did Swedenborg—did Irving’s apostles—or did any other impostors during ' the long age of darkness—pro fess that the apostleship was conferred upon them by those who held it last—by any angel who held the office himself? No: and ■therefore they . are not apostles, but deceivers. Jf Mr. Smith had pretended that he received the ■ apostleship by the revelation of the Holy Ghost, without an ordination under the hands of an apostle, we should at once know that his pre tensions were vain, and' that he was a deceiver. If an impostor, how came Mr. Smith to ■ discover this? Why did he not, like the Irvingites, assume the apostleship without an apostle to ordain him? How came he to possess so much more wisdom than Irving, as to discover that he could not be an apostle without being ordained under the hands of an apostle? If Mr. Smith be a false apostle, it must be confessed that he has exhibited far more judgment than all "the false apostles who have preceded him, learned and ■ talented as they were. Is not this another presumptive evidence of Joseph Smith's divine mission f Such a correctness upon matters of so great a moment, and upon subjects on which millions-have heretofore erred, indicates something more than, human—it indicates inspiration of the Almighty. The purity of Mr. Smith’s doc-

rine—the perfect coincidence of his testimony with that of ,10 DIVINE AUTHORITY, OR,

John’s, in relation to the manner of the restoration of the everlasting . Gospel to the earth, and the consistency of his testimony in relation to the-manner of the restoration of the apostleship, are strong presumptive evidences that beautifully harmonize with and strengthen each other; the evidence is therefore accumulative, and increases with every additional condition or circumstance in a multiplied ratio, and seems almost, irresistibly to force conviction upon the mind.

Fourth.—Joseph Smith not only professes, through the

medium of angels, to have received a dispensation of the gos pel, and the power and authority of the apostleship, but he also professes to have received through revelation and com-nunidmcat from God, a dispensation for the gathering of the Saints from all nations. Now the doctrine of • the gathering of the Saints in. the last days must .efther be false or true; if false, then Joseph Smith must be an impostor. It matters not how cor rect he may have been in all other points of his system, Jf this, one point—the doctrine of the gathering be false, he must be a deceiver. Why? Because he professes to have received. this doctrine by direct revelation and comr^a^rLdnimiti .On the other’ hand, if the doctrine of .the gathering of the Saints be a true. doctrine and scriptural, this will be another presumptive evi dence that Mr. Smith was sent of God.

Now a doctrine may he true and not be scriptural; as • for

example, Newton’s doctrine or law of universal gravitation is a

true doctrine, but not a scriptural one; that is, it can neither be proved nor disproved by the scriptures. So, Noah’s doc trine of gathering into ah ark—Lot’s doctrine of fleeing out of Sodom—Christ’s doctrine to depart out of Jerusalem and flee to the mountains to escape destruction, were all true; but neither of-them could be proved or disproved by any scripture given to any of the former prophets. So likewise Mr. Smith’s doctrine of the gathering of the Saints in the last days might he true, even though there should be no former scripture that' ’predicted such an event; but in this case sucli a doctrineWould be-no evidence that Mr. Smith, "who advocated it, was sent of God; but if such a doctrine can be proved to be a scriptural doctrine,, that is, if the ' gathering of •the Saints was predicted in ancient scriptures ’ as an eyent to take .place in a certain age,

WAS JOSEPH SMITH SENT OF GOD? 17

in a certain way, and through certain means, and Mr. Smith comes' -i& that age, professing to have a message to gather the Saints in such way, and by such means as the scriptures have foretold, then the exact and perfect agreement between the professed message of Mr. Smith, and the scriptural predictions relating to such a message or work, would be a presumptive evidence of great weight in favor of his divine mission.

The doctrine of the gathering of the people of God, includ

ing Israel, is one So clearly predicted by the-inspired writers, that it'- seems almost superfluous to refer to the numerous passages relating to it. The dispensation in which the people of God were to. be gathered in one, is called by the apostle Paul, “the dispensation of the fullness of times;” which he represents as being an event then in the future. John, nearly one hundred years after the birth of 'our Savior,' saw the won derful events and sceneries of unborn generations displayed in majestic and awful grandeur before him. He saw the churches of Asia, then under his own personal watch-care, lukewarm, ' corrupted, and about ready to be moved out of their place.’ He saw the universal apostasy -that was soon to succeed and hold dominion fof ages over all kindred and tongues, under the name of the Mother of Harlots—the great Babylon that should make all nations drunk with her wickedness. He saw that after the nations had been thus overwhelmed in thick darkness for ages, without the church of God, without apostles, without prophets, without the ministering of angels, without one cheer ing message from heaven, that there would be one more pro clamation of mercy made to all people^-one more dispen sation of glad tidings from the heavens, to be ushered i$ by an angel restoring the everlasting gospel, which was to receive a universal proclamation to all the inhabitants of the earth, fol lowed with a loud cry, that the hour of Gods jugdment is come. He.saw the universal proclamation of this warning message immediately followed by another angel, proclaming the complete overthrow and downfall of Babylon. Between

the interval of the flying of these two angels, he “heard another voice from heaven, saying, Come out of her, my people, that, ye be not partakers of-her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues. For her sins have reached unto heaven, and God

18 DIVINE AUTHORITY", OR,

hath remebered her iniquities/’ Remember, that this voice, commanding the people to come out of Babylon, was to be a

“voice from heaven.” It was not to be ? cunningly devised

plan of uninspired man, brought about by human ingenuity,

but it was to be a voice from heaven—a message sent from

God—a new revelation, commanding the-Saints to come out of

Babylon previous to its downfall. How came Mr. Smith, if an impostor, to get, not only all the other particulars which we •

have mentioned, perfectly exact, -but also to discover that there

must.be a gathering of the Saints out of Babylon, and that

that work must immediately follow the introduction of the gospel by an angel? Why did he not say, my doctrine is true,

and i f you will embrace ’ it you can be saved, and still remain

where you. are? formatters not how correct this doctrine might

have been in all other points, if he had told his disciples to

remain among the corrupt nations, and not gather together—

this alone would have exposed the cloven foot, and proved him

to be a deceiver. Swedenborg, Wesley,-Irving and a- numerous

host of others,-during the last seventeen hundred years, have

entirely neglegted the gathering, which proves that they were

without authority—that a dispensation of the gospel was neVer

committed to them—that the voice from heaven to come out

of Babylon had never saluted their ears. Previous to the

restoration of the gospel by an angel, God had no people in

Babylon, and therefore he could not call them out. An

unauthorized uninspired priesthood, preaching a- perverted

gospel, never could raise up a people of God in Babylon; for

they themselves are Babylon, and all their converts or children

are- begotten after their own likeness with Babylonish inscrip

tions upon their foreheads. It-is only when the gospel, apostle

ship, and power are again restored in the way and manner pre

dicted, that a people of God can be raised up among the

nations. It is then, and not till then, that the voice is heard

from heaven, calling that people out from among- the nations.

Mr. Smith did not forget this. It is marvellously strange,

indeed, that he should’-be an impostor, and yet embrace in his

system every particular that was to characterize the great dis

pensation of the latter-times. It matters not how diverse the

points of his doctrine were to the popular current among the

WAS JOSEPH SMITH SENT OF GOD? 19

great modern Systems of religion. He seems to have intro duced his system without paying the least regard as to what would be popular or unpopular—as to whether it would suit the learned or the unlearned—as to whether it would suit the temporal circumstances of man or not. He did not stop to make the inquiry whether the gathering of the Saints would be congenial to the feelings of those who occupied splendid mansions, upon fine farms, surrounded with every luxury of life. He did not stop to consider any of those things, but Spoke as one having authority; saying, “thus saith the Lord,” upon every point of doctrine which he promulgated. Now, for a young man, inexperienced and illiterate, to profess to give the word of the Lord upon subjects of so great a moment—to reveal doctrines which were directly opposed, not only to his own traditions, but to the teachings and doctrines of the most popular, numerous, and powerful sects of the day, and at the same time have those doctrines exactly accord, not only with the ancient gospel, but with every minute prediction relative to the dispensation of the last days, is an evidence that carries TRUTn upon the face of it, and leaves a deep and lasting impression upon every reflecting mind, and we can hardly refrain from assenting in our hearts, that surely he must have been sent of

God.

Fifth.—W hat else besides the “everlasting gospel” does the

Book of Mormon profess to contain? It professes to contain a brief but faithful history of a small branch, of the tribe of Joseph, and the revelations given to them both before and. after Christ, written by a succession of prophets who were the literal descendants of Joseph; hence it professes to be, in the full sense of the word, the writings or records of the tribe of Joseph. It contains numerous and pointed predictions, show ing expressly that the age in which their records should, by the power of God, be revealed to the nations, should also be the day in which Israel should be gathered; and that their records in conjunction with the records of the Jews, should be the power ful instruments in the hands of the servants of God in ing about that great work. Now, how does this accord with the word of the Lord to Ezekiel upon the same subject? Ezekiel was commanded to write upon two sticks, one for 20 DIVINE. AUTHORITY, OR,

Judah and the other for-Joseph; after which he. was com manded to join them together into one. And when . the children of Israel should make inquiry what these two united writings of Judah and Joseph’meant, he was to say unto them, that the Lord God would join the writings of Joseph with those of Judah; immediately after which He would take the children

of Israel from among the heathen, , whither they were gone, and would-gather ■ them 'on eyery side, and bring them into their own land: and that He would make them one nation in the land upon the mountains of Israel; and that one king should be king to them all •; and that they should no more be (wo nations or kingdoms, Ezekiel testifies that the waitings of Jossph should be • joined with the writings of Judah. Mt.

Smith presents this • generation . with • a book, consisting of several hundred pages, professing to be the sacred writings of the inspired prophets of the tribe of Joseph, who anciently inhabited the great western hemisphere. • Ezekiel testifies that

Israel should be gathered,-never again to be scattered, imme

diately after the union' of these two records. The professed

record of Joseph, brought to light 'by ' Mr. Smith, .testifies -in the most positive language, that, this is the age in which Israel

shall be gathered through the instrumentality of the word and '

power of God, contained in the two records. Ezekiel uttered

the prediction. ■-Mir. Smith presents a professed fulfillment.

This is another presumptive ■ evidence in favor of the divine

authority of his mission; for if the gathering jof Israel had

not been included in the mission of Mr * Smith, as an important

part of the great work of the last dispeusation, all.'would

have had good reason for rejecting him ■ without further

inquiry. The ministering of an angel—the restoration of the

gospel—the conferring of the apostdship—the setting up of

the kingdom of God—the gathering of the Saints—the revela

tion of the record of Joseph, and itsa union with the Jewish

record—and the restoration of all 'the house of Israel to their

own lands, are-the wonderful events to be fulfilled in the great

“dispensation of the fullness of times.” Whatever person, or

persons are. divinely commissioned to usher in that dispensation,

must have the keys of authority to perform every work per

taining thereunto. If Joseph Smith had included all. these

WAS JOSEPH SMITH SENT OF GOD? • 21

remarkable events in his mission, excepting one; then that one exception would be sufficient to prove him' to be acting without

’ authority. But where, we ask, is there one exception ? What

particular event or circumstance pertaining to the dispensation, of which he professed to hold the keys, has he excluded from his system? Did John predict the restoration of the gospel by an angel? It is included in Mr. Smith’s system. Did John predict that the Saints should receive a message from heaven, commanding them to come out of Babylon? It also is included in the system of Joseph Smith, and the Saints are now obeying it. Did Ezekiel predict the final gathering of Israel as an immediate result of the union of the two records of Joseph and Judah? Mr. Smith also includes that in his system. The two records are already united in their testimony, and will soon accomplish the purpose for which they were sent forth. What then is lacking ? Is there any of the prophets, or inspired writers of ancient times, who have pointed out some other way for the latter-da}' dispensation to be brought about? Can any man show that the gospel will not be restored by an angel, or that the Saints will not be called out of Babylon by a message from heaven? or that the record of the tribe of Joseph will not be joined with the Jewish record—the Bible? or that Israel will not be gathered to their own lands through the istrumen- tality of more revelation? or that the kingdom of God will not be set up in the latter days to break in pieces all other king doms? or that apostles and prophets will not be restored to the earth as in ancient times? If all these things are possible, probable, and scriptura l—if all these events must come to pass in their time, and in the manner predicted—can any one show that this is not the time? that the Book of Mormon is not the record of Joseph, about which Ezekiel prophesied? Can any one show any cause why Joseph Smith should not receive the ministering of an angel? why he should not be ordained an apostle, or prophet, or receive revelations and commandments from God? If the gospel is to be restored by an angel, it must be restored at tbe first to some person. Why not that person be Mr. Smith ? If the records of two different tribes are to be joined in one, why not the Book of Mormon and the Bible be the two records? and%why not Mr. Smith be the instrument in

22 DIVINE AUTHORITY, OR,
