THE RIGHTS, PRIVILEGES AND BLESSINGS ENJOYED BV THE

SUBJECTS IN THIS LIFE.

T N the preceding chapters of this treatise, we have already

* illustrated five important subjects • relative to the king

dom of .God. The next to be considered in the order tf tur arrangement is the

Sixth—Namely, The rights, privileges, and blessings enjoyed

by the subjects in this life.

The faithful subjects of the kingdom of God are entitled by

promise tt certain rights and privileges which are not granted to the citizens of any other kingdom. All the children tf the kingdom have the right of offering up daily petitions tt the King. This inestimable right or privilege is one with which the citizens of other governments are not favored. It is not only granted as a privilege, but it is also enjoined as a duty upon all the inhabitants tf the kingdom, to plainly make known all their wants, and represent all their grievance tr wrongs

### i

THE KINGDOM OF GOD. 91

which they may have endured from the citizens of other gov ernments. Those petitions offered in rightsou?ns??, art always favorably received; and the blessings asked for in

faith, if calculated to benefit the petitioner, are never with * held.

The blessings promised to the children of the kingdom in

this life, are wisdom, knowledge, joy, healings-miracles, tongues, interpretations, revelations, visions, dreams, the ministry '' of angels, prophesy^s, power ' to cast out devils; . power against deadly poisons, and in fine, all the other gifts of the Holy Ghost as recorded in the scriptures of truth.

Many thousands of sincere honest inquirers have been

exceedingly anxious to know whether they were really in the kingdom of God or not. This is an inquiry of infinite import ance, and one upon which none should rest satisfied short of a certain knowledge. For the benefit of such inquirers, we here give them an infallible sign by which they may always know the kingdom of God from all other kiugdoms. Where-

ever the miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost are enjoyed, there the kingdom of God exists: wherever these gifts are not enjoyed, there the kingdom does not exist.

That believers might , be distinguished from unbelievers

throughout all the world, Jesus promised certain signs to the former. He said unto them, “These signs shall follow them that believe: in my mame shall they cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues; they shall take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover. (Mark xvi. 17, 18, 19.) This promise has been supposed ■ by

J many to have been limited to the apostles or to the official • members of the Church of Christ; but it will be perceived

from the context, that Jesus’made this promise to every crea ture throughout all the world who would believe the gospel. In the 15th verse, He commanded the apostles to “go into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature.” In the 1Gth verse, He promised salvation to every baptized believer, and damnation to every unbeliever. In the three following verses, He promises miraculous signs to the believer. The

promise of miraculous signs was as unlimited in its nature as 92 THE KINGDOM OF, GOD

the promise of salvation. Where the ' ods ceases, the other ceases also. Miraculous signs are a part of the gospel plan, as much as the remission of sins or the gift of the Holy Ghost.

The gospel plan embraces certain commands oe ordinances

to be believed and obeyed, and certain blessings to be received. To limit the blessings of the gospel to the first age of Christ ianity, is to limit the gospel to that age; for all the blessings, including the signs, were to be received wherever the gospel was received. ,

Nothing can be move erroneous than to suppose that these

signs were merely •given to establish the truth of Christianity, and that when that was once established, they were no' longer mded. The signs are as much included in' the system of Christianity, as any other blessing that can be named. If the signs have ceased, true Christianity, of which the signs are a component part, has ceased. If signs '-have established the system of Christianity, ’ why should they, as _ a part of the very system itself cease as unnecessary, while the other part of the system remains? Why not the whole system cease, as well as a part ? W hy tell the world that Christianity was established by miraculous signs, and then declare, that as soon as it was established, nearly all of its blessings ceased ? If it be established, the whole system, signs and all, should continue in full force, as long as there is a souJ on the earth to be saved.

If so great a portion of the gospel blessings were intended

to cease as unnecessary, is it not exceedingly strange that no intimation should be given in the scriptures to that effect? When the commands, ordinances, and blessings of the system of Christianity have been once established in the earth, have we not every reasou to believe, without the least shadow of a doubt, that they are intended to continue, unless something to the contrary is intimated in the word of God? After Jesus had promised miraculous signs to the hslis'vers in all the world, would He withhold the promised blessings from them in any part of the world, ov i n any age, without giving some reason fov not fulfilling His promise? Every believer in all the world, and in every age, should seek after the mirac

THE KINGDOM OF GOD, 93

ulous signs with as much . confidence and assurance as he would seek after any other promised blessing, until Jesus intimates in His word that He no longer ■ intends bestowing them according to promise. Until our Lord declares that He will no longer bestow the promised signs upon believers, every church who are not in possession of these signs, may know

that they are not true believers. If true ' believers fail in receiving the promised signs, they have no reason to suppose that they will receive the promised salvation. Modern Chris

tians who do not enjoy the signs of believers, cannot expect to enjoy the salvation of believers.

One of two things is certainly true,■ either modern Chris

tians who do not enjoy the miraculous signs, are not true believers, or else Jesus fails on His part to fulfill His promise. If they are not true believers, they will fail of salvation ’ if Jesus fails on His part to fulfill one promise, what confidence have they to suppose that He will fulfill the others? If true believers learn that Jesus withholds one promise without rendering any reason for so doing, what certainty have they that He will not also withhold every other promise? They

can have no certainty at all. .Nothing sure upon which to build their hopes of salvation. If one promise fails, all may fail. If the words of Jesus are not fulfilled 'in one thing, this is calculated to destroy all confidence in the rest of His say ings. Therefore, if they really are true believers, Jesus has refused to fulfill His promise, and give them the signs of true believers, and consequently they may expect that He will refuse to give them ” glorious resurrection and an inheritance in His presence.

It may be argued that Jesus has nowhere in His word lim

ited. the promise“of-”'gloriou8 resurrection, and of salvation to the believers who should live in the first age of Christian ity, and therefore, these promises may be claimed in alb suc cessive ages. - So, likewise, it may be argued that, ■as Jesus has nowhere in His word limited the miraculous signs to -the believers of the first ”ge of Christianity, therefore they may be claimed by believers in all. subsequent ages, as long as the earth should stand.

Jesus promised both the salvation and -signs: both were

promised to every creature in ' all the world who should believe 94 THE KINGDOM OF GOD.

the gospel: both, so far as we can discover from the woru of God, were intended for ,believers of all future generations. Modem believers assert that they have not obtained the promised signs. Why, then, do they assert that they shall obtain the promised salvation? Why suppose that Jesus will fulfill one promise, when He fails to fulfill the other? To illus trate this subject, we offer the following parabbe:—

A certain king, great and powerful, reigned over a numer ous and happy people. His territories were situated in the most beautiful and delightful portions of the earth. The

land abounded with the most valuable treasures, such as were unknown in any other country. Nothing could exceed the order, peace, prosperity, and happiness diffused throughout all his dominions.

At a certain time, the king .sent forth ambassadors among all nations, to invite them to become subjects of his government, and in due time to emigrate to his happy country. These ambassadors were invested with power to legally administer the oath of allegiance, and all other laws and ordinances which the king had established for the purpose of adopting citizens into his own government. And the king said unto them, “He that receiveth you and becomes an adopted citizen, shall, when he emigrates, receive an inheritance iu my domin ions: but he that is not adopted shall iu no wise enter into my kingdom. These signs or tokens shall accompany the adopted citizens: in my name they shall carry a costly metal, enstamped with the great seal of my authority; they shall wear upon one of their fingers a choice jewel from my own dominions; they shall have a white stone upon which shall be engraved, in unknown characters, a new name known only to themselves. All these signs or tokens shall accompany them.”

The ambassadors went forth as they were directed, and many thousands in all parts of the world received the ordi nances of adoption; and the signs or tokens of their legal citi zenship were abundantly manifested. When the adopted citizens received the promised signs, they were greatly con firmed, and believed with much assurance that they should, after emigration, receive the promised inheritance.

THE KINGDOM OF GOD. 95

In process of time a great persecution arose. Many of

these adopted citizens were put to death. Many others began, through carelessness, . to lose the precious signs and tokens ot their citizenship. At length persecution began to abate, and the proclamation of the king was received more favorably. Many, on account of its increasing popularity, assumed the authority to administer the oath of allegiance and the ordin ances of adoption, without either seeing or hearing from the king. For fear the people would question their authority, they flattered them with the idea that the king would no

longer call ambassadors by revealing any new commission, and that the whole work of cQmmissionitg and authorizing was left entirely to their own wisdom. But it was soon found that the signs and tokens of citizenship ’ were no longer grauted, although many petitioned the king .very earnestly to send them, but their petitions were unheeded. The reason of this was, because no one was authorized from the king to adminis ter the oath of allegiance and adopt citizens legally. There

fore the king would not give the tokens of citizenship. But these unauthorized usurpers, who had already made the people believe that it was unnecessary to receive a commission by any new revelation, next actually persuaded the people to believe that the signs and tokens of citizenship were also unnecessary. Popularity and age soon established these false traditions, insomuch that the people almost universally believed, in direct opposition to the promise of the king, that the signs of citizenship were unnecessary.

They continued to emigrate in great numbers as was sup

posed to the promised land, where it was expected they would receive the promised inheritance. But at .it was absurd, according to their traditions, to expect ’ any communication from that land, they could not tell whether the emigrants were permitted to enter into the kingdom and receive their inheritance or not. Now the king was very angry with those who had usurped authority, and had administered the laws of adoption without . being sent. He was also very angry with the people who had suffered themselves to be so grossly imposed upon, as to suppose that any could be sent without some communication from him. He. therefore, withheld % THE KINGDOM OF GOD.

from them the promised signs and also the promised inherit ance, for none of them had been legally adopted. Though they obtained none of the tokens or signs, yet they vainly flattered themselves that they should get the inheritance. But as many as were found who had been deceived, and had not the promised signs of citizenship, were taken and bound as enemies and aliens, and- cast into their own place; and great misery prevailed among them—weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth.

And after a long time had passed away, the king sent forth

from his dominions one mighty and strong, clothed with great power; and many other messengers were called and sent even according to the first pattern. And they were commanded to go unto every nation, kindred, tongue and people, and call upon all men to come forth and be legally adopted, and take the oath of allegiance from such as were authorized to admin ister it, and irom their hands to receive the ordinances of adoption. And the king again renewed his promise, and said that the signs and tokens of ’ citizenship should again be enjoyed, and such should receive the promised inherit ance.

Now these messengers went forth according to the com mandments of the king, and those who received them were blessed with the signs, and had much assurance. Now these unauthorized usurpers who pretended to he the servoa^ of the king, and those whom they had deceived, when they saw the signs and tokens of citizenship again made manifest, were exceedingly angry, and sent forth all manner of wicked accus ations and lies against the king’s messengers, and those who

had received them; and by these wicked means the people were stirred up to greatly persecute them, destroying many, and driving others from place to place, and from city to -city. At length they were driven forth a great distance from among the nations; and there they were nourished until they became

exceedingly strong: tbe king himself greatly strengthened them by additional tokens of bis goodness.

Tbe king’s messengers, notwithstanding tbe cruelties which

they received from tbe people, continued to go from nation to nation, and the signs and tokens of citizenship began to shine

THE KINGDOM OF GOD 97

forth with greater brilliancy, which enraged the pretented citizens who had net these tokens still more, and they gathered together in multitudes upon all the face of the earth to fight against those wht had the signs tf citizenship. Id

process tf time, after passing through many tribulations, the lawful heirs went tut from among the nations with power and great glory, and gathered themselves in tne. And it came tt pass that they built a great city unto the king, and he came with all the mighty ones of his dominions, aDd dwelt among them; and those who had fought against his messengers, perished; and all the earth came under the dominion tf the great king.

. Let us now examine the use or benefit of these miraculous

signs. Jesus said, “ These signs shall follow them that believe” If they were tt be tf nt particular use tr benefit tt the believer, it is ntt reasonable tt suppose that Jesus would have promised them. Modern Christendom asserts that these signs were given, not st much for the benefit of believers, as for the convincing of unbelievers. The servants of God, it is said, wrought signs and wonders to establish the divine authenticity of their calling and message, Signs fol

. lowed, they assert, that ah people might know believers from

unbelievers—the true Church from every other church.

If these signs, as modern divines suppose, were given ftr

these purposes, then we ask, why should they be done away in succeeding ages, when there were millions tf unbelievers upon the earth? Htw are people to determine at the present day which among the modern churches is the Church tf Christ? How shall they know believers from unbelievers? or the ministers tf Christ from deceivers tr imposters? "We can distinguish them now, says modern Christendom, by the word of Gtd. But the word of God says, “signs shall follow them that believe.” And as they deny signs in these days, the word tf God would at once condemn them all as unbelievers.1 Ntt any tf the Papist or Protestant sects can pjrove, by the word tf God, to the unbelieving world, that they are the true church—that their ministry is authorized tf Gtd, and that they are true believers in Christ. The word tf God condemns "98 THE KINGDOM OF GOD.

them all, because they have not the signs which Jesus said

.should ■ follow the believers.

The Protestants denounce the Catholics as the mother of harlots-the most wicked and corrupt power on earth. The

Catholics denounce the Protestants as heretics and apostates from the true church. The word of God denounces them both as unbelievers, because they lack the signs. The infidel world denounces the word of God, because miraculous signs

follow neither Catholics nor Protestants, who pretend to be believers. The sincere inquirer, is almost distracted, because he is in greater doubt whether to believe in Catholics, Protes tants, infidelity, or the word of God. If signs then were given to distinguish the ministers of Christ from impostors, surely the present generation need them if ever they were cssCsC.

In the midst of all these conflicting opinions, the humble servant of God comes forth and boldly declares that no church can be the true church, unless they obey the words of Christ and enjoy the signs of believers. He testifies with authority

that all the promises of Jesus will be fulfilled while there is

one believer upon the face of the earth to be * perfected and saved. He testifies that all who deny that signs will follow them that believe, are unbelievers, who, according to the words of Christ, must be damned.

It is very evident, however, that these signs were not given merely for the purpose of convincing unbelievers. “In my name,” says Jesus, “they shall cast out devils." although this power might, in certain cases convince the unbelieving world, yet it is by no means to be supposed that this was the prin cipal design. Devils and unclean spirits frequently took pos session of the human tabernacle, tormenting individuals in various ways. Jesus promised believers that they, in His name, should cast them out. Now one object which Jesus had in view i n granting this power, was to benefit the one possessed. Another object was to confirm the believers, that they by having power over the devil in this life, might be more fully assured that they should obtain a complete victory aud final triumph oyer him in the world to come. That per son who cannot obtain power in the name of Jesus to cast out

THE KINGDOM OF GOD. 99

devils in this life, has great reason to fear lest the devil shall obtain power over him in the next life. What assurance has any one that he shall obtain a complete salvation from the power of the devil, when his spirit shall leave the body, if he cannot claim the promise of Jesus, and cast him out while his spirit dwells in the Body? One of the purposes then which Jesus had in view in bestowing this blessing, was that believ ers might learn to prevail against the devil before they should enter the invisible world of spirits. And another purpose, as we have already named, was to deliver the unhappy demoniac from his miserable and wretched condition, and set him free from the grasp of this awful monster.

Now both of these purposes are just as essential for the

good of mankind in this age as in the first age of Christianity. It would be equally as essential for a man who is possessed of devils in this age to be liberated, as it was in any former age. And it would also ' be equally as essential that a believer should learn to command the devil in the name of Jesus, that he might obtain a complete victory over him in all things, as it was for ancient believers. Therefore, as there is no scripture to do away this promise, nor any reason to prove it unneces sary, it must be intended for believers of all ages until the devil is bound.

/“They shah speak in new tongues.” The benefit of this

miraculous sign is obvious to every one. If a servant of God were under the necessity of acquiring in the ordinary way a knowledge of languages, a large portion of his time would be unprofitably occupied. While he was spending years to learn the language of a people sufficiently accurate to preach the glad tidings of salvation unto them, thousands would be perish ing for the want of the knowledge. If he could be endowed immediately by the power of the Holy Ghost to speak in any language necessary, how much laborious study would be avoided 1 how much time would be saved that could’ be occu pied more usefully in the spread of the gospel! how much more accurately would principles be expressed, when, not only the ideas, but the lauguage itself is given by the Holy Ghost! How vastly superior is God’B plan of qualifying His servants to preach in different languages and tongues, to the plans TOO THE KINGDOM . OF GOD.

adopted by modern divines 1/ The servant of God is qualified in a moment, as it were, to^preach by the inspiration of the

Holy Spirit in the language of any people to whom he may be sent; while modern divines will throw away years in acquiring the knowledge of a language; and when they have acquired it, they cannot preach in it by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, but are still dependent upon their own learning and wisdom.

In one day the unlearned fishermen of Galilee acquired a

more extensive qualification for preaching in the different lan guages of the earth, than all the various grades and ranks of clergymen who have disgraced the name of Christianity on the eastern hemisphere for the last seventeen centuries. The gift of tongues was not confined to the ministers of Christ alone, but it was bestowed liberally upon the private members of the Church. Indeed, it was one of the signs promised to believers throughout all the world. As sgou as Paul baptized the Ephe sians, he laid his hands upon them and they received the Holy Ghost, and immediately spake with tongues and prophesied {See Actsxix. 6.). When the household of Cornelius received the Holy Spirit, they also spake with tonguesandglorificd God (Acte? x. 46). The Corinthian church were abundantly blessed with this gift{See I. Cor. xii., xiii. and xvi. chapters).

That the principle use of this gift was to preach the gospel

to the people of different tongues and languages we presume no one will deny. And that there was another benefit derived through the medium of this gift is also evident The members of the church were confirmed and strengthened in their faith by the enjoyment of this gift. Jesus hid promised this miraculous sign, among many others, to believers?; if they had failed to receive the blessings, thev would have had reason to doubt whether they were true believers; but when they received tongues, together with all other promised blessings, they were no longer in doubt, but were assured, not only of the truth of the doctrine, but that ’they themselves were accepted of God.

The benefits to be derived from this gift are as essential in

this age, as in the first age of Christianity. It is as necessary that people of^diflerent languages should hear the gospel now,1 as in early ages. „ It is also as important that believers should be confirmed "by _ this gift now, as it ever was. Therefore, as

• ?

THE KINGDOM OF GOD, 101

there is no scripture to limit this gift to the early Christians, and no reason why believers should not enjoy it now, we art compelled to admit that this promise of Jesus is in full force yet, and that whenever and wherever we find a church. of true believers in Christ, there we shall also find the signs of believers. And as the gift of tongues is not among the apostate churches now on the earth, we are compelled by the word of God tc consider them all Unbelievers. Indeed, they cannot be believer; for if they were they could speak with new tongues, as • Jesus promised.

“They shall take up serpents, or if they drink any deadly

thing it shall not hurt them.” This promise of our Great Redeemer was also made to every creature in all the world who should believe the gospel. The use of this miraculous gift was to preserve life, in case any believer should accidentally be bitten by a poisonous serpent as Paul was (see Acts xxviii.); or should unintentionally swallow a deadly poison-as the sons of the prophets did (see IJ. Kings iv). Jesus promised that it should not hurt them. When the Israelites were bitten by poisonous serpents, they were healed by simply looking at a brazen serpent which the,Lord commanded Moses to raise up in the wilderness; so the believers in Christ can prevail against deadly poisons by simply looking to Him in faith; for Jesus cannot fail to fulfil His promise to the believer.

‘lThey shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover.”

This also is one of the signs of believers. Sickness is a very prevalent calamity among the inhabitants of our fallen world. Any medical discoveries that will benefit the sick, are consid ered of inestimable value. Medicines are valued in proportion to their usefulness. Some medicines are useful in one disease, but, at the same time, will leave a lasting injury upon the human constitution. Others have a more salutary effect; and are beneficial in numerous diseases , such, when their beneficial tendencies are thoroughly understood, are generally prized in preference to those of inferior quality.

One of the most simple and harmless prescriptions for the

sick, and one which is a certain cure for diseases and plagues of every description—is that prescribed by one of the most celebrated physicians that ever lived among men. The Dre-

102 THE KNGDOM OF GOD.

scription is simply this—“they-shall lay hands upon the

sick, and they shall recover.” There is ho disease so violent in its nature—so deadly in its operations, but what this remedy, when properly attended to, will effect a complete cure, without in the least injuring the human system like many other prescriptions. This remedy is infinitely superior to all others, first because of its universal application to all diseases, plagues, and pestilences; secondly, because of •the certainty with which it removes pain and every cause of disease; thirdly, because of the expeditious and immediate relief which it affords the patient; fourthly, because it does not prostrate the human system, and injure the constitution like many other powerful prescriptions, which frequently terminate in the worst of con sequences ; fifthly, because it can be obtained without money, or price, being within the reach of the poor as well as the rich; sixthly, because it does not require years of laborious study to acquire a knowledge of the nature of the disease or of the nature of its treatment like most other theories; and seventhly, because it can be obtained in all parts of the world where true believers are to be found.

Another prescription of equal value, and producing like

effects is given by another celebrated author in these words:

“Is any sick among you? let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord; and the prayer of faith shall save the sick, aod the Lord shall raise them up; and • if he have com mitted sins, they shall be forgiven him” {James ■ v. 14, 15).

The prayer of faith accompanied by the ordinances is the most

universal, powerful, and effective remedy of any that has ever

yet been discovered.

The great Physician, who has unfolded to the nations this

infinitely valuable and all powerful remedy, has’been jealous of

His own glory, and has so prepared it that it can never be

administered with the least effect only in His name by one that

is authorized, that i s by a true believer. This is an effectual

preventative against all quacks and impostors who may under

take in His name to counterfeit the genuine; for in all

cases, such will fail like the seven sons of Sceva (Acts xix-13,

14, 15, 16).

THE KINGDOM OF GOD. 103

The apostate churches for many centuries past have been

destitute of this promised blessing of our Savior. They have endeavored to blind the eyes of mankind, by telling them that’ this blessing was not needed after the first age of Christianity. This false tradition, invented by a set of wicked impostors to hide their own unbelief and want of authority, has been handed down by successive false teachers, until the present day; and what is still more strange, there are millions of poor, ignorant fanatics, who have been led away with the fatal delusion. It

has been the study of the wicked impostors of modern times to persuade the people that the promised signs of the

gospel are not needed now. In this thing there -is great policy; for as they have so far apostatized as to be entirely destitute of the blessings themselves, if they could not succeed in delud ing their followers to suppose that miraculous signs are not needed in these days, all people would at once discover that they were not believers, but impostors, acting without authority, having a form of godliness, but destitute of its pro mised powers, pretending to be believers without the signs of believers.

If their deluded followers should, by any means, get the

scales of priestcraft off from their eyes sufficiently to believe the promise of Jesus -in preference to the traditional impositions of their false, rotten-hearted, and corrupt ministers, away would go the popularity of long-established institutions, and down would tumble, with a tremendous crash, the long-loved salaries of a hireling priesthood, and they would stand forth- as monu ments of shame and disgrace before all men. To save them selves from this open disgrace, they have used all their cunning and ingenuity to deceive the people into the belief -that the gift of healing, and the other promised signs of Jesus, are unneces sary now. •

But are there any sick in these days ? if so, would it not be

just as beneficial for the sick to be relieved in these .days as at

any former time? Would it not confirm and establish believers

to lay hands on the sick, and see them healed in these days, as much as it did ancient believers? If then, it would confirm believers and benefit the sick the same now as anciently, we

104 THE KINGDOM OP GOD.

have dq reason tt limit it tt the early Christians. Hence, both

scripture and reason shew that the premised signs are as unlim

ited as the promised salvation.

The affliction tf devils—the confusion tf tongues—deadly

poisons-and sickness, are all curses which have been intro

duced into the world by the wickedness tf man. The blessings

of the gtspel are bestowed to counteract these curses. There

fore, as long as these curses exist, the premised signs are needed

tt counteract their evil consequences. If Jesus had net intended,

that the blessings should be as extensive and unlimited in point

of time as the curses, He would have intimated something to

that effect in His word. But when He makes a universal pro-

• mise of certain powers, to enable every believer in the gtspel

throughout the world tt overcome certain curses, entailed upon

man, because tf wickedness, it would be the rankest kind tf

infidelity not to believe . the premised blessings necessary, as

long as the curses abound among men.

If these signs are necessary, why have they not existed

among the churches-for the last seventeen centuries? Because

no true believers have existed among them during that time;

for Jesus says, they shall ftllew the true believer; hence, if

there had been any true believers, the signs would have been

among them. But the very fact that the signs have ceased

during that time, prove that true believers have ceased also.

This is a sad picture tf mankind, but it is nene the less true.

We say, let the premise of our blessed Redeemer be true,

though it prove every man a liar or a hypocrite. , The fault

cannot be in Jesus, therefore it must be in man. The premises, tf Christ are as unchangeable as His twn nature, and can never faii; but man is as changeable as tbe wind, and is very apt tt fail in almost every respect.

Since the great apostasy, sincerity has characterized millions

tf professed Christians, but ntne of them have obeyed the

ancient gtspel, because nt tne was authorized tt legally admin

ister its ordinances te them ; therefore, notwithstanding their

sincerity, they could net obey the gtspel for the want tf a legal

administrator; hence, they ceuld have no legal claim on the

gtspel blessings. And, for this reason, they could net become

legal or adopted believers; therefore, they ceuld have no legal

THE KINGDOM OF GOD. 105

claim on the signs promised to - believers ; and^isas .one reason why the sincere, honest-hearted, professed Christians of modern' times have not enjoyed these great blessings promised by our Savior, Neither can the^ enjoy the promised salvation in all its fullness, but must be rewarded according to their works, and the opportunities they have enjoyed, in some of the man sions or kingdoms inferior in glory 'to the kingdom possessed by the ancient .saints, who obeyed the law and enjoyed the prom ised blessings. Arid all who will not now repent, as the authority js once more restored to the earth, and come forth out of the corrupted apostate churches, and be legally adopted into the Church of Christ, and earnestly seek after the bles sings- and miraculous gifts-of the gospel, shall be thrust down to hell, saith the Lord God of Hosts; for now they have no excuse for their belief; therefore, if they will not now-repent, they shall 'be damned. This is the word of tbe Lord to priests and people of all churches, and ' of all nations. V We will now give a few examples to show the principle upon which the sick were generally healed. This was accomplished through faith in Jesus Christ. If the sick were capable of exercising faith, then faith was required of them id order fo obtain the blessing. The woman who had. the issue of blood for twelve years said, ‘If I may touch but His clothes, I shall be whole/’' Jesus turned to her and said, “Daughter, tby

faith hath made thee whole’’ (Mark v. 1 . When Jesus went

over into the land of Geuossarstb, Tud passed through their villages, cities, ‘and countries, so great was their faith in Him, that they brought their sick and laid them “in the streets, and besought Him that they might touch if it were but the border of His garment, and as many as touched Him wits made whole” (Mark vi.) Blind Bartimseus cried unto the Lord for msrcy. “Aud Jesus said unto him, go thy way; thyfaith bath made thss whole” {Marker.} When Jesus touched the syss of two blind men that came into the house where He was, He said unto them, “according to your faith bs it unto you” (Matthew ix. 29.) A certain cripple “beard Paul speak , who steadfastly beholding him, and perceiving that he had faith to be healed, said with a loud voice, Stand upright on thy feet. And he leaped. aud walked” (J.cts xiv. 9. 1U)

106 TIE KINGDOM Of GOD.

Many other examples might be given to show that the power

of healing was manifested through faith. Sometimes the faith of others was exercised in behalf of the sick, as examples: A

woman of Canaan sought a blessing for her daughter, who' was grievously vexed with a devil. “Jesus answered and said unto her, 0 woman, great is thy faith: be it unto thee, evenasthou wilt” (Matthew xv.) A centurion exercised faith in behalf of his servant, who was sick of the palsy. “And Jesus said unto him, Go thy way; and as thou hast believed, so be it done-unto thee. And his servant was healed in the self-same hour”

(Matthew viii.) A certain man whose son had been tormented of the devil from a child, says to Jesus, “If thou canst do any thing, have compassion on us and help us. Jesus said unto him, If thou canst believe, all things are possible to him that believeth. • And straightway the father of the child cried out, and said with tears, Lord, I believe: help Thou mine unbelief” (Mark ix.) The devil was rebuked, and his son was liberated.

Jairus, whose daughter lay at the point of death, came to Jesus, and fell down before Him, and requested Him to go and lay His hands upon her, that she might be healed. While on the way to his house, one met them, saying, “Thy daughter is dead: why troublest thou the-Master any further? As soon as Jesus heard the word, that was spoken, He said unto, the ruler of the synagogue, Be not afraid, only believe” (Mark v.) And Jesus restored his daughter to life agaih. Many other instances are recorded where friends exercised faith in behalf of the afflicted.

Therefore, it may be considered as a general law that sick

and afflicted were healed, either through their own faith, or the faith of some of their friends. There may be some rare instances where the blessing is bestowed through the faith alone of the administrator.

If is .the. general opinion of modern churches that the prin

cipal object of miracles was to do away unbelief. But when

Jesus went’into His own country, among His old acquaintances, He marveled because of their unbelief (/?ee Murk vi. 5.) “And He did not many mighty works there because of their unbellef” [Matthew xin) But according to the ideas of the false techers of modern times, He should have performed

^SE KINGDOM OF GOD. iO7

greater works there, than anywhere else.. As they consider signs to be for the convincing of the unbeliever; therefore the greater the unbelief, the greater should be the signs. When

He found His own countrymen ’ so very unbelieving, He should,' according to modern notions concerning the object of signs, have performed far more splendid and magnificent miracles there, ‘ than He did in any other region where their unbelief was not so great. But the facts of'the case were directly the reverse. The greater the wickedness and unbelief of a people, the less were the mighty works performed among them. So among

the Christian churches, as their unbelief increased, the mighty works decreased. And when the people became hardened in apostasy and unbelief, all mighty works ceased, and the salva tion ceased also.

Thus it will be seen, that the signs and blessings of the

gospel are enjoyed only by faith. The greater the faith, the greater . will be the manifestations of the miraculous power of God.’ The miracles will decrease as faith decreases; and cease when faith ceases. The miraculous signs bestowed "upon believers in this life, are blessings far inferior to the blessings of a glori •' ous resurrection and eternal life. .' But he that has not faith sufficient to obtain the miraculous signs, or smaller blcssingsJ how can . he obtain faith sufficient to receive the greater bles sings? If the smaller blessings are withheld for the want of faith, will not the greater blessings be withheld for a like reason? If a person has not means enough to buy himself a coat, how can he expect to purchase a splendid habitation? So likewise, if a person has not faith enough to obtain the miracul ous .signs promised, how . can ho expect to ’ obtain a glorious mansion in the kingdom.of God? If his faith is so weak that, it will not procure for him the smaller . blessings, ’ he may be

■ much more assured that the same weak faith will . not procure

for him ’the greater blessings.

Jesus said, as we have already * quoted,_that “AH things are

possible to him that believeth/j Jesus also said, ..“Have faith ’ in God. For verily, I ssy unto you, that whosoever shall say unto this mountain, Be thou removed, and be thou cast into the sea; and shall not doubt in his heart, but shall believe that those thingswhich he saith shall come to pass; he shall have 108 THE KINGDOM OF GOD.

whatsoever he saith. Therefore, I say unto you : What things soever ye desire, when ye pray, believe that ye receive them and ye shall have them” [Mark xi. 22, 23, 24), This promise was not confined to the apostles and early saints, for the term, “whosoever,” embraces all mankind who shall have faith, in

every age throughout the world. Who can read these precious promises of our Savior, without perceiving iD the plainest light, the awful apostate condition of the churches? They are with out faith—without any confidence in God. They despise those who are sincerely seeking after the ancient faith. Both from the pulpit and from the press they boldly avow their infidelity in the above promises, and say all manner of evil against those who do believe them. They will greatly praise up the faith of the ancient saints, and build synagogues and chapels to their memory; but for any person to ‘teach that the same faith is necessary now, is, in their estimation, the highest blasphemy. 0 ye hypocrites! Why do you profess to be the followers of Christ, and yet deny His promises? 0 ye blind guides! Why do you deceive the people with a form of godliness, and yet deny the promised powers? Why do you make void the' pro mises of Jesus through your unbelief and wicked traditions ? Why do you, through great swelling words of man’s wisdom, pervert the truth, and deny the inspiration of the Holy Ghost and the gift of revelation and prophecy? Why do you preach for hire, and through covstsoustsis make merchandise of the people, while the poor and the needy are crying lor bread 7 0

ye wicked and corrupt teachers! Ye hirelings! Why do you, through your mock piety and cunning craftiness, not only close the gates of heaven upon yourselves, but hedge up the way of others who would know the truth and be saved? How can you escape the vengeance of eternal fire? How long will the Lord suffer you to practice your deceptions and wickedness? The

hour of your judgment is nigh ! Howl, ye apostate churches, for the miseries which shall come upon you! The day of fierce vengeance is at hand, and yc shall utterly perish from the earth! _

The Church of Christ is called the body of Christ. “Now

ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular” [I. Cor. xii. 27). We shall^ere give the names of - the different mem-

THE KINGDOM OF GOD. 109

bers, composing the various parts of the body or Church of Christ. “God hath set some in the church, first, apostles; secondarily, prophets; thirdly, teachers; after that miracles; then gifts of healing, helps, governments, diversities of tongues'” (Verse 28). These members of the body were joined together upon one common principle which I have already

explained in Chapter II. of this treatise. They were all intro* duced into the church through faith, repentance and the ordi nances, Paul says, “By one spirit are we all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free; and have been all made to drink into one spirit’ (Verse 13).

This one body into which all members are baptized, is quick

ened and animated in all its parts by one spirit. The opera tions of the Spirit in different parts of the body, are various. “To one,” says Paul, “is given by the Spirit the word of wis dom; to another, the word of knpwledge by the same Spirit; to another, faith by the same Spirit; to another, the gifts of healing by the same Spirit; to another, the working of mira cles; to another, prophecy; to another, discerning of spirits; to another, divers kinds of tongues; to another, the interpre tation of tongues; but all these worketh that one and the selfsame Spirit dividing to every man severally as He will” ( Verses, 8, 9, 10, 11). Paul has here so clearly described the Church of Christ, that none need be at a loss when they have found it. Fvery faithful member of the body of Christ pos sesses some gift of the Spirit. All the churches now on the earth can compare themselves with this scriptural pattern ; if they do not resemble -the pattern, they may know at once that they are not the body or Church of Christ. If they have no apos tles nor prophets—no officers that can receive the word of wis-. dom, and the word of knowledge • by the inspiration of • the Spirit—if they have no member possessing the gift of healing —no worker of miracles—no beholder of visions or discerner of spirits—no speaker in tongues—if they have none of these members of the body of Christ, then they have nothing .that-resembles the pattern, and, therefore, they cannot possibly be the Church of Christ.

i to TIE KINGDOM OF GOD

The body of Christ is wholly made of the above named

members. To do away with the least member there mentioned would produce a schism in the body, aod it would he imper fect like the human body, with one of its members lacking. ’ The body, or church, like the human body, would become more aod more imperfect aod mutilated in proportioo to the usefulness and number of the above members that are. done away. Aod when all the members or parts of the body vanish, it ceases to exist oil the earth. It is an admitted fact that the greater part, if not all of the members described by Paul are done away, and considered unnecessary at the present day. Aod as the body or church is nothing, separate and apart from its members; therefore, where they cease, the body must cease also.

There are many parts of the human body that are essential

to its existence, aod without which, the body must inevitably perish ; such for examples, as the mouth—the heart—the lungs—the stomach—the liver—the bowels, and many others too numerous to mention. Deprive ’ the body of either of these essential parts, and all other parts will perish also. Two

of the most prominent parts or members of the body of Christ are, “First, apostles; secondly, prophets." These may be con sidered the eyes and mouth-picce of the body.' Take these

away, and the body is left in total darkness without eyes to see with, or a mouth through which to receive the nourish ment essential to its existence. ’ If, therefore, only these two mem bers were to cese, all the other members would speedily perish, and the Church of Christ would cease to exist among men.‘ The apostate churches have had neither of these members for upwards of seventeen centuries, therefore, during that time, they have had no eyes nor mouth through which they could receive light and nourishment.

If the mouth and eyes of the human body were to be

destroyed, the human spirit would take its flight, and the body would soon become a mass of putrid corruption, sending forth a most offensive stench, engendering pestilence and disease, and affecting the health of all who should come within its nauseous influence. Such would be the fatal consequeuces attending the church should they So far depart from God as to

7

TOE K^NGDMI OF GOD. Bl

lose inspired apestles and prophets, the first twt essential and most important members which Ged placed in the body. If

these members were taken away, the Holy Spirit, which is the life ef the church, would take its flight, even as the human spirit flees from the mortal body, when its essential parts are destroyed. When the Holy Spirit takes its departure, the

' body, er church, is left in a lifeless state; all the miraculous
