operatiens of the Spirit cease.

Id ancient timps, after apostles and prophets ceased, the

other members tf the body began immediately tt die fer want of nourishment; the member possessing the gift tf healing— the worker ef miracles—the speaker with ttDgues—the inter preter of tongues, and all other members, withered away and died, leaving a mass of putrid corruption whose nauseous stench and abominable filthiness have spread forth a deadly malaria am.oDg all nations.

It is in vain ftr the apostate churches tt endeavor tt prove

themselves tt be the body of Christ, by pretending that they have one tr twt tf the members still in existence; for Paul enquires, “If they were all tne member, where were the body?” (Verse 19). If every part,-of tur bodies were destroyed, except hands and feet, they ceuld . in nt wise con stitute a living body; so, likewise, if every member of the church were done away, except prefessed teachers, and some two or three other pretended members of different functions, these ceuld nt more constitute a living church, than hands, and arms, and feet, and legs, could constitute a living man. The Holy Spirit would no more dwell in these pretended frag ments tf the church, which are falsely said tt still remain, than the human spirit would dwell in the hands, feet, or legs, after the rest of the body was gene.

/ Reader, would it not be marvelously strange to beheld

hands, feet, and legs moving, acting and performing their accustomed functions after all the rest of the body was destroyed ? Yet this would not be any more strange, than it is tt see teachers and some few other pretended members, endeavoring to move, and act, and perform certain other func tions, after Dine-tenths tf the most important and vital mem bers tf the church have been done away ftr centuries. As

• s I 12 THJS KINGDOM Ob' UUD.

well might you undertake to retain life in an isolated human hand, as to retain life in teachers for centuries • after apostles, prophets, workers of miracles, etc., have ceased.

Paul says, “The eye cannot say to the hand, I ha^e no need

of thee; nor again, the head to the feet, I have no need of you” ( Verse 21). But in dirct opposition to this instruction, the apostate teachers of modern times say to the worker of miracles, I have no need of thee. And their pastors say to the speaker with tongues, and the interpreter of tongues, we have no need of you in the body. It matters not how feeble, or how inferior in use some members are, when compared with others, yet none can be dispensed with. “Nay,'’ says Paul, “much more, those members of the body, which seem to be more feeble, are necessary” ( Verse 22). If the speaker with tongues, or the interpreter of tongues, is considered a more feeble member, and not as useful as the prophets or apostles; yet Paul says expressly, that such “are necessary.” There

fore, for a teacher or pastor to say that they are not necessary7, is to come out’in direct opposition to the scriptures.

How superlatively ridiculous it would be for the hands and

feet to rise up in rebellion to the eyes—the mouth—the heart —the lungs—the bowels—the breast—the neck, and say, we have no need of you: we can get along without your assist ance; you are useless appendages to us, hands and feet: we can feel and walk without your help. And yet as a parallel to this, the teachers and pastors of our day have arisen up in rebellion to Paul’s words, and have said to apostles—prophets —the healer of the sick—the worker of miracles—the beholder or discerner of spirits—the speaker with tongues—the inter preter of tongues—we have no need of you: we can get along without your assistance, you are all unnecessary parts of the body: you are perfectly useless to us pastors and teachers: we can perform all the functions of our office without your aid.

Such has been the state of the apostate churches for the last seventeen hundred years. And such is the awful darkness that now reigns in their midst.

It is in and through the body or church of Christ that the

Spirit manifests itself: “The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal!” (Verse 7). It is, there

7

TOE KTOGDOM OF GOD. 113

fore, by these manifestations that every man in the church is profited. There is' as much necessity for these various mani festations now as anciently. Paul mentions in this chapter nine different gifts or manifestations of the Spirit. All churches which have not these miraculous manifestations have nor the Holy Spirit; and without the Spirit they are none of Christ’s.

The distinguishing characteristic^ between true and false

ohurches are so evident that none need be mistaken. The

one enjoys the Holy Spirit with all its gifts, as set forth in the

word of God; the others profess to enjoy the Spirit, but have none of the gifts and operations ascribed to it. The only way by which we discover that the human body is animated by the human spirit, is by its operations; so likewise, the method by which we determine that a church enjoys the Holy Spirit is by its diversity o£ operations or manifestations. If these cease, we have every reason to believe that the Holy Spirit has departed also.

Among all nations, and in all ages of the world, whenever

the Holy-Spirit has been given, it has exhibited itself in sup ernatural gifts. These gifts were given, not only for the bene fit of the church in this life, but to prepare them for still greater blessings in the world to come. It is altogether a mistaken idea to suppose-that these . gifts were merely given for the convincing of unbelievers. ’ Paul says expressly, that the gifts which were given by our Lord after His ascension were intended for other, purposes. “When He (Christ) ascended up on high, He led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men.” (Eph. tv. 8.) “And he gave some apostles, and some prophets, an'd some evangelists, andsome pastors and teachers.’’ ( Verse 11.). These, together with numerous other gifts, were

given, not merely to establish the truth of Christianity, but as Paul says, “For the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ: til) we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ: that we henceforth be no

more children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with

every .wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning 1H TFIE KINGDOM OF GOr.

craftiness, whereby they lie Id wait to deceive; but speaking

the truth in love, may grow up into Him all things, which is

the head, even Christ: from whom the whole body fitly joined

together and compacted by that which every joint supplieth,

according to the effectual working in the • measure of every

part, maketh increase of the body, unto the edifying of itself

in love.” .(Verses 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.)

By these declarations we discover the objects which the

Lord has in view, by giving gifts unto men. -One object i s declared to be “For the perfecting of the Saints." It is very evident from the whole tenor of the scripture, that unless the

Saints are perfected they can never enjoy a perfect salvation. The only plan which Jesus has devised for the accomplish-meat of this great object, is through the medium of the spiritual gifts. When the supernatural gifts of the Spirit

cease, the Saints cease to be perfected, therefore they can have no hopes of obtaining a perfect salvation. To do away

from the Church, apostles, prophets, and other gifts, is to do away' the great plan which heaveD has devised for the perfec

tion and final salvation of the righteous.

The author of the epistle to the Hebrews 'urges upon the

Saints the-necessity of “going on unto perfection,” (see chap. vi. 1), but this would be impossible for those churches

who have no apostles, prophets, and other gifts which Jesus gave after His ascension. Such churches could not-“goon

unto perfection,” for they have lost, and continue to do away

the very gifts which were’ intended to accomplish that

object.

Has Jesus anywhere in His word told us that His plan of

perfecting the Saints should cease, and that mankind would

introduce a better, one? If not, why then should we not pre

fer our Savior’s plan iu preference to all others? Why do

away the powers and gifts of the Holy Ghost, which were

intended, not merely for the convincing of unbelievers, but

for the perfecting of believers ? In every nation and age * where believers exist, there the gifts must exist to perfect

them, otherwise they would be altogether unprepared for the

reception of the still greater powers and glories of the eternal

world. If there were no unbelievers on the earth, still there

7

THE KINGDOM OF GOD. 115

would be the same necessity for the miraculous gifts that there was among early Christians; for if the whole world were believers in Christ they could not possibly be perfected with out these gifts, and hence they could notenter into the fullness of His glory.

It is, therefore, directly in opposition to the word of God

tor the apostate churches to declare that “the object of mirac ulous gifts was merely to establish the Christian religion, and that after that object was accomplished they were no longer necessary, and therefore ceased.” The word of God declares they were “for the perfecting of the Saints;’’ and, therefore, wherever there are Saints, thete the gifts are needed, not merely to establish the truth by supernatural evidence, but to perfect those who already believe. _ _

Another great object which the Lord has in view, in send

ing gifts unto men, is “the work of the ministry.” Without these gifts the “work of the ministry” never could be carried on; without inspired apostles and prophets the gifts of revel ation and prophecy cease’, and where these cease the work of the ministry ceases. The apostate churches have no more authority for taking away ^he gifts of apostles and prophets, than they have for taking away the gifts of pastors and teachers. There is precisely the same evidence for doing away the whole of the gifts, as there is for doing away a part

and pretending to retain the Others. “The work of the min-* istry” is clearly manifested in the scriptures. It is required to preach the gospel to all nations in the different tongues and languages of the earth. The ministry is required to receive revelations for the benefit of themselves and all tbe Saints, reproving by revelation those who need reproof; comforting those who need comfort; forewarning the Church of approach ing judgments; pointing out by the spirit of revelation a way of escape; revealing doctrine and principle in relation to things both temporal and spiritual, aud unfolding all things necessary tor the perfection and eternal exaltation of the righteous. Besides this, the ministry are to lay on hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, and for the healing of the sick, and administer all other ordinances of the Church. There

fore, without the supernatural powers and gifts of the Holy

116 THE KINGDOM OF GOD.

Spirit the “work .of the ministry” would cease, and when

that ceases men cease to be saved.

Paul declares, as we have already quoted, that the gifts

were given “for the edifying of the body of Christ.” But

the various bodies or apostate churches declare boldly, that

the gifts are no longer necessary in this age of learning and

refinement. Now, say they, we can be edified by learned

divines who have become eminently qualified by a long course

of study in . our great theological institutions. Now, they

exclaim, we have a glorious substitute in the stead of the

inspiration of the Holy Spirit. . In the first age of Christian

ity—in the days of ignorance and darkness, the gifts of the

spirit were given to edify the Church; but now, we have

become so learned and enlightened, we need some better plan

than the one devised in that day of ignorance; then they

knew no better than to be edified through the gifts of the

Spirit, but now we have sought Gut a plan far superior ; then

they had nothing but knowledge and certainty, and were all

of one mind, but now we are blessed with the opinions and commentaries of uninspired men, fill differing and contradict ing one another, dividing us in our sentiments and doctrines. Oh, how great is the wisdom of our modern divines! How immensely superior are opinion and guess-work to certainty and knowledge! Then they had nothing but direct revelation —the spirit of prophecy, visions, and the ministry of angels to guide them into the truth, but now we have advanced to the high and exalted privilege of being taught by men who despise new revelation and the gifts of the Spirit, and favor us with their superior opinions, and creeds and articles of religion. Great is the plan devised by human wisdom, for the edifying of the church; God’s plan can be dispensed with ’ now as unnecessary. This is the language of modern Christ endom if we are to judge from their opposition to the gifts which Paul says, were given for the “edifying of the body of Christ.”

That no one need be mistaken, and suppose the gifts in the

future ages of the Church to be unnecessary, Paul says expressly, that they shall continue for the purposes which he specifies, “Till we all come in the unity of the faithy and of

7

TOE KINGDOM OF GOD. 117

the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.” This

pHts the subject beyond all doubt and controversy; all can see that the gills were intended as long as there was a Church of the Saints that needed perfecting and edifying. If the mod ern churches of Christendom have not attained to the unity of the faith and knowledge—^ all - the perfection and fullness of Christ, they certainly need the gifts until they shall arrive at that state. The period when the Saints shall attain to the perfection and fullness of Christ is very clearly and - definitely unfolded by the apostle in his first epistle to the Corinthians. “Charity‘never faileth: but whether there be prophecies, they shall fail; whether there be tongues, they shall cease; whether there be knowledge, it shall vanish away. For we know in part, - .and we prophesy in-part. But when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away.” (xin 8, 9, 10.) “For now we see through a glass darkly; but then face to face; now I know in part.; but then 1 shall know even as also I am known.” ( Verse 12.)

Thus it. will be seen that the gifts were not to. cease until

“that which is perfect is come”—until we see the Lord/ace to face—until we know as we are known. Then tOngues will cease, and the heavenly glorified throng will all speak the same language. Then prophesying in part will be done away, for the knowledge of the - future will be fully understood. Then knowledge in part shall vanish away and the Saints will know in full. Then the day of perfection will come, and all the Saints shall enjoy the fullness of Christ, and see Him no longer -through a glass darkly, but face to face. Until that day of glory and perfection shall arrive, all the spiritual gifts will be indispensably necessary, without which the Saints can never attain to that great salvation promised.

Another object for which the miraculous gifts are given

unto men, is to keep them from delusion. They are given that the saints “henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in, wait to deceive.” The very reason why the apostate JcbuTchsi have for the last seventeen centuries been carried

118 TIE KINGDOM OP GOD.

about by the doctrines, creeds, and traditions of uninspired

men who have craftily deceived • them—is because they lacked;

the gifts which Paul says were giveD.as an effectual perventa-

tive against such winds of doctrine. Ail churches which have

not the gifts, are already deceived and deluded. If it were

possible, these popular and learned impostors would deceive

the very elect; but this is impossible, for the elect enjoy the

gifts which will detect with the most unerring certainty every

imposition, • however plausible and popular it may be.

x The Papist and Protestant churches of modern times, not

withstanding the greatness of their numbers and their exceed

ingly great popularity—are impositions, under the pious name

of Christianity, of the most glaring and dangerous kind./

Their cunning, learned, arch-impostors, have multiplied

their followers • to millions, and flooded all Europe and Amer

ica with their pernicious doctrines. Thousands of the honest

and unwary are annually" led away by these fatal delusions

under the false and vain suppositions that they are embrac

ing Christianity. Instead, however, of embracing the Chris

tian religion of the New Testament, they have only embraced

somo traditional forms that bear but a faint resemblance to it,

while its .miraculous powers, gifts and blessings are entirely

unknown among them, and indeed, are considered as alto

gether unnecessary, Oh, apostate Christianity! Oh, mod

ern Christendom! Thou, that corruptest all nations with

thine abominations, and makest merchandise of the souls of

men! Oh ! that thou didst but know the day of thy visita

tion—the hour of God’s-judgments—and wouldst awake from^

the awful slumber of ages! But alas! Thine eyes are closed,

no more to be opened, until they are lifted up in torment, in

the midst of lamentations,, and woes, and miseries, and hopless

despair!

Seventh.—The rights, privileges and btessings, promised-to

the faithful obedient subjects in a future life.

Eternal life is the greatest of all the gifts of God. It is a

blessing, promised to all the faithful subjects of His kingdom.

The hopes of a future life• of happiness that will never end,

serve to comfort and cheer them through all the sorrows and

tribulations of the present lie./ We shall endeavor to point

TOE KINGDOM OF GOD. 119

out the nature of that eternal life, promised to the children of the kingdom. “This is life eternal, that they might know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent.” (John xxii. 3.) It is not enough merely to have a knowledge of the existence of the Father and Son; but to know them aright is to understand their character--their attributes—their glory—and. the nature of the laws which they have ordained for the government of all happy, glorified, and intelligent beings. Such knowledge, when once obtained, is eternal life. Eternal life is not merely to believe on the testimony of others in the existence and attributes of God, but it is-to obtain something more than a belief; it is to obtain a certain knowledge. Such knowledge can only be obtained by direct and immediate revelation. “No man knoweth the

, Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father,

save the Son, and be to whomsoever the Son will reveal him.” [Matt. xi. 27.) All men can believe in the existence of God on the testimony of others; but no man can know

God only by revelation * __

Hear this, ye that deny new revelation, fear and trem»

ble for yourselves; for .you can in nowise inherit eternal life, without knowing 'the poly true God, and Jesus Christ whom He hath sent; and you can in nowise know them without you receive a new revelation. Peter did not obtain his knowl edge that Jesus was the Christ, only by a new revelation. Jesus said to Peter, “Blessed art thou, Simon Barjona; for flesh and blood hath not revealed ’ it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven.” [Matt. xvi. 17.) No man can know God unless “the Son REVEAL Him.'- Hence we can per ceive, that .eternal life can only be enjoyed by a people who believe in, and receive new revelation. All others are in uncertainty and doubt, like the apostate churches, who do not believe in any later revelations than the New Testament, which plainly proves, that they have not attained to the knowledge of God, and therefore, eternal life is pot among them. . __ __

: But the children of the kingdom have a knowledge of both

the Father and the Son. through the medium of new revela tion; therefore, eternal life is with them. Their happiness

120 TIE KINGDOM OP GOD.

and joy in eternal life will increase as their knowledge of the

glory, power, wisdom, and goodness of God increases; and

this knowledge will increase only through the medium of new

revelation. Hence the whole system of salvation and eternal

life, and the increase of knowledge and happiness, are founded

upon continued revelation to the children of the kingdom

throughout all ages in this world, and in. all worlds to

come.

We have in this treatise briefly touched upon some, of the

most important subjects connected with the kingdom of God.

We shall now proceed to give a summary statement of some

of the leading arguments contained in the foregoing.

l 1.—We’ have endeavored to point out the nature and char

acter of the great Supreme governing Power of the universe,

consisting of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. The

person of the Father consisting of a most glorious sub

stance. called Spirit, which we have shown must have exten

sion and parts, and consequently must be material. Without

these qualities no substance could exist.

. The Son is in the express image of the Father, and is also a

material being. The same material body that was crucified

and laid in the tomb, arose again. The same flesh—the same

bones were reanimated by 'the same material spirit. This

glorious compound of flesh, and bones, and spirit—sill mater

ial, ascended into heaven to dwell in the presence of the glori

ous personage of the. Father, of whose express image and

likeness He was the most perfect pattern. Therefore, from

the description given of J esus we are irresistibly l ed to the

conclusion, that both He and the Father must appear, so far

as it relates to form and size, very much like man. If then,

both of these glorious personages are about the size of man,

they must, like man occupy a finite space of but a few cubic

feet in dimension ; and, according to the admitted truths of

philosophy, no substance can 'be in two or more places . at the

same time, therefore neither the Father nor Son can, consist

ently with those truths, be in two places at once. Revealed

truths never will contradict any other truths. The revealed

TEE KINGDOM OP GOD. 121

truths contained in the Bible, inform us that God is every where, sustaining and upholding all things, and that in Him we live, and move and have our being. How can these important truths of divine revelation be reconciled with other admitted truths of philosophy which are equally certain? They can be reconciled in no way only by admitting the omni presence of the Holy Spirit. This all-powerful substance extends throughout the material universe, uniting and ming ling with all other ’ matter in a greater or less degree, not absolutely filling all space, for then there would be no room for other matter, but like the rays of light or heat, existing in different degrees of density in different parts of space. By it all things are governed in the most perfect order and wis dom, according to the will of the Father and the Son. This view of the subject does not necessarily do away a personal Spirit, acting in conjunction with the other two persons of the Godhead; for myriads of personal spirits could be organ ized out of the inexhaustible quantities which exist, and still an abundance would be left to govern and control the various departments of the universe where those personages could not.always be present.

other officers of the kingdom of God, must be called and ordained by the inspirattom of the Holy -Ghost; and that

.without new revelation these officers never could be

qualified to perform the various duties of their calling. We

have also proved that the officers of the kingdom have the authority to administer the word, the water, and the Spirit, according to certain conditions, and through certain ordin ances in the name of Jesus.

tion, 'and the conditions to be complied with on the part of man. These conditions are, faith, a humble repentance, an immersion in water for the remission of sins, the gift of the Holy Spirit through the laying on of hands, and a strict observ ance of .every other requirement of heaven, even unto the emj.

• 4.—We have proved from the dealings of God with His people in all ages, that continued revelation is absolutely '

122 THE KINGDOM OF GOD.

necessary for the well-being of the Church, and for its exist

ence among men—that new circumstances are constantly

requiring new information from heaven, adapted to these cir

cumstances ; and that the Church in one age neyer could * learn its whole duty from revelations given to the Church in a „

former age.

5.—We have urged the Saints to cul tivate'such a disposi

tion and character as would best correspond with the word

and spirit of Christ.

the supernatural gifts of the Spirit, tWr miraculous signs

promised to believers, and every blessing promised under the

gospel dispensation, are all necessary in the Church noiw and

should be earnestly sought after by all the faithful Saints—

and that no church have any reason or scripture by which

they can suppose themselves to be the Church of Christ,

unless they believe in and enjoy those miraculous powers.

to the laws and ordinances of the kingdom—a paradise of rest

—a glorious resurrection—an eternal life of happiness—and

an everlasting inWrritanar upon the new earth, where they

shall reign as kings and priests for ever and ever. These are

the subjects w WOcW we have endeavored to elucidate in this

small treatise. They are subjects with which every man throughout the world should be well • acquainted, however imperfect they may have been set forth in the foregoing pages, they are none the less . important.

/The Almighty has decreed to rend and break in pieces all

earthly governments—to cast down their thrones—to turn and

overturn, and break up the nations—to send forth His mes

sengers, and make a-way for the establishment of the ever

lasting kingdom to which all others must yield, or be pros

trated never more to rise. Awake then, 0 ye nations, for with you, the Lord hath a controversy! llis kingdom is now

for the last time organized upon the earth—all nations are invited to become citizens—it is the only government of safety or refuge upon all the earth—it hath its seat in the everlast ing mountains—its dreadful majesty shan strike terror to the hearts of kjngs in the day of His power l Awake, for tdsebe

THE KINGDOM OF 006. 123

ous times are at handjX^^Natiotfs shall no longer sit at ease!

The troubled elements shall foment, and rage, and dash with tremendous fury I A voice is heard unto the ends of the earth 1. A sound of terror and dismay! A sound of natious rushing t6 battle—fierce and dreadful is the contest—mighty kingdoms -and empires melt away! The destroyer has gone forth—the pestilence that, waketh in darkness. The plagues of the last days are at hand, and who, shall be able to escape? None but the righteous—none but the upright in heart—none but the children of the kingdom. They shall be gathered out from among the nations—they shalTstand- in holy places, and not be moved! But among the wicked, men shall lift up-their voices, and curse. God because of His sore judgments, and die. And there shall be a voice of mourning and lamen tation unto the ends of the earth , for the cup of the indig nation of the Almighty shall be poured out without mixture of mercy, because they would not receive His messengers, but hardened their hearts against the warning proclamation— against the gospel of the kingdom—and against - the great preparatory work for the universal -reign of the King of

kings- and Lords of * lords..

124 DIVIDE AUTHENTICITY

DIVINE AUTHENTICITY

OF THE

BOOK OF MORMON.

BY ORSON PRATT.

INTRODUCTION—TO EXPECT MORE REVELATION 19 NOT

UNSRIPTURAL—TO EXPECT MORE REVELATION 19

NOT UNREASONABLE.
