HE Book of Mormon claims to be a divinely inspired

•A record, written by a succession of prophets who inhabited

ancient America. It professes to’ be revealed to' the present

generation for the salvation of all who will receive it, and for

the overthrow and damnation of all nations who --.reject it. ;

. This book must be either true or false. If true, it-is one of

the most important messages ever sent from God - to. man,

afecting both the temporal and eternal Interests, of every

people under heaven to the same extent and in .the same degree that the message of Noah afected the inhabitants of the old

world. ’ If false, it is one of the most cunning, wicked,. bold,

deep-laid impositions ever palmed upon the world, calculated

to deceive and ruin millions who will sincerely receive it-as the

word of God, and will suppose themselves securely built upon

OF TIE BOOK OF MORMON. 125

the rock of truth until they are plunged with their families into hopeless despair.

The nature of the message in the Book of Mormon is such,

that if true, no one can possibly be saved and reject it; if false, no one can possibly be saved and receive it. Therefore, every soul in all the world is equally interested in ascertaining its truth or falsity. In a matter of such infinite importance no person should rest satisfied with the conjectures or opinions of others: he should • use every exertion himself to become acquainted with the nature of the message: he should care fully examine the evidences of which it is offered to the world: he should, with all patience and perseverance, seek to acquire a certain • knowledge whether it be of God or not. Without such an investigation in the most careful, candid, and impartial manner, he cannot safely j’udge without greatly hazarding his future and eternal welfare.

If, after a rigid examination, it be found an imposition, it

should be extensively published to the world as such; the evi dences and arguments upon which the imposture was detected, should be clearly and logically stated, that those who have been sincerely yet unfortunately deceived, may perceive the nature of the deception, and be reclaimed, and that those who continue to publish the delusion, may be exposed and silenced, not by physical force, neither by persecutions, bare assertions,

• nor ridicule, but by strong and powerful arguments—by evi

dences adduced from scripture and reason. Such, and such only, should be , the. weapons employed to detect and overthrow false doctrines—to reclaim - mankind from their errors—to expose religious enthusiasm—and put to silence base and wicked impostors.

But on the other hand, if investigation should prove the

Book of Mormon true and of divine origin, then the import ance of the message is • so great, and the consequences of receiving or rejecting it-so overwhelming, that the various nations—to whom it is now sent, and in- whose lan guages it is now published, should speedily repent of all their sins, and renounce all the wicked traditions of their fathers, as they are imperatively commanded to do in the message; they should utterly reject both the Popish and-Protestant

126 blVINE AUTHENTICITY

V . ; _ _ ... • •'

ministry, together with all the churches which have been

built up by them or that have sprung from them, as being

entirely destitute of authority; they should turn away

from all the priestcrafts and abominations practiced by these

apostate churches (falsely called Christian), and bring

• forth fruits meet for repentance in all things; they should be

immersed in water by one having authority, and -receive - a

remission of their sins, and be filled with the Holy Spirit.)

After thus * being baptized into the kingdom of God, they

should seek to translate the Book of Mormon into every written

language of the earth, and send it forth by millions of copies

to«every nation, and not cease their exertions until all peopTe

have heard the glad tidings. Every synagogue, church, and

place of public worship should be thrown open to the servants

of God. Presidents, governors, and rulers—kings, lords, and

nobles, and all in authority, should set the example before the

mass of the people, by receiving with all meekness and humil

ity this great revelation of modern times. Every periodical

throughout their dominions should devote its columns to dis

seminating, far and near, among all classes, the evidences,

arguments, and reasons, which establish the divine authenticity

of so great and important a work. These are some of the pre

sent duties of both the American and European nations .if this

message be true. (

The great majority of the world, however^reject the Book.

of Mormon without the least examination as to its claims .

They have heard there was such a-book, but they know nothing

of its contents, only that it claims to be a divine revelation.!

They at once reject it as an imposture.’ Is this method of

judging justifiable? Has God ever authorized His creatures to-

judge, without an investigation, a matter that professes to .

involve their eternal salvation ? Has He ever informed the

world that they have enough revelation, or that He will never .

give them any more? All who have read the Bible know .

that He has given no intimations of the kind. r He has given

no grounds whatever for supposing that there is to be no more

revelation. Why, then, should the world be 'so presumptuous

as to reject a professed revelation as false without investiga .

tion?_ This method of judging is not only unjustifiable, hut

OF THE BOOK OF MORMON. ]2“

featful in its consequences. -As l ong as there is a possibility that man may receive more, he is in danger of losing his sal vation, by rejecting indiscriminately aH that comes. By this rash and unjustifiable-method of ’ udging, he is not only in danger, but he i s sure to lose his salvation if God should con-, descend to give more.

The conduct of millions in relation to the Book of Mormon

goes to show that they would reject all true revelations as well as false ones: they are determined to reject at all hazards, without the least inquiry, every thing under the name of new revelation. They seem to ’be absolutely certain, as 'their con duct abundantly indicates, that God will never favor men with. another communication of His will concerning them. .

To expose this popular, though fatal error, invented by

priestcraft in the ’early ages of the apostasy, and transferred to succeeding generations, will be the object of the following chapters. In the first, it will be shown that to expect more revelation is neither unsciuptural nor unreasonable , and in ' those which follow, it will be further shown, that the doctrine of continued revelation in the Church of God, is one that rests upon the most infallible testimony, being necessary for the sal vation of man, connected with which, the the divine authen TiCity OF THE BOOK OF MORMON WILL BE DEMONSTRATED.

TO EXPECT MORE ' REVELATION IS NOT UNSCRIPTURAL.

-. . — “

revealed to man all that He ever. intended to reveal, then a professed revelation would not require investigation; for it

would be known at once, that every thing of the kind was an imposition. It would be folly in the extreme to enquire whether a professed new revelation were . true or false; for if God had declared in His word that, no more was io be given, all writings or books vurpor01tg to be a new revelation could not be otherwise than false.'

New Testaments are the only ones which are to be received as divine revelation, then why do we not find some intimations in those books to that effect? , If God saw that man had enough, why did He not tell him so? His mind would then have been

e

128 DIYDTE AUTHENTICITY*

relieved from all dubiety on the subject. Then, ’ all nations and

generations would have known that the canon of scripture was

complete and full: then, there would not have been ’the least

possible chance of palming upon the world any more: then, it

would have been known that all. possible, communications

between God and man were, from thenceforth, cut off—that the

heavens were to be sealed up, and the mouth of the Deity to

be closed in a deep, profound and perpetual silence throughout

all future generations.

3.—If God never intended to speak to man after the first

century of the Christian era, it certainly would have been a'

great blessing to the human family, and saved many millions of

them from delusion to have told them of so important a

matter. But as God has failed to give any such notice, learned

divines have concluded to give the notice themselves: hence

they have invented “Articles of Faith,” in which their followers

are required to reject, under the penalty of excommunication,

all books professing to be of divine origin, except those named

in their “Articles/’ or those few which human wisdom has

selected and compiled into a Bible. This is as much as to say,

that the Bible contains all that God ever has given or ever will

give unto man, and you must not receive any more; and thus

the whole Protestant world are circumscribed and limited, and

bound down by their “Articles of Faith”—their “Creeds”—

and their “Disciplinsi. ” It matters not how important a message

may be sent, nor how great its accompanying evidences, they

are positively forbidden to receive it, because it does not happen

to be bound up with the rest of the books of the Bible.

• 4.—The learned and popular false teachers of modern times

who have so presumptuously rejected all revelation except the

few books of the Bible named in their ’“Articles,” have,

endeavoured to make their deluded followers believe that it was

contrary to scripture ’for any more books to be added to the

Bible, or for God to give any additional revelation to man.

As their strongest proof upon the subject they quote the follow ing text, spoken to John on the isle of Patmos, when in the act of finishing his manuscript: “For I testify unto every man

that heareth the words of the prophecy of this book, if any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him tbe

I <

OF THE book of mormon. 129

plagues that are written in this book; and if any man shall take away from the words of the book of this prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of life, and out of the • holy city, and from the things which are written in this hook” [Rev. xxvi. 18, 19). Here, it is supposed, is proof that the Bible is forever closed, and that the addition of any other reve lation is forbidden under the penalty of great plagues. But

every man who has read this text, knows that there is not the least intimation given in it about the Bible’s being closed. Such .a book as the Bible did not then . exist in its compiled state. The gathering together of the few scattered manu scripts which compose what is now termed the Bible, was the work of uninspired man which took place centuries after John had finished his manuscript. Among the vast number of pro fessedly inspired manuscripts, scattered through the world, man, poor, weak, ignorant man, assumed the authority to select a few, which, according to his frail judgment, he believed

•or conjectured were of God, but the balance not agreeing, per haps, with his peculiar notion of divine inspiration, were

rejected as spurious. The few, selected from the abundance,' were finally arranged into Jone volume, divided into chapter and verse, and named the Bible. Afterwards a set of cunning, wicked impostors, under the name of Protestant ministers, ' make their appearance, who finding themselves entirely desti tute of the spirit of prophecy, of visions, of revelations, and of every, other power and gift which always characterized the ministers of Christ, have endeavored to invent some cunning,1 crafty arguments, to • hide from the people their powerless, apostate condition, and make their deluded followers think that they are really genuine ministers of Christ. The best scheme to carry out their corrupt purposes and deceive the people, is, in their estimation, to tell them that God did not intend to reveal anything more—that the Bible contains all— that the caution not to add to the words of John’s prophecyJ

means not to add to the Bible. Thus the consciences of the common people become quieted, and they sincerely begin to think th&t the Bible contains all the sacred books ever given to man, and they at length become willing to subscribe to a set of cunningly-devised “Articles of Faith,” requiring them tQ renounce all others as spurious.

130 DIVINE AUTHENTICITY

5.—How do the Protestant world know that the compilers

of the Bible, in hunting up the sacred manuscripts which were widely ’ scattered over the world, one in one place and another in another, found all that were of divine origin? How do

they know that the compilers of the Bible found even the one- hhndrete part of the manuscripts that were sacred? And as

the compilers rejected many that they did find how do they knew but what some of the rejected books were equally sacred with those received into the collection ? Would not the prophecy of Enoch with which the Apostle Jude was familiar, and from which he makes a quotation relative to the second coming of Christ, be as sacred as any other prophecy of the Bible? Would not the book of Iddo, the seer-the book of Nathan the prophet—together with some twelve or fifteen other books and epistles, written by inspired prophets, seers, and apostles, and referred to in scripture, be as worthy of a place in the Bible as any that human wisdom has already compiled ? Would it have been any more a violation of the caution not to add to the words off John’s prophecy, for the compilers to have added the book of Gad, the seer, with the collection called the Bible, than it was for them to add to the volume the book of Ezekiel—the book of Solomon’s Song—the book of Matthew—the book of James, or any other book of the collection? If the bofk of John’ s prophecy means the Bible, as these false teachers assert, and if the Bible means a collection of all the sacred books written by inspired men, and if the adding and diminishing to the words of John’s prophecy mean adding and diminishing to the Bible, then the whole Protestant world are under the curse for diminishing many sacred books from the Bible which are certainly referred to as being written by inspired men, ’but which they in their “Articles of Faith” absolutely exclude and diminish from the Bible by prohibiting their deluded fol-' lowers from receiving only such as happens to be compiled-|

Should any of these sacred manuscripts hereafter be found, ’ the “Articles” and “Creeds” of men prohibit their reception. If they had happened to be found by the compilers of the Bible, they would have been sacred, but to be found afterwards renders them false. For men a few centuries ago to hunt up a few scattered manuscripts, and compile them into a Bible, was

OF TIE BOOK OF MORMON. 131

considered a very laudable undertaking, but for any man to

find a sacred book since that time is considered the highest blasphemy!

there is to be no more revelation after the caution is given, then all books purporting to be a revelation, and given after such caution, must be false.- Now such caution was given as

• early as the days of Moses. “Ye shall not add unto the word

which I command you, neither shall ye diminish ought from

- it” (Deut. iv. 2). The caution in John’s book must mean • the

same thing as the caution in the book of Moses; if the one means that there is to be no more revelation, the other means the same. Therefore, according to the arguments of modern divines, all the Old and New Testaments which have been added since Moses gave the caution must be false, and conse quently, they and all their followers must he under the eurse for believing in and advocating sixty-two other books as divine revelation, which they know were all given after the caution by Moses. Thus it will be seen, that if their application of these texts be correct, they are under a double curse; first, they are cursed in John’s revelations for diminishing some fifteen or twenty books from the compilation of the Bible; and, secondly, they are cursed in Deuteronomy for receiving sixty-two books which were added’ after the caution was given by Moses. If

modern divines, rather than subject themselves to a double

.curse should be willing to give up their perverted applications

of these texts, then what becomes of their scriptural argu ments against receiving more revelation? There is certainly no other application •of these • passages .that forbids additional revelation.

means nothing more nor less than to add words or sentences of our own to his book, so as to alter the meaning, and to publish such additions as the words of John. For Isaiah to have added to the words of the books of Moses, so as to alter their meaning, and to have represented Moses as the author of these altered writings, would have subjected him to a curse. But to receive, as he did, a separate and independent revelation was no more adding to the words-of Moses, than a deed conveying

132 DIVINE AUTHENTICITY

an estate in America would be adding to ter laws of England. If ten tesetand new revelations were to be given, it •fseld be no more adding to the words of lJben’t book than a message of the president of the United States dselh be adding to the words of a proclamation by•Qerrn Victoria. | No revelation

given from God needs any alterations, additions, or diminutions,' by the wisdom of man. If they need altering, God alone has the right to alter them, or to add to them, as He did iu the case of a revelation feice He gave to Jeremiad, ' deiah was burned by the king of Judah, but tytedfadhs Jeremiah was commanded to write all the words again,, “and terrr were added besides unto them many like wsrhs“Jr(«/rd. xxxti. 32).[ God has never prohibited Himself from giving drerlatisn as often as He pleases, neither has He prohibited Himself-from adding or diminishing words in case He sees it necessary. But •

woe unto that man dhs pretends to give a revelation, and is a deceiver; wWo adds, or diminishes, or alters a revelation feice God has given; such cannot escape the threatened judgments of the Almighty.

that the passages concerning adding and diminishing, so often referred to by the nrf-reerlttisn denier, hsrt not contain the

'most distant intimation that the day of revelation is gone by.

They never would have resorted to such a perverted application of tertr. passages if they had any better evidence in the scrip tures to sustain themselves.', The very fact that they so often

pervert 1^^ passages from their evident meaning, shows most

asnclesierly the weakness of their position, No other passages are susceptible of being so grossly misappiiedf It is under this seallsd covering that they endeavor to hide their apostasy and deceive mankind.

new revelation, some of the more ignorant have assumed that deeh Christ was lifted upon the cross, and cried, “It is finished,” it put an end to all further revelation. If this assumption be correct, neeh all the bsokt. of the New Testa mem, written years after, must be false. If Christ fihiteeh the wofk of revelation, when He exclaimed, “It is fihiserh, neeh the apostles must eaeerhrrh base impostors for prenendihg

OF I OO TOE BOOK OP MORMON. I OO

to receive revelation scores of years after this exclamation. All, therefore, who reject new revelation upon these grounds, are required by their own application of this saying, to reject all the writings of the New Testament: thus, in their heated zeal to oppose new revelation, they not unfrequently destroy the very books which they profess to believe.

10.—A saying of Paul to Timothy is sometimes referred to

by the enemies of new ' revelation, and applied in the most deceptive manner, in order to strengthen the world in the fatal delusion that God will no more speak with man: it reads as follows: “From a child thou hast known the holy scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation” {II. Timothy Hi. 15). The obj’ec-tor to new revelation argues, from this passage, that the scriptures with which Timothy was acquainted in his childhood, were abundantly sufficient to make him wise unto salvation, and consequently there was no need of any more. If this conclusion be correct, it would do away with all the scriptures of the New Testament; for Timothy when a child was only acquainted with the scriptures of the Old Testa ment, the scriptures of fho New ’Testament not being yet written. Thus, again, the' enemy of new revelation in his fan atical zeal to close up the volume of inspiration, has done away the very scriptures which he pretends so firmly to believe.

11 .—Modern false teachers, in order to sustain their imposi

tions, sometimes quote the following. “All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works” {II. Tim. Hi. 16, IT). They assert that this passage means

that “enough” scripture has been given to perfect the man of * God—that “enough” has been givcq to thoroughly furnish him unto all good works; but the word enough is not found in the passage: it reads, “all scripture is given, etc.” The righteous man has no authority from this passage to assume that he has enough, but he should continue to seek for “line upon line, precept, upon precept, here a little, and there a little;” and if he gives heed unto “all scripture” which God may condescend to reveal, it will perfect him, and thoroughly-

134 DIVINE AWTHE NTICITY •

furnish him unto all good works. This passage, therefore, leaves the man of God to be perfected by “all scripture” which God has given by inspiration, in early ages, or which He may give in latter times. He is not limited to any particular num ber of books which uninspired man has happened to find and compile into a Bible. Indeed, if the assertions of these false teachers- be true, then there - are several books of the New Testament which must be rejected ; for if the man of God had enough scripture at the time Paul wrote his epistle to Timothy, then the book of Revelations given on Patinos some years after, together with the book of John’s gospel, and several of the epistles, must be excluded from the Bible.

12.—Well-educated and learned divines have been so utterly

at a loss to find any scripture to sustain them in denying imme

diate revelation, that they have not hesitated to pervert, in the

most glaring manner, not only the foregoing passages, but some few others of a similar nature which they have culled from the Bible, and which they, and all persons with the least reflection, know have the most distant bearing upon the subject. They tell their flocks that no more revelation is to be expected, because St. Paul, in addressing the elders of the church at Ephesus, says, “I kept back nothing that was profitable unto you. I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God’ (^cts xx. 20, 27.) “All the counsel of God” having been imparted by St. Paul to the Ephc^sians, it is presumed that all further revelation was unnecessary. If this presump tion be correct, it would like the former presumptions, not only cut of from the Bible several of the epistles, but the book of John’s gospel, and the great revelation given on Patmos, all of which were certainly written years after Paul declared “all the counsel of God” to the elders of Ephesus. Paul, no doubt, had previously declared all the counsels which God had mani fested to him in relation to their welfare, but this did not pro hibit the Lord from revealing afterwards other counsels as the future circumstances of the Ephesians might require. Indeed, notwithstanding this saying of Paul, the Lord did, a long time after, give further revelations and counsels to this same church, through His servant John, on Patmos (see Zi’sw, ii. 1-8.) '

I •

OF TIE BOOK OP MORION, 135

cease when the '‘savanOy weeks” mentioned by Daniel had passed away.. The angel, Gabriel, said to Daniel, “UtaeISOend the maoOat, and consider the vision. Seventy weeks are deoet• mined upon thy people and upon the Holy City, to finish the trensgeassipn, and to make an end of sins, and to make recon ciliation foe iniquity, and to bring in aveelestitg eightapustass, and to seal up the vision and prophecy, and to anoint the Most Holy” (Daniel ix 23, 24.) Here the atamlas of new revalalion assert, that as soon as the Messiah came, and was ennolttad, and the seventy weeks had elapsed, “the vision and prophecy were sealed up.” But we ask, what vision and pro phecy were saalaa up? They reply, that all new ravelaolot by vision and peovhacy was then come to an end. If this wild conjecture be cpreact, then all the visions and prophecies, and eaveleOions, and books of the New Testament, given from fifty to a hundred years after the seventy weeks had ataaa, must be false. The vision and prophecy which God had given to Daniel, and which the angel commanded him to consider, no doubt were the ones which were to be sealed up, or to heta their fulfillment at the time therein specified. But to suppose that God was to give no more visions and prophecies after that time is contradicted by the fact that abundance of heavenly manifestations were given during the whole of the first cetOuey of the Christian aee, all of which new-revelation deniers must exclude from the Bible, or give up their varveelad application of this text.

revelation—namely, the declaration of Paul in relation to the cessation of some of the spiritual gifts. He says, “Charity never faileth ; but whether there be prophecies, they shall• fail; • whether there be tongues they shall cease; whether there be know ledge it shall vanish away” [I. Corinthians xiii 8.) Modern

ministers will read to' their followaes this passage, and very gravely tell them that the time when prophaclas wete tc» fail arrived upwards of sevatOeet centuries ago; but they ate very careful not to read the two following veesas- IisO ohaie heaters should find out the teue maatltg of the passage, and learn the very time when this event should happen. Paul, as
