MORE REVELATION IS INDISPENSABLY JEOESSARY-

more revelation is neither uueceipSueal tor ugrtaso'table;-httct, thtra is as great a probability that more will be given it our day, as in any former agt. The obi'scS of this. chapter is So show ShaS jpore revelation is lgdiereniably gocoesaeyT

First, for. the calling op officers in the church.

a work it any age or dieregeaSiot, is has boet noge by reve lations,. and not by mere impressions, or some utnefitable, internal fooliggiT which loavo She mign in ugcoetaitSy and doubt. Noah was callen-by sha word of tha-Larn to- bo a preacher of elgbtooustoes, and So build an ark. Abraham i _ Lot, Isaac, Jacob and Joseph, wort called by eavelatiag to por' form a great variety of duties. Mosts and Aaron wera pallon So Sho priost’s office by-tho word of Sho groat Jehovah. Seventy 0^^ of Seeaol ware callod by revelation So assist Moioe.-’ Joshua was appoitSod by the voen of tho Laen through Maeoe So ba his successor in leading Seeael. The Succeesare of Aaron wore appoltSon to tho priesthood by rovalaSiat. The Judgas of Israel Were callod by visions, by angels and by the igepira-Sion of the Spirit. Samuol was pallon by She voice of Sho Lord. And finally, all their oficare, wise men and prophets, down, to tha days of Malachi, were callon by naw ravela- tiot.

cattlguen tha sama. John, the eoearuttee of CheietT was callod by the spiriS of prophecy, as matieoetan through She angal Gabriel and bee eaSbee Zacharias. Jesus was pallon by His FaShar, and appointed a prissS eoeevae aeiae She oenae of Melchisedec: He is termed by St. Paul, “the Apostle agn

158 DIVINE AUTHENTICITY

High Priest of out profession.” Jesus, being an Apostle,

called othees lo ihe same office, and said unto them, “ye have noi chosen Me bul I have chosen you, and oedeinaa you, ohal ye should go and bring foeih feuit” [John xv.) When Judas fell through transgressioni the avpstlas did nol avvolnl another lo lake his bishopric through a maea imveasslot- bul they called upon the Lord lo show whom He had chosen; and “ihe lot fell upon Matthias”[Acts i. J5-2G). The satanly disciples were called by ihe word of the Lord. Paul and Barnabas were booh Apostles (see Acts xiv. 14), and wara set apart to ihe work of ihe ministry by new retaleiiot ih rough the inspired prophets and leechars, which wara in ihe chuech at Antioch (Acts xiii. 1-4.) Thai ihe aldars of ihe church at Ephesus were called by ratalellot, is atiaanl by the following language of Paul to them, “Take heed therefore unto yourselves, and lo all ihe flock ovee which the Holy Ghost hath made you over seers, io • feed the Church of God which He hath purchased with His own hlppd” (Actsxx. 28). Timothy, ihe first bishop of Ephesus, was epvoitled by pepphacy and by the laying on of hands'^. Tim. io. 14.) Titus, the first bishop of ihe CraOiats-was apvoinlad by the Apostle Paul “oo ordain eldees in every city;” ohasa aldaes were lo be praelnad after ihe metter, and in the way that Paul had avppiniad TituS (Titus i. 5.) And we have already seen that a spirii of prophecy was tacassary to ordain a bishop; and as Bishop Tious was io ordain elders in every cily afiee the pattern he himself had haat oraeitaa, he must, io have cateied oui his itsOeucOipns, have enjoyed ohe spirii of prophecy. If ihe elders of EpheSus were meaa over seers of ihe Church by ihe ratalaOion of the Holy Ghost, io is reasonable io infer, that eavelaoipn■ was nacassery lo the appoint, menl of alaaes in all other cities. Paul says, “As God hath

distributed * io every man, as ihe Lord hath eellaa every one,1 so let him walk,-and so ordain I in all churches” (I. Cor. vii.

17.) Paul did nol presume lo ordain in all churches, only such as were called of ihe Loed, and he ordained ihem according io ohai caHing; and such callings iouM only be meaa known by eatalallon.

4.—When mankind through their aVpsOesy lost ihe spirit of

prophecy and eata|alipt, they also lost ihe other suvartalerel

OF THE BOOK OF MORMON. 159

gifts of the Spirit, such as healing, miracles, tongues, interpre tations of tongues, etc. These gifts ceased, not all at once, but by degrees, until the spirit had entirely withdrawn, leaving only a powerless form. The necessity of revelations, visions, pro phesying^ ministry of angels and miraculous gifts, was never denied until mankind found themselves destitute of these pro mised blessings; when it was pretended that they were only designed for the first Christians; the people began by degrees to believe this wicked pretension, until, at Saneth, they boldly denied the necessity of every miraculous power. Millions in every succeeding generation have continued to walk in the foot- » steps of the early apostates, fulfilling in every respect the pre diction of Paul, that “in the last days perilous times should come; for men should be lovers of their own selves, covetous, etc.” “havir'g a form of godliness but denying the power thereof” (II. Tim. Hi. 1-5.) Notwithstanding the universality of this apostasy, yet the numerous religious bodies which enter into its composition, have had the daring presumption to still call themselves Christians, or the church of Christ. But if they were the church of Christ, then the miraculous powem and. gifts of Christ would be shown - forth among them, and their ministers, as formerly, would be called by revelation.. The Church of Christ cannot exist on the earth without an author ized ministry. This ministry cannot be called and authorized without new revelation. -“No man taketh this honor unto him self,” (that is the honor of the ministry), but he that is called of God as was. Aaron” [Heb. v. 4).

5.—Without new revelation every office in the Church would'

necessarily become vacant. It is true, that those who held office at the time revelation ceased, would still, during their natural life, continue to retain it, unless through transgression they should be legally deprived of it. If revelation .ceased at the close of the first century, it is not at all likely that any of the officers, then holding the authority, would be alive a cen tury afterwards; and as they would have no authority to ordain others without new revelation, when - they died, the author ity upon the earth would necessarily become extinct. How overwhelming the thought! Yet there is no conclusion more certain. If all offices became vacant there could be no aOOb

160 DIVINE AUTHENTICITY

tiabr to thc church by baptism; for it would be a great sin foi private members to assume the authority to baptize; hence, as roob artgose who had been baptized by authority were dead, the darlg would be entirely destitute of katg thc-officcrs and private members of the Church of Christ.. But when otficerr and members both ccase, what is left? bothibg at all. Hcmcc,

without continued revelation, the Church could no more con tinue in its existence on the earth, than a body could live with out the spirit. Therefore, if revelation ceased with the Apos tles, as the “Articles” ung “Creeds” of ‘men declare, every

•vvct gc of-authority, as well as the Church itself, must have

become extinct from the earth, as early at least as the third century ; since which time the earth Ius been cursed with priestcraft and apostasy, and with every species of wicked-bcss.

C—Since the Church with its authority and power Ius been

caught away from the earth, the great “mother of harlots” with all her ■"descebgubts has klasogcmourly assumed the

'aauhority of agminirtcribg some of the sacred ordinances of

the gospel. ThCy have blasphemed the name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, by using it without authority in their .ministrations They have gishoborcg the name of Christ, by calling their * powerless, apostate, filthy and most abominable churches, the Church of Christ. The whole Romish, Greek and Protestant ministry, from the pope down through every grade of office, are as destitute of authority, from God, as the devil and his angels. The Almighty abhors all thcir wicked pretensions, as Hc docs the very gates of hell.

V.— The great apostasy of the Christian church commenced

is the first pestur^, while there were yet inspired apostles and prophets in their midst;, hcncc Paul, just previous to his martyrdom, enumerates a great number who had “made ship wreck of their faith,” and “turned aside unto vain jangling; ” teaching “that the resurrection was already past,” giving “hcci to fuklcs and endless genealogies,” “doting about questions and strifes of dargs, dgcreotcume esvyings, ruilibgr, and evil surmis-mgs, perverse gisoutibgs of men of corrupt mibgr, us. dcsti- tutc of the truth, ruopasibg that gain is godliness.” This

uoartury hag become so general that Paul declares to Timothy,1

OF THE BOOK OF MORMON. 161

“that all they which are in Asia bt turned away from mt; ” and again he says, “At my first answer, no man stood with rnt, but all mtn forsook me;” he further states, that “thtrt art many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers,” “teaching thiugs which they ought not, for filthy lucre’s sake.” These apostates, no doubt, pretended to bt very righteous; for, says the apostle, “they profess that they know God; but in works they deny Him, being abominable and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate.” Near ’the close of tht first century, tht apostasy had become so universal that only seven churches throughout all Asia, - Africa, and Europe, were considered worthy of being either reproved or blessed by tht voice of reve lation ; and even these seven were so corrupted by tht doctrine of tht NicolaitaDts, and of Balaam, by tht fornications and adulteries of Utzebtl, and by losing thtir “first love,” and becoming “neither cold nor hot,” that tht Almighty considered “thtm, with a very few exceptions, as “0sa0,” and threatened

to “sput * them out of His mouth,” to cast them “ipto great tribulation,” and “kill their children with death,” to “fight

against them with tht sword of His mouth,” and to “remove the candlestick,” or church, “out of its plact.”

8.—That this apostasy, which had become so gol * miOgblt;'

while ytt inspired apostles wtrt-in thtir midst, was to greatly increase, instead of decreasing, is evident from the predictions of scripture. Paul prophesies that “tht day of Christ shall not comt, except there comt a falling away first;” that “evil mtn and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived.” As a reason for the strict charge which he gave to Timothy, ht predicts, that “the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine; but after thtir own lusts they shall heap to themselves teachers, having itching tars; and they shall turn away thtir tars from tht truth, and shall be turned unto ganlss.” The predictions concerning the apostasy were not expressed in a vagyt uncertain form of language, hut in tht clearest and most forcible terms. “Now the Spirit sptaketh expressly,” says Paul, ‘rthat in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving hetd to scduciiig spirits and doctrines of devils, speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their con science seared ivith a hot iron.”^ Peter prophesies that “thtrt

162 DININE AUTHENTICITY

shall be false teachers among you, who privily shall br'mg in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction; and many shall follow their pernicious ways; by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of; and through covetousness shall they with feigned words make merchandise of you” (11. Peter ii. 1, 2, 3.) These “fables,” “doctrines of devils,” and “damnable

heresies” which false teachers should introduce into the world, were to constitute the religion of future ages, rendering the state of society fearful in the extreme. Paul gives c pro phetic description of the religion of latter times as follows: “This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall

come;’ for men shall be l overs of their own selves’, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthank ful, unholy, without natm^ affection, truce breakers, false accu sers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of''pleasure more than lovers of God; having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof from such turn away. For of this sort are they which creep into houses, and lead captive silly women laden with sins, led away with divers lusts; ever learning, and never able to come to a knowledge of the truth. Now as

Jcnnes and Jambres withstood Mioses, so do these also resist the truth: men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith. But they shall proceed no further; for their folly shall ■ be made manifest unto all men, as their’s also was” (77. Tim. iii. 1-9.).

9.—It seems from the foregoing predictions, that the religion

t of the latter-dcys was to be most awfully corrupt; that its

teachers, instead of being sent by revelation from God, were to be heaped together by the people. These man-made teachers were to turn away-the ears of the people from the truth,. or from sound doctrine, and in its stead were to teach “fables,”

“doctrines of devils,” “damnable heresies,” “speaking lies in hypocrisy; ” they were to come “with feigned words,” or, “with great swelling words of vanity,” to “make merchandise of the people;” they were to have c “form of godliness,” but “the power” they were to deny; they were to meet with great

success id deceiving mankind; for “many were to follow their

OF THE BOOK OF MORMON. 163

pernicious ways.” Tbc people were to delight in nertr oodrr- less, devilish, ayoocritiaal, lying, damnable eeresirt, while tee way of truth was to be evil spoken of; and “braaete they reariveh not the love of tee truth,” God was to “send nerm strong delusions, that they should believe a lie, that they all might be damned who believed not tee truth, but had olrrsere in ehrighneoesness.” Such was to be-the religion of the latter

-ages, as odsoeeniaally hrtcribrh by the ancient apostles; and

such is tWe religion of the Papal, Greek and Pronrtnrnn

• chedahet of • the hinnrehna arhnery. The predictions drrr

etnrrrh eigaterh crhnerirs ago, and modern Chrisnehdsm exhibits a most perfect fulfillment. Instead of having apst-tlrs, OdooWett, and onhed inspired men in the church now, rrarivihg visions, dreams, revelations, ministry of angels and OrsoWrtirt for the calling of sfficrrt, and for the government of the church—they have a wicked, corrupt, uninspired oooe, or uninspired adcahiseoot, hithsps, clergymen, etc., wWo have a great variety of corrupt forms of gohlihrss, but utterly deny tWe gift of •devrlrniohi and every other miraculous osdrd dWiah always . aaadranedized .Christ’s ■Church.- Teese man-made, osdrrlest, Wypscrinical, false nraceers, “make mrrcWanhisr of tWe oroole..” by preaching for large salaries, amounting in many instances to tens of nhoesanht of dollars annually. They and neeid deluded yollodrds are drprohane ashcrrhihg the faith once delivered to the Saints. The faith which onar quenched tWe violence of fire, stopped the mouths of lions, divided danert, and controlled the powers of hanere, is discarded as unnecessary. The faith that inspired men with tee gift of drve- lrtioh—tean oorhrd the heaeeht and laidlhold on mysteries teat derr■hot lawful to be uttered—that unfolded the visions of the past and fetere—and that called down the angels of heaven to eat and drink with men on radte—is denied as being antrinahlr in this age. • The sound hoan•rihr taught by the aostnlrs which put mankind in the psttrssioh of thrtr glsriset gifts and 00deds cannot now be endured. The doctrines, commands, yrhlrt, traditions and creeds, of uninspired men, are now sub- tninunrh in the olrcr of direct inspiration from God. “They are ever lrrdnihg, but are never able to come to a knowledge of the truth.” Gersltdodk, conjecture, opinion, and, perhaps,

164 DTVINE AUTHENTICITY

in eama itetatcee, -a belief in regard to tha truth, are all that they aSSalg tov while a ktovlodga they do not obtain, because they deny now eavolatlag Sha only moans of obtaining it. This greaS multitude of ealeo teachers who have found their way into all nations, deceiving milliage, “rosisS the truth/’ catSage against She miraculous powors of she gOipalT and rojocS iterleae men, as “Jagtes and Jambres,” the magicians, did Mosss; but “shoir folly shall be made manifest unto all mon, as theirs also was;” yea. all nations shall soe She righteous judgments which shall epoonily ba poured out upon Shem, for they shall, like Pharaoh's bosS, porleb quickly eeom She earth.

10.—If the revelations cagSaiton in She sixty-six books of

the Old and Now Testaments, are Sha only onos to be eece^ven, it would bo impossible for any man sinco Sha apostasy, So prove from those books Shat ha was callod of God. Tha Bible cag-Sams the eocaen of She callings and commissions of many who lived during the first four thousand years; but is says noS one vaen about Sha palligfs and commissions of Sbaso who have lived during the last sovatt.oag cotSueios. Some who have soon the dilemma in which they are placed by rejecting new revela tion, havo eteeavoueod So extricate tbemsolvos from it, by pra- tognitg that She old commissions given to the apostlis are eue- ficient for all peeeagS purposis. But‘this places them in another dilemma squally as great; for how can any man learn wbetboe tha cammlielat given So the apostlis is applicable So himself or nos ? Without new revelation he could nevor know. Surely She apostolic commission doos noS authorize all mankind who should live in future agos; and if is authorizes a part only, Shen it. certainly would require now eovolaSlat So specify which raeS. Thereeoee. if wo wora to admit so absurd an idoa, thore still would be an equal tocoesity for new eevolaSlog. Bus com missions or callltfe given to ona man naver -die, nor tovee cam authorize agaSbar. Mankind have no more authority So peoacbT baptize, agn anmltiiior tha oedltagces of sha gaspolT by virtue of tha apostolic commission, Shan they have to ascend sha throno of Great Britain by virtue of sho commission given to King David.

11 —As tha church of'England and aSboe PeaSesSagSs do nos

profess to _ have received any new commission by revelation, but

OP THE BOOK OP MORMON. 165

on the contrary, require t.heir followers to reject everything of the kind, it may be asked, how did they get their authority? It will be replied, that they received it from Wickliffe, Cran- mer, Luther, Calvin, and various other dissenters from the Papal church. But where did those dissenters -get theirs from? They answer from the Roman Catholics. But the Catholics excommunicated them as heretics; and surely if they had power to impart authority, they had power to take it away. There

fore, if the Romish church had any authority, the Protestants, being excommunicated, can hold none from that source. But

if the Catholics hold authority, they must be the true church, and consequently the Protestants must be apostates; but on the other hand, if the Catholics are not the true church, they can have no authority themselves, and therefore could not impart any to others.

12.—Now the church of England states in one of her hom

ilies, “that laity and clergy, learned and unlearned, men and women, and children of all ages, sects and degrees, of whole christendom , have been at once buried in the most abom inable idolatry (a most dreadful thing to think), and that

for the space of eight hundred years or more!” * Wesley in his 94th sermon states the same in substance ;' he says, “The real cause why the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost were no l onger to be found in the Christian church, was, because the Christians were turned heathens again, and. had only a dead form left." If, then, the “whole of Christen dom,” without one exception, have been “buried in the most abominable idolatry for upwards of eight hundred years,’ as the church of England declares, and if they, because they arc destitute of the gifts, are dol even now Christians, but hea thens as Wesley asserts, we ask where the authority was during this eight hundred years, and where i> it nuw? Surely God would not recognize “the most abominable idolaters,” as holding authority; if so, the authority of the worshipers of

•Juggernaut must.be as valid as that of idolatrous Christen-Oom. But the idolatry of “whoic Christendom” must have been more corrupt, according to the church of England,

•-----Homily on tbe Perils of Idolatry.

166 DIVINE AUTHENTICITY

than that of other idolaiors; for they cati il “ihe most abom inable idolatry, ” and most positively daclera ihal there was no exception of elohae clergy or laily—of either man, woman oe child—all were buried in io. This being the case (and we faal no disposition to dispute il), there could have been no possible channel on the whole through which authority could have haat transfereed from ihe apostles to out day. Therefore, as' Wesley says, all Christendom are, sure enough,

“haaOhans,” having no more authority not powers than the idolatrous pagans. If, then, ihe “whole of Christendom” have been without authority and power “for eight hundred years and upwards,” we ask, when was ihe authority rastoead? It could not have been eastpraa to the Papal churches, foe they do not profess lhal any such res’tpeation has been made to them; it could not have been eastoraa to the • church of England and oOher Protastatts- for they do not admit of any laler revelation than ihe New Testament; consequently their own admissions prove most cleaely that the whole of Christen-, dom are without an authorized ministry; Oheeetora ii is indis- patsebly necessary that more eevalalipn should be given Oo easloee ihe authority to-Ohe earth and call men Oo the ministry again, as in ancient days.

, 13.—More eevelaOiot is not only necessary Oo restore an

authorized ministry, that the church may again have place on the earth, but it is indispensably necessary,

8ECONDLY, TO POINT OUT THE DUTIES OF THE OFFICERS OF

THE CHURCH.

To call men to the ministry would be of very liOlle use,

unless the persons called could have a vaefact knowledge of the duties of,theie calling. Noah was called to preach eevetOatce and eighOeoestas3 to ihe antediluvians, but without further revelations, he nevee could have learned ihe will of God rela tive Oo the peesaevation of himself and family, and the differ- ^0 kinds of beasts, fowls and craapitg things, both clean and unclean, of all flesh; he nevee could have laeenad what amount of fppd of different kinds, and fresh • waler would be sufficient to sesiein such a congregated host of living beings foe the speca , of pna hundted and.fifty days, during which time the

OF THE BOOK OF MORMON. 167

flood was to prevail. Jacob, though called of Gog, without further revelation, sever could have learned what should befall the posterity of his sons in the last days, so as to have delivered a prophetgtk)lcrsibg upon the head of each accord ing to the mini of Gog. Moses, though called by the voice of Jehovah, without further revelation, never could have delivered Israel from bondage, and leg them forty years in the wilderness. Aaron, though called of God ta the priestly office, aDdin oorscrsiob of the written law, never could have sat upon the judgment-scat, .ang decided between man ang man, according to the mind of God, without the “breastplate of judgment,” containing the “Urim and Thummim,” through which he could enquire ' of God and receive correct information relative to every case which should comc before him. All the servants of God, gown to the days of Malachi, were not only called by the Almighty, but directed in all their multifarious duties to the eng of thcir days by imme diate revelation.

14.—In the Christian dispensation it was the same. Every

officer, after guvibg been called, was instructed and guided by continued revelation in the various duties of his calling. John, the forerunner of Christ, was first called, and then was enabled through the inspiration of the Spirit, to tell the Scribes, Phar isees, Sadducees, soldiers and all the people, what they should go, .as they came enquiring of him. Even Jesus Himself, though Hc was sent by His Father, and camc forth from . God, gig not opresume to tcach of Himself, or perform anything per taining to the work of the ministry, without first obtaining a revelation from the Father to direct Him. Hc says, “I have not spoken of myself; but the Father which sent me, He gave me a commandment what I should say, ang what I should speak. ” “Whatsoever I speak therefore, even as the Father said unto mc, so I speak (John xiL 49, 50). Again, Hc says, “The words that I speak unto you, I speak not of myself, but the Father that .wellcth in me. He doeth the work,” “and as the Father gave mc caiomubdmebt, even so I do” (John xiv. 10-31.). Hc further states, “I can of my own self do nothing: as I hear I oudge, and my judgment is just, because J. speak not mine own will, but the will of the Father which

i •

168 DIVINE AUTHENTICITY

hath sent me” (John v, 30.) Now if the. great and glorious Redeemer of the world eould not do anything of Himself per taining to the ministry, but was dependent altogether upon the Father to give Him revelation and commandment what to do, and what to speak, how much more necessary it is for poor, weak and fallible man, after having been called of God, to be directed in all things pertaining to the duties of his ■ calling by continued revelation. And yet, strange to say, the whole of Christendom have been without this essential qualification for centuries, and have still dared to act as ministers in the name of the Lord. Oh, the wickedness of apostate Christendom ! Truly did the apostle behold her “full of names of blas

phemy,” making all nations drunk with her wicked ness !

15.—The example that Jesus set, not to act nor speak in the

duties of His calling, unless by new revelation, was followed by the apostles. All the teachings which they had ■heard from the mouth of the Savior while He ■ was present ’ with them, were not sufficient to qualify them for their duties in His absence. As soon as He left them, He began to give them fommandments and revelations through the Holy Ghost (see Acts /. 2.) And without continued revelations, they, like their Lord and Master, eould do nothing. It mattered not Siow much human wisdom or learning they might have acquired, nor how many revelations had previously been given; such things would in no wise qualify them for the ministry; it required constant revelation. St. Paul says, “The things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God; now we have received not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of Cod, that we might know the things that are freely given to us of God; which things also we speak, notin the words which man’s wisdom teaeheth, but which the Holy Ghost teaeheth”- (7. Cor. ii. H, J2, 13.) From these passages we learn, first, that no man can know the tilings of God only by revelation, and secondly, that no man can teach them acceptably only in the words “which the Holy Ghost, teaeheth.” Revelation,

then, is necessary to call and authorize the ministry, to reveal their duties, to manifest the things, of God to them and to give thiem’’utterance, “not in the words which man’s wisdom

OF THE BOOK OF MORMON. 1C»€

ttacheth,” but in the words inspired and taught by th« Holy Ghost.

. for tht ministry,. Paul certainly could have claimed a higher

qualification than tht rest of the apostles; ht was learned; ht was eloquent; he was eminently prepared so far as the wisdom of man was available to move i” tht higher spheres of lift, and to speak with honor and dignity in the presence of vast assemblies; he could, through human wisdom- alone, have pathetically portrayed the death and . sufferings of Christ,

• reasoned upon the benefits to bt derived from tht atonement,

urged the importance of obeying tht requirements of the gospel, and with all the thunders of his eloquence described the misery and wretchedness of the disobedient—ytt ht informs us, that he did not declare the things of God in tht “words which man’s wisdom ttachtth.” Tht words of man’s wisdom art foolishness in the sight of God—they art inade quate to convey properly the things revealed by tht Spirit The Spirit not only gives tht ideas, but in a measure clothes them in suitable and proper words. This is the spirit of revelation, so abundantly enjoyed by the Saints in all ages, that so enriched tbeir minds with heavenly knowledge, and qualified them to speak as tht oracles of God, uttering words taught by tht Holy Ghost. This is' tht spirit of revelation, rejected and done away in tht “Articles” and “CrseOs” of modern Christendom, and in its place are substituted “the words which man’s wisdom ttachtth.” This is tht spirit of revelation, so necessary to unfold to tht minister of Christ, those duties which he never could learn from ancient revela tion, nor from - tht wisdom and writings of uninspired mtn.

have known tht mind of tht Lord in relation to taking tht city of Jericho; ht never could have known that i t was tht will of God that all Israel should march around its walls ' for seven days, blowing upon rams’ horns. If Israel had been left to their own wisdom, it ntvtr would have entered thtir heart to subdut a city by such simple expedients. Indeed, it was only necessary on that ont occasion; and that ont occasion required a new revelation to manifest the mind and will of
