God. In subduing another city or hanish, the Lord might

Wave alnogenarr a diyrdrht plan, so teat the rule followed in one

instance, • might never be applicable in another ; emce the

necessity of aohninueh revelation ; for no trreann of God or

leader in. Israel could possibly learn tee mind of God dineset

it. ‘-God's ways are not as our ways, nor His neoegWnt as our

thoughts.” Therefore, the wisdom of man, unaided by

immediate revelation, cannot perform accrotahly before God

any work, either in directing tee mseemrnnt of an army, or

in orercaihg the gospel of praar, or in ruling his own aoetr-

Wold, or in managing, the rflf’rirs of a nation. When Israel

went to hannlr, they first enquired of God, and then odoarehrh according to His direction ; when they ahsihned kings to sit upon the nhrshe, they did it by revelation ; darh a city was to be warned of aoproachih;g•jehgmrhn, a Lot, or a Jonah, or tsmr. inspired man was sent •by revelrnisn to do it: when Israel turned aside from nhr law of God, multitedrt of orsoarns were not only sent by revelation t o reprove them, but t he mes sage which they frrr to deliver, was given by revelation also: when die Lord saw that Philip had warned • the people of Samaria sufficiently, He ' did not l rrer him to tWe vague con-

jrcnurrt of his own mind dhrrr he should go next, but sent

an angel wWo spake 'ns him, saying, “Arise, and go-towards

tee ssenh unto the way nhrn gsrnh down from Jerusalem unto

Gaza, which is hrsedn.” {Acts via. 20.) If Philip had been

left to his own wisdom, We never could haer learned d1lrthrr

Wis mission was done in Samaria or not,; and even if We had

learned this, the desm country off to the ssute, would have

been ner last plrcr that human dithsm would Wave guided

h im. But after Philip had rracerh this lonely tslinrry desert, he

still needed revelation to hirran him in regard to fernard duties.

The next thing which we find revealed to him was by tee Spirit,

deica said unto him, “Go near, and join nhysrly’ns this chariot.”

He obeyed, and succeeded in cshvihaihg a man of great

aeneoriny—a eunuch, of ner nrenhs of the gospel; and after

having brotizrh him, “the Spirit of the Lord caught away

Philip, teat nWr eunuch saw him no morr.”

18.—In Damascus,• there was ahsnher sereahn of God, called

Ananias; We was not a Pronetnrnt clergyman, for We hrlireed

OF THE - BOOK OF MORMON. 171

in visions and revelations; “agn So him said sho Lord in a vision, Ananias. And ha eain, Bohold, I am heea, Lord. And Sha Lord said unto him, Arise, and go into tha strest which is callon Straight, and inquire i n tha bouee of Judas foT one callod Saul, of Tarsus: foe. bohold, ho peayotb, and hath sian in a vision a man gamoe Ananias coming in, and putting his hand on him, that ho might rocoive his sight/’ {Acts ix; 10, 11, 12.) Hero art two visionary characters, Ananias and Saul; if they had livid in our day, Shoy would have boon cateineeod, by now revelation noglees, as appropri ate subjects for Sha insane hospital. It is so natural eoe man kind So think Shat ^0^ own judgment is sufficient So guide them in tho way of duty, ShaS oven Ananias himself was rathor ltpllgen to question tha propriety of rovolaSion, and eallov his own wisdom; for ha atswaron “Laen, I have hoard by many of this man, how much ovil ho hash dato so Shy eaitse aS Jerusalem ; and hare he hath authority from she chief peeosSs to bind all ShaS call upon Thy - name.” ( Verses 13, 14,) But tho Lord noS eoelitf nlepoeon So ba gavorton by tho weak judgment of Ananias, commatnae - him again, saying, “Go shy way ; for he is a chosot vassol unto me, to bear my name before sho GonSilos, and kings, and sho chil dren of Israel for I will sbav him how grtas things he muss sufor for my tamo’s sake.” ( Verses 15, 10.)

19.—PoSor was agaShee of shise visionary phaeacSoei so

much dospleon bv monoet rollglagleSe. Ono of sho ^rsS revelations ha absalton, was about Jesus boing Sho Christ. It soams ShaS shore was a greaS nivoeelsy of opinions among those who did not stok for now revolaiiog. relative to whom Jesus was; soma thought ho was ono of tho old peorhots, some thought ho was John sho Baptist, having rison from She noad, the wisdom of man had imagined a variety of opinions eaepocslgg Him. PoSei’, nos being iasiifion with sho conjocSuros of men about it, was just simple ogaufb to ask Sha Father whom Jesus was. Tho Fashor Sold him, shat Jesus was “tho Christ, tho Son of tho living Gan/' Hiro thin was coei.algty—cotjocture and origiog had flod away.; Whin tho Savior inquired of His nisciplos whaS their viove wore in ellatiog to Him, Pator could answer tho question

172 DIVINE AUTHENTICEY

without any doubt or hesitation ; and because of this knowl-

, edge Jesus blessed him, and said unto him, “flesh and blood

hath not revealed it-uDto thee, but my Father which is in

heaven.” (Matt. xvi. 17.) The great mass of the Jews

were destitute of this knowledge; they did not seek of the

Father a revelation on the subject, but OepenOeO, like this

generation, on former revelation and their own wisdom, and

therefore not knowing by new revelation the Savior, they

crucified Him. Peter, having had faith sufficient to get one

revelation, the Savior, counted him worthy to receive more,

therefore He took him up into a mountain with- James and

John, “and was transfigured before them; and His face did

shine as the sun, and His raiment was white as the light; and

behold there, appeared unto them Moses and Elias talking

with Him.” (Matt. xvii. 1, 2, 3.) These visionary per

sons could now testify to the-nations what they had seen, and

heard and known about Jesus, about God and about angels. But such testimonies to be given by any persons in these days, would be counted the highest blasphemy. But we ask, what do modern Christendom know about God? they have not heard His voice, - nor received a revelation from Him. What

do they know about Jesus? nothing, - only what they have

read of tha.kDOwlaOge of others. What Oo they know about

angels? they have never beheld them, nor heard their voice * .

What Oo- they know about visions? nothing at all, for they

despise all those that profess to have seeD visions since . the

apostles’ days. And finally, what Oo they know about the

Holy Ghost? It has never spoken to them nor to any one

else, in their estimation, for the last seventeen centuries.

They have, not heard, seen, handled nor known anything for

themselves by revelation ; consequently, they are eutirely

unqualified to be witnesses of any spiritual or heavenly knowl

edge : they -know nothing, onty what they know naturally “as

brute beasts, made to be ‘taken and destroyed.” (See Jude

10.) Without new revelation, they are entirely nuqualifieO

to judge of the things of GoO : they would be as apt-to call

good ' evil and evil good, and put light for darkness and dark

ness for light, as ancient revelation deniers were. Their

preaching would not justify nor aouOamD any one, because

OF THE BOOK OF MORMON. 173

they know nothing, only whaO others have wriiten, and lhara-fore cannot testify. This is the sad, amd awful, and most wretched condition of ]epaart Christendom.

20.—PeOae had another vision while he was praying upon

a house top: ■ he saw heaven ovatea, and all mannee of beasls let down, and drawn up ihrice; and “While PaOae thought on the vision, ihe spirit said unio him, Behold three men seek thaa, Arise, tharatora, and gel thee down, and go with them, doubling nothing: foe I have sent Ohem.” (Acts x. 39, 20.) Petar, through this vision, and the sayings of the spirii, learned ' duties veeieititg lo his calling that tatae could have baat laeetea naturally. PaOae had had a vast amount of knowledge previously rateeled Oo him, bul that would not manifest Oo him his present duties. Present duties require veasant eavelatiot ; and withoui ii, no servant of God avae did, oe ever can do the work of God. Without it, he dpas not know where to go, oe what lo preach. But says ihe objector, it does not matlee where he preaches, for he cannot go amiss ; all must have ihe privilege of hearing. We reply, that though all must hear, yet the Lord designed some to heat hafoea olhees, as is evident from ihe fact thal Paul and Timothy “were forbidden of the Holy Ghosi io preach ihe word in Asia;” and egeit, ‘^1 they were come to Mysia, they assayed io go into Biohyma; but the Spirit suffered them not.” (Acts xvi. 6, 7.) Hence we learn, that ihe Lord has a choice where His sarvenls shall go; and lhai in some places where their own judgment would' dictate them to go, the Lord desiees they should nol go, and actually for bids them io go. Now, how, without new revelation, is the sertati-of God io know the mind of the Lord as to where he shall oe shall nol go? Would any former reveleliot communicate the desired lnialligance unto him ? Certainly not; former revelation contains the history of the revealed will of God io others, but io docs noi specify in all things the eavaalaa will of God lo us. To read of others learning the will of God in relaOion io their callings and mission, and enjoying metlfesiellots of ihe Spirit by visions, dreams,'angels, eOc., would be of no more ad vantage to us, than lo read of the hislory of a good dinner when we

174 DIVINE AUTHENTICITY

were hungry. It is the present enjoyment of klerriogs which we want, and not merely the history of others’ blessings.

about going to Macedonia without gciog tolf? Therefore, “a

vision appeared to Paul in the night: There stood a man of Macedonia, anf prayed him, saying, Come over into Macedo nia and help us.” (Acfc, xvi. 9.) And again, how did Paul know it was his duty to tarry in Corinth about a year uof a half? He found it out by a vision. “Then spake the Lord to Paul in the night by a viriao, Be not afraid, but speak, uof hold not thy peace: For I am with thcc, ubf no man shall set on thce, to hurt thee: for I have much people in this city.” (Acts, xviii. 9, 10.) How did Paul lcarn that it was necessary for him to depart quickly out of Jerusalem, ang go to other nations? Hc learned it by a viriao in the tcmplc. Hc says, “And it came to puss that when I was come again to Jerusa lem, even while I prayed in the temple, I was in a trance; unf saw Him saying unto mc, Make haste, <tod get thcc quickly out of Jerusalem; for they will not receive thy testimony coo- ccroiog mc.” (Actc, xxii. 17, 18.) And wIcs Paul rcuraocf with the Lord upon the subject, as if he thought that from their acquaintance with his former course of life, they would receive his testimony, the Lord again cammuofcf him, saying,

“Depart: for i will send thce far hcncc unto the Gentiles.” Thus we see how imparriklc it is for a mioirtcr of the gospel to lcarn what to do, or where to go, or what to say, unless hc is taught by new revelation. Without this heavenly principle, his own judgment would constantly lead him astray.

to the ministry, and afterwards tQ instruct them in the various duties of thcir calling, but it is infirocorukly necessary.

Thirdly to comfort, reprove and teach the church.

Jcsus, before his usccorlao, promiref the Holy Ghost to IIis

disciples, which Hc calls “the Comforter.” They •gud prev iously been camtartcf by the dorfs of Jesus: He had unfolded to them His puraklcr; Hc guf instructed them for three years

and a half; He had given them * a vast amount of information upon a great variety of subjects; and sow, us hc was about to

OF THE BOOK OF MORMON. 175

l»e taken from them in person, be promised to send unto them another comforter, He says, “If ye love me, keep iny com mandments; and I will pray the Father, and He shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you forever; even the spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him ; but ye know him ; for he dwelleth with you, and shall be io you.” {John

xuk 15, 16, 17.) The reason why the Holy Ghost is called the Comforter i s, because of the office which he was to per form ; he was to comfort the ■ disciples, by reveariug to them still further knowledge of the things of God. The mind of man is too weak to-receive at once, all the knowledge which God is willing that he should know: hence Jesus says, “I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now. Howbeit. when lie, the Spirit of truth is come, he will guide you into all truth; for he shall ■ not speak of himself,’ but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall bespeak; Cnd he will shew you things to eomc. He shall glorify me: for he shall receive of mine, and shall shew it unto you. All things that the Father hath,-are mine; therefore, said I that he shall take of-mine, and shew it unto you.” (John xvi 12, 13, 14, 15.)’ Here we find’ how the disciples, after Jesus ceased specking unto them in person, were to be continually guided by revelation. Many things which they could not then bear on account of the weakness of their minds, were afterwards to he revealed to them through the Comforter : he was to guide them into all truth. But even the Holy Ghost was not to teach without first getting c revelation as to what he ■ should teach, for, says Jesus, “he shall not speak of him self, but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speck.” It is strange, indeed, that the ministers of modem Christendom dare speak of themselves, without getting any new revelation, when even Jesus and the Holy Ghost would neither of them presume to do such c.thing. The Comforter was to be the guide of the disciples, not only in this short life, hut forever. Again, Jesus says, “the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you.” {John xiv. 26.)

8 _

176 divine AnTHEM'nciinr

reve^tor to tht disciplts, 'was • peoJnped on tht day of PeDtt-

cost, to all who would obey the gospel. After ht ngddepceDdtd

upon ont hundred and twenty, on the morning of that day,

revealing to them, not only other tongues, but also “the

wonderful works of God, it excited the attention of thousands,

who, after learning that it was tht Holy Ghost that operated

so powerfully, felt txtrtmtly anxious to obtain tht same gift,

and they wtrt told the conditions on which they all might

rtctivt it. “Repent,” says Ptttr, “and be baptized, every ’ one of you, in the name of Jtsus Christ, for tht remission of

your sins, and yt shall receive the gift of tht Holy Ghost”

{Acts u. 38.) Thus, wt perceive, that thousands had tht promise made to them on certain conditions, evt” the -promise of tht Holy Ghost, which “promise” says Peter, “is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off, tvt” as many as tht Lord our God shall call.” ' { Verse 39.) Con sequently, all persons, in all generations and ages, who will perform . thtst requirements, have tht promise of tht Holy Ghost; the same . Holy Spirit that Jesus promised, and tht same that was given on the day of Pentecost—all could receive the spirit of revelation, and bt- guided into all truth. To show still further that the Holy Ghost was to bt a revela-tor to the Church, as well as to tht apostles, we will quote tht words of John, written to the Church generally; “Yt

have an uDetioP from tht Holy O”e, and ye know all things.”

And again, “the anointing which yt have received of him, anldeth in you, aDd ye nttd not that any man teach you: but as the same anointing teachtth you of all things^ and is truth, no lie, aDd tvtn as it hath taught you, ye shall abide in him.” (I.

John iV 20-27.) Nothing is more certain than that tht

Church, as well as tht apostles^ were to rtctivt tht promised

Comforter, and that ht was to teach all things to the Church,

as well as to its officers; therefore, tht revelations of tht Holy

Ghost, art indispensably necessary to comfort and teach tht

Church.

duce false drsteinep into tht Church, commanding the Gen

tiles to bt circumcised, tht Holy Ghost immediately gave a

OF THE BOOK OF MORMON. 177

revelation on the subject, and •corrected tWe error; taus ore-erhnihg endless cshtrovrrsiet and strifes. (See Acts xv.) If this great guide and rreelatsr of nhr Church be rejected as unnecessary, bow quickly tee body falls to ruin ! New revela tion is the only prihaiolr waica will orrtrder nhr unity of tee Church. The wisdom of man, taken individually, or the wisdom of councils, taken collectively, is fallible, unless drdrcned by immediate revelation, and neerefsde liable to err ; hrnar all doctrines, or principles, or matters of which are not clearly revralrh in ancient revelation; ' will be continually tae subjects of dispute; and if any man or coun cil dinhoet ner aid of immediate deer]anion, sWall undertake to decide upon such subjects and odrtcdihr “ Articles of Faith,” or “Creeds,” to govern nhr belief, or views of onhrrt. narrr will be nWsusands of drll-mraning oroolr wWo will not haer confidence in the productions of nWrte fallible men, and terrrysrr, will frame creeds of their own, deicW they seopstr, are more consistent. In this way, csnnrhnions arise, divisions multiply, trcns are formed, the CeeraW becomes rent into ten tasetahh fragments,, and the dhrlr world becomes a babyion of confusion, As an o)rrvehtaniee against all false dsct^•ihe, against all strifes and divisions, against all conten tions and conndovertirs in ner Ceurae, God has placed within it a grrrn and infallible nraaard or reeelatod, called nhr Com

forter, dhs cannot err, dWote decision is an end of contro

versy, deste counsel is orr^rcn, and daose judgment upon all points of doctrine cannot be oner1•disr than correct. Difer-

rhart of opinion cannot exist in tae Church for any length of time ; for tee Holy Ghost will decide all mrnnrrs of csniro-versy, and thus orrtrdvr the unity of the Church : while all w Wo rebel against.,his decisions, will be excommunicated as errrniat or apostates, and will form no part of the Church of Christ, any more than the Chinese form a ordt of tee Eng lish government. Hence, in tee Church of Chrm, nerde is a unity of faith—a' ohrhett of spirit, such as cearacnrdizrt no other people. In nWr Church of Christ, nhrrr can be no hiffer-rhcet of opinion, in regard to baptism, or any other ordin ance ; for the Holy Ghost will guide into all nretW, and neraa the Church all iHdus pertaining to doctrine or ordinances,

178 DIVINE AUTHENTICITY

Shings present, or things to coma. Tho groaS variety of origloge which havo torn asunder monort Chriititnam. and bovlldoeod sho mitne ‘ of milllate, can havo no oxleSotco i n

. I

the Church of Christ; for thoro, all maSSars of importance ara nocldan by eovolaSiog, and nos by ^00^ itvogton by human wisdom; thore, tha deap and hlddet Shings of God ara eevlalen by the Spirit of truth; tblee. rich teeaeueae of wisdom and kgowlldgl are brought to light; thero, they havo no teed of utitsplran councils to invent “Articles of Religion” So eaStee Sha mind of man ; Shore, tha Holy Ghost takos thg Shings of Sha Father and shows them by rlvelasiat unto the Church, and Shlel. infallibility is indelibly and unchangeably stamped upon every docSeltl, principle, arditatpe and law of Sha Church. With such a rlvelaSae, certainty and knowledge abound in every heart; parables, mysteries and intricate sub

jects are unravelled ; fulse work, conjectures -and opinions,

flae away. Wish such a guida, there is no datgor of beitg necaivln. The oloct, cannot bo ■docoivld \ for shoy have - an infallible dlSecSae of all neluiloge, hovlvae cutglgf|y navleln: they have a Sest by which they can try all tbltge, prova all Shings, judgi all Shings and ovlecama all Shlgfi not ordained of God; they can eaae aloft to. tho third hoavons and gaza upon the mansions of tho blesiln, whori she. highest ordor of

lgtllllfetca reigns : or they can nlscltn in Sho viiloge of sho spiriS, aud bohold Sha kingdoms, namltiote, principalities and pavlee, in worlds of an inferior ordor, in thi gelaSTecall of universal 1x^1.^.

-25.-*- Whet Sho Church falls into sit, or turns aeenl -rom

hor duiloe, now elvilation is gocoieary So reprove and chastit har, ShaS she may rlrlgt and bo forgiven. Wo havo froquont examples of the plarll of God boitg rlreavld by she eovola- tions of the Holy Ghost. Tho Caelgsblage wort eovoeily elrrovln by She Spirit of igsrieailan, because they had suf-eleld cagtlgtlags and divisions to got it among them atd disturb the harmony aud peaco of the Church. Although

Shi divisions which existed thoro wort nos in ellaSiag to doc trine, but only it relation to tho Sallgte or abilities of Paul, Apollos and Cephas, yet ovot eae this thiy/were callln carnal. i(£ee I. Corinthians, iii. 1-7J If Sha Coregthlage weri

OF THE BOOK OF MORMON. 179

worthy of reproof because they were divided in relation to the talents or qualifications of the ministers of Christ, how much more worthy of censure would they have been if they had been divided in relation to doctrine, like modern Christ

endom? * All divisions in the Church, of every - kind, are utterly condemned by the apostle, and he pleads with them to banish all such things from their midst, and cultivate a

perfect unity in all thiDg3. * He says,' “Now I beseech you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you, but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind aud in the same judgment.” (Z. Corinthians, i. 10.) Are modern religionists “perfectly joined together in the same mind and iD the’ same judgment?” Do they all “speak the same thing?” No ‘ they are far from it: they declare doc trines diametrically opposite to one another; yet they have the presumption to acknowledge each other as Christians, enjoying the Holy Spirit. • But it is an insult to the Holy Spirit to say that two churches, who are - divided in doctrine, both eDjoy his teachings. Where the Holy Spirit is he guides into all truth; and where two churches believe in doctrines directly opposite, odi, if not both, must be destitute of the Spirit. The Holy Ghost must be a very uncertain guide, if he would teach one church to sprinkle infants, teach another to immerse none but adults, give the privilege to another to immerse, pour or sprinkle the candidates just as they chooha;-tell the fourth to baptize for the remission of siDs and forbid a fifth to baptize any until they gave evidence that their sins were remitted ; and teach a sixth that it is not necessary for them to be baptized at all. If all these churches, who teach and practice doctrines so very different, are in possession of the Holy Spirit, then the Holy Spirit must be divided against himself, aDd must come to nought. But the Holy Spirit is the Spirit of truth, and teaches the same ' doctrine in all places; and wherever we find differences of opinion in Ooc. trine, we may know most assuredly that the Spirit-guide is not there; at least,-'all churches must be destitute of the Spirit but one, and Cve’u that one does not enjoy it unless she receives immediate revelation for her instruction and’ edifica tion,

180 DreWE AUTHENTICITY

being the necessary results of the fallible judgments of men. That the judgments of men are fallible, and that division is the necessary result of fallibility, we by no means deny; but to say that they are unavoidable throws cpniamvo and msult upon ihe Holy G-host and- eepeasatis him as unable to guide the Church inlo all teulh. While division is the result of fallibility, union is the result of infallibility.' The Savior peayed foe the most perfect union to be in His' Church. He

uses ihe following language—“Neither peay I foe taasa alone, (meaning the eposOlas-) but for them also which shall believe on me through lheir word, (meaning the whole Church,) that they all may be one; as thou, Faihee, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us; ohat ihe world may believe lhat thou hasl sent me. And the glory which thou gavest me‘I have given them ; that they may be one even as we are one: I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made peefact in one, and that the world may know that thou hast sent me, and hasl loved them, as thou hast loved me. [John xvii. 20, 21, 22, 23.) The oneness here prayed for was Oo be of Ohe most perfect kind: there were Oo be ho more jars—no more differences in santImant ’than there is between the Fathae and the Son. Now there is no possible way to being about this perfect pnetass and union in a church com posed of imperfect beings, only through the medium of immediate revelation. This, and this alone, can accomplish the work, and vartact the Sainis in knowledge, wisdom and power. All pihae substitutions will be found totally Inede-quaie to the task; for unless teuth is revealed and- ’known, loo, efoae it is revealed, the feail judgments of men will clash OogaOhar; discordant notes will be sounded, and disunion will make i ts evvaaeanca. And herein is the religion of Heaven aisiinguishad from all other religions. Continued revelation always was, and is now, iis motto, and Union, perfect Union, the necessary result; while all oOher religions are dastituie of ihis binding uniting principle and will ete long vanish away and vaeish with all who follow them.

heinous sin, namely, rhal of foehIcarioh in its most aggravated

OP THE BOOK OF MORMON. 181

form—“such faroicutionI” says Paul, “as is not so much as named amaag the Gentiles, that onc should have his tatgcr’r w ife.” (I. Cor. v. 1.) Without further revelation the Church would have been ignorant how to proceed in relation to such a case. Some might have supposed that the iof^vig• ual committing this great crime could, if he made confession, bc forgiven, and be retained imhe Church. But the apostle knowing the great magnitude of the crime, decided by the spirit of iosoirutiao quite otherwise; therefore hc commuofed them, saying, “Io the name of our Lord Jcsus Christ, whes yc are gathered together, asd my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jcsus Christ, to deliver such as osc unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may bc saved is the day of the Lord Jcsus.” { Verses 4, .5.) Here, then, wc pcrccivc the penalty to be inflicted for this particular trans gression: first, a deliverance usto Satan; second, a destruc tion of the flesh; and third, so salvation for the spirit until the day of the Lord Jcsus. The wisdom of mas would have been entirely at a lorr how to have rendered a correct judgment caoceroisg this matter, therefore it required the wisdom of God by revelation. The Coriotgiuos themselves sccm to have bccs ignorant of thcir . duty os this subject; for Paul says to them, “Ye are puffed up. asd have sot rather mourned, that he that hath d aoe this deed might bc takes away from among you.” ( Verse 2.) Oh! how different arc the fecirioor of the Spirit from the feciriaor of fulliklc mas!

28.—It was necessary that the Caristgiuos should bc

reproved by-the* voice of ioroiratios for going to l aw before unbelievers. They were iotormcf that both mcs and angels were too bc judged by the Saints asd therefore they ought to judge among themselves the smaller matters of the Church

pertaining to this life. It was scccrrury that they should bc teorovcd for partaking of the Lord’s supper unworthily, some

using the wise to excess asd becoming intoxicated, “bat dis-ccrsisg the Lord's kafy.‘” Sickness asd death prevailed among many of that church, the cause of which was revealed to them by the apostle; he informs them that they had sot properly examined themselves previous to receiving this solemn arfiounce, and “for this cause,” says Paul, “many

182 DIVINE AUTHENTICITY

cre weak cnd Sickly among you cnd mcny sleep.” . (2 Ccn\ xi.) If ■sickness cnd death prevail to c great extent among ' modern religionists, instead of getting c revelation , to know the cause, they fancy up c great variety of cchpep, one imagines one thing and another supposes another, cnd the imaginary causes cre nearly cs numerous as the individuals. Oh! what a blessing it would be to modern Christendom had they cn inspired man ■ among them who, like Paul, could point out to them the very causes of the cholera and such like plagues with which they are so frequently visited! Knowing the cause, they could, by. c thorough reformation, ’have the judg ment removed from theifr;■ but so long as they are ignorant of the cause, and depend upon their own conjectures upon it, they will not be likely to repent acceptably before God so cs to have these judgments removed.

29.—The seven churches of Asia were reproved by revela

tion for their sins, threatened with various j’udgments if they did not repent, and promised on certain conditions great and inestimable blessings. These threatenings and promises were not the same to all churches, but each had ’its peculiar promises cnd threatenings according to its works. ’ But for centuries past the Lord has not had c church on the whole earth whom He considered worthy of being reproved by revelation, or of receiving cny promises. None knew anything about God, or heaven, or the future state, only what others have told them, in the sacred scriptures. Eternal life does not abide in them; for, says Jesus, “This is life eternal, that they might know Thee the only true God and Jesus Christ whom Thou hast’ sent.” (JJm xvii. 3.) The only possible way to know God is by new revelation; for Jesus says again, “No man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any ■-man the Father, save the Son, cnd he to whomsoever the Son will reveal .Him.” {Matthew xi. 27.) Here is the most positive testimony that no man can know God without he obtains a revelation, and teat.,no one can ’ have eternal life without such revealed knowledge. Think of these sayings of our Savior, all,'you ■ enemies of new revelation, and tremble at your awful, benighted; and sinful condition. Remember that the only way

OP the book op mormon. 1S2

to obtain tCee”gl lift is to know God, and tht only way to know Him is by New Revelation.

30.—Further revelation is l”dlppeDsanly ”scespgey,

Fourthly, to unfold to the church the future

In every agt of tht world God has considered a knowledge ol the fucuet of tht utmost importance to His people. To impart this knowledge Ht has invariably appointed a certaiD office among His people, called tht .prophetic office. Persons

holding this office were filled, with tht Holy Ghost who taught them, not only of doctrine and principles, but of tht future. Ont of the tgellspc prophets, of whom scripture gives an

. account, was Absl. Tht Savior ranks Abtl among the

prophets, when he says to the wicked Jews, that tht blood of all ths prophets, from that of righteous Abe! to that of Zacb- geigp, who was slain neCwsca the porch and the alter, should bt required of that generation. Enoch, the seventh from Adam, pesOicCeO things which have not yst comt to pass. (Se Jude xw.) Noah teeOictsO evtDts of the utmost import ance to tht gtnsegtion in which ht - lived. All the patriarchs called of God, from Noah to Mosts, were sdOowsO with the spirit of prophecy. Moses was peculiarly blissed with''a knowledge of future events. Tht Lord did doc confine tht spirit of prophecy to Moses alont, but poured out His spirit atrD tht seventy Elders of Isras!, aid they all prophesied. El0g0 aDd Mt0a0, two that remained in tht camp, prophesied as will as those who wert gsPsmnleO together; aid Joshua, hearing of this, aid gssliDt somewhat contracted i” his views of this glorious gift, exclaimed, “My Lord Mosts, forbid them . 'And Moses said unto him, hovisst thou for my sake? eoalO God that all the Lord's people wire prophets, aid that ths 1^(1 would pot His spirit upon them. (Num xi 28, JO ) We have do account of ths predictions uttsrsd by thsst seventy prophets ^mg written, aid therefore it is uot liksly that they could bt of any nsisfic to after geiseations: but it is very probable that ths thiugs predicted wert iitSD0sd to bintSt mors particularly that geDtegtioD of Tpegel. Moses

bad hitherto tht whole burdt” upon himself, but now it was divided among others, aid ip order to be qualified to take

184 DIVINE AUTHENTICITY

part in tee teaching and leading of Israel, it was hrarttady

that they sWould understand future events, narn all might be

prepared to act i n relation to such events and nWes, . i>y fore

seeing things, rtcaor thousands of difficulties. All orooWrns

do not enjoy an equal degree or measure of fore-know ledge,

for the Lord said to Israel, “Hear now my words: If narrr

be a propern among you, I tee Lord will make myself known

unto him in a vision and will speak unto him in a dream. My

% servant Moses is • not so, , fWs is faithful in all mine eoutr.

t With him will I speak mouth to mouth, even aoprdehnly, and-not in dark speeches; and the similitude of the Lord shall he

behold.” (Num. xii. 6, 7, 8.) To some oroohens tee Lord

speaks in visions, dreams and dark speeches; tq otaedt, He •

reveals in great plainness. Some orsoercies are written:

others only entrrrd verbally.

31.—G•rran companies of prophets existed among Israel at

diffrrrhn times. When Saul after Wis first interview with

Samuel the Seer, met one of nWrtr csmorhirt, “ner Spirit of

God caihr upon him and he orsoaesird among them.” (Z

Sam. x. 10.) When We rytrdfarht sent mrstrhgrds do nrkr

David teat he might slay him, taey met one of nertr com-

oanirt of prsoerns dinh Samuel over teem, and tae Spirit of

God came upon nhr mrttrhgrrs and they orooarsirh also:

Saul then sent a second company, and they all turned odsoh-

ms , and he sent a third and nar same thing eaoorhrd to

them; and despairing of success by his mrtsehgert, We con

cluded to go himself, and w Wile on his way “the Spirit of

God was upon him also, and We went on and odooertirh,

until We came to Naiml in Ramah. And We snrioord off his

clothes also and odOoersirh hefOdr Samuel in like manner and

lay down naked all nean day and all thm night. Werreyodr

they say, is Saul also among the prophets?” (Z Sam. xix.

20-24 ) In tWe days of Elijah and Elisha, terdr was an

abundance of prophets: narsr orooarns srrmrh to eave a

knowledge of almost every thing before it came to pas , when

Elijah was about to be nrahtlaneh, he could not keep • [t a

secret, though We sought diligently to do so; Elisha was too

much of a odspern to be ignorant of dern was about to

happen, thrreysrr We ysllswrh Elijah darreerr We went; and

OP THE BOOK OP MORMON. 185

also fifty other “prophets went and stood to view afar oft’.’’ {IL. Kings ii. 7.) These prophets l iveO in various cities and generally had masters or chief prophets over them. One

company dwelt at Ramah, over whom Samuel was appointed to preside, as just mentioned; another company dwelt at Bethel: another at Jericho. (See II. Kings ii. 3—5.) When Jezebel cut off the prophets of the Lord, there were a hun dred that Obadiah managed to save alive by hiding them in caves. (See I. Kings xviii. 13.) Hence aroahe’h, at times, were very numerous in Israel. AnO, do Ooubt, if we had all of their prophecies, we should have many volumes much ; larger than the' Bible; but their ' prophecies were not all writ’eD, and from .this fact, we have reason to believe that their gift was intended more for the benefit of themselves and others in their Oay, than for future ages. •

tian Church would not be blessed with prophets any more; but this is a mistaken notion, for Jesus says Himself to the Jews, “Behold, I send unto you prophets, and wise men, and scribes ; and some of them ye shall kill and crucify; and some of them shall ye scourge in your synagogues, aDO persecute them from city to city.” (Matt. xxiii. 34.) Paul also informs the Ephesians, that when Christ “ahcaDOaO up on high, He led captivity captive aDd gave gifts ud’o men.” AdO he further states, that “he gave some, apostles; and some, prophets- and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers.” (Eph. iv. 8-11.) • Prophets, then, were among the gifts which were given unto meD after the ascen sion of our Savior : this accords with another saying of Paul, that “GoO hath set some in the Church, first apostles, second arily prophets, thirdly teachers,” etc.; (I. Cor. xii. 28.) and also wheD speaking of the diversity of gifts imparted -to the Church by the Spirit, he says, to one is given wisdom; to another, knowledge; to another, faith, to another, prophecy" atc- From these aehhaeah we learD that prophets were just as much intended for the Christian Church as teachers, pastors, wis dom, knowledge, faith or any other gift. AnO ye’, those who profess to have the Christian religion exclude aroaha’s from their churches; with the same propriety, they might exclude

186 DIVINE AUTOWTICITY

tha gifts of wisdom, ktovlongiT faith, ilacblee, pastors and

ovary oShir gift peamiein in thi gosrll.

33.—Wa shall tow show that propheSs and all other aficlee, ’

or flets, ara igdieponsably glcoiearyT as lxreleion ‘ by Paul;

“For tha poeelpting of thi eaigSeT for the work of tha mltle-

teyT for Sha 1$^^ of tha body of Christ, till wo all come in

the unity of the faith, and of thi knovllngl of Shi Sot of

GanT utSo a pleeoct mat, unto tha measure of She stature of

tha rUllnoee of Christ: Shat we honcleaeSh bo to more chil-

nrlg, Soeson So and fro, and caerlln about with ivory wind of

nocSeinlT by Sha sleighs of-men and cutting ceaetigois,

vbleoby they lia it wait to dociiva; but speaking the truth '

it lovlT may grow up itSo Him it allHhltgs. which is She bladT

avot ChrisS; from whom sha whole body fitly joined SogoShor

and compacted by Shat which every joitS euprlioth. accord

ing So tha afocSual working it Sha measure of avery pars,

Rakesh increase of the body unto tha imfying of itself in

lovo.” (Eph. iv. 12-16.) Tho object, Shot, of shise officers

and giess, is first, “for the perfecting of the Saints;" soconnly,

“eoe she work of Sho ministry,” and thirdly, “for tha onleyltf

of the body of Christ.” Wa now ask, all Chrletoteam who

peoelse So be SaitSs, whiShtr Shoy are plefocS or imperfect?

The goglral atsvoe is, “we are imperfect.” How do you

expect So become roeelcS, if you do away out of your churchos

igipieod apostles, peopboSe, and othor officers? Thesa art tha

only gifts and officers by-which the Saints cat be pleeocSon.

Have you got them in your m]ees? Millions agevle “to ' we

do tot believe it pearhoSe it our day.” Bus do you boliave.

it “pastors atd teachers?” 0 yos, they art gocoisary Who

Sold you to reject tha most important gieSi of sha church and

So retain Sho rest? No oto has tom us So do this but our

mltlesoes. atd shoy must bo goan men, and they say that ‘

arosiloe and peophoie ara to longor gocossaey, but that avat-

fllisiST rasSoee and soacbles are And shot do you shitk’

your mlglsSlre ari gaoe met whin they do away she plat

established for the ^61^^ of sho Salgse, atd eubetliuSl tha

plats of mon in its sSoae ? Daoe not- Paul noclae1 that any

mat or angol shall ba cuee1e who preachis a nlf1rogS gasrol

from shi oti hi preached ? And did he tot include i t his

OF TOE BOOK OF MORMON. 187

gospel all rhasa gifts foe rHe peetactlng of rhe Samis ? Most cerlainly he did; and if youe ministers teach you aitferehrly they ate ceesaa and all ’ rhai follow Oheir iaechihgs will be cursed. Know assuredly ihai Ohere nevee was any othae plan adopted in the gospel • oo perfacr the Sainis raeh through epostlas, prophets and otHee gifts. Do you taaa “rhe work of the ministry ?” All ehswae, yes. Remambae, thah, ahai “for the work of rhe ministry,” eppsolas and veovaais, ate declared to be as nacassery as pesiors and teachers. If pha is unnacas- sary, alt are uhhacasseey- and Ohe work of the ministry must

,ceasa. On ihe olhee aehd, if one is necessary, alt are necae-

sary, ahet rhe work of rhe ministry may cpnrihee. If God has auahoeizad laachars among ihe chuecheB of Cheisrahdom, He must l ikawlsa Have aurhoeized eposOlas and prophets; if He has not lHe lariae, He has ^0 the former; and if He has nairher, He has no Church on the earth. Agam , doesthe Church need Oo be edified in rhese days? Mos'certainly. What is God’s plan Oo edify ihe Church? Paul says, that He gave, not only pesOpes and teachers, io edify them, but also eppsrles and peophats. Whete these otficaes have no existence there can be no aaificelipn of ihe Chuech. Any oOhae plan of edification, however great and megnificana, will noO do. God’s plan is, not only supaeloe Oo all oihars-but it is thejonly plan peaeitaa “foe the edifying of ihe body of Christ.” Thus we

eae, tHai wiohouO inspired evosllas, provhais- etc., ahara can be no work of rhe ministry—no eaificeiiot of ihe body of CHeisO —no veefacring of ihe Samis—and consequently no Chuech.

34.—Bui Paul • did' noa leave us ignorant with eagara to

further dulies of rhese itsviraa officers. He says rhai they ate nacassaey to prevent ihe Church from being “lossed lo and fro” like children and lo keep iHem from being “carried about by every wind of doclrina, by the sleight of men and cunning ceefoitass, whereby they, lie in wail lo deceive.” The geaar eeason why rhe millions are carried away and tossed about wiih the false and soul-destroying docieinas of the Pe-pisls and ProrastanOs is, because they hava noi inspired evosllas and prophais among Ohem, and, tHarefora-without ahis great pre-vanOative, the cunning craftiness of men ovaevowees them, and they follow rhe Corrupt impositions of modern ealigIonisrs.

188 DIVINE AUTHENTICITY

thc Church is this state of existence, as we have already proved in the first chapters of this series. Asd Paul carrokorater this when hc says, thCy were gives “for the perfecting of thc Saints, for thc work of the ministry asd for the efito’isg of the body of Christ; till we all come in the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.." In what state will all thc Saints comc is the unity of thc faith ? When

will they all comc is the unity of thc knowledge of the Sos of God? When will they all bc perfect mcs9 When will they all comc unto the measure of thc stature of thc fullness of Christ? Thc answer to all these questions is given by Paul when hc suos,. that when that,which is perfect is comc, the Saints are to see thc Lord face to face, asd know as they arc knows, asd scc us they are seen. Consequently', it will bc is the next state of existence, asg sot is this. Therefore, is this state of' existence, as the Church is imperfect usd needs edifying, apostles, prophets, teachers and all other gifts which Jesus hus gives or promised, arc isfisocorykly oecersyro to accamolisg that great and important work which cuobat parrl-bly be acCamolirhcf in usy other way.

thc veiy life usd soul of the religion of heaves—that it is Indispcnryklo onecessary for thc culling of ull officers in thc Church—that without it, thc officers -can sever be instructed in the Various duties of their callisgs—that where thc spirit of revelation docs sot exist, thc Church cyosat bc comforted und taught in ul dirgom and knowledge—cannot be properly reproved and chastened according to the misd of God—cas- sot obtain o^omircr for themselves, but arc deocof cst upon thc promises mudc through the uscients. Without new revclution thc people arc like a klibf mas groping his way is total darkness, sot ksodiog the gangers that beset his path. Without prophets asg revelatory darkness gastr over the future—no city, people or cation, understand what awaits them. Without new revelation, so people know of the approaching earthquake—of thc deadly plague—of the tcrri. blc war—of thc withering famine—and of thc fearful judg

OF THE BOOK OF MORMON. 1S9

ments of the Almighty which hang over their devoted heads. When the voice of living prophets and apostles are no longer heard in-the land—there is an end of perfecting and edifying the Saints—there is c speedy end to the “work of the minis try”—there is an end to the obtaining of that knowledge so necessary to eternal life—there is ah end to all that is great, grand and glorious, pertaining to the religion of heaven— there is an end to the very existence of the Church of Christ

on the earth—there is an end to salvation in the celestial king dom. Awake then, oh, ye slumbering nations—awake from the slumber of death and Christ shall give you light by the revelations of the Holy Ghost!
