•

THE BIBLE AND TRADITION, WITHOUT FURTHER REVELATION.

AN INSUFFICIENT GUIDE.

1.—In the former chapters of this series it has been proved

that more revelation is neither unscripturcl nor unreasonable, but indispensably necessary to the very existence of the Church of God on the earth. In this chapter it ’will be shown that without further revelation the Bible is an insufficient guide. That part of the Bible called the New Testament was written many years after the establishment of the Christian Church. How was the Church founded and governed before the New Testament was written? Answer: by the revelations of Christ and of the Holy Spirit, speaking through the apostles and prophets. These revelations were verbal, and not written? were delivered by word of mouth, and not with pen and ink. Large and numerous churches were established in Palestine, in Asia, in Europe and among the various nations of the eastern hemisphere, which were abund antly blessed with revelations, with prophecies, with dreams

and visions, with the ministry of cngels, and with the miracul ous powers cnd manifestations of the Holy Spirit; and yet they had not the writings of the New Testament.

190 DJVmE AUTHENTIC JTT

and bt perfected without the Nsw Testament writiogs: if shs could, through verbal revelation, Jsgen'‘ every principle of doc Cel”t, and be taught in every duty, during the most of the first century, tht same gift of revelation and prophecy could have i”SCrUcteO her in all succeeding generations, tvsn though ths New Testament had never bsti writth”. If i”ptirsd apostles, prophets and rtese rfficeep could perfect ths Saints in cee first otnCuey, surely ths 'same kind of rffiotep could perfect them in all fucaee ages. Written revelations were never intended to papsessdt verbal and continued revelation through ths living ministry. Tf tht Church of Christ had continued od the earth, puootpplvt gprpclsp and prophets would have coDCinusd with hsr, endowed with all tht prwtep and gifts of ths first; a”d the revelations in each successive generation would havs bren squally sacred with those given at the first; and thirt would have bren no such thing thought of as the canon of scripture being full and complete. •

Protestant churches which the scriptures do not clearly reveal, thertfort they must both of them consider that tht soriptueip art not a sufficient guide. We art informed in scripture that marriage is ordained of God, but we art not informed in ths pcelpCuet who has tht right to officiate in this csrsmoDy. Who

can till from the New Testament anything about ths ordsr to be observed in etlgClr” to this subject? Wt rsad cegt “what God hath joined Crgtthtr lit no man put asunder/’ but through what particular office doss Gcd join togsthse ths ssxss in matri mony? Gan laymt” officiate?- Can those out of ths Church officiate? Can a woman officiate? Can ths parties join- thtmpslvss togrthsr in mgtrimrDy, in the name of tht

Lord? Who can gipwse terss qasptiris from ths Bibls alons? No ods. Ths Biblt doss not guidt ths Church in this important oe0ingncs.

cons have authority to baptize, or not? Baptism is an important ordinance, and perald bs gdmiiisttesO by proper authority, but can any ont in ths Church gOminiptsr it? Can

private members baptize? Can womsn baptize? Doss the Biblt anywhere forbid thsm, or say that they art not author^

OF THE BOOK OF MORMON. 191

ized? John tWe Baptist, who Weld. nWr PdirttWssh of Aaron,

Wad aenhodiny to* baptize. Apostles, Elders and Evangelists haonizrh. Did nWr aetWo^iny-extend to any lsdrd sffiaedt or

members? • The Bible hset not inform us; nWrdrysrr tWe Bible is not a sufficient guide.

-5;—Again, what officers in the CeraW-Waer a right .to lay on

Wands for the gift of nWr Holy Spirit? Can any but aoostlrt administer tWe .Spirit by this sacred sdhmance? • Ananias was sent to Paul to haonizr him, and lay Wis Wands upon Wim, that We “might be filled witW tWe Holy GhoJ:” Was Ananias an apostle? or ‘did We Wold tsmr lower office? Philip could bap-nozr tWe Sr'maritaLht,. while Peter and John laid Wands upon hsnW men and women for tWe gift of nWr Holy Gaost The

great question is, can •any but apostles lay on hands in the ordinance pf confirmation? The Bible • does hsn answer this question, nWrdefode tWe ■ Bible is not a sufficient guide.

ance ; but wWo is aetWsdizrh to break nWr hderh and bless it", and also .the. wine,. and administer it to tWe Saints ? Can Teachers or Dracsht do this ■witW authority ? Can • odivanr member^ or women ahmmisnrd in-tWis solemn sdhihahcr ? TWere

is hsnWihg in tWe New Testament nhan einWed aunWodizrt or ysd- hidt them • to do it. Can any • one, ditWoen being instructed by

. ■ mew rreclatnolh,,ahmihitned the Lord’s teoprd m His name, witW

His-aenWoldity‘ and by His sanction ? TWe Bible does not answer this question, nWrdryode tWe Bible is not a sufficient guide.

from a Deaaoh’t? ■'WrWrrrin .do tee duties of Elders, Evan gelists and Pastors difer ? What aetWoriny Was one tWat the

othrdt do not ootsrtt ? All nWrte are qeetnioht dWiaW tWe Bible does not plainly answer., yet to be v.tuffiairhn guide, it tWoeah answer all such qurtnioht definitely.

wWere teach infant baptism by command or example ? If infant ..baptism be rigat, the Bible Was not informed us of it, nWrrr• fore it must be an insufficient guide. If infant baptism be wrong, at dWan age should cWilhdrh be haonizeh ' ? Upon tais question tWe Bible also is silent

192 DIVHfE AUTOENnCITY

hands upon little children, and pray for them, and bless them ef’ar the example that Jesus has given or not? This is a ques tion that cannot be seatled by the Bible.

an ordinance limited to the apostles and officers of the Church? The Bible again is silent, and Ooes not plainly answer the ques tion.

week be kept holy unto the Lord ? The New Testament does noa clearly answer this question. There is rather more evidence in that book for keeping holy the Sabbath Oay or Saturday, than tnara is for keeping the firs’ day or Sunday. The New TesLameD’ is very indefinite on ahis subject, and thararofa ia is an insufficient guide

king and people in England ought to revolt from the Romish church, and form a church of their own by act of parliament? If the Bible were a sufficient guide, why was aD act of parlia ment Dacasserv as another guide to form the English church ? If ’he Bible were a sufficient guide, why was another book made, calleO the “Book ofUom on Prayer,” and the people csmaallaO to give heeO ao it under pain of banishment, and eveD Oeath itse^ ? If ahe articles of religion, contained in ahe New Tasaamana were a sufficient guide, why were “ThirLy-DiDe Articles” more, enforced upon ’he aasala by acts of parlia ment, and ahe people butchered and murdered because they could not conscientiously comply with diem ? Ia is certain ’haa this nawly-rormaO-aefliament■meOe church considered the Bible to be very deficient as a guide, or anav never would have fahsrtaO ’o such blood-thirsty, murderous meahufah ao establish other books in addition to ’he Bible

13—If Pro’ah’•aD’h sup pose ’he Bible ’o be a sufficient

guide, as they are coDstaD’ly ’elliDg their followers, will ’hey be so kind as to point out-wha’ part of that, sacred book, calleO Luther, Calvin, Crammer, Wesley and hosts of s’harh, to afaacn, baptize and administer many other ordinances such as the ancient Church eOminih’efaO? Indeed, whaa para of ’he Bible calls and commissions any of ’he ministers of ’he afesaaa

I I

OF THE BOOK OF MORMON. 193

day? It cat be said without any e1ae of cogiranictlogT that tha -Bibla gavb1e1 has pall1n a single individual So tho work of thi migleSey for Shi last e1V1gS11g canSueloe. Thoe1eoe1T for thi calling of thi ministry, ths Bibla is at insufficiont guin1.

aei1e of the nlfie1nt oflc1ee of tha-church? If is bo gicoeeo]er thaS pr1aph1ee should havo wagis, how much shall it he ? How much more sBoH at apostli gas that a prophet? If a-bishop get from Sat So twenty thousogn rounne for ota y1oe’e preach ing,' how much should ah itspleon apostli or prophet got? Or bow much should some of tbe lower afipoes have? Tha Now T1sSam1ni naos toS Sell us She amoun'i of vagoe eollfloue blea- ^lgfe should hav1. thoe1for1, if it be important to know, tha, Bibla is at lgsuffipionS guide. Is says, hovovoe. that apasSloe should “take tiithor purse tor scrip,” but it leavis us entiroly- it Sha dark as So how much bishops, arch-bishops atd other officers should Bovi. Would is not be a wise plat for at act of parllamogS So incrooe1 thair wagos a lisil1, ‘loss shey euef1r?; Wa soe plainly ShaS Sha Bible is toS a eufficiogt guide it many, vary many polgSe. as the doings of She vhal1 PraSosiagt world most plainly declare.

tbi Bible a .eufficl1gt guide. They plainly toll us it sheir wriS- igge tbaS they do nos. So eae, 'then, tbey are pagslsS1gS. BuS what do they suppose makes up tho doficlogcy? Tboy answoeT

“tradition,” 'or She “ug■weiSi1g vaed” of G-od, as it was erak1g by Sba apostlis, and hognon davg ugcaerupi1d So thi prisons day. The Right m1vae1nn Doctor Milner, a very able and l1aegon, CaSbolic bishop, says, “Tha Catholic rule of eoltb, as I eSai1n b1eoe1, is tot merely, the written word of God, bus the whole word of God, both written and unwritten; it oShor woeneT Scripture and Tradition, and Shise propounded and

explained by the Catholic church." * Tha Coibolice do nos believe it any lator e1v1lotiogs than whaS voe1 givin it tbe firsS ago of CbrieSiagity: Shis may bo slot it thair weltigfe. Dr. Miltor, it speaking of Sba Pap’iei churches, says, ’“Is

■wEgn of Oagteovarey,” LaStar x. p. 125.

194 DIV^l AOTHENTICtTY

is a tUnaamenial maxim with ahem all, never to admit of any tenet, but such as is believed by all the bishops, and was believed by their predecessors up to the apostles themmeleis." t According Oo ahis, the Romanists nevee admit any new tenet. With theie views, no eavalarIons can be given—all things haliavaa oe received by ihem must be araced back through all “rhaie predecessora up Oo the eVosrlas rhamselves:” they are not pae-mitOed Oo haliate any thing which thaIe fathers wete ignorant of. When any thing is veasenrea. Oo ahem, the 3^'0^ is nor, whaihee ii is a new eevelalion from God, but they •immediaOaly inquire, has ii been halIavea by the chuech since ahe fiest age ? If it has noi, it is-eajactea. The Catholic chuech does not claim ihe asslsOenca of aHe Spirit Oo ^^1 any thing new, “but merely,” as Bishop Milnee axvrassas himself, she .claims .“Ohe aid of God's Holy Spirit, Oo enable her Oeuly to decide what her faith is, and has ever been in■ such articles as have been made known to her by scripture and tradition.” J

16.—After eatalation ceased Oo be given, and, consequently,

the Chuech of Christ ceased iis existence on the eaeOh, many of the fiesa aposta0as veaoanaea ahaa scripture and 0raaiaion were a sefticiana guide,' and Ohat noahing new was needed. Iren'eas, wHo-lived in tha-second cen0eey, saams to have foe- goaoan that God placed in ahe Chuech Itsviraa men lo con stantly ^80^00 hee by new eavaleOipn- and like all the sehsa- quenl appstaaas lays geeal sOiiss upon tradition. He says,

“SUPPOSING THE APOSTLES HAD NOT LEFT US THE SCRIP

TURES , OUGHT AVE NOT STILL TO HAVE" FOLLOWED THE ordinance of tradition which , they consigned 0o those Oo whom they committed rhe churches ? Ia is this pealnenca of tradition.'' cotlituas he, “which many nelipns of beebaeiens, believing in ChrisO, follow, without rhe use of laiaars or ink.” $ TeeOullien, who lived at rhe close of-aha same eanlury, finding rhe sceipleLeas an itsutticiatt guide, apvaels lo tradition itsoaea of new revelation,. He says, “We begin, tHaratora,’with l aying ia down as a maxim, thal ahasa men” (svaeking of iHe opvP-

t----End of Controversy, Letter sii. p. 1G6. J-----Ibid, Letter xii. p. 1G8. 2-----Advera. Hteres.. Letter iv. c. 64,

OF 195 TIE BOOK OF MORMON.

nents of his church) “ought not to be allowed to argue at all from scripture. In fact,” continues he, “these disputes about the sense of scripture, have generally no other effect than to disorder either the stomach or the brain It is therefore the wrong method to appeal to the scriptures, since these ciferd ’either no ’ decision, or, ct most, only c dpubtful one. And even, if ■ this were not the case, still, in appealing to scripture, the

- natural order of things requires that we should first inquire to ( whom the scriptures belong. From whom, and by whom, cnd . -on whct occasion, and to whom . that tradition was delivered by

which we became Christians.”* This author in another workj as Dr. Milneb states, “proves, at great length, the absolute necessity of admitting tradition no less than scripture as the rule of faith, inasmuch as many important ’points, which he mentions, cannot be proved without it.”

17.—Doctoc Milner, Co sltoss th’t the Sradition c£ the sc’C'

. * J . 1 A t •

the early ages of his .church, cites us to the writings, of St. Clement of Alexandria, St. Cyprian, Origcn, ctc., _of thc third century—St. Basil, and St. Epiphanius of the fourth century —and St. John Chrysostom at the beginning, and St.'Vincent of Lcrins, ct the end of the fifth century. All these writers, instead of contending for the great and infallible guide, namely, new revelation ,' which instructed the Church during the first century, have contended merely for. ancient scripture and tradition as their only guide—as their only rule of faith. Thus we can sec, how early apostasy succeeded Christianity-wc can sec, how early this rule of faith was changed.

. 18.—I—Ilf Che deoreer an’ dedscons:of thf ,c pe an’ ge necnl councils among the Catholics be examined, it will be seen that such decrees cnd decisions profess to be founded, not upon new revelation, hut haGd ancient scripture or tradition. Shc pro- fessCs that her general councils are guided by thc Holy Ghost in ascertaining what the apostolical traditions arei but that the Holy Ghost does not give them anything new. That these arc really the views of tee.Catholios, may.be perceived on almost

*----Praircrip. Adverg. Hsere8..edtt. . pp. 36,37. t----Be. Corona Milit,

1 DIVINE AUTHENTICITY 9 6

every page of some of their standard works. The Right Rev. Bishop Milner, in his “End of Religious Controversy,” hag very definitely, and at some length, set forth this view. J. Mur doch, a Roman Catholic bishop, has highly recommended a work by Joseph Mumford, entitled “Question of Ques tions,” or “Who ought to be our Judge in all Controversies?” In this work the author states most clearly that the Roman Cathojie church, “pretends to no new revelations, but _ only to declare clearly what she finds to have j

' before been revealed .” i These general councils are con

sidered infallible, not because they are inspired with the word i of God direct to themselves, for this power they deny, but 1 because they suppose the Holy Ghost assists them to find out ' ancient tradition. We again quote, from the last-mentioned work.

19.—“Now to see what the councils on their part are to do

I must tell you, that their chief business is to examine the point's in controversy; hearing all that occurs for the one side and the other, and permitting several replies, if any remain, in due time to be made. After this diligence is used,, they consider what seems most conformable to the word of God, and every one’s vote is passed upon this particular. But here I must tell you, that ■ by the word of God, all councils, and orthodox believers have ever understood, not only God’s written word, contained in scripture, but also His unwritten word made known to the church only by tradition, which tradition also is, and was ever accounted by the church the very best and surest interpreter of the scripture. The votes .therefore of the fathers assembled in council are demanded, not only of what they think to be conformable to God’s word written in scripture, but also ’ how conformable to God’s word written in scripture, but also which they have all received from the fathers oftheir church, as delivered to ■ them from their fathers for God’s word, by tradi tion committed to their forefathers as such, from the apostles themselves.” 3

2d. —Let no one suppose that the Catholics believe in new

J----- “Question of Questions,” See. xxiv. par. 14. 2-----Ibid, Sec. xix. 2.

OF - THE BOOK OP MORMON. 197

revelation; for in tht above quotation it is sxpesppry appeetsd ChgC, “the unwritten word is made kDown to ths church onlt by tradition,” and that this tradition-must comt through thiie gatetep “from ths Apostles Chempervep ” Ths nuplnepp of tht Catholic councils, ceen, is, not to get any word from God diesoC to

chtmpervsp, but * to dstsemint what God said to ths Apostlss. That this is all that they pettend to do, is also evidsnt from ths words of Vincsntiup Lirfinetisis, as quoted by Mumford; he- says, “This only, and nothing but. this, ceh‘ Catholic• church does do by ths Osceses of her council! cegc what before they had escsived only by tradition from chtie ancestors, that Dow

they l eave consigned in authSn'ticgr writing to all posterity. * Councils, then, art convened to dtttemins tegditloDP—they aro convened Co writs Ceaditirnp in cee form of decrees. Now all this is good as far as it goes,,' but it stops infinitely short of cht true rule of faith, estgbrlshsd:in Cht apostolical church, namely, direct nd immediate revelation through A hsr oglctrp, whtChte assembled i” council or. dippeeped individually among tht nations.

21.—That tht apostate papal church dors not obtain Dtw

revelation, as tht gprptoricgr church always did, is still further tviOtnC from her defining tht canonical books, cglltO PcelpCaet. This was first done -at the Third Council of Cgecegte in tht year 397. ^Previous to that time had brtn a grtgC variety of opinions as to what books wert inspired of God. ^Mumford speaks thus on Chip subject:—“If you fly to-Cee CeadLtio]n(rg ths church only of ths first four hundred years, remember thgC ths Council of Carthage just after tht tid • of tersi years alleged ths gnoitnC tradition of their ggChirs, - which they judged sufficient for defining our canon. They, who wirt so near those firat four hundred years, knew far - neCCte the mors universal tradition of ChgC agt, than we ca” twelve hanOeid years after it. True it is, (nothing being defined till tht”) private doctors wirt fret to follow what they judged -to be truest; and as you find them varying from our canon, some in soms books, some in rChtrs: so you will find them varying from ont another, and varying also from you.” (meaning tht PertesCg”C canon.)

•-----“Question of Questions,*' Sec. xix. par. 2.

198 DIVINE AUTHENTICITY

“For in those first four hundred years, Melinet and Nazianzen excluded the hssk of Esther, dWicW you add.. Origen doubts of the roisnlr to tWe Hebrews, of the second of St. Peter^ of tWe first and second, of St. John; St. Cyprian and Nazianzen, leave the apsaalypsr or revelations out of neeir canon. Fuse-

bius doubts of it.” Elsewhere, he says, all nWotr holy yaihrrt agreed ever in this, tWat such hssks were evidently God’s word, which had evidently a tefiairht ndahinion for them : now in the days of nWosr fathers who taus varied from one another, it was not by any infallible means made known to all, nhan tWotr books about which neeid variance Vas, drdr recommended for God’s infallible word, by a tradition clearly sufficient to ground belief; for tWe church had not'as yet examined and defined, • whether tradition did clearly enough thod such and suca • books to be God’s infallible word. Burin the days of St. Austin, the Third Council of Cartilage, Anno, 897, examined how tey■ £0^^ or insufficient the tradition of the church was, which recommended nWote books for sadioterr, about which nhedr was' so much doubt and contrariety of soihioht. Th&y found all tee books cshnaihrh in our canon, of dWiaW you aaasehn so many apocryphal, to Wave been drcommehdrh by tradition, tef~' ficient to ground faith uosh. For on this ground (Can. 47.) taey odscrrhrh in defining all the books in o'ur canon to be aanshical. Because, say nWry, we have received from our fathers that those books were to be read in the Church. Poor

Innocent tee First, w Wo rived Anno 402, • being requested by Exeoeries, hithoo of Toulouse, to declare unto him waica books were canonical, he answered, {Ep. 3,) tWat Waving examined what sufficient tradition did demonstrate, We sets down— What books are receicedin the canon of the Holy Scrip tures, in tWe end of Wis epistle, c. 7. To wit, jetn nhstr dWiaW we now Wave in our canon.: and thougH he rejects many other books, yet he rejects not one of these.” f

22— Here is tWe most ihaohnrovrrtiblr evidence that this

vosttanr church, who define tWe canon of scripture at the clstr

of the fourth century, did not brliree in any insoideh books

being given after tWe first century. For if she Wad believed

t ■“Question of Questions,” Sec. iii. pars. 412.

OS' THE BOOK 0£ MORMON. 199

that eDVi man or officer in her communion had been inspired to write the word of GoO, during- ’he second, third or fourth century, she would most assuredly have incorporated such inspired writings in ’he sacred canon, but the very fact aha’ no books were admitted by the council of Carthage into the canon, which were written after the first century, shows most conclusively tha’ ’hey did no’ consider any later books to be

inspired. Here, then,’is * damoDh’fa’ive evidence, tne’ the apostate Romish church, OuriDg ’he second, third and fourth

centuries were destitute of ’ha’ efaa’ and infallible rule * namely, new rEVElatiON which characterizeO ahe Church in the first century, and in all previous ages whenever and wnafavar God had a people living in righteousness before Him. _

23.—So destitute were ’he officers of ahis apostate church

of ’he spiri’ of revelation aha’ they could no’ tell, only through tradition, which books were sacred, and which were not-, and hence there arose a great csn’aD’isD among ’hem on ahis sub ject, and a great variety of opinions. A’ length the same con-’ending parties mee’ together in ’he capacity of a general coun cil, and decide which books shall be received into ’he canon. Recollect, dear reader, ’hat ahis decision does no’ pretend to be founded upon new revelation but upon tradition, and LraOi- ’ion, ’oo, ’hat was so very imperfect that i’ led one ’o reject one book, and a■DO’har, another; producing a efaa’ contrariety of opinions before the council met. Who can. for one momem’, suppose that a council, composed of a set of con-enOing aass- ’e’eh so desti’u’e of the spirit of truth and faith, ’haa they could-not inquire of God and ge’ a revelation upon any sub ject, however important—who, I say, can suppose ’hat tnay could sia- in judgment upon God’s holy word, aDcf infallibly decide by ahe aid, no’ of new revelation, but tradition alone, which books were ’he word of GoO and which were not? Had

they believed in new revelation, and inquired of God which was His word and which was not,' ’here would have beeD some confidence ’o be placed in ’heir decisions; but as it is, ’here is scarcely any confidence whatever to be placed in ’hem in regard ’ o this mataer. Where inspired officers, possessing power ao obtain new revelation, have ceased, ahere iDral^ibili’v has ceased, and there uncertainty and doub’ must remain. Jell

9
