THE BOOK OF MORMON CONFIRMED BY MIRACLES.

origin of this work, the Lord confirmed the truth of the Book

of Mormon unto many witnesses in such a way, and by such

wccos, that it was impossible for them to have been deceived ;

that the testimony of these witnesses stands good until it can

be refuted; that no man eau be jn^t^i^ed in rejecting this testi

mony until he -can show that it is false; that it can only be

proved false in two ways, first, by showing directly that these

witnesses did not see and hear as they testify; second, by

showing that there is something connected with the nature-of

the message of which they testify, that is unreasonable,

unseriptural, improbable or contrary to some known truth.

Now, no one has ever attempted to bring any direct negative

testimony; this, indeed, would be impossible, unless the wit

nesses themselves should deny their former testimony, and this

they have not done. And those who have attempted to con

demn their testimony from the nature of the message itself,

have only exhibited their own weakness and folly. Upwards

of fifty years have passed away, and no man has, ' as yet, been

found able to prove the Book of Mormon or the testimony of

its witnesses false.

has wrought mcof great and glorious miracles by the hands of

His servants in confirmation of tie Book of Mormon. We

humbly speak of these things, not in a bochOiog spirit, for we.

can do nothing of ourselves; but it is the Lord who Scs in His

infinite mercy, performed many great and mighty works among

OP THE BOOK OP MORMON 255

ofis glalgeiiot, through ohose who havi hellhtlh ot His name.

•Thera art iwo kitd' of mi^1 9, Gist, iHosi wrought

by oft vpwtg of God; atd. hhcotd, tfost wrought by ifi power

of oft devil. Whet Moses was '1^ with a messagt to tht Egyptians, tfi Loid w-roughi miiadis by his Hana. Tfi magi- cieah e1ho, at the heml timi, wrought mi^ecllh. Wfit Most' casr his rod uvpt ahi ggpeah, ii btceme a sitpint; ihe magi cians cast Ofiii ephh upon ifh ground atd rhey also became seg-

Vhaih. Most' iugtta ifi ^011' ito'o blood; tht magicians did ifi heme. Most' brought frogs it giiat multitude; ohi magicians vlgtoreeh ihe same. Tfi migec1th plgfogmth by Mphlh wart dote by ifi powee of God; tHose pletpgmlh by ohi meglciaah wire doni by aft vpwlg of aft devil. Some

migades plgtormla by Mp'lh, thi magicians wiet nor pigmitiea io ptrfoim ; bur as fag as rhe Lora huftlged iftm to do miracles, they did vgtci'ely tfe s^mt of ings ofai ^lohlh did. Tht witch of Etdoi pegtormeh a giiai miracle, it bringing up Samuil from ofe dtad, by the request of Saul, king of Ihrell. If Ofis woman was pphhlhhth of at evil 'piiia, if it" we age forced ro admit rial rfe devil fas gitao vpwlg . foe sht was enabled rhrouga oht huvlenatuga1 j>)wee by which she was influenced to diieco Saul, aoawlrH'lanhing ft camt io fee it disguise. Thai sht ecleallf did bring up Samuil is ttihttl fiom aft cpateghation which pahhhh bhtweit Saul atd Samuel: mogtovig. Samuil Vgophthlhh ro Saul, concerting wf ao should befall Him atd all

Ihreel; and ihe texi day Oft pglhiciiot was literally tu1filledf*■ It slims that Oft Prophir Samuil weh gaoftg al'v1teslh al btitg hl'0egbld from his quiei resiitg place, for afieg Oft king of Israel fad bowed before him, “Samuil heid lo Saul, why east thou disquieted me, lo bring me up ? "

3.—As a ^11111 lvialach rear tht devil cat work eirecllh,

el'u' 'ef', “Thiee 'hall agist falsi Chrisis, ana false propHe??. atd hfe1l show geiaO sigt' and wotdtrs; ithpmuch of ar, if it wert pphhib1l-ihiy seall aiceivh the viey elect.” f As etoiHtr example of ahi .migecu1puh power of ahi dtvil, we are infprmlh thai ihe mat who vPh'lhhlh a itgion, had bitt ofiit boutd

t---- L SaiD' xxviii,

0---- Matt• xxvv 24.

256 DIVINE AUTHENTICITY

with fetters and chains, and the chains had been plucked

asunder by him, and the fetters broken in pieces.”* The

miracle of breaking chains and fetters is equal to the miracle

wrought by Samson in breaking new withes and new ropes, f

Jesus says, ‘ Many will say to me in that.day, Lord, Lord,

have we not prophesied in Thy name? and in Thy name have cast

out devils? and io Thy name done many wonderful works?

And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you. depart

from me, ye that work iniquity.” From the preceding verses,

taken in connection with this, we learn, that faise prophets and

such as should say Lord, Lord, and do not His will, but work

iniquity, were io perform wonderful works, and make great

pretensions/not only before men, but before the Lord. The

devil, therefore, assists those who work wickedness to perform

great signs and wonderful works. If the present translation

of the Bible be true, he has power to show visions, for it is

said, that he showed our Savior “all the kingdoms of the

world.” and it is also said, that “Satan himself is transformed

into an angel of light.”

should do “great wonders, so that -he maketh fire come down

from heaven on the earth, in the sight of men, and deceiveth

them that dwell on the earth, by the means of’ those miracles

which he had power to do in the sight of the beast.” £ Imme

diately before the second coming of Christ, there is to be a

general gathering of the nations against the Jews at Jerusalem :

these nations will gather into the valley of Armageddon near

Jerusalem,, after which the Lord will destroy them, This great

movement of all nations against the Jews, will be set in opera

tion by the means of wicked miracles. John speaks of it thus: '

“And I saw three unclean spirits, like frogs-, come out of the

mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and

out of the mouth of the false prophet For they are the spirits of

devils, working miracles, which go forth unto the kings of the

earth, and of the whole world, to gather them to the battle of

----Mark v ..

I----Judges xvi. y-l‘Z.

X-----Matthew, vii . 22, 23,

l----Rev. xui. 13,141.
