PROPHETIC EVIDENCE IN FAVOR OF THE BOOK OF MOR

MON.

1.—In the last Owo chepOeeh of this heeiah, it has baan

abundantly proved-thcO the Book of Mormon Sis been con-

fiewad' by the voice of Ohe Lord, by the ministry of cngels, by

heavenly visions or by Ohe miraculous gifts cnd popaeh of the

Holy Ghost, unto tens of thousands of witnessas. The Book of Mormon, Oharefoee, is damons-rcted by a vast amount of

the most inpon0as0eble evidences such as never can be weakened

or overthrown by cll ohe powers of priestcraft, adiOora and Ohe

infernal - regions combined. < It may ba - ridiculed, laughed ct,

treat ad with contempt, entirely naglactad, or persecuted , but

all such arguments will cvcil nothing in the dcy of judgment,

only to -bring down upon those who reject so gracO a revelation

still greeOae condemnation. Having demonstrated the divioe

auOhenOiciOy of Ohe Book of Mormon, we might with propriety

proceed -no farther in saarch of evidencas, for all additional

evidences drawn from Ohe prophecies or any oOhar source, can

only ct the most be additional dawonhOrationh of tha same graat

divioe truth. A problem in gaomaOry aFOae having once baan demonstrated, caooot be mada coy more certain by cny oew peocash of demonstraton; so with this grecO and haavenly

teeahuea—the Book of Mormon ; if coy ooe will follow Ohe steps of demonstration already pointed out, ohay will know with Ohe scws caeteiniOf ohco io is c revelation from God, OhcO a geome trician Sis whan he follows Ohe rules of demonstration ip ralcOion Oo cny peroiculee problem,

OK THE BOOK OF MORMON. 283

ation of the gospel to the earth ; jhe' says, “And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto ■ them that dwell on the earth, and to every — nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, saying with a loud voice, ‘Fear God, and give glory to Him, for the hour of

His judgment is come; rnd’woeship Him* that made heaven and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters.’ And

there followed another angel, saying, ‘Babylon is fallen, is fallen—that great city—because she made all nations drink

of the wine of the wrath of her fornication.’,”* When the gospelwas committed.unto man’in the first century, it was not by the ministry of an angel, but by the person of our Lord Himself; therefore, hohn had no reference to the preaching of the gospel in the first century. Our Savior commanded the apostles to go into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature: this mission was fulfilled before hohn saw this vision, as is evident from Paul’s declaration to the Colossians : (i 23.) “If ye continue (in the faith grounded and settled, and be not moved away from the hope of the gospel, which ye have heard, and which was preached to every creature which is under heaven^ loherefore I, Paul,, am made administer." At the time the apostle wrote this epistle, it seems that “every creature under heaven” had heard the gospel. It was several years after this that hohn “saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, kindred, tongue and people.” From which we learn that there was to be another period after the first century when the gospel should be again preached to every creature.

this series that immediately after the first century the whole earth became corrupted by the great “Mother of Harlots,”— that apostasy and wickedness succeeded Creistirhity—thrt, for the want of new revelation, all legal succession to the apostle ship was discontinued—that the gifts and powers of the Holy Spirit ceased—and that the Church was no longer to be found on the earth: this being the case, all nations must have been

•-----Revelation xiv.. G. 7. S,

284 DIVINE AUTHENTICITY

dtsClCuCt of Cht tvtergtC1ng gospel foe maty gtDtiat1rDt—boC

dttC1tutt of its history as-it was onct petgched and enjoyed,

WuC-destitute of its nrest1ngt, of its powers, of its 2^, of its

Pr1ttCho0d, of its red1ngbcit gdmiD1steetd by riggr authority.

During Chis long prelod of dgekDett, no man could obey tht

gosptl and enjoy its Wlitt1ngt, nicgusi no people were authorized

Co gdm1bitCte its rid1Dgnois legally; ChrregoIe, it oedtr ChaC

mankind might again postitt and enjoy the rrdinabcit and

nlettmgs of Cht gospel, iC necgmt absolutely becrttaeh that tht

gprscrithip, with every othte authority which chgegcttI1zid

Cht Che1tt^gb church whst it was before on ths eaeCh, should

be eetCreid among met. This eettorgC1ob of Cht gotprr PelesC-

hood, with an its' gfCs, powtrs and nlrstiDgs, could, not Cakt place, gccrediDg to Cht scriptures, only by at aDgtl coming

from heaven, as SaitC John has creae]h predicted.

4.—That Cht ngC1rnt have had a history of Cht gospel, cob-

Calnid in ths few books of Cht Ntw TittamebC, oe lb other

words ChaC Chry have had a history of what another people

believed, obeyed and tnjoytd, wt by to means deny, But

ChaC tht batOons have gotugrrh obeyed atd enjoyed Cht gospel

foe Chimtervet, wt do dety. Tht history of whaC oChers

enjoyed is a vtey difftrtnC Ching from gcCagl potsrstioD and

enjoyment foe ourselves.' The h1tCoeh is but a dead lettse,

unrest we cab ttjoy tht same things. WhaC advantage would

it br to a hungry mat who was riady to pieith to read ' Cht

hostoey of ths Savior's feeding there teoasgDd on logyes and

fishes? It would only stive Co aggrsvats his appetite: ht

hlmseif must have food or' perish. So with 'mankind it

iigaeO Co Cht gospel: its history is one thong, its enjoyment is

atoChee. To erad the;. -blsCoey of oChres gigsC1ig on gotttl

brist1igt will toC saC1tgh Cht craving anxieties of ' oue souls; to

erad tht history of a Cheitt1gD church gtoiintrh, is calculated

Co give us a longing desirt that a Christian church might again

bt eettoetd Co Che ^arth. That Che batOons might toC ditpgie

of tvte again eijoyltg Che gotpir, ths LoeO ' left them that

glorious attuegDOi that $Cr gospel should again be maOs mani

fest by another angel flying it the miOsC of heavet.

I If Chret wret a taClon, klnderd, Cobgut, oe propls, on the

whole taeth ChaC grIrgdh prttrtsrd atd enjoyed the gotprl,

OF THE BOOK OF MORMON. 285

* .

there would Dot be the least necessity of an angel coming with it; but the very fact that the everlasting gospel, when revealed by the angel, is to be preached “TO EVERT NATION, KINDRED, TONGUE AND PEOPLE,” shows most clearly - that every nation on the whole earth was entirely desti tute of it. This agrees most perfectly with what we have before demonstrated: all people being without it the angel restores it for the benefit of all.

all its fullness.; and it has been revealed to the inhabitants of our earth by an angee; it was by an angel that the npcstieuBie and Priesthood' were again restored; it was by an angel that men. were called and ordained by the holy ministry, and empowered to preach, baptize and -administer all the ordi nances of the everlasting gospel, contained in the Book of Mormon; therefore, let all people rejoice for the gospel is once more crutccrd to the earth ; let the nations, be glad that nftrc so many generations of darkness, a Christian Church has again been organized upon our dark and benighted globe: let gongs of praise and thanksgiving ascend up before God among all nations, that glad tidings of great joy Bave.cgtr more been sent down from heaven—that inspired apostles and prophets have once more been sent to preach, baptize, and show unio man the way of salvation.

ing been taken away from the earth, because of apostasy and wickedness, could only be restored to man by new revelation, and such revelation must come through an •unge! The Roman Catholics and Protestants do not pretend to any such rrutorn- ticg of the gospel by an angel, and tBrcrfocr they cannot be in posueuuiog of it. The only-people that do testify that the gos pel has been restored to the earth by an angel, are the Latter- day Saints,; therefore, if the gospel is restored, the Lnttrc-ray Saints are the only people to whom it is restored: all ctBecs testify that it has not been restored to them. If the only people who do testify to the restoration of the gospel by an angel, be impostors, then all nations must still be in darkness, without the gospel, and without a Christian church, and must remain so, until the angel is sent in fulfillment of JoBo’s pre

286 t>IVI^ AUTHENTICITY

diction. The gstox1 is, nltdcfiodr, wiri die Ladder-daa Saints, or rlsejn’it hsd1rrr on dir wiole xartl; Bud wlxn dlr angel restores die gospel, lx must dxttodx it io soie oxsp1e ; why may nod nie‘Ladtrr-dva Sainis bx diad people ? If it were drstsded io ana bdard proo1r. would dix hrdisnt be. any more willing to drcriyr id dian niry are now? If ii t1oe1O bx restored in-die next grhrradibh, would niry bx any lode believing rlvn dir orxtxhd generation? Is riere vhydWihg abhhXctrd widi nWr message wlici dix Ladtyr-Oah Sainis desiifh diad an angxl ivs .drtdoded, niad proves id nod do be die message of “dlr ryrd1asd“ ing gospel? ” If not, neen all people wio drtiti ii will ms3t astereO1h bx cshdr1hrd in tie day of judgment for so doing.

7.—Id is do bx expxcdxh diad wixn dWr angxl dxsrodxt nie

gospel, id will br dxsiorxd in yuI1hxtt. and in nie losd pxdfxct timo1iainh• and o1rinhrst, so diad eyrdh pomr of dir dscrrihr of Christ slall bx clearly revealed, and expressed in sucl language, dhat na dds oxrtoht cse1O uhdrrttahd id differentia. Many .lings, connectth wiri nie docidme of Cirisi, an not clearly revealed and rxpdXStxO in ld1r English ndaht1adioh >f dhe Bible: diis is owing, as wx 1^3 already t1odh in c1aodrd III. do die 1ott of many of iWr inspired dd'iiings. and do thr drjxarioh of iana trcrrd books by dhe third council of Carthage, together widl nlose daica hvvr since bcxn drj■rarxd by nhr P>rsrxtiantn : and also, as we layy before proved, ahst1rd great source of ' error is, dian dix Greek and Hebrew 1anuscriprt, from wlici die Bible was traht1rtrd, Wad become so awfully csrruprrd, in almost ryxdy iexi, riad die rrant1vtods were utterly ai a loss io know which reading was correct. All iaese things, combineO ' wiri dix unavoidable eddsrt of an uninspired nrant1arion, Wave-320x1x0 die English Bible extremely uncertain and ambiguous. This uncxdiaindy and ambiguity lave bxxn dlr principal cause of all dhe diyitioht of modern Chrisnxhdo1. Thr only way to reiedy tiis• great evil, is do obtain anonicd dxve1atish of tlx gotp'r1, free from all die aodrupnisnt and uhcxriaihny wlici a1arvcixrizet dhe English Bible. Nodhing slori of such v rxvr1anioh can xvxr rxdxri mankind from dieir errors of dsc- .1123 ; nodling else, can bx an infallibly standard of ihr Cadit-tian religion; noneing xlsc can reclaim dixm. from divisions and

OF THE BOOK OF MORMON, 287

sOeifhs; aorhltg else will 'give ctiiaitiy atd 'iehi1lly, so ttcts- harf to the hevvltl'' and helfe01on of mat; atd nothiug 11'1 could bh ixpecitd in tie Iltl1erloa of oht gospel by an angel. Such a tlfllallpa is til Book of Mormon; lit most itfa1^ih1h chiiainly cHaracOlIizhh ivtiy 0Ihltetcl atd eviiy aocteine1 vpltO rhfla1la it that hppf. It it thert is no ambiguity—no eoom for cpnltottIhy—to docliite so lmptItecOly expressed, tfal two Vtthoth would draw Owo difftreno conclusions thtitfrom. Such a eavtlatiot was gnarly thedaa, atd such a ravtleilpt tht angel has gavialed.

8.—As an example of Ohe exceeding grtai plalatthsIt which

the aocOeite of Ohh gospel is tlfhellh, wt qtioii the itachitgs of Jesus Cfrist, it rilarion lo baptism, as • givtt by His pei’ 'pael minisOiy, it the tprOhttt peI0 of South Amtiica, soot after His 11^1^601000 : •

“Atd it came to peh' . llat he 'vofi utio Nephi (for NepHi

was among the multitude), and He commathia him that be 'hoeth come foilh. Atd Nephi aiost atd went forth, atd bowed Himself bhfoth lit Lord, atd hi did kiss His fttO. Atd the Lord commanded Him that ft should eel't. Atd th erp't atd hioph befoga Him. Atd lit Lord heia utio him, I give utto you power Ofat ye shall heviizt Olis ptpp1e- whet I am again a'chtheh itOo htevet. Atd again Ohe Loid calltd oiltis, atd said utio tlim likewise; atd He gave utio thtm powte to baptize. And Hi saia utio ifem, on tiis wist hhe11 yh bap tize; atd titre 'fall bt to al'puletloth among you. Verily I

say utto you, ^0 whoso rhptaOith of his sits tirougl youe wora', atd di'ietOl lo be baptized it my name, on Olis wise shall ye baplizh them : btloia ye shall go dowt atd siata in tie water, atd in my name slall yi baptizi tlim. Atd tow behold, thtst ati' ihe woids which yh shall say, calling thtm by tame, heyitg- Havitg auihoiity givit mi of Jesus Citist, I baptize you in Ohe tame of the Falhtr, atd of tie Son, atd of Ohe Holy G•Hphr. Amtn. Atd Oitt shall ye immtise Ohtm it thi water, atd comt foeih again oui of ohe waler. Aud afoir ilis matter slall yi hepllzh in my tame, foe Behold, vigily I say utio you, Ohat the FeoHer, atd Ohe Sot, and ihe Holy G•hohr, ate one; and I am it lie Faller, ana ihe Faller it me, and tlh Fathte atd 1 are one. Atd according as I lave

288 DIVINE AUTHENTICITY

commanded- you, thus shall yn baptize. And Choos shall bn no rl8euCntihP8 among you, as Chaos enhh eiceeoCh been '/neither shall Chaos bs ri8p.uhnCihPS among you chpnsoping Cha pomis of my doctrine, as Chaos etce eicehohh been; foo vnoily, veoily, I say upho yon, ho ChaC enhe Cha spirit of chntontihh is pot of ma, but is of Cha devil, who is Cha faChao of ouo coptanciop, and ha 8Clroate up Cha hearts of men to chPCopd with apgao, ops wilh nnoCeeo. Behold Chis is not my rhntoina, ho -stir up Chn hearts off men with angao againsC ora another; but this is my

doctoipo, cenc such Chings should bn dope away.” *

9.—Nrw, we w3k, how ry e es u!(O en * in regand Od CO e

meaning off Chis quhCnCiop chpceopirg Che mods of baptism : no iwo meanings could bn drawn from teosa definite Coachings. ' Every oChao point of Cha rhntripo of Choisi is squally as plain, ' and as dofiniCaly expressed as Chis, so ChaC thoon is po possible chance for apy rifeeoepce8 of opinion in rocCoine. Theoa can be no-quasliop raised as ho Che moaning - of Che rOnColpe ip ths Book of Mormon; ceeonfhos all who obtain a knowledge of its divine nu1eepCicity, aoe fOom ChancefooCe sure and cooiair upon nvaoy point of Chs gospet: and thus divisions, 8hoieos, ooptap-8ihps,- ahd'all Cha evils ChaC flow from a diversity of opinions aoa, among Chn Latteo-day Sainis, foo avoo dona away. The

wrapglipgs and quarrels about hhe doctrines of salvation, which have rl8toncCer mankind for gepoontiops and ages, cap hava-no placa in ouo midst. Among us new oeoelntihp has Cakop lhe place of human ^00^, and knowledge has haksp Che placo of opinion and gusss-work, and Cha result heereoh is union, eoana,

and sternal life. * ■ _ ’

; 10.-Tfe hs- piaulcr ao-pod wh ww th-hogth sh oulh fid w-'h

Cha eoorla8tipg gospel is expressod ip a pari Of his eoonlamn- hior ; he was to say, “Fear God and give glory Co Him, foo hhe hour of His judgment is nhme.” Tha- seovaphs of God aoa nmphhooed nol only Co preach “Che evOolascipg go8eol,” but Co proclaim Co all rations ChaC “the hour of god’s judgment is 'come,” Il is Che elevepce hour, or Cha last hima cenC Chn Lord will eorpa His vineyard ; ih - is Che lash eohclamnhioh of Cha gospel ChaC chn world - aoa ho bo favored wich, and Cha lash

+-—Book of Moomoh, Now Edition, page 502.

OF the BOOK OF MORMON. 239

time OhcO He will ccll upon Oham to repant; if they head Ohe warning they shall be gcthared out from among Ohe nations, and ba saved; if they heed io not, the fierce judgments of Ohe Almighty will hpaaWilf overtake them. LeO the-nations know eshura(tly Ohct “oha hour of God’s judgment is come,” cnd OhaO they have only ona way of escape, cnd thct"is, by embrac- iOg tha Book of Mormon, which - contains a peocleweOion of mercy as well as of judgment. LeO the nations hearken to Ohe voice of werpf, while she pleads in Ohair midst; let Oham bow their stubborn heeeOh, cod forsake cll OhJeir evil Waedh, before

justice shall make his claim ; for judgment followeth quickly aod lingere-h oot; Ohe hour is come, cod Ohe terrible day of Ohe Lord is aO hand—c day of wrath aod of aeaat terror—a day of fierce vaogacoce. .

11.—John predicts cobOler aeaaO event to take place imma-

WiaOelf after Oha procleweOioo of the everlasting gospel, namely, the downfall of grecO Babylon. After Ohe first cogel had fin ished his wishioo, he says, “Aod there followed aooOhae cogel, hefiog, Babylon is fallen, is fcllao, that great ciOy, baceusa she male cll nations drink of Ohe wineiof ’Ohe wrath of her foraicc-

I ,

tion.” The Revela-or has told us whcO Babylon maaoh in Ohe seventeenth chapter: it is represented under Ohe figure of c woman, called, ’-‘the mother of harlots and abomtna-’ tions of the earth.” Io Ohe first varse, this, woman is eepeesaoOaW as “ohe gracO whore that siOOeOh upon mcny waters.” Io Ohe fifoaeoOh verse, Ohe cogel said Oo John that, “The waters which Ohou sawest, where the whore siOOeth, are peoples aod multitudes, aod oatioos cod tongues.” The Romco Catholic, Greek aod Peotesteot church, is the graaO corrupt ecclehiehtip power, represented by areeo Babylon which has made cll oeOiooh drunk with her wickedness, cod

she must 'cll, after she has baeo weeoeW with Ohe sound *of “Ohe everlasting gospel.” Her overthrow will be by a sarias of Ohe most terrible judgments which will quickly succeed each other, cod sweep over Ohe oaOions where she has hcd her dominion, aod cO last she will be utterly burned by f^e, for thus hath Ohe Lord spoken. GraaO, aod fearful, aod most terrible judameoth are Wapeaed upon these corrupt powers— the oeOionh of modern Christendom; for sOeooa is Ohe Lord

290 DIVINE AUTHENTICI TV

God who shall execute His fierce wrath upon them, and ■He will

not cease until He has made a full end, and until their names

he blotted out from under heaven.

the nations of Babylon is to save a remnant by literally gather

ing them out of her midst. St. hohn says, “And I heard

another voice from heaven, saying, Come out of her, my

people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye

receive not of her plagues; for her sins have reached unto

heaven, and God hath remembered her iniquities. ' ’ * Hence,

there is connected with the great myssagy of the Book of Mor

mon, “a voice from heaven,” commanding the Saints to come

out from all nations as fast as they obey the gospel message;

this they have been doing for ohysy many years, and this they

will continue to do, until the work of gathering is fully accom

plished. And after the Saints, who are the salt of the earth,

are gathered out, those who are left will quickly perish, as did

Sodom and Gomoeehr. All these events are clearly revealed

in the hewish scriptures; they are also clearly revealed in the

Book of Mormon, which comes, saying, that the time is at

hand; it is also revealed by the voice of God from— heaven,

and by the ministry of angels to chosen witnesses sent forth to

warn mankind for the last time. *

more to the inhabitants of our earth for the purpose of again

organizing the Christian church, or in other words, the king

dom of God, as predicted by the Prophet Daniel, who said

that, “In the days of these kings, shall the God of heaven

set up a, kingdom, which shall never be destroyed: and the

kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it shall break in

pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand for

eVcr. ” t The kingdom of God set up on the earth in the first

century of the Christian era, was not the fulfillment of Daniel’s * prophecy. His prediction reached forward to a much later period of the world, namely, to the time when the angel should bring the gospel—to the time when the great image, eypresent-

*-----Revelations xviii 4, 5

t------------Daniel ii. 44.

OF THE BOOK OF MORMON. 291

ing all the kingdoms of the world, should be complete, from the Bead of gold to the feet and toes of iron and clay. The kingdom or church established eighteen centuries ago, does not, by any means, corceup■ogd with the time; for the feet and toes of Nebuchadnezzar's-great image were not then in exist ence; indeed it was many centuries after that, before the Roman empire represented by the legs of iron, became divided

- into feet and toes. But Daniel says to Nebuchadnezzar, | “Thou sawest till that a stone was cut out without hands,- which smote the image upon his feet, that were of iron and

clay, and brake them to pieces” (34 verse) From this we learn that the feet and toes must be in existence before “the God of heaven sets up a kingdom,” represented by “the stone cut out without hands,” cthrcwiur, the stcge could not com mence its first attack upon the feet and toes, and break them in pieces.

14.—The nations of modern Europe, including England, and

the Gentile nations of America, compose the legs, feet and toes of the image, while the ctBrc pccticgs of the image will be found mostly among the Asiatic nations. The geographical position of the image is from east to west; its head is found in Asia, and its toes in Europe and America. When the king dom of God is set up, it must be somewhere near the western extremity of this great image, for the toes and feet are first broken by it, and afterwards all the ctBec pcctiogu, from which we learn that its advancement is from west to east. The pro gress of the kingdoms of the world has been from east to west; the progress of the kingdom of God is'from west to east, in a retrograde direction. This stone, according to Daniel ii. 45, is to be “cut out of the mountain without hands.” “Cut out of the mountain, ’ ’ signifies its lccntioo before any part of the image is broken. The present iocaticg of the Latter-day CBuccB is in the valleys among the Rocky Mountains: this appears to be its appropriate pcsitiog,racco^rig^ to prophecy. The stone is to be “cut out without hands:” this signifies that it is a kingdom, not formed by the will of man, but by the will of God; human wisdom has no hand in its formation; it is “the God of heaven’ ’ that sets it up, and by Him it #ill be sus tained and never be destroyed, qoc broken to pieces, nor left to ctBec people.

292 DIVINE AUTHENTICITY

15.—Ths kingdoms of Cht world mads war upon tht Saints

of- Che grrmeeodgy kingdom and pervaded agalnsC Chtm, and

ovrrogmt Chem, atd rooted Chtm out of Chr taeth, so Chat Cht

kligdom no lotgee existed among Che DaCioDt; not so with Cht

1gttre-dgh kingdom ; foe 1C will prevail-against Cht kingdoms

of ths world until they thgll, as Darnel sgyt. “Becomr like Cht

chaff of Cht Summre Chershltg flroet; and Che wltd caeey

Chem away, Chat no placr shall bs goutd foe them : atd tht

stonr ChaC smote Che image shall ntcrmt a geraC mountain,

and fill the whole raeth” (Daniel ii. 35). And Chib shall “Cht kingdom and dominiot, atd ths -,1^”^ of the kingdom

undtr the whole hravet, be givrn to Chr prople of Chr Sa'iDts

of Che Most High, whosr kingdom is at everlasting kligdom,

and all drmin1oDt shall stive and obry Him” [Daniel vii 27).

Ths events predicted by Daniel aee Che samt as ths events pet-

dictrd by John; Daniil says a kingdom shall be setup; John tills

us by whaC meats, tamely, through Che tvrrlattiDg gosprl,

revealed by at angel : Datlrl says, whet tht’kltgdom of God

is srC up, that Chr kingdoms of tht world shall br broken lb

plrcrs: John says, Chat whrt Cht evrrlgttmg-grtprl has betD

erttoIed atd pieached Co the Dgt1ott ChaC Chet is, “Chr hour of God’s judgment”—ths drwngg|| of Babylon. Both of Chess

wiittes nthrld ths samr great tvrtCs, but drtCIibed Chtm lb

differtbC l anguggr- That which was perdicCrd by Chrst Cwo

intp1ird met is tow bring galfillsO. Tht angel has appeared —the gospel is rtstoerd—ths kingdom is srC up—its location

is ..among Che mountains, and shortly Che balance of Chrst pre

dictions will grto br fulfilled to tht very lrttre, atd not ont jot

oe tiCtls shall fall, until the rarth shall erst from wicktdDrts, atd “ths kingdoms of Chis world thgll nrormt Che kingdoms of oue God and His Christ.”

, 16.—In Cht Jewish tcripturts three is to prophet who has

spokst more fully and plainly crDcerbing the geeaC tyriCs of

lattse timss Chat Isaiah. It tht CwenCy-ninth chapter he has

oltgrry petdlcCed ChaC a ctetaln book should br etvsaltd—ChaC

Chr drgg should hrae tht words of it—ChaC a marvelous work

and a wonder thruld br gcormtr1thtd—Chat Israel should bt

gathersd and savrd—that ths poor and mrtk should rejoice—

ChaC they who tre in spleit should comt to uDdrrttgbd1tg—-

OF THE BOOK • ’OF MORMON. 293

ata, finally, thaO tie wicked should all be de'rIoyth. It tie

£1130, atd parO of tie htcoad fhIhe, Olh Lord ahehalhth Ariel, oe Jerusalem, with judgment: le 'afh, ‘‘Woe Oo Ariel, Oo Aeiel, thi ciOy wleri David dwhlO I add ye yhat to year; let them kill hec^itLl^s; yet I will hihrrih' Ariel, atd tlhri slall be hieviaihh atd hoggow.” After tie Messiah came atd was haceificih tpg tie hIah • of Ohi world, the Jews coa0iaetd Oo “kill sacrificis,” whit Oliy should have bitt dote away; thty ehheh • “feae Oo yhae” to thi law of Mp'eh, until tlty brought down “htafiat'h atd hperow,” and greal ’“hl'rri''” uvoa Oheie beloved city. Tit Roman army incpmvah'th the city— casO a reitd about it, atd, finally, brought il down • “efea with Olh ground.” The principal pari of tie Jews ptei'led, and a eimaaar was 'cartteth among Ole nerioth, where t1ef fave weadtrth it darkm's unio Ohis day.

17.—Tlh latier part of the heCoah versi • hphek' of atoller

ivint Ohat should bt similar to the one which was to hawit Oo Ariel, or Jerusalem : io reads thus; “And it shall bt utto mh AS Ariel.” This cantoO have ehfeettce to Aritl itself, buO iO must eefer Oo 'omitling which should be “As Atihl.” It

would bh folly to say Olat Ariel slall be as Aritl. Thieiforh ill woed “io” must jefir to a nation rial should suffte similar judgments to r1phh which should btfall Jerusalem. It Oil

tliht following fer't', Ohe Lord hehceibt' more fully Ole 'hcoah event; hi says, “And I will camp against Ohei round about, atd will lay siege against thth with a mount, atd I will raise foeis against tlte. Atd Olou shall be brought dowt, and shah speak out of the ground, and thy speech shall be low-out of the dust, and thy voice shall be as of one that hath a fam iliar spirit, out of the ground, and thy speech shall whisper out of the dust. MoIhPVhr, ihi mullituat of thy hOratghIh slall bt like small dust, and iht mu1oiledt of thi 0111^11 otts hhel1 bh as chaff that ve'htlh away; yea, it slall bt at at iahiatt sud-dhtly.” 111'1 pItdiclioth of Isaiah could tot reftr to Aritl, oe Jei'u'e1hm, because thiie 'pitch heh tot bten “out of tie groutd,” or “low out of tie aust,” bui it eifers to the rim- tatO of Jo'ev1 wfo wtrt aehiIpytd it America upwards of

hundred yeeI' ago. Tit Book of Mormon athcrIbhh

Olhir downfall, and truly ii •was great and lerriblt. Ao the 294" DIVINE AUTHENTICITY

arecifictioh of. Cliist, “die 1e1nineOr of dieid deriiblx ones,’* vs Isaiah • predicted “bxcamx vs chaff diad passeri away,” and it took place, as le ye1t1r1 pix-icis, “ad an instant suddenly.”

Many of their great and magnificent ciiirs were Oxtd1oyeO by fire, bnhrrt by radiaquakxt, odarrt by bring sunk and buried in dix depdis oi. die earth. This tedOen drsiruaiioh camx

upon ihxm bxaaetx •they had stoned and: killed dhe piopieds send along thri. Between dhrxe and four lundicd-hears

after Ceiisr, dixy again fell into grrad dickrOhxss, and • die

principal nation fell in bantle. Forts were raiseO in all • parrs

of rhe land, dhe dx1ai2t of d1ica may bx sxxn at dhe • prxtxhn

day. Millions of oxoolr oxrit1rd in bantle, and ihea tefifedxd jusi as die Lorh forxdolh ba'Isaiah—“And I will camp against

dice round ahset, anh will lay sixgr against nWer dit1 a mb,eni. . 1

and I will raise forts against diex, anh dhou shali bx brought

down, and shald spcak out of nix ground,” etc. This 1X12,2.

of Joseph in ihrir hisndrts and destruction, became undo die

Lord as Ariel. As rhe Roman vriy lay sicge to Adiyli and

broughi upon her great dittdest and sorrow, so Oid thx co2nehhing

haris2s of v2cirhn Amclica bring upon each other dlr most

direful taxhxt of blood anh carnage. Terrxyodr. dhe Lcdd.

‘ourd, widh dhe gdeaiesd pdooririy. when speaking in rryrrrdce

do riis evrnd, decl'are nWad, “Id siall bx unio ix as Ariel.”

18.—One of die lost 1advx1sut .lings cs22X‘reh widl rhis

Orrdiciioh is, tiad vfrei dhe nation seoulO br bioughr down, •

dixy should “speak oud of iWx ground.” This is 1rndiohed

or repeated four diies in rie saie verse. Never was v pro

phecy more truly fulfilled tian nWis, in rhe cs1i2g forii of die

Book of Mormon. Joseph Sgrirh iook dhan sacred history

“out of rhe ground.” Id is ihr voice of dht ancient o1ophrrt

of America speaking “out • of dlr ground;” tWxid spreci is

“low oui of -the Oust; ” it speaks in a losd familiar manner

of the doings of bygone ages ; id j is dhe voice of dWstx who

slumber in tie dusd. It is thr ysi‘r of pdOoWxrt speaking

from die dead, crying rroxnrv2ae iLd.nar ears of tlr living. In

wlvd 1,22x1 could v danion, rfrrrl $Wxy weir brought hofd

and destroyed, “spxak oui of thr ground?” Could their head

bohirs or dieir 0^., or rheii atext spcak? Verily, 20: ihey,

can only spxak by dieir ddiningt or rheid books iWar ihea wrote;

OF THE BOOK OF MORMOff. 295

while living. Their voice, speech or words, cao only “speak out of the ground,” or “phihpae out of Ohe duso” by their books or peitiogs being wispoveead. Therefore, Isaiah further

seyh, in Ohe elevaoOh cod twelfth verses: “Aod Ohe vision of all is become uoto you cs the words of c book that is sealed, which meo deliver to one that is learned, hayioa, read this, I pray ohee: cod he saith, I caonot; for it is sacled': and Ohe book is delivered to him that is oot learned, safioa, read this, I prcy thee: cod he scioh, I cm oot learned.”

lhOrf of Ohe aogel, “out of the ground,” Mr. Smith traohceibaW sows of Ohe original cherectars upon rlpar, cod seoO them by Ohe hands of Martiu Haeeih, a Faemar, Oo Ohe city of Naw

.York, whaee they ware peahonteW to Peofohhoe Aothoo, c man

deeply learned in both cocieoO aod wo'ero languages. Mr. Harris very aoxiously requastad him Oo recW io, but he rapliaW that he could oot. None of the learoad have as yet baan able Oo decipher - the cheracOorh aod hieroglyphics which are found

among tha cocieoO ruins,' io almost avary part of America * The written language of aocieot America is c hoaleW language Oo this gaoaeaOioo. In Ohe year 1841, PeoFehhoe Anthoo peoOo a lotOoe Oo co Episcopal minister, io Naw Rochelle, WasO- phehtae County, oaae New York, io answer Oo co inquiry wcWo by the mioisOar io reference Oo Ohe words or cheeacOers scid to -have baeo peahanOoW to him. Peofeshoe Aothoo’s l etOer wcs writtan with parwissioo to publish ; - its avowed object being to put a stop Oo Ohe sreoed of tha fulloohs of Oha gospal, con tained io the Book of Mormon. Wo here give c. short extract from it, taken from a periodical, ooOitlod, “The Church RacoeW,” Vol. I., No. 22.

pla^-olookina countryman ccllad upon me with c leOtar from Dr. Samuel L. Mitchell, requesting wo Oo examine cod give my opioioo upon c certain papoe, maekaW with various pharaCteeh, which Ohe Doctor confessed he could ooO decipher, cod which the-beeeoe of Ohe ooOe was vary aoxious to have explained.”

12

22f) DIVINE AUTHENTICITY

Hors, thou, is Cho 1os1imhhy of tho lotreer, chat a man did

call upon - him wilh “ths words of a book.” Bul chh ■lotorer

erhfo88oo continues:

“A vary brief examination coeo’inced mn Chai ic was a were

hoax, and a very clumsy oro, loo. fhn netrnccao8 wooe-

trrthgor ip columns',, like Chs Chinese mods of woicieg, aed

presented'Cha-mosh singular medley chai I aveo behold, -

Greok, Hohroh ahd all sorts of letters, more oo loss di-siooted,

niihor ceooure rrskilleulrc88 oo from actual design, heoo

inloomirglod with-sundry rolirottihes. of half moors, siaos

and othoo haCural objocls, and -Che hhhla■orrod ir a ouda

ooero8on1aCihn of lhe Mexlnnn Zodiac ”

21'.—Professor Anthon, ho rhuOc hehrght this 81a1ar

m icnt' would milicala againsC the Book, of Mhomhh ; but wa

consider-it a great acquisition of aoldorne, chrfiomt1hry of

tho Cruth of ChaC book, wlior •compared wilh Cho dis

coveries of Cha glyphs and characters among cho aecionC ruins - of America. Tha. coleOrnter antiquarian, Professor Ptahnesquo, ir speaking of Cha glyphs discovered or Cho Tuirs - -of a sCore city fourd ip Mexico, says:

“Tho glyphs of Otolum are woiiloh from top Co hhhCom■,•

liko Cho Chinese, oo from side ho side, iprihhrepCly, like lhe Egyptian,- and the Domolic Lybiae. Although hhe mosh common Way of woilirg Che groups is ir, o‘ows, apd each group

' 8oenra1er, yel wn find some fhrmor, as ih Were, ip oblong

squares or Cablets, like Chose of Egypt.”*

Two'years-necar Che Book of Mormon appeared 'ip prihC,

Professor RtfihO8que, ie his Atlantic Journal for 1832, gave tha public a fac-simile of American glyphs, found ih

Mexico. They are nronrror in columns, being footy-six ih * number. Thosa, Che loaoeod professor renomlraCo8 “che elomorCs of cho glyphs of Ololum,” and ha supposes hhah by. lhe chmbira1ihp of Chose alemeeCs, words and sohlopcos were formed, nhrsCltuCleg Cho woiilop language of Cho ahniaet nt1lhes of Chis vast coheirerC. By an iespoclioe of Cha etn- simila of Chose footy-six olemorhary glyphs, we tied all tha particulars weice•Profos8hr Aulhon ascribes Co Che characters,

•—-Atlantic Journal foo 1832, by Poof Rafniesquo.

OF THE BOOK OF MORMON. 297

which he says “a plain-looking countryman’! peysyhtyn to him. The “Greek, Hebrew and all sorts of letters,” inverted and in niffyeeht positions, “with sundry delineations— of half-moons,”'planets, suns, “and other natural objects,’’!, are

found among 'those forty-six elements. * ’ This “plain-looking countryman,” according to Professor Anthon’s testimony, ' got some three or four years the start of Professor Rrtfmesquy, and prysehtyn him with — the genuine ylymyntrey —ggyphs yeres before the Atlantic Journal made them public; and what is still more remarkable, “the characters,” Professor-Anthon says, “wyey arranged in columns, like the Chinese mode of writing,” which exactly coeeyspohns with what Professor Rrfihysqhe testifies, as just quoted, in relation to the glyphs ' of Otolum. We see nothing in Professor Anthon’s—■state ment that proves the characters presented to him to be a “hoax,” as he terms it; unless, indeed, he considers their exact resemblance' to the glyphs of Otolum, and their being arranged in the right kind of columns—is a “hoax.” But. as hoseph Smith was an unlearned young man living in the country, where he had not access to the writings and discoveries of antiquarians, he would be entirely incapable of forging the true and genuine glyphs of Ancient America; Ohyeefoey we cousiner this testimony of Peofeddoe Anthon, coming as it does from an avowed enemy of the Book of Mormon to be a great collateral evidence in its favor. Profedsoe R,rfinydquy says, as we have already quoted, that “the glyphs of Otolum are written from top to bottom, like the Chinese, or from side to side, indifferently, like the Egyptian.” Now the most of the Book of Mormon was written from side to sine, like the Egyptian. Indeed, it was written in the ancient Egyptian, reformed by the remnant of the tribe of hoseph.

22.—Isaiah says, as we have already quoted, that “The

vision of all is become unto you as the — words of a book that is sealed, which men deliver to one that is learned, saying,■ read this I pray thee: and he saith, I cannot; for it is sealed.” Mark this prediction; the book itself was not to be delivered to the learned, but only “the words of a book;” this was literally fulfilled in the event which has already been described, as clearly testified of, not only by the “plain-looking country

29ft DIVINE AUTHENTICITY

man,’' namely Martin Harris * but by the l earned professor

Agthcg himself.

2 U—But .Isaiah informs us in the next verse (’* 2) that the

bcck ishould be delivered to the unlearned: he says,

“and the book is delivered to him-that is not leei'ned; saying,

crar this, I pray thee: and he said, I am not leaned.”

This was fulfilled when the angel of the Lord delivered the

book into the hands of Mr. Smith ; though unlearned in

every language, but his Own mother tongue, yet he was com

manded to read or translate the bcck. Feeling his own iocn‘

pebility to ceer such n book, he said to the LocS, in the

wccSu of Isaiah, “I am not learned .” When lie made this

excuse, the .Lord answered him in the words of Isaiah, next

verse -{13,14), “Wherefore the -Lord said, forasmuch as this

people draw near me with their mouth,-and with their lips do

Boocc me, but have removed their heart far from m.e, and

their fear toward me is taught- by the precepts of men ; tBece-

fore, brhclr, T‘ will proceed to do a marvelous work «amogp

this people, even n marvelous work and a wonder; Tor the

wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding,1

of their prudent men shall be hid.” What words could bet

ter portray the powerless apostate ccnriticg of modern'
