Christendom than this reutrletiog ? and what wccdu could be '

more rrucciptivr of the “mncvelcus work and n wonder,’* ,

than to say that “the wisdom of their wise men shall perish,’

and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid?

What could' be more marvelous and wonderful, than for the

Lord to cause an unlearneS youth to read or tcanulatr a book

which the wisdom of- the most wise and leacorS could not

road ? Surely the Lord’s ways are not as our ways, and His

thoughts-are not as our thoughts; for the wisdom of the

world is fcoiiuBoruu in - the sight of God ; He bi-ingeth forth

by His power the hidden things of His wisdom through the

meek, the simple ’ and the unlearned, while he- crjectctB the

wisdom ’pS learning, of men, because of their pride and BighmioSrSoesu. How marvelous and how wonderful are Thy doings, 0 LocS God Almighty ! For Thou ccofcugSest

the wisdom end learning of men, that no flesh should glory

in Thy presence ! Thou exaltest the meek and the humble,.

OF 299 TCCE BOOK OF MORMON.

that they may bt taught of Thst, atO know Thy ways ! Gloey, and hotor, atO wisdom, atO powte, atO of streitth, abd txotlrrnch of UDOeettalDOiDg be unto Chr LoeO oue GoO for evermore ! Lit all tht sarth feae atO honor His getat name,-foe “Che hour of His judgment.is come,” atO ths Cimrs foe tht gulfillmenC of tht geeaC svstts of ths last Oghs. as spokst by His srevants Cht tiophrtp.

- 24.—Isaiah, lb ths ninth atO tenth vresrs, has given a fue-

ther OrscrlpClot of Che conOiClot of all ths baCioDt, addessting

'enmtrIg to Chem, hr exclaims—“Stay youe-silvis atO wonder;

cry ye out, atd cry: they ait drunken, but toC with wine; they staggse, but toC with tCirDg drink; foe ths Lord hath poueeO out upon you ths spirit of drrp slrep, atO hath closed your eyes: Chr peophrtt and your ealeis. ths seres egte He coversO, atO ths vision of all is bicorns umo you as Che eriOt of a book ChaC is staled,” eCc. Hrer wr peeceivt Cht Oaek atd brtighCrO condltiot of the maltiCuOe of all ths igtiots ;

'aC Chr time “ths words of Chr book” should “speak out of

Cht ground” “ths spoilt of Orrp slsrp” was to br toairO out

•apoD them ; Chey wees. Co hr drunken atO stagger, nat■tot

with wins toe with strong delbk; the propertt atO .srrrs weee Co br covreed from them ; and “Che vision of all,” that is, Cht etYtlatiots of all ths erlh peoperts aid ssees, cotta'itrO tithee it the Bible or aty oChre place writ to becomt as the wreOt of Che staled Book of Mormon. If they aiOtittooO

“Cht vision of ail” who have spokst it past ages by ths spielt of peophecy, Chty would toC br “Oeuike^,” tor “staggre,” toe be it a “drep sleep,” but all igt1ots are drunkeD with the wine of Che Wrath of Cht foeniogtiot of gerat Babylon; Chty set toC ntiChtr Oo Chty atdrestaDd ths juOtmrDtt which aer about Co btggll them. As Chr lraeteO Pergettor AbChob could not read “Che wreOt of Che book” perssttsO to him, ntcgute 1C was a staled book—a language not anOrIStpoO by tht ltaebed, so with “the multitudr of all ths tatioDs” it eegaed to “the v1pion of an 'Chr prophets atd srers ;” they aer covtetd; Chty aer not aDOtesCord aty moet Chat the woids of Cht pedltd book wter uDdrIttrrd by Chr lrgIDrO. Whei Che tv'tits of Che toe1pCuet prophecy aer so clrarlh falfillrd. nrgoee thele tyes, they will tot tvrn thet ptective 1C; whtD the

i I

300 DIVINE AUTHENTICITY

wisdom of dhx wise and 13,12x0 pcrisics, and marvx1sua work ,2-V dodded” ■it oxdfsrmxd on causing die unlxainx- to read die look, nWe danisdt will nod iakr id do heart; nWougi, as TtaiaW' Says, niry will “snaa dhxmtr1yxt and wonder,” and

.“‘ry put, ,2-cry,” because of die book which “spxaks Out

of die ground l”•yen, hxcautx ilea vie • drunken with eyedy tprcirt bf dickrdnxts and ahsminaiiodt, ,2-hxcvutr dWry draw 23,1 •do the Lord dir1 dheii mouths, an-.wotW dheir lips, while nieii 13,1^ arc iX1syrd far from Him, and .bxaaute niry arc daugin by 'dlr prcccpts of mcn nWxa will reject id, an- 12 so-sidg, diea will reject die Lsrd’t gdxad and lasd warning 1Xttvgr io man, vn- bring upon dixisxlves tfiyn-xsriuctish. Because dixa despise so great• v •work, diea ‘^1,11 br yitinrd,” .as Isvlvi svysj “wiri sisim' an- teipcst,” an- “eartiquakcs,” • “vnO nhX flair of -ryou1idg. •firt.’

25,‘^As anodlcd .rvidxdar diad die hssk of wlici Isami

torakt was to ‘s1r forra i2 IVniei dime's, ir says in ihr txyxd-

1332.1 yx1tr, “Is in 2^ yed v very liidlt wWilx, and Lebanon sWall be turned idib• a fruitful field, an- rbe fruitful field shall be’ xtrrr1e.d as dhx fiorcst?” I8iW ve-e: •“An-in niat day shall rie dxvf WXvr .We ldorht of tie ■■bsok. an- tie eyes of nWe •blind sWall sxx our of lohtauiity. • an- • oud of -arkdxst.,” ■Teis book cse1- not mean lix N yw • TrstamXdn, fod d1ed dWat was '^0.132 id was abour iWe rime nhan •Lebanon was do • bx forsaken by dhe • Jews and become v -'drsb1vt1od, V foixti. or

wilderness fod many generations. . ’“.I*osd tlr 1,2-' of my .people shall ‘ome up thsrhs vn- briers.” (Isaiah 13.)

Hxncx rbe la nd of 1-vics tint,'which in‘1udrt Lebanon, was

'when rhe Nxw Txsdaient wvf ^11.1x2, abour ■to bx cuitxh. But iiixdiarxly vfirxi, die en1rarhx- • t1ou1- rxa- the bssk,

,‘■LxbrhOh .shall bx--rerhxd indo v fruitful field, an-die fruit

ful fixl-*11,11 bx etrxx1xd •vs rhe forest?*;-The ' book, ihtix- ybrr, dhvd Isaiah p10oartirt of. is no ‘ome forri jusr'before tthx grXvr-ay of tbe rxtrO1vniSd of Israel do dixii own lands; an which ■ri1x Lxbvhsn an-"v11 dlr 1,2- of Canvan is again io bx b lessed, flilr rbe fruitful field occupied by dlr danions of rbe Geniilcs, “/will be esrexmr- vs v forest;” tie Jme1ridedr • of dWr dvtioht ;of • •ie •■Grrndilys • are do lperita,-,20 11x11 1anOt kvWiobrfldr—nof—like a • fruitful fixld, vre no be’ •1Xfn <-xts1vrr of

OF THE BOOK OF MORMON.. 30]

IahebItaaO', atd become as Lebanon las beet foe many git-hraOIpns, veht;. while Labanot'shall again bh occupied by I'eatl, atd. bh' auetad itOo a fruitful field. Thisi great

evenis could too Oaki place until Ohi Loed should first being foeOh a book out of Ohh ground.

thebook.” ’This heh alItahy bitt 1ilt^al1f fulfilled. Thphh

who weih so deaf that Ohiy could too heat ihe |pedt't 'outd, have had Oheig hats opeath Oo htag Ohi glorious eah most precious woed' of Ole Book of Mormon, • atd iO has bitt doth by Ohh powee of tGoh eah tot of taat. “And the eyes off the blind shall see out of obscurity, and out of darkness.” This

ha' also bitt ' lIOerallf. fulfilled, as abuadant1f tthtifith ' of it the fifih clapier of Ohis sigit'. “The meek also shall increase their joy in the Lord.”• Now duting the long• tight of daek-nehh Olteh ' havt beet 'ome, fumblt, mitk vtIhPah who have' had a degeth of light; • buO as the clutch of Clei'a lad fttd from' tit latah Oltet was to oth that had aelhoeitf to bap tize oe admiti'lit Ohi pehiaaaceh of Ohi gospel io Ohose mttk Vte'oas; therefore th ait joy wa’s imperfecc: but I'aial 'eyh, whit Ohh book is ehfta1eh, “Ohe mttk 'hall itcreash Oheig joy it Olh Lord.” This is wlat oht book is calculated to pro

duce ; for by ils cottenO' tie metk ihart that ohi Oimt i' at hand-foe them io .inhteit ihi laril, accpehitg to Ohi hlehhitgh of oug Savior on'.Ohe Mount: • “B1thhth, ate Oht milk, foe Ohey shalli Iaheei0 Ohi earth.1’ This will bt fulfilled aflat all Ohe wicked aatIonh • aih 'hth0roytd. “Atd Ohe poot among

met shall etjoich it ohe Holy One of Iseatl.” This elho is VepmIhth as a result of thi etvhletioa of Ohe book, . atd thi meaah by which iO is Oo bh efflcied is by a genital oveitheow of Ohh wicked’; eh, hafh• Isaiah: “For Ohe 0111^11 one is blought to nought, atd Ohi hcoeate is consumed, and all Olat watch foe iniquity ^1• cut off; that make a man at otftahh’e for a woed, eah lay a stare for him thaO reveofhih it tht gait, hah Oum ehlhe Ohh. jusO foe a thing of naught.” 0 how

plainly iO is dictared Olat judgment was soot Oo fall upon all the wicked ' afthg Ohe epptaeeach of tlis book—ohis mar-vilom' work; atd a wpahtg • k-td 0 how plainly iO is also dhc1aehh .thaO Ohe deaf, Ohe hloah, Ohh mttk and Olh poot among men were to be greatly btaefit0hh by Ohe book! 302 DIVINE AUTHENTICITY

oo happao oo Lebanon, to tha Oaaf, atc:, whao Oha book.shoulO be eavaela0, ha ohao dascribas more raeticDtarlf the aeeeO baoafit tha book should ba to the house of Jacob. Ho says, “Tharefora, thus scith Ohe LoiO, who ee0oeme0 Abraham, poocaeoioa Ohe house of Jacob, Jacob shall not oow be eshamaOJ oaithar shall his Fico wax pcle. BuO whao he haath his chilOreo, Oha work of mine hands io-Ohe midst of him, they shall seoctiff my oawe, aod heoctiFf Ohe Holy Ooo of Jacob, and shall Foci tha God of IsraeL” The house of Jacob has baao mada ehherbaO, cod his Fico has wcxaO pale, ever sioca he was Orivao away from Lebanon or Canaao, but tha Lord hcs now brought forth out of Oha ground a book

which shall, cccompaniaO by His power, eahOore Oho Oeibah of

Jacob from Oha four queeOees of tho globe, cod asOeblihh-them

o Oha land of Pelehtioo cod Labaooo forever; aod His

holy oawe Ohay shall oo more profane,, but'shall be c righteous paople throughout all their gooaraoiooh, while Ohe oarth shall sOaod, cod they shall- pohsahs thair promisa' lcoO cgaio in' etaeoitf, oevor wore 'to pass-away ’; theeaFore,-Ohaf shall'oaver cgain ba mcdo eshemad. It is io vcin for the Gaotilas to saok tha conversion of Jacob, and to beioa about Oheir gracO rodamptioo, only io Ohe way that tha Lord God of - Ihraat hath predicted cnd appointed: Ohay-may call maoOioas and conventions Oo convert tha Jews, but lat Oham know ahhueadly that Oho book spoken of by Isaiah is to accomplish the siI-veOion• of’Oha housa of Jaaob> aod bring about the eastoretioo of all Isrcal, while Oho Gantiles who will oot rocaivo jo cud’ be pumberaO' cod iOaoOifiaO with Oha house of Jacob, must surely parish, fee, aod they shall be uOOeelf wehOaO with storm and Oempost, with aeethquekes and famine, with the flama of 0evoueina firo, aod oheir fruitful Iio's shall ba ahOeemed as a forest, while Jacob- shall dwall io safety for ever.

latioo of Oha hook: ha says, “They elss that eneO in spirit, shall come Oo undaehOenO^oa, cod they Ohat wurwurad shall loaro- OscOrino” (verse 24). The weak of Oha aarth who erraO in spirit, hapeuha “‘the fen of the Lord was -taught by ohe pracapt of . moo” should come Oo uodaehtenOing. Oh, how

OF TOE BOOK OF MORMON. 303

precious must be tbe contents of a _book which shall deliver us from all the er ors taught by the precepts of uninspired men! Oh, how’ gratifying to poor, ignorant, erring mortals who have murmured . because of the multiplicity of contra

dictory doctrines that — have * perplexed and distracted their minds, to read the plain, ' pure and most precious word of God, revealed in— the Book of Mormon ! It is like bread to the hungry—like the cool eyfeydhing fountain to him that is ready to perish with thirst. Lift up your heads ye meek of the earth ; let the poor among men rejoice in the Holy One of Iseael; let them that have erred in spirit and stumbled in judgment, drink from the fountain of understanding; let all that have murmured because of the uncertainty of the pre cepts of men, read the words of the book, and they “shall learn noctriretot the humble and contrite in heart among all nations be exceedingly glad, for the hour of their redemp tion from Babylon is at hand ; let all Israel praise the God of

. their fathers in songs of yvyeOrdting joy; for that which He

spake by the mouth of their prophets, concerning their res toration to their lands—is at hand to be fulfilled ; already has the book which Isaiah said should accomplish your restoration and turn Lebanon into a fruitful field, made its appearance ; and it truly is “a marvelous work—even a marvelous work and a wonder!” Let Zion awake again, and put on her strength as in days of old; let the seevrhOd of our God shout' praises unto the Holy One of Zion; let them shout among the chief of the nations, and sing with gladness for hacob, for he shall come in his apposed times, and none shall hinder. Lo! he shall come and sing in the bight of Zion, and— the high plrt.ed of the earth shall be glad for him, and

. the everlasting hills shall tremble with joy. ' 20.—]phraim, the Lord’s first-born, shall be like a mighty

man, and his heart shall rejoice as through new wine ; for he shall crowu the tribes of Israel with glory, and his birth right shall hyvye be hredOyd from his hand ; his dwellings shall be in the fat valleys, and his seed shall cover the hills; he shall put forth his branches in all directions, and many shall repose in the shade thereof; with him is the key of hidden mydOyeics-^the mysteries of ancient times; he shall unlock 304 AUTHENTICITY

lha 8ncror archives of eaaveh, and hhe skies shall pour down rightaou8ha8s, like oain; lha bowals off tha -narth-shall heeh, and shall disclose tha whnrar8 of ages unknown. By him Zion shall bo built, and hoo dwellings shall bo ohcirnlad hice glory; her light shall bo as Cho sun, and har bonr.hy as the morning; har habornnclo8 shall ba as hhe dwelling places of lha Most High, and in hao palaces kings shall arise and-woo

- - n * • • tn - r-

ship ; har neilrror hlte ora hoari shall look upward, while Cha Zion ChaC is above shall look rohhhaor ; theD Cha eonoap8■ and tha eaoCh shall meeC, and all tha noentlor8 8ene shako with gladness; Chen Che union of all dispensations will Oa completed, and Che royal families of heaven and aarth will Oe ope fOom eehcefOoce, even foo avermorOi This is ths blessing of tha neilrooh of Zioe, and tha glory of Ephraim tha Lood’s servants. Tha neildoah of Mapass.oe shall assist Ephraim, and in all his glory they shall be glorified.

30.—The oechod8 of MaDas8ae in Cho hands of Ephraim shall gather ouh Cho-Lord’s nlect from hhe four winds, from

ona end of hha 0^^ ho Cha othoo. The Book of Mormon is ■cee rochor of Mnhas8oh ; ih is now in the hands of Ephraim,

who have boon foo many gohoonhior8, as cho-Prophet Hossa said, “mixed among Che people.” By them will tha Lord “push Che poopls Chgoheoo Co Cho ands of Che earth,” even by -Cho neildroh of Ephraim, who is Cho Lood’s fiost-hhrh in chis groat laCCao-day wook. The American rrrinh8 aoo partly of Cha children of Mapasseh; chough many of tham aoo of Ephoaim, ceroure Cha two sons of Ishmael, heh camo ouh of Jerusalem six eunroor years bofora Christ, and some of Judah, ceoorge Cho loins of David and Cha kings cenh oaigpod ovao Jaousalom._ When Zodokiae, king of Judah was carried away captive into Babylon, the Lord hook ona of his sons,- whose nama hn8 Mulok, wilh a company of cehsO who would eotokon unio His hhod8, and brought hhom over tho ocean, and elnrtnr Cham in America. This was done in fulfillment of Cha 22nd and 23od vnrsns of cho sooohtaah1h-nhaeCao of Ezekiel, weice road thus-: “Thus, saieh cho Lord God, I will also lake of ths hirhosh •hrnece-of tha high codao, and will sal it: I will, cross off ff’Ohm cho the of his young twigs a TENDER ONE, . and will plant ' it. upon ah high mhuh1alr and

OF THE BOOK OF MORMON. 305

eminent; in the mountain of the hight of Israel will I plant it; and it shall bring forth boughs, and bear fruit and, be a goodly cedar; and under it shall dwell all fowl of every wing, in the shadow of the branches thereof _ shell they dwell.” By reeding this chapter, it will be seen that the Jews were the “high cedar,” that ZeSekiah the king was the “highest branch,” that the “tender ogr” cropped off from the top of his young twigs, was one of his sons, whom the LocS brought out and eingtrS him end his company, upon the choice land of America, which He had given unto n remnant of the tribe of Joseph for an inheritance, in fulfillment of the blessing of Jacob and Moses upon the head of that tribe. *

31,—Jacob being a prophet, said unto his soos, “Gather

yourselves tcprthrc, that I may tell you that which shan befall you in the last days.” JHe then commenced birusiop them, by the. spirit- of prophecy, from the oldest to the youngest. • The blessing of Joseph was as follows: “Joseph is n fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by a well, whose

branches run cvrc the wall. ** * * The blessings of thy father have prevaileS above the blessings of

my ercgrgitcru, unto the utmost bound of the everlasting hills: they shah-be on - the head of Joseph, end on the crown of the head of him . ’ that was separate from his bcrthceo.”. (Genesis xlix.) Let the reaSer particularly gctitr this blessing.

First, Joseph was to become very numerous: Second, his bragcBrs were to run over the wall: Third, he was to receive n blessing which was situated .'to the utmost bound of the everlasting BIIIs - Fourth, Jacob declares that these blessings were gcratrc or above those which his progenitora inherited. In the preceding chapter, Jacob predicts that Ephraim and MagasurB, the two sons of Joseph, should become a multitude of nations. A-multitude of nations would require a large country for an inheritance. No wonder then that Jacob should prevail before the Lord, end obtain a greeter blessing than Abraham and Isaac; for the l and of Canaan would be altogether too small to accomodate, “the multitude of the nations of Joseph,” and the ctBrc tribes too; end Jacob

■(Genesis xlviii., and xlix ; also Druteccgcmy x.x.xiii.

SOfi DIVINE AUTHENTICITY

foirssrlig this, sought foe a getatte nletsiig Chat the land of

Pgltstint, which ' was crDgeeIid upon his peogtnitoes. This

gieatte nlrtt1Dg is eeteetrntrd Co bt “to Che utmost boutd of.

Cht tvrrlgst1ig hills.” Tht teem utmost bound must have

erftrrnoe to ths most distanC portions of tht eaeth. The geo

graphical potit1rb of America crrIesprDdt, as to O1sCgDce,

with Che tsews of Cht pertheoh. The eatge of mountains

txtstdiig the whole length of Che geeaC wister” crDt1Dtnt,

are the longest lb the whole world, and may will be dts1gDgCrO

by the Peophtt Jacob as Cht everlasting kills.

32 —That Joseph might obtain tht iihiiltaDct which Jacob

ootfeeIrO upon him, “lms branches run over the wall;'" that is,

they left the main poetlob of Cht bough and wtbC into somt * • •

oChre couDCey. They never could have had eoom to. “brorme

a multitude of nations” without breaking ovte Che wall oe

nrandgeiet of Palrst'Di, and sreking the geraC 1DereicaDCh

conferred upon thrm, among the boundaIirt of Che eveelattint:

hills in Amri'ica, which may well br tsemrd Cht “utmost

nratOt” oe distance feom whree Cht prophecy was uCtseed.

Ot this vast cmt-lnsnC, Chty could stIegd forth atd become

not only g-gIrgC nation but “a mah■itadt of tgtiots.” Asia,

Africa atd Eueope aet occupied principally by ths Gebtilrt,

and by bgt1ott who are tot the OrtoenOgDts of Jostph. As

Cht pIrpercy has tot bset fulfilled ot the raster” hrmitphtrt,

the wetteIt ermitperre is the only part of our globe where 1C

could br-galfillrO. If w, cannot find tht maltitaOe of Cht

nations of Jostph lb Amreicg, we cattoC find thrm anywhere.

But it Ameiica we Ceuly Oo find srvteal eabOerO t a tOots of

people who do tot exhibit Chat diversity of cegIactte which

wt find O1tt1nguith1tg the nations of Che taster” world. Terir

orrre, Chtir gtgtuers, Cheie gr.tregr peytirgDomh, Chelr tra-

d1tirbs, thsie mannees and custrmt. Cheie dialtott. Chile gen

sial chgegcteI1stics of mind, atd modes_ of living, all proclaim

that they are dttctbded from ott common oeiglt. While

their religious worship, thsie belief lb -one GoO, Chile compu

tation of time, by tht crrtmoniesof Che tew moon, thsie hav

ing an Ark of Chr coviDgnt., their erection o' a Ctmplr similar

to tht Jewish ttmple, thsie errctlot of gltgrs, thele d1v1s1obt

og Che hege into four tigsobt, corIetpoDd1tg Co Cht Jewish

OF TOE BOOK OF MORMON. 307

Fast * ivelh, Oheir lcws of secrificah, Ohoir ebluOisos and maeeieaeh) Oheir placas of refuge, Oheir maooae of conductiog war, OSair ebsOeioioa from eaOioa cartaio things forbi'dao by ohe laws of Mosas, cod the numerous efinitiah of Oheir taoaueae, Oo Ohe Hebrew, cll Oohtiff loudly OhaO they cro of Isrealitish origin. GrecO numbers of writers, Ouring two or throe of tho last cao- tueiah, have balieveO them Oo be Iseaolitas, auO have gooaeallf supposed Ohom Oo ba Ohe oioo cod a-half lost-ribas. BuO

their history heh spoken “out of Oho aeoDnO,” by which wo learn ohaO they cre, ioOeeO Israel, but ooO tha oioe coO c-half tribes * , Ohoy cro only a small remoaot of ooe Oriba, namely, of Josoph, among whom some of the triba of JuOeh cro mioglod, through Ohe royal seed of David.

33.—Moses, when blassing tho tribes of Israel, by the spirit

of prophecy, specks io c very peeOiculae mannar of Ohe laoO of Joseph. AoO of Josaph, ho heid, “Blassed of Oho LorO ba his laoO for Oho precious oSiogh of heaveo, for Ohe daw, cod for Ohe daop OhcO csuOcSeOh banecOh, aoO for tho precious fruits brought forth by oha sun, and for Oho precious thiogh put ^^01 by tho moon, cod for Oho chiaf-Ohiogs of tha cnciaot msuo0ainh, and for tho precious thiogs of tho lasting hills, aoO for tho precious Ohiogs of tho ocrth, cod fDlloohh thoraof, and for - Ohe good-will of him thcO dwelt in Ohe bush: lat oha blas- hina como upon tho head of Joseph, aod upon Ohe Oop of Oho head of him that was separated from his brethren. His glory is like Oho firstling of his bullock, and his horns aro like the horos of uoicoros; with thew he shcll push tho people togo-her Oo Ohe onOs of the earth; and they cro Oho Oau thou-

heodh of Ephraim, and Ohay aro the thousands of Meolhseh.”* From this wo Ioiio OhcO Joseph was ooO only to ioSarit a lcoO

ae * oe0er Ohco tha rest of Oho Oribas, but Ohct his lcoO was to be peculiarly blessed. America fulfills Ohe terms of Ohe prophecy io ovary wiouOo particular. j among other favors, his lcod peh

to ba blassed “with the precious things of heaven.’* This blessing was of more imrseteoco Ohco all tha others; haoce Moses plcco-s it f^rsO io Oha list of gssO Ohioah Ohct were to he given Oo -Joseph.

/

*-----Peuteronomy xxxjii.

368 DIVINE AUTHENTICITY

separate, and at a distance from, Canaan, all ■thydy bOeddihgd

would be without any meaning. If the land spoken of only

memthis inheritance, joining the other tribes, why should

Modys designate such great nledsings upon it, and forget to say anything id reference to the particular bledsihtd of the adjoining

lands? The land of hoseph, in Palestine, syymd to be about

the same as the lands of his brethren ; no great peculiarities

seem te.nistinguidh it from the other inheritances; therefore,

the very fact that Moses speaks so definitely in his bOyssingd

upon tribes, about the land of Joseph * and enumerates its bles

sings, while he is nearly silent about the others’ lands, shows,-most conclusively, that the land of hoseph was to be in some other country. And as he speaks of “the chief things of the

ancient mountains, and the precious thiDg3 of the lasting hills,” he must have reference to the same “everlasting hills,” which hacob gives to hoseph, that are said to be at the “utmost bounds.” It was in this choice land,' where the pre=

cious things of heaven” were to be unfolded tothe multitude of the nations of hosyph.

it is to be expected that they would keep a record or history

of their nations in whatever part of the earth they might be

located. When the ten tribes revolted, there were many-pro

phets raised up among them from time to time, who,, wrote

their prophecies .as well as the prophets of hudah. If the

Lord did continue to. dyhn; prophets, as Elijah, Elisha and

many others- among the ten tribes after their revolt, why not

erisy up prophets among the multitude of the nations ofhedyph,-

after their separation from hudah? We cannot for a moment

believe that .a multitude of the nations of hoseph would be left

nysti0u0y of the warning voice of prophecy. ' It ' would be

entirely contrary to the dealings of God with both Israel and

hudah. • If the nations of hoseph uhnersOeen the art of writ

ing, and were to have “the precious things of heaven revealed

to Ohym,” thoy would certainly write them, not only for the

benefit jof themselves, but for the neheOio of future generations.

This they did; and the Lord God of their fathers has now

brought their .history, their prophecies, their nocOeihyd' and

• OF THE BOOK OF MORMON. 309

Oleir precious eevhlation' from itavtn to tie knowledge of oht people.. The propeils, Ohe shtrs atd ill Itvtleto^h of the taiioth of Joseph levy spokht “out of lit ground, _and ihtir spercS is low oul of ale dust,” atd tltir writings ath tow

joined • toghifhi with Ohe Bible, wlicf cotiaits aft wrilitgs of

Judaf, £td iley lave become ont it Oftir Oesilmoty, (dtclaritg

» tlet Oft Oimi is at hand for Ofe risloratiot of Olh whole louse

of Israel to ileie own latds.

Jacob nevie could he Ith0orea, utiil God seouia bring forih a book, atd that, Opp■, “out of Ole ground; ” atd, until tft deaf

* 'fould lent tSr words of iO. It will text be slowt from lie

Otsiim.ony of Ezekiel, llat tie look wf icf is lo vtIfoIm so great a work foe Israel, was teally and leuly lo by a record of Joseph. Ezekiel 'efh “Tie Word of lie Lord came again utto mt, saying, Mortpfte, tfou sot of mat, lake

- a airy ote slick, atd wrilt uvpt ii, for Judah, atd for tly cfil-

hIen of Isrerl, his companions; Oirn tekh atpt1rI stick, atd weilh upon it, for Joseph-thy Slick of Epfielm, atd foe all tie lousy of Israel, his comvaipth: 'ena join tirm ote Oo eapoaee into otr hiicf, and aery shell become ote it ilitt fata. ; Atd whit thi cfiiaert of Ofy prov1e sfall 'vref utOo Ofth, heylag, Wilt thou tot show us what ilou mQinesitiby Ohrst? Say utio' Oirm, TSus saith oft Lord God, Btioia I will .take lie stick! of Johrve which is [h1e1l bt] it tfy henh of Ephraim, ata ill tiibt' of Israel lls fellows, ata will pul ifem will Sim, ivin will tit slick of ’ Judel, atd make tlim one slick, and OShy • 'fall be oth it mite lata. And ofy '0^ wf treon thou weii- e'i hhe11 be it Ohitt fetd before OStit yyrs.”

mrtt, atd roll oSe same uvpa sticks, and 'ucl Iiehltg•'ilck' or rolls wree called books. All Ofe vIPVfrcleh of Jeremiah, from ill days of JosI-S dowt io ify fouriS feaI of Jeeplf im wire

„ wrltiet it one of 011'1 rolls (Jeremiah xxxvi. 1, 2). This

i“ron” of tit wriiings.of Jrrtmlaf, is celltd e “hppkM it iSh

8th, 10ih, 11th atd 1301 viIhes: fitce, thy Orres roll atd book hie hfaonfmpuh. If Oirn, a ereaitg-slick oe roll, conialtltg writings, is called a “book” wr cet air utarrsiata Oft mratitg of Ohh woed of tly Lora lo Ezrkiel: it was a citer atd breu-

30S DIVINE AUTHENTICITY

separate, an- at a -1tnvdcr yiom, Canaan, all lt1rtr h1est1dgt

would bx witioud ana 1radidg. If thr lan-spoken of only

mean. • iis inarrirvdax, joining dlr oliei rr1bxt, wly t1bu1h

Mssxt-3^2,13 sucl grxad hlrttings upon in, vn-forger to say

mailing ih iryr1rn‘r to die particular h1ett1ngs of dhe a-jolning

lands? TWe lan- of Joseph, in Pv1rtrinr, seeis io br about

rie same as die lan-s of his bixneren; no gread pxce11arinirt

sxxm nb.-isringuisW id from thx brher 1nWrr1nadcrs; dhriefore,

die vera fa‘d diai Mstrt speaks so-efinirela in lis b1rstidgt

upon ri1brt, about thr land o/Jsseph, an-rdu1rivnrt ids b1et-

t1dgs, wiile Wr is nearly t1lrdn absun dhx b1heis, 1,2^, taswt.-

mosi cbnc1etiyr1y, dhad tlr lan- of JbtxoW was io br in somr otixi country. An-vs le speaks of “dhe cllef 1Wingd of die

vnciedr ibedraint, vn- tie precious n1ihgt of rie lasting 1111^” Wr lusd lave irfxiedce to tlr same ■“ryxr1vttidg Wills,”

which Jacob g1yrt no Joseph, dhad are sal-do bt vd die “urmosd houddt.” Id was in diis ‘loice lan-, wlrre t.Wr pdt=

a1but things of 1rayed” were to br edyo1-e-do'dar me11ire-e■

of dlr dvn1odt of Joseph.

id is to be exo.rctr- tiat tiea would keep a drcor- or ' Witnoia

of’ nieid nations in d1airyei pvit of die earth dhey might be

locale-. Wien die 1x2 tribes dxyo1ie-. nWere wedt many- pior

pWrtt raise- up among diem from dime lo dime, d1s. dioie

their oropWeaies as well as die orooaent of Ju-vi. If dlr

Lord -id aohninue do. sen-' pioo1etd, as Elijah, Ellsi, vn-

1,27 oilers-vmo.ng die irn nr1hxt after- dield 1ryb1t, why nod

raise up orbpaent among tlr me1nitu-r of die dvn1ont ofJoseph,-

after dield srpV1aniod from Ju-ai? Wr cannot for v ibmxdr'

believe ihai • v 1^1^03 of tie dan1sdt of Joseph woul- br left

-rst1neie of die warning voice of prophecy. * In woul-bx

entirely contrary to tie -ra1ihgt of Gro- wllW boll Israel and

Judah. * If die nvn1ods of Josxpl ed-r1ttoo-lie aid of wrir-

ing, vn- were do 1^3 “‘tlr oircioet rilngs of aeayrd rryrarrd

no dWym,” diea woul-certainly wilte 11x1, ^1 only for nir

benefit .of nWrmsr1vrt, bun for dbe 1x2x61 of yenedr grdrivtoods.

This diea -id; vn-nhe Lor-Go-of dhelr yvn1ert las juo^

bibug1n rheid .hitnora, dixid prophxcixs, lirli doc1didet vn-

OF THE BOOK OF MORMON. 309

their precious revelations from heaven to the knowledge off the

- people. The prophets, the seers auS the cevrletors of the

oatioos of Joseph have spoken “out of the gcouor, eod their speech is low out of the dust,” and their writings are now

joined ' toprthec with the Bible, which ccoteios the writings of

Ju dah, £od they have become one in their testimony, declaring

» that the time is at hand for the rrstocatioo of the whole house

of Israel to their own lands.

Jacob never could be restored, until God should bring forth a book, and that, too, “out of the ground; ” nod, until the deaf

• should hear the words of it. It will next be showo from the

trutim.ooy of Ezekiel, that the book which is to perform so great n work for Israel, was really end truly to be a record of Joseph. Ezekiel says --(xxxxVii.t “The Word of the Lord came ageio unto me, saying, Moreover, thou soo of mao, take '

- i thee one stick, and write upon it, foc Judah, and for the chil

dren of Israel, his companions; then take aoothec stick, eod write upon it, for Joseph-the ktick of Ephraim, aod for all the house of Israel, his rcmeaicns:-and join them ooe to eoother into ooe stick, aod they uhali become ooe in thine heod. ; And when the children of thy people shall speak unto thee, seyiog, '

.Wilt thou oot show us what thou meegestlby these? Say unto-

them, Thus seith the LocS God, Behold I will fake the stick’ of Joseph which is [shall be] io the haod of Ephraim, noS the tribes of Iscael his fellows, end will put them with him, even with the stick of - Judah, aod make them one stick, aod they

shall be one in mine hand. And the stick whereon thou writ-« est shell be io thioe h.aod before their eyes.”

37 . —It was wustomam ’r ancienc ehnes te wri tw ue on porch-

meot, aod coll the same upon sticks, aod such crerlog'seltks or rolls were called books. All the pcoeBrcles of Jeremiah, fcom the Says of Josiah down to the fourth year of Jehoikim were

„ written io ooe of these rolls (Jeremiah xxxvi.. 1, 2}. This

,“roli’’ of the wcitings.of Jeremiah, is called a “bcck” io the(

8th, 10th, 11th aod 13th verses: Brotr, the terms rollaod book nre synonymous. \ If then, a crurigp• stick or coll, ccotaioigg writings, is called a “book” we can elf ugrrrutuor the menoing

. of the word of the Lord to Ezekiee: it was a clear eod beau-

310 DIVINE AUTHENTICITY

hiful oopoosoetaClhh, of cho union of Cho Ohhes in cho hard of the Lord. Ezekiel was commanded fiosl, to write upon ora slick, “for Judah and for lhe children of Israel, his compan ions.” This was a ooeoosontntion of Cha Biblo which is cho rocood of Judah. “Thee iaka aiiothor slick, aed woies upon ic, foo Jesope, lha slick .of Ephraim, aed foo all Cho house of r8rnal, his companions.” This was a Oopoo8oeea1iop of Cho Book of Moomor, which is Cho oonhod of Joseph writCor ir ancient 'America. “Aed join ChOm one Co nhoteoo into orn slick, ahd ihoy shall become one in China hand.” This was a rapoo8or1teihr of tho union of iho records of tha iwo rations. In hhe lntoreoaet1ihr of Cho moaning of ths 1hh slicks, Cha Lord says tent Ha Himself “will taka Cho stick of Joseph” and put il “with the slick of Judah.” e’earoeooa, wo loaor by

Chis ChaC lha stick of Joseph was * noC found uriChd hi1e ths stick of Judah by ncciroee, Out it was a work which the Lord

Himself should poreoom. Honco, Ho fuo1eoo says, “They shall ba one in mine enrr.”’ Teorofooa, Cho two hoi1lhg8 bocomlhr ops in Ezekiel's hand, was a mosh beautiful ooeoo80hea1ior of chO iwo hrl1lpg8 which should bocomO one ir the LoOrs hand. -

38.—Having loaonod -by Ezokiol thaC the Lord God will tako

Che stick of Joseph, and put it with lha slick of Judah, aed make Cham oea in His hand; lot us next inquire, hetC hvoets aro io follow the union of thoso two hoitihr8. Tha Lord fur--• Choo declares, “Aed lhe stick heooooh Chou hoit081 shall Oo ie

Chips hand Oofora Choio eyes. And say urlo chom, Thus sailh

Cho Lord God, Behold, I will Cako the celldoor of I8ono■l foom

among the eoa1hor, whilhoo they bo gone, and will gather thom

oh ovooy side, aed bring thom into thaio own land ; and l will make them ono palion in Cho land upon lha rloreenlhs of

r8onol; and ono king shall bo king Co them all; aed ihoy shall

be no moos two naCionsj roithoo shall they bo divided inCo two

kingdoms any more at all: poithto shall Choy dofilo ceomsoloo8

any moos with ihoio idols, roo with thoio dolosiablo Chings, noo

with any of Choio Craesgressions; Out I will savo ihom out of

all Choir dwelling places, whoroip Choy havo simiad, and will

nlonp8o them: so shall Choy bo my poopls and I will bo Choio

God.” Wo loaop fOom Chis, Chat Cha gonaC hhjon1 Cho Lord ha4

OF THE BOOK OF MORMOCf. 311

in view, it briDgiig forth tht book of Joseph, anO uDiting it with the Biblr, is to gather Isiasl never more to br sogttsriO. That wr srt that both Csaiah and Ezekiel have spokst -of the samt grraC atO marvelous tvstts; ont Oiclgris that the erast of Jacob should tevte again “wax pals” oe “be maOt gtealniO” it ths day ChaC a cretam book should make its

' appearance; the other OicrgIis, ChaC ths whole hoatt og Itegir

thourO bt rrstoreO to its owt latOt. atO should tevte again be OlviOrO into Cwo DatioDS. it ths Oay that ths LoeO teoalO put Cht writings of Joseph with, the weititgs of JaOgh- Take Che CttCimoDy of Itgige anO Ezekiel in conDectirD with ths tetCimonh of Mosss, coDoeIiiDg Che “trrcOras things of heaven,” which thralO bt ' givrt ot tht latO . o' Joseph, atO

joli Chis with ths trttimoiy of John coicreiitg ths Iistregtiot of the gospel by at caDgrl, atO ths trstimoty of Datiel cot-ctenjtg the stone cut geom ths InraDtgits without hgDOs. 1,^-tentiDg the ratter-Ogy kingdom of God, atO wr have by a com- nina.tiob of all Chrse tittimrniit. peophetic rviOrtcrs of tht dlviir gathiDticith of the Book of Mormon which thralO con- ¥1^, the most incIiOalrat, atO 0estIOh aceiitm out of rxist- etct.

39.— Lrt us tow hear what- the LoeO has tgiO to DaviO it

Iilgtirn to the tg|vgtioi of Israel. DaviO saw the long cap tivity of Jacob, atd tegyiO eaIDettlh that ths LoeO would show mercy-to them. Ht prays thus: “Tuit us, 0 God of our salvation, atO cgase Chits atgee towards us to cigte. Wilt thou br angry with us greeviI? Wilt thou Oraw out Chits atgee to all giniratirDS? Wilt thou tot revive us again, that Chy people may rejoice it thre? Shew us thy msecy, 0 LorO, atO geatt

us thy sglvgtioD.’•’ * After he haO thus peghrd foe Isiasl werm he saw On a long captivity, ht Chen says, “I will hrae what GoO ths Lord will speak : foe He will speak trgce utto His psople, atO to His saints; but lit them not turt again to folly-’’ From this wt perctlvt, that nrtw1thttgnOODg ths Lord has bsst angey with Jacob for maty grnergtiots, yet, He will again “speAk” Co Chtm. But ltt us erad the following vtetrs,-that wr may

*---- I’vilm Ixxxv.

13*

312 DIVINE AUTHENTICITY

leno io wSct manner He will “speck peace.” “Mercy aod truth cro met toae0Sae, rightesusnahs coO paace have kissed each othor. Truth shall spring out ok the earth ; aod eiahtaousnass shall look down frow heaveo. Yac, the dseO shcll give Ohct which is gssO, cnd our lcod shall yioIO her iocrease. RigS0eouhnahs shall go before Him, cod shall sat us io the way of His htaph.” O, what a alsriouh eohpae DcviO receiveO Oo his peefee of captive Israel. Ho lecroad that tho Lord would “hpaek■ peace” Oo thaw by ceuhioa “Truth Oo

spring out of tho eeetb,” and then, and ooO till oheo, “Right* esusoash should look dowo fesm haaveo” in bahalf of capOivo Israd; than he learnad oSat Oho lcoO of Ihreel should cgcm “yield har iOcro.cse,” bapeuhe “ohe Lord should give Ohct which is aosd.” This aaeaah with what we, have already quotaO from Isaiah: so Ohct both Dcvid cud Ihaieh scw how Israel wara Oo ba Oalivorod. Ooo says io sIiII ba by truth ' cud rightaousnehh, combining Ooaethae, truth coming out of the acrOS and eigh0eoDh-oass cO ohe samo time looking down from hacvan; while the othae Oecleech Ohct Isrcal should “speak out of the ground,” efoae which, Jacob should oo looaae be made ehhamaO'. DcviO hayh, ohco after “truth hreiogh out of the ocrOS,” Ohe lcod of Iheeel “should yialO its increase.” Isaiah hefs, OhaO io the day that Ohe meevelouh work aod a woodor is ecPsmrlihheO, then “Labanoo shall ba tumad into c fruitful field,” -“and the Waaf shall hen the poedh of Ohe book.” DcviO hefh, OhaO Ohao is Ohe time, OhaO “eigStesuhoehh shall go baftra Him, cod shcll sat us io tho way of His sOaps.” Iseieh■ says, “That tha book shall causo those who erraO in spirit to come to understanding.” Every event csncaroiog this le00ae-day work io bahalf of Iheeel, which DcviO Oascribah io his Psalm, is clso daspeibaO by Isaiah; Ohe tcOier givas mcoy paeOiculees,. howevoe. which Oho formar does ooO.

IsaicS must have had eaforeoco to tho samo meevalsDs evont,

when, ho oxptaiws, “Drop Oowo, yo haavans, from above, aod teO tho skies pour down riah0oousoahs; lot Ohe ecrth opan, aod let them bring forth salvcOion, cod laO eigh0aouhoohh hpeina

up together: I, the LorO, have ceee0aO iO.” *

♦——Isaiah xlv. 8,

OF THE BOOK OF MORMON, 313

great and marvelous, work for the restiOutibn of Israel; and never had mankind more prophetic evidences in confirmation of a revelation * than they have for the Book of Mormon. None of the books of the Old or New Testaments were prephysiyn of ebefore they were revealed, whereas this great revelation of the last days has been clearly predicted by many of the inspired writers. In this respect, the Book of Mormon is tOhfiemyn by testimony to this gyhe■rrtioh, such as no other prophets could bring forward to ydOrblish their books in the day that they were given. •

of the earth who shall read-this syried of pamplels, that Ohy Book of Mormon is a divine revelation, for the voice of thee Lord hath neclrren it unto me. And having been commanded

• of the Lord, in His name, 1 humbly warn all mankind to

repent of all their sins, Oo turn away from all their false doc-Orines, and lo forsake the precepts of uninspired men. Yea, come forth with meek, humble and contrite hearts, and be immersed in water for the remission of your sins, and you shall

receive the Holy Ghost by the laying on of the hands of * the Apostles or Elders of this Church; and signs shall follow them OhaO-bylieve, as they did the believers in limes of old; and all people, nations and tongues,' who will not do this, shall be damned, and shall in no wise enter into the kingdom of God, for this mysdagy shall condemn them at the last day. Rypept, therefore, all ye ends of the earth, for Ohy great day of the Lord is al hand ; lhe sword of Ohe justice of lhe Eternal God will soon fall upon you except ye repent. Repent, 0, ye kings and queens of Ohe earth, for ohy day-of Ohy Lord’s controversy with Ohy nations has come; . and thrones shall by cast down, and your kingdom shall be rent asunder, and Ohery shall he no safety for you, uhlysd you repent. Let Ohy lords, and hebOes, and all those in high places, repent, for calamity shall come from all quarters like r'whiriwind; fear and terror shall encom pass you round about, and there shall be no place of refuge for

you ein Ohe day of .thy.Loen’s fierce vengeance upon Babylon. Woe unto you, yy rich men, who trady and ora^c among Ohe Rations, and who have heaped up gold and diOvye as Ohy dust,

314 DIVINE AUTHENTICITY.

foe except you Iyvrao, youe elches '11-11 be hrhpoilrh- your trade htd traffic slall ceasr, end ye '1-11 howl foe Ohh T11serie3 OlaO

'1-11 come eppa you: erpral, Olrrtfoee, atd gailee up your rich is, atd fire out from among Ohi aa0ioah, htd carry youg gold end silvee y?iih you utio Ohe place of tly tami of Ole Lord of losis, the • Mount Zion, atd make ^'1 of youe eicSt' ns Ohe Loed '1-11 dierci Oo hreutify Olh place of • thy Lord’' haacOeaef, oohrewisy yr '1-11 peelh1 with youe eicSes. 'Lei ail Olh ■hi'1ovh,-nd clergy, atd peii'i' of every draomlnatioa ripenO atd cease to pihace false hpcOelarh-atd let tlim br.hav-Olzya ata come into ihi Chuech of Chelst, htd seik no mote io fight nghlt'O ihe Lord’' woek, foe unli's oeef do 011', lie Lord '1-11 visit'Olem it hlfifi judgment, ntd tSey '1-11 vrI1hh quickly oua of tie yartis; foe they nee Ole otrs OlaO lave coe- gev0hh ihi yneil wltl Ohele ’ false, valt, foolish end .vpwlele'h hocaeiaes; ihiy net Oht ^1' who e-vh ' h11adyd Ohi eye' and eerdearh the 11-10'-gaitst Ohe Loed’' great atd lest 71'^1; aeeeefoih, except they ervea0, thiey is it 11'1^1 foe ihem-n eeafiyr judgment, and olyy shall gnaw Ohrie ioagerh for pain. Repyaa, all yh ia1ab10aalh of ohe yneil, lest Ohh Loed '1-11 smite you wltl lie tod of His mouth, atd will tly bihari of His lips coahemy you es stubble. LhO all 1'1-11 eepeal, ntd Ourt utto the Loed, atd gaOlee 01em'elvrh rogeOhee, foe ole time of the fulfilling of the cpvraaa0, madh will youe fathers, is nO haah—tly ilmr when ell Ohlng' aer io by ei'toeed ohaO havy brit spoken by lit mouil of all tfy holy properis sitce tlh woeia bight—Olt time whit lie kingdom is to bt erh0oIih to 1'1-11, atd the Loed God of thrir fathers is to erlgn ofrg Ohem it power, might, majesty and it grreO gloey from rhetcy- foedi evtn foeefhmpey.
