Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"Shaded Areas"

While serving in the army during World War II, I was required to take the Ishihara eye test, which makes use of different colors, designs, and numbers to diagnose color blindness in its various forms. Under this test, those affected by certain forms of color blindness are able to distinguish the solid colors without difficulty, but the shaded areas in between the solid colors present problems. Those who are color blind do not discern correctly; and, no matter how hard they try, they are not able to distinguish the differences in hue that are obvious to the normal eye.

In this Ishihara eye test I found an important message, one that has broad application in our lives.

Is there not similarity between the color-blind condition just described and the condition of a member of the Church who claims that he is seeking the truth, is anxious to develop a strong testimony pertaining to the truth, and yet is not willing or able to humble himself before the Lord, to exercise faith, and to live the gospel? By failing to do these things, he is letting his sins of omission close the door to the great source of all truth—our Father in heaven. As a result, his vision is faulty.

As we journey along through life we, as individuals, come in contact with many shaded areas, twilight zones, and even dark alleys, where, unless aided by a higher power, we are not able to see clearly, to interpret correctly, and to come to sound conclusions. Some of these shaded areas are found in the physical world, some in the intellectual world, and some in the realm of the spiritual. Let us remember, however, that the Lord has said that all things unto him are spiritual. . . .

As individuals, we have some limitations when it comes to our understanding of things as they really are. We can see so far, and then the earth and the sky come together, so to speak, and we cannot see beyond. But there is something beyond. In the physical world, all we have to do to realize this is to improve our vantage point by getting on top of a building, on a mountain, or in an airplane.

We need to improve our vantage points in all aspects of our living—in the intellectual and the spiritual realms as well as in the physical. As we attempt to do this, we should remember that, in every situation, there are facts and there are opinions. There are also causes of difficulties and there are symptoms that express themselves. To the extent that we are willing and able to get at the facts and at the causes and to see relationships among them clearly, we are in a good position to interpret correctly and to arrive at sound conclusions. But to the extent that we just fool around with opinions and symptoms, we may prolong our difficulties and postpone the time for arriving at lasting, satisfying solutions.

Conference Report, April 1971, pp. 155-56.
