Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"The Correction Was Made"

The gospel teaches the importance of obedience to law. . . . You will remember that the astronauts on one of the missions had an outward trip and a return trip. On the outward trip their goal was the moon. On the return trip their goal was the earth, their home base. They reached their goals both going and coming because they themselves, the engines and the instruments under their control, and those at mission control at home base were able to operate in accordance with law.

Do you remember what happened on the Apollo 13 mission? As they made their return trip they were almost home when they found out that they were off course a bit. They had to make a correction. To do so, they had to fire their engine. If that engine hadn't fired, the correction could not have been made; they would have missed the earth by eighty miles, and we wouldn't have been able to bring them back. But the engine did fire, and the correction was made, and they returned to earth safe and sound.

Is there not an important lesson there for us? Is it not true that we, too, had an outward trip when we left our Father in heaven in the spirit world and came to earth? Are we not now walking around on our earth, which might be likened to the astronaut's moon? And is it not true that whether or not we will be able sometime in the future to return to our Father in heaven, our home base, will be dependent on our willingness and our ability to observe the laws and keep the commandments that pertain thereto? And is it not true that the Lord has provided us with a way through repentance for making a correction to put us back on course when we have strayed because of sin?

The gospel of Jesus Christ is the answer to all problems. However, men and women everywhere must be doers of the word, and not hearers only, if they would have peace in the world and would find joy and happiness in this life and in the life to come. This is our great and important test.

Conference Report, October 1970, p. 148.
