Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

ELDER BERNARD P. BROCKBANK

Biographical Sketch

Elder Bernard P. Brockbank was named an Assistant to the Council of Twelve of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints on October 6, 1962. He was president of the Scotland Mission of the Church at that time and completed his term of service in addition to taking up his new responsibilities.

His principal assignments have been as supervisor of the Eastern and Southeastern American missions and member of the Church Information Committee. He was managing director of the Mormon Pavilions at the New York World's Fair in 1964-65, Hemisfair '68 in San Antonio, Texas, and Expo '70 in Osaka, Japan.

A well-known Salt Lake building contractor, Elder Brockbank was active in building associations as well as in civic affairs, having been a member of the Salt Lake Real Estate Board, Utah Home Builders Association, Holladay Lions Club, and Sons of Utah Pioneers. He is a past president of the Granite School District Board of Education.

Elder Brockbank attended Utah State Agricultural College (now Utah State University) in Logan, Utah, and studied economics at George Washington University.

He served in many responsible positions in the Church, including those of bishop, stake high councilor, and stake president. He has also been an officer and teacher in the youth organizations of the Church, and, during his youth, he served as a missionary in Great Britain for two years. Prior to his appointment in 1960 as mission president, he was chairman of the Jordan Valley Region of the Church welfare program. He opened and was president of the North British Mission, Scottish-Irish Mission, and Scottish Mission.

Born May 24, 1909, in Holladay, Utah, Elder Brockbank is a son of Taylor P. and Sarah LeCheminant Brockbank. He married Nada Rich of Logan, Utah, on November 1, 1935; she died in 1967. They are the parents of five sons and a daughter and have several grandchildren. In 1968 he married Frances Morgan Rivero, and her children—two sons and two daughters—were added to the Brockbank family.
