Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"I Would Like to Know the Truth"

A fine couple came into my office in the Mormon Pavilion recently, and the husband was concerned because his wife who had visited the Pavilion a few weeks before had recently joined The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and she was filled with peace, joy, and satisfaction. He said, "My wife seems to know, but I do not know, that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. I do not know that Joseph Smith is a prophet of God. I would like to know the truth."

He said, "I do believe that there is a God or a Creator."

In answer I said, "Your Father in heaven has a greater desire that you know that Jesus Christ is literally his Son and that he is the Savior, and he desires that you know the prophets, even more than you desire to know, but you must be ready to accept and follow the Savior."

Jesus Christ gave us the key of how we can know, and this has been repeated, and I think it is rather significant. . . . I think it has great import and is very essential in the great missionary program because no convert can come into this church, knowing the truth and knowing what is essential, unless he follows and understands what the Savior mentioned. . . .

This revealed one of the little secrets that was keeping this young man from the Church. His desire was good, which is very important; he had a marvelous attitude, but he wanted a witness through his own mind, from his own reading, through his own understanding, even though we had been speaking about the message the Lord gave of how we can know. This witness cannot come from flesh and blood but must come from God the Eternal Father.

I again asked him if he would privately and secretly fast and pray from his heart to God, so that he might know the truth. He said, "I will do the best I can, but I assure you I will pray."

One week later he was baptized, and with tears in his eyes and joy in his heart he knew that Jesus Christ was his Savior and that he was literally the Son of the living God. His Father in heaven also revealed to him that Joseph Smith was a prophet; he also knew that the Book of Mormon was scripture and was the word of God. That came as an answer from his Father in heaven, and he was thrilled to get acquainted with it. He told me, "Life has greater meaning."

Conference Report, October 1965, pp. 138-40.
