Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"What Would You Give for That Kind of Faith?"

A few months ago, I was assigned to a stake conference in a certain area of the Church near a military installation. On Sunday night I was invited to appear before a group of servicemen, and most of them had their wives and their children. It was a camp to which many of our young men are assigned.

When I walked into that very modest chapel, I saw the place was filled with servicemen—young men with their wives and their children. I also saw in that audience a young lady I knew from Salt Lake City. I had known her a number of years ago, and I knew her folks. She had a very beautiful baby in her arms. Oh, a very choice baby, such a beautiful child. As I watched her, she seemed very happy sitting by her husband.

After the meeting was over they came up, and I was grateful to see them. I shook hands with them and congratulated them on their beautiful baby; and the husband said, "Are you driving back to the city after this?"

I said, "Yes, sure, are you going back?"

"Yes, I must be there in the morning."

We told him where our car would be, and he had his suitcase there ready to go. He bid his beautiful wife and baby goodnight, and I thought it seemed a little strange because they did not seem concerned as he left them to go to the city where he was to appear at the hospital the following morning for a very serious operation. As we were driving along, I said, "Who is going to take care of your wife and baby while you are in the hospital?"

"Oh, they'll be all right."

"Do your folks know you are going into the hospital?"

"No, I haven't told them."

"Well, do your wife's folks know you are going in the hospital tomorrow morning for this serious operation?"

"No, we haven't told them."

I thought that seemed so strange; and I started to worry about that wife and baby, and asked, "Will they get up to see you while you are in the hospital?"

"No, no, they won't be able to come up to the hospital."

"How long will you be in the hospital?"

"Oh, about ten days or two weeks."

I thought how strange it was to have no worry, nor concern, nor anxiety; they hadn't even told his folks or her folks.

"Why didn't you tell your folks?"

"Oh, they would have worried, and they would have probably rushed right down here; and we didn't need them, and we don't want to worry them."

"Well, how long have you had this ailment?"

"Oh, I have known of it for some time."

"You are not concerned about it?"

"No, why should I be concerned about it? Why, my wife and I have fasted and prayed about this for weeks. We have no concern and we are not worried at all."

She did not seem like it when he left, and he did not either. And I thought, Oh, what would you give for that kind of faith?

Then he said, "Oh, we have had a lot of problems already in our married life, and we are sure that everything is going to be all right."

"You repeat that you are sure that everything is going to be all right?"

"Oh, yes. We have no worry at all. The Lord has manifest to both my wife and me that everything will be all right."

Then he told me of this incident. He said, "You saw our beautiful baby tonight. A number of months ago while we were here on the post, my wife became very ill. The doctor of the post had her under his charge, and finally he called me in with my wife to say to her, 'You're very ill and I'm not a specialist. Therefore, I am going to release you because I cannot take care of you any longer. You are a very sick girl. I suggest that you go home, or that you go somewhere where you can get excellent specialist's attention. I am worried for you; and if you were my daughter. I would get you somewhere quickly. There is a specialist who comes here next month, or I can call him to come down sooner. But really you are in serious condition, both for your own life and the life of your baby (which was to be born in a few months).'"

Again that man in the automobile that night, that wonderful serviceman, said, "From that time on my wife and I fasted and prayed that she wouldn't have to go home, and that we wouldn't lose our baby, and that everything would be all right."

Again I thought, What faith! What would you give for that kind of faith?

"Well, in a few weeks the specialist came to the camp. He looked at the tests and the X-rays, and concurred with the original doctor in saying, 'I, too, think that you had better get out of here. You had better go home where you can get special attention!' This doctor did not make any tests of his own."

But then this young man and his wife spoke up to the specialist and said, "I wonder if you would be willing to make some tests of your own, and some new X-rays?"

He did; and as they compared the new tests with the originals, they discovered that the new tests gave no indication of anything wrong at all. There was nothing wrong with the young wife; she did not need to go home! She would have a normal baby. This young man told me, "Those two doctors didn't know what had taken place between the time of the first test and the time of the second test. You see, we had prayed and fasted that everything would be all right, and that my wife would be so blessed that everything would be normal and right with her so that she could have her baby. Those two doctors don't understand."

Now I could see why that young man said goodnight to his wife with composure. No worries; no fear; no anxiety. They knew everything would be all right, so they did not worry their parents, although I thought they both ought to have been spanked for keeping their parents in ignorance of this problem. But you will have to admire them for their independence; you will have to admire them for their great faith. They were not relying on their parents. They were not relying on themselves. They were relying on the blessings of the Lord and the faith that they had. I pray that you and I may have that same kind of faith and strength when the day comes that we need it. . . .

I worried about them for the next ten days until he got out of that hospital. He had a lot more faith than I had. I watched his case and kept in touch with his wife. Within ten days or two weeks he was back home well and strong; the operation was successful.

Again I ask you, What would you give for that kind of faith? Well, that is the kind of faith I pray you can develop. That is the kind of faith that I pray you can have, and every single one of us can have it if we will only live for it. What is it worth to you? Why, it is worth everything!

"Faith Promotes Faith and Testimony," BYU Speeches of the Year, November 16, 1960, pp. 4-7.
