Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"Buy a Hot Dog, Mister"

There was once a man who lived by the side of the road and he sold hot dogs. The father had a boy away in college. The father was hard of hearing so he had no radio. He could not hear what was going on. He had trouble with his eyes so he read no books or newspaper, but he sold very good hot dogs, the very best hot dogs and hamburgers. He was keeping his boy in school, in college.

He had some signs put along the highway telling how good his hot dogs were. He stood on the side of the road as people drove by and cried, "Buy a hot dog, mister, the best hot dog." And people by the hundreds stopped and bought his hot dogs, Yes, his hot dogs were the biggest and the best hot dogs that were ever sold.

His business increased. He hired some help. His meat and bun orders increased and doubled. He bought a bigger stove to take care of his heavy trade. He was making money. He was succeeding financially, and then his son came home from college to help him out with his business, but something happened. His son said to his father, "Father, haven't you been listening to the radio, don't you know that there is a very serious depression coming?"

"No, son, I haven't listened to the radio, because I don't hear very well," said the father.

"Well, haven't you been reading the newspaper? Don't you know that business is dropping off all over the country?"

"No, son," he said, "I haven't read the newspapers because I don't see very well."

"Well, Father, there is a big depression coming. The world condition is terrible. The domestic situation is even worse."

His father became alarmed. His father thought, "Well, my son has been to college; he reads the newspapers; he listens to the radio, so he ought to know." Then the father decided to cut down on the meat that he put in the hamburger. He reduced his purchases. He dismissed one or two of his helpers, and he decided to sell much smaller hot dogs so his profit could be higher. He thought, "There is no need of me having these signs and standing out on the highway asking people to stop and buy a hot dog; that won't do any good." His sales soon fell off.

And then the father said to the son, "Well, son, you are sure a smart boy. We certainly are in the middle of a terrible depression."

"Cooperation—The Spirit of BYU," BYU Speeches of the Year, November 30, 1954, p. 8.
