Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"Eight Doctors"

A few weeks ago a business associate of mine asked me to go with him to make the acquaintance of and visit and talk with eight wonderful young Latter-day Saint practicing physicians. He wanted me to go to see these doctors and meet them, wishing that I would agree to write a letter recommending consideration of these doctors so they could successfully get a loan to build a medical clinic. I agreed to go with him.

As we discussed the time for the appointment with these doctors, my friend informed me that it could either be in the morning between 6:30 and 7 o'clock or after 9 o'clock at night. I then decided that it would be better for me to meet them in the morning between 6:30 and 7 o'clock. We left Salt Lake City very early. It was dark because it was in the winter months. We drove to their offices some little way out of Salt Lake City, arriving between 6:30 and 7 a.m.

Soon their individual cars appeared at the office. I was then made acquainted with these wonderful, fine doctors, and we were invited into their office. After all had assembled and we were comfortably seated, the oldest of these eight doctors—and he himself was a comparatively young man—walked over and shut the door. Then he said, "Would you mind joining us in morning prayer before we discuss our business problems with you?"

Then I thought, "seek not to counsel the Lord but to take counsel. . . ." I was somewhat astounded at this procedure, but I confess I was humbly grateful and proud of these young doctors. The presiding doctor called on one of the other doctors to offer the morning prayer, and he offered a very beautiful, appropriate petition to the Lord and asked for his guidance.

To my recollection, I have never had that experience with professional or businessmen before. I asked the doctors before I left, "Is this your common practice?"

"Oh, yes, every morning, six days a week, we meet here between 6:30 and 7, where we lock our door and, before starting our duties of the day, call on God our Eternal Father for his divine guidance. If for any reason one of the doctors has important or urgent surgery or an urgent patient call, we go ahead without him, and each takes his turn offering the morning prayer."

Of course these doctors will be successful! I thought they were wonderful.

How many teachers, how many bankers, how many business or professional men, how many of us follow that kind of procedure every morning? These doctors are seeking the divine guidance of God their Eternal Father, and mainly they are men skilled in science, trained in their profession, but not sufficiently so that they can rely upon their own training and their own natural abilities.

Conference Report, April 1957, pp. 68-69.
