Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"I'll Be Here"

Last Thursday evening I had just come home from the office. There was a long distance phone call awaiting me. The voice on the other end of the line introduced herself as "This is the secretary to President Lee. He and President Tanner would like to speak with you, but they aren't available right now. I am wondering where you will be this evening that they might call you back."

All of a sudden everything I was going to do that evening became insignificant, and I said, "I will be here." And then for the next thirty longest minutes of my life, I did many unimportant things, trying to keep busy.

The call came, and President Lee and President Tanner told me of this assignment from the Lord. I must apologize to them for not doing my part in carrying on the conversation that continued. All I was able to say for a while was "Thank you." It seems that my voice box and tear ducts did not know whose turn it was.

Finally President Lee said to me, "Brother Peterson, we want you to know that we have had a confirmation from the Lord that this is what he would have you do." It seemed when he said this that I too received that feeling. It seemed then that even though I didn't know how, and I still don't know how, I knew that everything would work out as the Lord would have it work out.

I am thankful to him for having called a prophet in this day. I am thankful to him for having called noble men to stand at the prophet's side. I appreciate their confidence.

I appreciate the confidence of Bishop Victor L. Brown. I am thankful that the Lord directed him in the selection of his counselors. I will do everything I can to make this an enjoyable and profitable experience for him as he works with me.

After the phone call, I called in my wife, and I told her what had happened. We sat and visited for a while about how this would affect our lives, our five daughters, our business, our home that we just bought. And then it seemed that almost automatically we knelt together and thanked our Father in heaven for his confidence, for his love, and for the things that he has done for us. We thanked him for our children and for their love for their Father in heaven. And I thanked him for her, this eternal sweetheart of mine. I thanked him for allowing her to remain on the earth for another season. I thanked him for her faithfulness in all the calls that have come into our home.

Setting the Example in the Home," The Ensign, July 1972, p. 47.
