Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"The Book of Mormon in the Same Cover with the Bible"

When I was in the mission field in the Eastern States, into one home I went the man was not a member of the Church, and every time I would leave he would say, "I believe I have been a Mormon all my life, but did not know it," but I could not get his wife to come in and listen to me. She would go into the next room and iron. You know ironing is a quiet job. I do not need to tell you that I usually take my "loudspeaker" along with me, just in case, and I made sure she heard all I had to say.

The last visit I made there I said, "Mrs. McDonald, you would surely honor me if you would come in today and listen to me." She finally consented. I said, "You may never see me again in this world."

We had just started our discussion and in walked her son from Harvard College. She said, "My boy, you are just in time. You take this book," because I had her take the Bible to follow me, "and you show us how this man is trying to lead us astray." I took one hour and a half and I closed my Bible.

The discussion that day was on the House of Israel, the new land the Lord had promised to Joseph, the ultimate final gathering in the latter days, and the two records to be kept; and I turned to her son from Harvard and said, "You tell your mother how I am trying to lead you astray, will you please?"

He said, "Mother, this man is not trying to lead you astray, he is teaching you the truth."

Before I left she said, "Mr. Richards, even if I do not believe all you say, there is something about you I cannot help but like. Will you pray with us before you go?"

In that same city we were holding a street meeting, and the Gospel Hall people were holding a convention a short distance away. They adjourned their meeting to come and try and break up ours. I said, "You men would like to be gentlemen, wouldn't you?" As I recall, there were about sixteen ministers there that night. I said, "You give us twenty minutes to finish our meeting and then we will stay thirty minutes and listen to you." I said to the crowd, "Won't we?" There were two or three hundred there, and they indicated they would. During their thirty minutes they painted the Prophet Joseph as black as anybody could. "Why," they said, "if you would let them, the Mormons would bind the Book of Mormon in the same cover with the Bible and ask us to take it and like it."

I did not like to see that meeting close right at that point, so I stepped up to this minister and said, "You would not mind if I made an announcement before the meeting closes, would you?"

He said, "No, go ahead." So I turned to the crowd and said, "If you will come back next Tuesday night at 7:30 we will tell you why we would bind the Book of Mormon in the same cover with the Bible and ask you to take it and like it." And I said, "Bring your Bibles along with you, because you will not need them after next Tuesday night if you are not willing to accept the companion volume of scripture that Ezekiel said the Lord would bring forth, the record of Joseph, which he would join to the record of the Jews and the two should become one in his hand."

When they came that night, and the crowd was larger than the previous one, I said, "How can any of us stay the hand of God from bringing forth the record he has promised?" As I remember we sold sixteen copies of the Book of Mormon that night.

Well, I have had so many experiences that I cannot understand why we cannot plant the truth in the hearts of our people until no outside thing or movement in the world can have any influence with them. We have so much more to offer than any other church in the world.

Conference Report, October 1949, pp. 176-77.
