Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"Are There Any Mormons Living Around Here?"

I used to like to check up a little on us when I was a mission president. I was driving along the highway in Alabama one day, and a man was hobbling along the highway. I picked him up, and as we drove along a little way, I said, "I suppose you have no idea whom you are sitting by?"

He looked me over and said, "No."

I said, "Have you ever met a Mormon elder?"

His face lighted up, and he said, "We had two of them in our home last week, and we have one of their bibles [meaning the Book of Mormon]." Then he said, "They blessed me for my leg, and when they left I said, 'Ma, when they come back next week, let's join their church.'"

I didn't know what kind of response I would get from him!

I was driving in western Florida and stopped to get some gas for my car; to a man sitting down by one of the pumps I said, "Are there any Mormons living around here?" (I knew there were!)

He said, "There is a whole colony of them here."

I said, "What kind of people are they?"

"Oh," he said, "they are the most wonderful people. One of them is my nearest neighbor, and I never had neighbors like that family." Then he said, "You don't happen to know Jim Martin up in Magnolia, do you?"

I said, "Oh, yes, I have stayed in his home."

He said, "He's my uncle. What do you think of him?"

"Oh, he is a wonderful man."

When I was going up through the marble quarries in northern Georgia, I walked ahead with the guide. He had a whole group there that he was showing around. I said, "I suppose you have no idea whom you are walking with, have you?"

He turned and looked at me and said, "No."

And I said, "Have you ever met a Mormon missionary?"

And then he stopped and turned to the whole group and said that he had lived out in Idaho, and his nearest neighbor was a Mormon. He said, "He was the most wonderful neighbor I have ever had."

Now I could tell you many stories like that, because I like to know what people think of us when they know us.

Conference Report, October 1968, pp. 11-12.
