Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"Our Spiritual Health"

Someone once said to a small boy, "Who gave you that black eye?" The boy said, "No one gave me that black eye. I had to fight for it." That is what we must do for every worthwhile thing in our lives. We must fight for it. Certainly we must earn the right to be religious.

I told my friend about a little toy clown that I saw at Christmastime. It was a little plastic figure that had a lead weight in the crown of his head which could always be depended upon to bring him to an upside-down position. If you laid him on his back, he would immediately flip up on his head. If you stood him on his feet, he would quickly reverse his position and land on his head.

But isn't that exactly our own method of response? We can absolutely depend upon this fact, that wherever we place the weights of our interest, that will be the place at which we will more or less automatically respond. For example, my friend was very much interested in athletics; he spent his Sundays and other free time reading about and participating in various kinds of sports. He told me that he could quote the batting averages of every important major league baseball player in the United States, and at the same time, he confessed that he could not quote one single verse from the word of God.

My friend thoroughly understood the importance of taking a vitamin pill every day, but he had no conception of the desirability or the methods for developing spiritual health and vitality. Someone once said, "I never put religion out of mind. I was so open-minded it fell out."

Our spiritual health must always be primarily our own responsibility. A physician judges the health by the appetite, and our spirituality may be judged the same way. It is easy to ruin our appetite for the things of God when we build bars in our homes instead of altars. By the desecration of the Sabbath Day we may become more interested in a horse race than in the celestial kingdom.

Conference Report, April 1957, pp. 108-109.
