Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"Pre-living the Important Events of Our Own Future"

Branch Rickey, the famous baseball manager, was once asked to name his greatest day in baseball. He replied, "I haven't had it yet." And I would like to invite you to consider this important question. How could you employ your life more constructively than in getting ready for those exciting experiences that you haven't yet had?

H. G. Wells gave us some stimulating self-improvement help, when many years ago he wrote an interesting fantasy entitled "The Time Machine." Out of his imagination he invented a machine that could carry people through time much as an airplane carries us through space. In his time machine Mr. Wells could go thousands of years back into the past in just a few minutes. Being a historian, he took great delight in witnessing the important events of history while they were actually taking place.

He made a trip back to the year 1066 to verify personally some of the details of the Battle of Hastings. Then he went still farther back for a visit in the Golden Age of Greece, and he personally discussed philosophy with Socrates 400 years B.C. With mission completed, his time machine would bring him back into the present. Then by pushing the lever in the other direction, this time scientist could with equal speed go up into the future to study civilizations and institutions as they would someday actually be. And his speedometer always indicated which year of time he was in.

While this story is only a fantasy, it contains the germ of a great possibility. Actually, our minds have been equipped with some significant time-traveling abilities. In thought, we can go backward or forward across time faster than any missile can travel through space. In President McKay's great book Gospel Ideals, he has one paragraph in which he says, "Last night I dreamed about my mother." And then he said, "I would like to dream about my mother more often." In his dream he went back into his own past and relived those important days at his mother's knee when he learned the lessons of life that brought him to the presidency of the Church. Upon awaking, he found that his ideals had been renewed and his ambitions greatly strengthened. He had revitalized his life by reabsorbing the original good from the greatest experiences of his own past.

Whether we refer to this process as reflection, meditation, or assimilation, a great source of strength may be had from reliving the past. An even greater source of strength can come from pre-living the important events of our own futures. This ability to look ahead might be called vision or foresight or the utilization of that wonderful power of imagination, which is like a giant radar beam searching the skies of future years. Someone has said that one of the greatest gifts that God has ever given to man is an imagination.

When in our minds we pre-live our marriage, we help to determine the kind of person that we would like to be when that event arrives. As we pre-live our success, we develop the abilities necessary to bring it about. And with the information and direction given us in the Holy Scriptures, we can even pre-live that important period that lies beyond the boundaries of this life.

Conference Report, April 1964, pp. 11-12.
