Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"The 'As If' Principle"

Some time ago I spent a few hours with a group of missionaries. We were discussing missionary work under the two great headings of the "message" and the "messenger." We are halfway to success when we understand the tremendous importance of the message that the gospel of Jesus Christ has again been restored to the earth with the authority to officiate in all of the principles and ordinances of the gospel having to do with the celestial kingdom. But no great message is ever delivered without a great messenger.

Inasmuch as the professional approach to any accomplishment is first to isolate the problem, I said to the missionaries, "Before I can be of much help to you, I need to know what your problems are. Will each of you tell me in one word why you're not ten times as effective as you are?"

As the answers were given, we wrote them on the blackboard. However, when we analyzed them we found that every single one of them had to do with the "messenger"; none of them was about the message. I said to them, "I'm going back to church headquarters in the morning, and I would like to be able to report what's wrong with the message." But no one had any complaint with the message. Their only problem involved changing the messenger.

One missionary said, "I can't be a good missionary because I am not friendly."

I said, "What do you mean?"

He said, "Well, my companion loves everyone, and everyone loves him. Our contacts all gather around him, but because I am not that kind of a person I am left by myself."

I said, "Would you show me what you mean by going down this aisle and shaking hands with these people the way you ordinarily do it?"

In complying, he did his usual unimpressive job. Then I said to him, "Now, will you go down this other aisle and shake hands with these other people the way your companion does it?"

Then he squared his shoulders, got a little different look in his eye and a little different tension in his muscles, as he tried to demonstrate to me how his companion did it. He seemed to be an immediate success while following the example of his companion. I told him about the famous "As If" principle of William James. Mr. James said that if you want to have a quality, act "As If" you already had it. If you want to be friendly, act "As If" you are already friendly. How long does it take one to learn to be friendly? It takes just one-quarter of a second, just long enough to make up your mind to practice the "As If" principle. If you want to be brave, act "As If" you were already brave; don't go around telling everyone how scared and weak you are. It is the axiom of the theater that each actor should live his part.

Conference Report, October 1963, pp. 79-80.
