Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"Armchair Generals"

While World War I was raging in Europe, there were certain individuals here at home who would sit back in their easy armchairs, surround themselves with maps, and follow the progress of battle by reading the newspapers. They were extremely critical of the generals and those who were directing the campaigns and were very eager and vocal in outlining the strategy they would employ if in similar positions of leadership. These individuals were referred to as "armchair generals."

Prior to demolition of old buildings or the construction of new buildings, a solid fence is built to protect passers-by. It has become a practice to bore holes in the fence or to install glass portholes. From these observation points many pause and watch with interest the demolition or construction activities. There are those among the viewers who would improve the way the job is run. Some would knock a building down immediately, while others would have it done bit by bit. Then there are those who would make changes in the architectural design of the building. Others are critical of the manner in which the cement is poured, the bricks are laid, and the glass is installed. These persons are known as "sidewalk superintendents."

Then there is another group belonging to this category. While riding in a car they are continually offering suggestions to the driver as to how the car should be operated, the speed that should be traveled, when to turn, and the signals to be employed. These are the "back seat drivers."

The Church becomes an object of criticism from just such "experts." They are dissatisfied with the manner in which the superintendent manages the Sunday School. They find fault with the way the bishop conducts the affairs of the ward. The stake president does not please them, and they criticize his administration. They are unhappy with the way the tithing is disbursed. These are the persons who find no fault with their own actions, but seem willing and anxious to confess another person's sins.

The Savior was chastising such groups as these when he said: "And why beholdest thou the mote that is within thy brother's eye, but considereth not the beam that is within thine own eye? . . . thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye; and then shalt thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brother's eye." (Matthew 7:3-5.)

I believe that is the same thought that the poet Burns desired to express when he penned the lines:

O was some Power the giftie gie us

To see Oursels as ithers see us!

—Robert Burns, "To a Louse"

I assure you that I am not against criticism, if it is the right kind. Constructive criticism can be good and helpful. Destructive criticism can be bad and harmful. Many years ago my mission president gave this sound advice: "If criticism is just and given kindly, accept it and give thanks for it. If it is just and given unkindly, accept it. But if it is unjust and given unkindly, pay no heed to it."

A critical attitude and faultfinding with the Church, if persisted in, can easily lead to apostasy. A good motto to adopt and follow is, "If you can't improve on silence, say nothing."

Conference Report, October 1960, pp. 8-9.
