Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"Look at That Big Tree"

A boy was extended an invitation to visit his uncle, who was a lumberjack up in the Northwest. For months the boy had looked forward with anticipation to this trip as an exciting adventure. Finally the time came for his journey to the vast timber empire of our country. His uncle met him at the depot, and as the two pursued their way to the lumber camp, the boy was impressed by the enormous size of the trees on every hand. There was a gigantic tree that he observed standing all alone on the top of a small hill. The boy, full of awe, called out excitedly, "Uncle George, look at that big tree! It will make a lot of good lumber, won't it?"

Uncle George slowly shook his head, then replied, "No, son, that tree will not make a lot of good lumber. It might make a lot of lumber but not a lot of good lumber. When a tree grows off by itself, too many branches grow on it. Those branches come from trees that grow together in groves. The trees also grow taller and straighter when they grow together."

It is so with people. We become better individuals, more useful timber when we grow together rather than alone.

This growing together places a responsibility upon each one of us. We should try fully to appreciate all our associates, help them, love them, teach them the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, his plan of salvation for them. We are all the children of God. We can help others; they can help us. Together we can become valuable timber in effectively building his church in which we are blessed to hold membership.

Somewhere out there in the wards and branches and cities where you live are those who are lonely—lonely for want of the light of truth; lonely for the association of those who reflect the Spirit of the Master; lonely, though they may not realize it now, to be a part of the body of Saints that make up the kingdom of God here on the earth. Don't let them stand alone in the dark. Go to them. Let your life be a lamp to their feet. Guide them till they stand with you and associates in the gospel of our Redeemer. This is your responsibility, your obligation, your mission, your privilege. May you fulfill all of those opportunities humbly and nobly, I pray in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Conference Report, April 1965, pp. 54-55.
