Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"Excess Baggage"

Rather recently I enjoyed my first experience of traveling on a jet-propelled plane. It was amazing the speed at which we traveled. Less than two hours after leaving Denver, we were in Chicago. Prior to departure we were required to place our luggage on a pair of scales. If the weight was under forty pounds, the amount allowed each passenger, a green light flashed. But if the weight exceeded forty pounds, a red light flashed and a bell rang. The weight exceeding the allowance is considered excess baggage and a penalty or additional charge is levied. When the red light flashes, one begins to consider the unnecessary articles he could have left behind, such as an extra pair of shoes, for example.

The thought occurred to me that this earth life is also a rapid flight or journey. We are traveling toward a desirable destination, that of eternal life and exaltation. Now the Lord has said, "For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.)

Our goal should be to become perfect, even as our Father in heaven is perfect. It would be well in early life to select and make secure the characteristics and traits needed for this journey of life, discarding the ones which are harmful and which might be classed as excess baggage. We can then be sure, as we continue our journey, that the green light and not the red one will be flashing.

What are some of the traits that might be regarded as excess baggage on our journey toward perfection? To mention but a few: hate and anger and the holding of grudges, a hot temper and a quick tongue, envy, jealousy, and greed, a critical attitude resulting in faultfinding, backbiting, and judging harshly. All these are excess baggage, and we shall have to pay dearly for them.

In contrast there are certain basic, essential characteristics or traits that are very desirable. They constitute legitimate or necessary baggage on our life's journey. One is love, love for our Father in heaven, love for fellowmen and neighbors. The Savior taught. "But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you." (Matt. 5:44.)

Someone has said. "Be kind to your enemies, for you are the one who made them."

Conference Report, April 1960, p. 119.
