Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"He Received His First Pay Check"

It is pleasing to the Lord that the poor and needy be provided for. Running like a golden thread through the scriptures, which contain the word of the Lord, comes a message loud and clear: "Thou shalt remember the poor and the needy."

The Lord has affirmed and reaffirmed that it is his purpose to see that they are cared for, but he has made it equally plain and clear that it must be done in the way and manner that he will indicate or prescribe.

In spite of the Lord's concern for the well-being of the needy, he has pointed out and proclaimed emphatically that they themselves have a responsibility, and if they find it necessary to seek assistance from the Church, they are under obligation to work to the extent of their physical ability for that assistance. Idleness has been designated by the Lord as being a curse, and to receive without giving is contrary to his desires. The beautiful and vital principle of work removes the welfare program from the category of a dole, which has been denounced as an evil. To reenthrone work and make it a ruling principle in the lives of the Church members is one of the primary purposes of the welfare program.

A man over thirty years of age had never been able to work, due to cerebral palsy, from which he had suffered since birth. He was brought by his bishop to a Deseret Industries plant, where someone with love and kindness patiently taught him to cut the buttons from old clothes that were brought daily into the Deseret Industries plant. This became something he could do, and fairly skillfully too. For the first time in his life this man felt he was a useful member of society. With joy and pride he turned each day to his humble task. And then came the day that he received his first pay check. With trembling, uncontrolled movements he took the check, read the amount eagerly, and proudly placed it in his wallet as he had seen others do, but which he had never been able to do in all his thirty years until his great moment. What a blessed privilege is the rewarding principle of work!

Conference Report, October 1969, p. 125.
