Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

ELDER THEODORE M. BURTON

Biographical Sketch

Elder Theodore M. Burton, Assistant to the Council of the Twelve, was a professor of chemistry at Utah State University at the time he was called to his present position, on October 8, 1960.

Elder Burton was born in Salt Lake City March 27, 1907, to Theodore Taylor and Florence Moyle Burton. He earned B.A. and M.A. degrees at the University of Utah and in 1951 obtained his doctorate at Purdue University.

Elder Burton has spent much of his life in Europe in Church and government service. He went there first as a young missionary to the Swiss-German Mission, 1927-30, during which time he was president of the Schleswig-Holstein District. Later he became technical assistant to the U.S. Treasury Attache, U.S. Treasury Department, in Vienna, Austria. In 1937-38 he held the same post in Berlin. In 1957 he returned to Europe to preside over the Church's West German Mission for over three years.

From January 1962 to 1964 he served as president of the European Mission. In this position he supervised the missions in Austria, Switzerland, Germany, Sweden, Denmark, Norway, and Finland. In January 1964, he was appointed vice-president and general manager of the Genealogical Society and managing director of the priesthood genealogy program of the Church. In 1972 he was appointed president of the Genealogical Society.

Serving with him in the leadership of the mission in West Germany and in his present assignment is his wife, Minnie Susan Preece Burton, whom he married in the Salt Lake Temple February 23, 1933. They have one son, Robert Preece Burton.

From 1932 to 1934 Elder Burton served as Salt Lake City's assistant city bacteriologist. He taught chemistry, physics, and mathematics at Carbon Junior College, Price, Utah. In 1934 he began teaching at Utah State University, where he was professor of organic chemistry when called to his present position as one of the General Authorities.

He has served as president of the American Association of University Professors, USU chapter, and as chairman of the Utah Section of the American Chemical Society. He is a member of the Sigma Chi, Phi Lambda Upsilon, Sigma Xi, and Alpha Epsilon Delta fraternities.

In Church service he has been bishop of the Logan Fourth Ward, high councilor in the Cache and Utah State University stakes, and high priests group leader in the Cache and East Cache stakes.
