Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"There's an Eagle in Your Chicken Yard"

I visited 1,710 missionaries, and I am proud of them and their spirit of devotion. There is a good spirit among them, and they have an esprit de corps which is uniting them in spirit. They are catching the great vision of the work which they have to do. They are beginning to realize now who they are.

This concept of knowing who you are is a very important concept, and I would just like to tell you a little story that was told to me by John Bennion, one of my missionaries, which I think illustrates this principle very well. It is a story about a salesman who came into a rather isolated valley on a selling campaign. He had some selling to do, and as he looked around for a place to stay that night, he found no hotel, no rooming house, no boardinghouse, no place where he could stay. So he did what all good salesmen do when caught in a predicament of this kind. He looked around for the finest house he could see in this valley, went up, and knocked on the door. When a man came to the door, he introduced himself and said, "I am sorry to bother you, but I am looking for a place to stay tonight, and I can find neither hotel nor rooms available. Would it be possible for you to put me up tonight?"

The man opened the door in true western hospitality and said, "Stranger, come on in and make yourself at home."

So the man came in and made himself at home, and they had a very, very pleasant evening together—such a very pleasant evening that in the morning, he decided he would get up and help his newfound friend with his chores. He took up a bucket of grain and went out to the back of the house to the chicken yard to feed the chickens. As he started to feed the chickens, all of a sudden he called excitedly to the man, "Hey, mister, come quick. There's an eagle in your chicken yard."

"Oh," the rancher said, "don't worry about that."

He said, "You don't understand. That's a vicious bird. If you don't get him out of your chicken yard, he'll kill all your chickens!"

"Oh," the rancher said, "don't worry about it."

"But that's a golden eagle!" he cried.

Then the rancher said, "Let me tell you the story, and then you'll understand. Last year some of my boys went with me up into the mountains, and there on a cliff below us we found an eagle's nest. In that eagle's nest were three eggs, and so we let one of the boys down the cliff with a rope, and he picked up two of those eggs from the eagle's nest and brought them back up with him. When we got home, we put them under a brooding hen. One of those eggs hatched out. That's that eagle. You see, that mother hen was his mother, and all the rest of those chickens are his brothers and sisters. That's no eagle. That's a chicken."

The salesman looked over into the chicken yard and sure enough, there was the eagle scratching around in the chicken yard with all of the rest of the chickens and picking up grains of corn just as a chicken would. Then he said to the rancher, "Do you mind if I perform an experiment on that bird?"

The rancher said, "Go ahead, he can't lay any eggs."

So he walked over and picked up that eagle in his hand, looked him right in the eye, and said, "Thou art an eagle. Take to thy wings and fly!"

But the eagle just blinked at him with those big yellow eagle eyes, ruffled up his feathers, and turned his head sideways and looked him up and down. Then he hopped down to the ground and started to scratch in the dirt after grains of corn.

The rancher laughed at the salesman and said, "See, I told you he was just a chicken."

The salesman shook his head and he said, "It just isn't right." Then he went out on his selling campaign, but did not finish, so he returned that night and said, "I am sorry to bother you again, but could I stay another night?"

The rancher said, "Look, you stay just as long as you have a mind to. You will always be welcome here."

So he spent another very pleasant evening and the next morning got up, picked up his bucket of grain, and went out to feed those chickens again. After he had fed the chickens he looked at that eagle. He went over and picked him up, raised him on his hand, and looked him right in the eye and said, "Thou art an eagle. Take to thy wings and fly!" But the eagle just blinked at him with those big yellow eagle eyes, ruffled up his feathers, cocked his head, and looked him up and down, then hopped to the ground and started to scratch for grains of corn again.

The rancher laughed again and said, "It's hopeless. Give it up." Well, the salesman went out to sell another day, but he still did not finish, so he stayed a third night, and that third morning he went out to feed those chickens again. He fed them and then looked at that eagle. It was very early in the morning, and the sun was just coming up over the mountain as he reached down and lifted up that eagle and turned him this time so that he had to look right at the sun. Then he said, "Thou art a golden eagle. Take to thy wings and fly!"

But the eagle just blinked at him with those big yellow eagle eyes, ruffled up his feathers, cocked his head, and looked at him again. But as he did so, the sun got in his eyes, so he raised his head to look at the sun, and all of a sudden he began to tremble. Then he spread those great wings and off he flew, and that was the last that was ever seen of that eagle.

Now, he was no longer a chicken. He was an eagle, the king of the air, in the element where he belonged. He was free. A golden eagle, the king of the birds!

I am convinced that there are too many golden eagles among us who are convinced that we are chickens. This is no time for us ever to be chickens. This is a time for us as well as a time for our missionaries to realize who we are.

Conference Report, April 1962, pp. 55-57.
