Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"We Have Enough—Don't Bring Any More"

In February of this year we had a terrible storm which crashed down upon Northern Europe. The wind blowing in from the North Sea drove the water up the rivers, and we had a terrible flood in the area around Hamburg. We were very concerned.

I happened to be touring the North German Mission at that particular time with President Howard Maycock. On Friday evening when we left Altona and drove through Hamburg on our way to Bremen, we passed along the levee and noticed that the water was rising. Some of the cars were already partially under water, and not much more than ten minutes after we passed the water came in and flowed over the very road that we had been traveling.

At that time we did not realize how serious conditions were. Although we knew that the water was high, we spent the night in Bremen, held our missionary conference there the next day, and as soon as I returned to Frankfurt by air I telephoned to find out how things were, for I heard that President Maycock could not get back to Hamburg because the roads were under water.

I had reports from that area on Saturday night, and the president of the stake said they had things in hand and were working to care for the people but were concerned about some of the members. The amazing thing was the way our wonderful brethren there immediately sprang into action and took care of their own people. The president of that stake and his counselors with some of the members of the high council visited the bishops, checked on the Saints, found what was needed, and took care of them. They located and helped flood victims, for many of our people lost all their belongings. They lost their furniture, they lost their clothes, even the wallpaper was washed off the walls, and the homes were filled with slime from the floods, but miraculously all their lives were saved.

Some very remarkable things happened. President Panitsch told me that he was concerned about one elderly sister who was bedridden. He was afraid that the flood which covered much of Wilhelmsburg might have taken her life, because she could not move. However, the night before the flood came, she became a little more ill and was taken to a hospital and so was saved.

One of our sisters was concerned because in the middle of this flood, as the waters came rushing in, her children, whom she had held by the hand, were swept away from her by the floods, so she lost them and despaired of their lives. She was rescued and came in tears to her bishop, wanting to know what she could do for her children. But the children had been miraculously saved. They had clung to trees the whole night and had been rescued the following morning and were restored to her again, frightened but safe.

So you see, the local Saints helped one another. When the call went out to gather food and clothing, they brought so much material into the Altona branch house that the bishops had to tell the people, "We have enough. Don't bring any more." The sisters spent their time sorting the clothing (it was good clothing that was brought in) and making sure that all the people who received clothing had proper fit and suitable attire.

The local Saints helped one another. And the greatest testimony of unity for me, brothers and sisters, was to see how the presidents of the other German-speaking stakes sprang to the rescue. Berlin telephoned over and asked if they could help, and Switzerland and Stuttgart, without even bothering to telephone, started up their relief action and gathered sums of money, which to us were really large in terms of German marks, and sent that money to President Panitsch, offered food and clothing, and telephoned to ask if they could give more help.

So you see, they are working together, and those wonderful German and Swiss Saints in our European stakes held together as one people. It is a thrill to see such unity. I thought to myself, truly these stakes now are places of refuge and safety. Zion is where the pure in heart dwell, and these are true stakes of Zion. My heart swelled with pride for our Saints in Europe.

Conference Report, April 1962, pp. 54-55.
