Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"Tickling the Tiger"

Now, as a chemistry teacher, I could not stand before a group of students without starting to tell you something about my field. My brothers and sisters, I would like to tell you a little bit about the development of the atom bomb as it proceeded in Alamagordo, New Mexico.

It was necessary when they were beginning to study the reactions of the atom with the hope of making an atom bomb to know its critical mass. This is the least amount of uranium that can be brought together to produce a chain reaction that would result in an explosion. It is a very critical experiment that involves bringing two masses of uranium slowly together until, by watching the Geiger counter and seeing the rate of reaction, we can see that we are approaching a critical state.

Now, the scientist who was working with this experiment was very, very careful, and he followed very careful experimental procedures. There was a spring attached to these masses of uranium so that when he released the pressure, they would immediately fly apart to avoid any danger of an atomic reaction. So, as he proceeded to carry out this experiment time after time and became a little bit familiar with its reactions, one day he became careless and proceeded just a trifle too rapidly. Before he knew it there was a flash of blue-white light. Quickly he released the apparatus. There was no atomic explosion—the mechanism functioned perfectly—but the burst of neutrons had done its work. In spite of massive blood transfusions and all the care that could be given, within a short time he was dead. Whenever we become careless, disaster may be lurking in the corner to destroy us.

Now there is a lesson here for all of us. This is what we call "tickling the tiger." In my day we used to call this "pulling the lion's tail." It is a very dangerous business to do this sort of thing—trying to see how far we can go without getting hurt. We do many of these things in the name of excitement. We call it having a good time. It may be done in a number of ways. It may be drag-racing down Main Street, taking a drink, progressive petting, or it may be the flirting of married couples, all in the name of excitement and having a good time! But it seems to me that we must go back to Alexander Pope's poem:

Vice is a monster of so frightful mien,

As, to be hated, needs but to be seen;

Yet seen too oft, familiar with her face,

We first endure, then pity, then embrace.

"Tickling the Tiger," BYU Speeches of the Year, January 17, 1961, pp. 2-3.
