Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"Brush Creek"

A spirit of dedication, willingness to serve in any capacity and to sacrifice, if necessary, characterizes the true Latter-day Saint.

It was not long ago that I was in one of the stakes in southern Idaho. I was asked to interview five young men between twenty-five and thirty-five years of age, most of them married and having one or two children, to see if they were ready to receive the office in the Melchizedek Priesthood for which they had been recommended. I received the thrill of my life.

Somehow, I decided—I don't know whether I made a mistake or not—but I decided to see what the depth of their willingness to sacrifice was. As each one came into the room, I sat down with him, introduced myself, and became better acquainted with him. Then I stated that the Church had acquired a great tract of land in Brush Creek and wished to prepare it for settlement for the Saints. The water had to be brought onto it, the brush had to be cleared and the land leveled, homes built, schools erected, and all things must be done from scratch. It would be no easy thing. I said: "If you were asked to go, would you take your wife and family and leave what you have and go to Brush Creek and settle it?" Every one of those young men said yes.

I said: "What would your wife think about it?" In every case they said, in effect, "I am sure she would feel as I do, that if the Church required it, we would go." Then I explained that I had concocted the story.

I felt like putting my arms around each of those young men. I commended them; and then I got down on my knees, and I thanked the Lord for such young men of this day who were ready to dedicate, to consecrate, to leave all that they had and go, no matter where they may be called to go, to build up Zion. That is the test that we all should be ready to meet.

There is a veritable army of men and women such as these in the quorums, in the missions, and in the wards and stakes, and in all places, where they serve without a thought of compensation.

Conference Report, October 1955, p. 122.
