Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"Our Divine Destiny Is Imperiled"

The picture of young couples expressing their joy and happiness in their associations and in their anticipation of eternal joy can be contrasted with one case that came to my attention. A young woman of our church wrote me a letter asking for advice.

She said, "I was born in the Church, but I fell in love with a fine young man who did not belong to our church. We decided finally that we would marry. As we talked it over, we decided that even though our religious beliefs were entirely different, neither of us would impose our beliefs or practices upon the other, that we would leave each other free to worship and to believe as each saw fit." She said, "This went along all right until our baby came. When I wanted to have it blessed in our church, my husband objected, and he had the support of his mother and others who insisted that our child be christened in their church. My heart is broken." She ended her letter with this question, "What would you suggest?"

Well, I was dumbfounded to know what to suggest at that point in her experience, my brothers and sisters. I thought, surely somewhere along the line some of us had failed to suggest and to advise and to counsel this young woman long before she got into this situation. She, like others in like circumstances, had thought that everything could be "worked out later."

How will this young woman now obtain the blessings that are promised to the faithful children of God? How will she obtain her eternal blessings? How will she be assured the association of her husband and of her children and of others that are dear and close to her?

Parents, bishoprics, and all agencies in the Church, and officers and teachers in the various classrooms are responsible to see that boys and girls do not get so far away from us that they marry out of the Church. Even though there are fine, wholesome, wonderful people outside the Church, nevertheless, when we engage in marriage with them our divine destiny is imperiled!

Conference Report, October 1953, p. 126.
