Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"We Rushed to Our Scoutmaster's Aid"

There was great excitement at the ranch home of Scoutmasters Paul and Harold Walker as the Scouts of Troop 1 of Lindon, Utah, assembled on a beautiful night, July 17, 1923, preparatory to a hike the next day. The bedrolls were spread out on the straw stack under the stars and in the barn on the hay. In the early evening there was little sleep because of the pranks and normal running about.

At five a.m. we were up, and after breakfast we were on our way to the campsite—Pittsburg Lake—up the north fork of American Fork Canyon. The boys were stacked in a wagonbed. Scoutmaster Paul Walker, who had been ill and was still recovering, took Old Rone, his faithful horse, since the doctor had told Paul he could go if he did no hiking. Old Rone was a faithful horse used by the Walkers to drive cattle on the mountain range. It had a reputation of being a surefooted and dependable horse. We all felt secure with it carrying the Scoutmaster, for it had taken him over mountain trails many times.

As we journeyed up the canyon to the campsite, we had the normal fun of a group of boys on an outing. Once, where the road was very narrow at a point far up from the base of the canyon, the rear wheel of the wagon seemed to slip dangerously close to the edge, and we were all frightened. We soon came to the old Dutchman Mine, where we unpacked the supplies from the wagon, loaded them onto packhorses and mules, and started up a trail to Pittsburg Lake. After a few hours we arrived at this mountain clearing with its lake and fresh spring and beautiful play area.

We would have been content to spend the entire time around camp with the many exciting things there were to do, but the excitement of climbing the mountain was too great. Thus we started out after breakfast and made our way to the top. The Scouts all hiked while Paul Walker, the Scoutmaster, rode Old Rone. We reached the summit and continued along the top on the trail, which continued slightly at the side of the ridge.

The trail soon came to a rugged wash, full of sharp rocks and rough terrain. At this point there was a step-down of about 18 inches. We were concerned about the horse continuing because of the step-down and the rough and narrow trail that followed. But Paul was confident that Old Rone could do it; they had traveled this kind of terrain many times driving cattle on the range. But after Old Rone stepped down the 18-inch incline and started across the rough area, Paul decided to turn back. To turn the horse on this narrow, steep trail was frightening in itself, but the horse made it and started back along the trail. Then it came to the incline—the 18-inch step-up. It tried the step but missed its footing. It tried again and again; then it became excited and lunged forward, trying harder, but missed again, lost its balance, and fell backward. The horse, with the Scoutmaster on it, rolled over and over on this rugged area, down the mountainside. Paul was thrown free about halfway down, but the horse rolled all the way to the bottom.

We Scouts stood frozen with fear, numbed by the horrible sight before our eyes. Then we rushed to our Scoutmaster's aid. As we reached him he was moaning and in great pain. Blood was coming from several severe gashes and cuts on his head and face. Young and frightened, we looked at Paul, then at the steep mountain he had just fallen down, and wondered how we could ever get him back to the top. Then someone suggested we pray. In unison, we quickly knelt and prayed to the Lord for help in getting our Scoutmaster to safety, for direction and guidance in this disaster, and for his recovery.

When we arose from our knees, Paul directed us to get him out of the hot sun and into the shade. Then he sent us down to the horse to get the saddle blanket and to make a stretcher out of it. This we did, and we finally were able to start up the mountain, with Paul on the improvised stretcher.

In the meantime, one of the boys had been dispatched to go to camp and then on the Dutchman Mine for help. There was usually a first aid man there, and we hoped that he would be able to come with help.

After much difficulty and many rests along a trail that led back and forth across the side of the mountain, we reached the top. Some of the Scouts had already made a fire and were melting snow with which to bathe the wounds and cuts before bandaging them. The boys applied their training in first aid as they bandaged Paul. This done, two poles were cut out, and by using coats and shirts of some of the boys, we made a sturdier stretcher. Then we began the long trip back to the camp.

Before camp was reached, the first aid man from the Dutchman Mine met us. He said he could do nothing more than what had already been done. He directed us to the main road, where his pickup truck was waiting. We placed Paul in it and drove to the nearest town. I distinctly recall the pain and distress Paul was in during the journey. The roads were rough and the truck was not a particularly gentle cradle.

Later it was discovered that Paul had suffered a broken collarbone, a fractured skull, and many cuts and bruises.

Although the Scoutmaster directed his rescue from the accident scene and conversed with us continually until we reached home, he remembers nothing of the whole incident. It was the next day before he completely regained consciousness.

The Scouts had done a perfect job with the first aid they rendered. The bandages they had applied weren't removed for several days, but the broken bones and the wounds had healed perfectly.

Brother Walker recovered fully in a few weeks and has lived a long and happy life. Now retired, he wrote to me recently: "I have always felt that it was the leadership of my Scouts that brought me off the mountain.

"Of this one thing I am sure—because of the prayers of a group of boys that day, I am here today."

"An Event in the Life of James A. Cullimore," Improvement Era, September 1967, pp. 46-47.
