Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"This Is Where You Are Supposed to Be"

In 1937 we moved to Oklahoma City, where I worked for a large department store as divisional merchandise manager. After a few years the owner of the business passed away and his widow took over the management of the business. I became somewhat dissatisfied with my employment and began to look elsewhere.

About this time Elder Joseph F. Merrill, an apostle, was touring the mission, and as he visited Oklahoma City, he stayed in our home. We sought his advice as to our moving. Sister Cullimore visited with him at great length one morning, expressing her concern as to the children's associating with nonmembers almost entirely. They were getting to the age of dating, and she was concerned that they had no members of their own age to associate with. We were concerned that they might marry out of the Church.

Brother Merrill said to us, "Don't worry about it. This is where you are supposed to be. The Lord has directed you here and this is where you are needed. There are plenty of folks out west that can take care of the responsibilities there. You are needed here." He said, "Don't be worried about your children marrying out of the Church. Just make sure that you teach them the gospel, have a good home life, see that they go to their meetings, and then send them to a Church school, and they'll marry in the Church."

We listened to this direction and gave heed to it, really never expecting things to move quite as fast as they did. But the very next day after he was there, as I went out to lunch I met a real estate man whom I had asked to keep his eyes open for a building that we might rent to go into business for ourselves. This had been several months earlier and I'm sure he had not taken it too seriously and had done nothing about it, but as I sat and visited with him this day at lunch, he said, "I've just been over to your store to offer them a building to rent to open a residential store in the city."

I asked him where it was and he told me and I said, "Why, that's exactly the location I have been looking for. Why haven't you let me know about it?"

He said, "Well, it's yours if you want it; they didn't take it."

So within three days we had made our decision to rent the building and go into business for ourselves. We started out in a very modest way, but the business mushroomed and prospered and we felt strongly the hand of the Lord in this direction. Because of our business and the success of it, we were able to help many of the branches get buildings and move on faster than they otherwise would have done.

We also saw the fulfillment of the other advice Brother Merrill gave, that of the children marrying in the temple. We have three children all of whom have married in the temple and are active and faithful in the Church, and even though none of them really found their mates at the Church school, they all attended Church schools. We are grateful for their faithfulness and the fulfillment of the promise made by a servant of the Lord.
