Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"Beware of the Mormons"

I was interested in listening to the story of a new branch president in Bandung, Indonesia, just two months ago. He was a wonderful man, so qualified and excited in his newfound religion. I asked him how he came to be interested in the Church. He told me a very interesting story.

He had been to the doctor, and, after the doctor had completed the examination, she had said, "You look like a good Christian man."

He said, "No, I am a good Buddhist, a very good Buddhist."

But the doctor said, "I still think you should investigate some of the good Christian religions, for you would be a good Christian. There are many here in the city that you could investigate." Then she said, "There is only one thing I need to warn you about. Beware of the Mormons."

Well, he had never heard of the Mormons, and this had aroused his curiosity. He went home and looked at the encyclopedia that night and got his first understanding of the Mormons, and it was not a very good account. Still, he was curious and looked further. It was only a day or two until the missionaries knocked at his door, and in three or four weeks he and his wife and son had joined the Church. And, even though he had not known of the gospel before and his manner of worship and understanding of things religious were entirely different, he made the transition beautifully.

As I listened to this wonderful new member of the Church relate his story, the thought occurred to me that even though he had been a non-Christian, the message of the restored gospel had appealed to him, and the Spirit had borne witness to him of the truth. And I thought, Why not? When the Prophet received an answer to his prayer in the grove that day, he had asked the Lord which of all the churches he should join. And the Lord had told him that he should join none of them. And, as I remember, I don't think he made any exceptions as to whether they were Christian or non-Christian.

I had assumed, when first given some responsibility for this basically non-Christian area, it would be necessary to convert an individual to Christianity and then to Mormonism. It was rather interesting to observe that this was not the case. The same general approach is used in teaching the non-Christian as the Christian.

"The Latter-day Harvest," BYU Speeches of the Year, May 9, 1972, pp. 3-4.
