Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"Paul, Warn Your Neighbor"

In our final days in Boston, as our mission was drawing to a close, I was in the Harvard Trust Company closing out our account. We were having a final open house and activities, and Billy Casper was kind enough to be our visitor to attract nonmembers.

I was standing in a bank line. Have you ever had that experience? I do not know what it is, but what does a bank line do but stop moving, just when you get in it? As I stood in this one line, I thought, "Whew! Ten minutes to relax." Then the Spirit prompted me, "Paul, warn your neighbor." I thought, "Oh, I am tired, Spirit." But the Spirit replied, "Now, look, you're sent out here for 1095 days to warn thirteen million people. Now, for heaven's sake, warn your neighbor." I finally said, "Shut up, Spirit." But the Spirit countered, "Oh, no, you warn your neighbor." I asked, "Who is my neighbor?" The Spirit replied, "The guy in front of you." I declared, "I don't know him, Spirit." The Spirit said, "Get acquainted with him." Too often we warn our neighbor next door to death. But our neighbor is also the fellow out there whom we do not know. So I tapped this man on the shoulder.'

I do not know what your method is, but I try to be a little original and creative. This man turned around and said, "Yes?" I asked, "Pardon me, sir, do you happen to be a Mormon bishop?" I did not think he was. He had a thin Pantella cigar in his hand.

He said, "No, I'm not a Mormon bishop. Why do you ask?"

I replied, "I hope this isn't offensive to you, but you look like one."

He asked, "What does one look like?" So I described a Mormon bishop.

Now would you be offended if I told you—you men, at least—that you look like a Mormon bishop? This man was flattered. He was a sharp-looking young executive, thirty-five, a brilliant dresser, who seemed to know what he was doing and how to do it. When I finished describing a typical Mormon bishop, he said, "Well, thank you. I didn't know I projected that well."

I replied, "You really do."

We moved up a couple of spaces. I then asked, "You play golf?" He replied, "I'm a Sunday hacker." "What's your handicap?" "Thirteen." I asked, "How would you like to get it down to five tonight?" "Well," he replied, "who wouldn't?" I said, "Do you know Bill Casper?" "The golfer? Yes, I've heard of him" was his reply. I said, "I've got him cornered in a meeting tonight. Would you like to meet him?" He said, "Believe I would." So I took a card out of my pocket and wrote the mission address on it. I said, "You're my guest tonight. Seven o'clock."

It would not surprise you if I told you he showed up, would it? I drove him out. When he arrived at the home, I introduced him to Brother Casper, and he thought that was great. We had a tremendous meeting that evening, and before he left, I said, "You would not be offended if I had two young men call on you to teach you more, would you?" He replied, "I'd be honored."

Would it be a surprise if I told you we baptized him ninety days later? Without the cigar. He is going to be a great bishop one day.

Who is your neighbor? Do not think these people do not respect you. They really do. Get enthused. Catch the vision. Be prepared. Do it enthusiastically, and I will not worry where you are in five, ten, fifteen, or twenty years. You will be great.

"Plan to Succeed," BYU Speeches of the Year, October 19, 1971, pp. 9-10.
