Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"I Have My Checkbook Here"

Sometimes you are put on the spot just because of who you are. You find lots of critics in the world—not so much on this campus hopefully—but as you share your Mormon identification with other campuses, it becomes a problem. We are being shot at right and left. In a sense I am grateful for this because you will show your true colors—whether you can stand up and be counted or not.

I have always appreciated being put on the spot because it makes me remember who I am and certain covenants that I have made. Do you know what this church really is? It is the most glorious organization the world has ever known, and, of course, it is the kingdom of God restored to earth. Sometimes, when you get into academic environments other than BYU, people tend to criticize the Church and its programs. If you are not careful and if you do not have the vision, it is easy to become critical yourself.

Let me share an experience that happened at Harvard University recently. My mission office was just a couple of blocks off campus, two blocks from Harvard, one block from Radcliffe, two and a half miles from MIT, three miles from Boston College, and four miles from Boston University. Wellesley College was not far, and 120 other schools of equal competence were nearby in this Boston environment. Just outside my office window could be seen the Henry W. Longfellow home and estate. I used to sit at my desk occasionally, when I was troubled, and look out the window and just meditate.

On one occasion, as I was doing a little thinking and day-dreaming, about twenty-five Harvard-Radcliffe students rounded the corner of Longfellow Park and headed toward the mission office. They were carrying placards in a protest march. I was taken by surprise as they entered the mission office. I thought, "This will be an exciting morning." The group was barefooted and, for the most part, dressed in clothes that looked as if they would be very appropriate for trick or treating. They were carrying placards that read, "Feed the starving children of Biafra."

They entered the building. I could hear my secretary having a little challenge out there. Finally the intercom rang, and he said, "President, I'm having some trouble." I replied, "It's good for you. What's the matter?" He said, "I've got many college students here who say they will not go until you see them." I said, "Bring them in."

As I opened the door, in came twenty-five of the most interesting-looking college students I have seen in many a year. I offered them each a chair, but they thought that was too much like the establishment; they preferred to sit on the floor. A big burly fellow with a large bushy beard and hair to match was their spokesman. He said, "Dr. Dunn, we have done a little research on you and your church, and we don't think you represent true Christianity. You and your church are racists! We're here to correct it. We will not leave your office, sir, until you personally donate $500 to the children of Biafra." There they sat. Now what would you do?

I thought I could pick up the phone and call the law enforcement agencies. But what would the Savior do? He would probably teach them, would he not? He would educate. So I declared, "That's fascinating. I'm delighted to see that I'm going to be so generous. Before I donate my $500, you would be willing to answer a few questions, wouldn't you?" "Certainly" was the reply.

I said, "You all look intelligent, and you're out for a worthy cause. Let me ask you a few questions." I looked at the big burly fellow on the floor and said, "May I ask any one of you since you're all here in a common union?" He replied, "Certainly."

I moved third row over to the corner where there was a skinny girl who did not have much on. I said, "Young lady, would you stand up please? Yes, you. Stand please." She stood up. I said, "I happen to know a little about administrative affairs. I know that when people donate money there sometimes is a creaming off. I'm interested in knowing into whose hands my check goes and how many of my dollars actually go to Biafra. Would you walk me through the administrative distribution of my check, please?" She answered, "I don't even know who we're going to turn it over to."

I did not think she did. I said, "Thank you. Would you be seated?" Then I picked out a little fellow and said, "Would you stand, sir?" He stood up, and I asked, "Where are you in school?" He replied, "I am a Harvard sophomore." "What's your major?" "Economics." (He looked like he needed it.) I said, "I understand that you're here on a Harvard scholarship. [This came out in our discussion.] Would you mind telling me what Harvard, with its massive endowment, and you personally are doing for the Maori people?" He replied, "Who are the Maoris?" Then I told him who the Maoris were and gave him a little Church history.

Do you know who the Maoris are, and do you know what your church has done for an underprivileged people in New Zealand over the last hundred-plus years? Do you have the whole vision, or are you caught in a little academic corner somewhere, saying, "Yeah, we are kind of an odd group."

I called on another fellow and said, "Would you stand, please?" As he stood I inquired, "Would you tell me what this wonderful university and you personally are doing for the children of Samoa?" He did not know and replied, "I'm not doing anything personally." I asked, "Would you like to know what the Mormon Church is doing in Samoa?" "Yes, sir" was the reply. So I taught him.

Then I asked him, "Where were you in 1967 when the hurricane hit?" "I was in high school playing marbles," he replied. I said, "Do you want to know where the Mormon Church was? I was coordinating that part of the world when word came to me from a great mission president that food, medicine, water, and supplies were needed. Within twenty-four hours three 707s from Pan American were airborne with goods supplied by tithing and fast offerings to save, not just the Mormons, but thousands of natives who were homeless. I noticed that Harvard University and even a Red Cross unit were not there."

Calling on another student, I said, "What did you do personally with your personal funds for the people of Tonga?" He did not know, so I taught a similar story. I asked him about the Tahitian children, then told the group about the elementary school system that you and I are supporting with our tithing. I walked him through the great Lamanite program. "What are Harvard and Radcliffe and MIT doing do help the Lamanite, the starving American Indian?" And as I inquired, they did not know. So once more I taught them one of the great programs of the Church, to say nothing of welfare and other social agencies at work. They were becoming more humble with each experience.

Finally, I said, "I'll tell you what I'll do. I have my checkbook here. I will sign a personal check for $500 for the children of Biafra, if in turn—and I think this is only fair—collectively, you will donate $500 to the Mormon Church to help the starving kids of the Pacific." I never saw twenty-five students exit an office so fast in my life.

What did I learn on this occasion and many occasions like it? These students were not out for a cause. They were caught up, for the most part, in a rebellious movement. Ninety-five percent of those young people did not even know what they were rebelling for. Of course, there are some great causes. But do you know what your church is doing in the world, young people? Can you stand up and be counted? Can you teach the rest of the world? You do not have to take a backseat to anybody. But I notice when all these great deeds are being performed that the New York Times or the London Times is not telling the world how the Church feeds and educates people. But the minute there is a little statement of a critical nature, we get publicity galore. Keep the vision of who you are and what this great church is really accomplishing.

"Plan to Succeed," BYU Speeches of the Year, October 19, 1971, pp. 5-7.
