Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"School Thy Feelings"

One of the things that impressed me deeply was the comment that President David O. McKay made concerning the need for self-conquest. He indicated that in the life of our Savior, self-control was divine. I have reflected upon that. My mind was brought quickly to the hymn that we often sing, penned by Charles W. Penrose, which suggests that we school our feelings. Let me just refer to the first verse as perhaps a text that I would like to develop:

School thy feelings, O my brother;

Train thy warm impulsive soul;

Do not its emotions smother,

But let wisdom's voice control.

School thy feelings; there is power

In the cool, collected mind;

Passion shatters reason's tower,

Makes the clearest vision blind.

—Hymns, no. 340

. . . I hope my wonderful partner will forgive me if I share a little experience that occurred during our adjustment period shortly after we were married. I recall that one day as I was at my work I felt ill, a little blue, and sensing the need for added physical comfort and attention, I left my office a little early to go home. The heavy traffic of the Los Angeles freeway did nothing but add to my anxieties. When I arrived home, I found that my wife was not there. Here I was, expecting tender love, care, and understanding, and of all days she could have picked, this was the one she decided not to be at home. I couldn't imagine why she couldn't read my mind.

When I arrived home, I settled myself on the couch, actually growing a little more angry with each moment that she was absent. And then finally, after about an hour of anxious waiting, she appeared on the scene. Can you imagine what she had been doing? Shopping! I looked at her somewhat wonderingly and asked where she had been. "Couldn't you be more thoughtful of your husband?" I said.

She responded, "I couldn't know that you were coming home early."

I was still a bit upset.

She wanted to show me the treasures she had just purchased, and I wasn't particularly interested. One by one she unwrapped the various purchases, and finally getting to the last she had saved for the big surprise, she said, "Just wait until you see the material that I finally found to cover the couch." And she showed it to me. She said, "What do you think?"

I said, "It is terrible."

She was hurt, and with her emotions showing she left the room. I was still upset, so I let her go. An hour passed. And you know women sometimes have an interesting way of striking back. It was one of my first lessons on this subject. Without saying a word, she just did not fix my supper.

Well, one act begets another, and I thought, "Two can play this game." So in my moment of real concern, I started to play the mature adult game that sometimes goes on in the homes of people—it is known as the silent treatment. I didn't talk to her for the rest of the evening, and she responded by not answering.

I am sorry to confess to you that we retired to our beds that night without saying a word, and I was still unfed. That night as I tried to find comfort and solace in the night, I failed to go to sleep. It was a month later before I discovered that the two of us were having a like experience. All night I lay clinging to my side of the mattress, being fearful that I might roll over and touch her.

The next day added more to our anxieties, and it was not until the following night that I gained control of my compassion and feeling and took her by the hand into the living room, where we knelt down together and sought our Heavenly Father. The impression of the great discovery was that I was able in part to school my feelings.

Conference Report, April 1968, pp. 140-41.
