Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"My Wife's Husband"

I am wondering if you good sisters here in this building and listening in would pardon me if I visited with your husbands and the dads for just a few moments.

Every once in a while there comes into the life of each father and husband a tremendous challenge, and some weeks ago it was one of these challenges that brought me to a greater realization of my responsibility as both father and husband. I am sure my experience is not unlike some that many of you here today have had.

It all happened this way. My wife one day, in her interest to go shopping with one of her close friends in the neighborhood, asked if I would be kind enough to attend to the household chores for about four hours during her absence, besides tending our smallest daughter. I assured her I was most anxious to do what I could as a priesthood bearer and as a loving father and husband. And I will have to confess there was a selfish interest at heart, thinking as I did that perhaps here was an opportunity to catch up on some of my own projects.

Well, now, I want to tell you, that was a day I shall never forget. Let me just give you an accounting of my accomplishments on that afternoon:

I answered the telephone 15 times. Thirteen of those calls were for our teenage daughters.

I shouted, Don't, Kellie!" (that's our five-year-old) 43 times.

I spread bread with jelly 19 times. Some of my youngest daughter's little friends were visiting with her at the time.

I stopped 9 different quarrels.

I wiped noses 12 times.

I tied shoes 8.

I shut and opened doors 53 times.

I bandaged 6 different fingers.

I answered 117 questions.

And as well as I can figure at this point, I ran approximately two and a half miles without ever going out-of-doors.

Now, brethren, I ask you, how long has it been since you stood in the place of your good wife? . . .

Brethren, fathers, priesthood bearers, I tell you that I sincerely believe that my day is as long and nerve-racking as any represented here. But I wouldn't trade my job, and I don't believe most of you would, involved as it might be, for that of a good wife who manages the home, supervises a family of children twelve hours a day and more at times, not to speak of a few other responsibilities that engage her time from morning until night.

I wish today, brethren, that my wife's husband could remember every evening when he comes home that, no matter how tired he is or how hard he has worked, she has labored just as hard. And no matter how disappointed he may be with the things that have gone on during the day, she has an equal reason to be tired and discouraged with the load of her multitudinous and hectic responsibilities.

If my wife's husband could always realize this, I believe he would try even harder than he does to forget his own troubles and would try to bring into his home a spirit of love, fun, optimism, and assurance that would make every member of his family glad to be alive.

There are a number of other things that I wish my wife's husband would do as he views this lovely creature that he has taken unto himself as a bride for time and all eternity—that he would continue to court her and respect her as he has promised to do because of his genuine love and appreciation for her.

Conference Report, April 1965, pp. 31-32.
