Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"A Father's Blessing"

Earlier in the conference, President David O. McKay, as you will recall, stirred our souls with his profound message concerning our young people, and it caused me to do a great deal of thinking, some soul-searching in my own life; and as I went home last Thursday with his thoughts on my mind I reread a letter that had appeared in the Deseret News just a few nights before. I thought it was significant, as it applies to father-son relationships. May I just share a part of it with you.

This is a young navy man writing to an advice column in the paper. He says: "Before I came into the service, I felt I knew just about everything. I was sure my parents no longer needed me, and all that I could think of was the day that I could be on my own. The first time I realized how much my parents cared for me was the day they took me to the train station to see me off. When my father said good-bye to me, he broke down and cried. I have never seen my father cry before, and I shall never forget as long as I live. I have had a lot of time to think. I never told my father that I loved him. I gave both my parents a hard time when they tried to guide me for my own good. Now I write home every chance I get, and I am trying to make up for the heartaches I must have caused them, and for my failure to be a better son. When my next leave comes up, I am going straight home and really get acquainted with my wonderful parents. I have written this letter in hopes that other thoughtless teen-agers will wake up before it is too late. Thanks for letting me get this off my chest."

Contrast that, if you will, with an experience I had just a few weeks ago as I came through the Los Angeles terminal on my way to Salt Lake City. While waiting for my flight, I was approached by a former acquaintance in Southern California, and as we exchanged greetings as you do on such occasions, he hurried to tell me that he was down seeing his boy off. His son was entering the army. When he learned that I was to be on the same plane, he said, "Paul, would you be kind enough to sit with my son as far as Salt Lake City?" I told him that I would be more than pleased to do so.

So it was, and I got reacquainted with the young man, who had matured considerably since we had last met. As we sat together we talked about the little things that mean a great deal to young people, and he commenced to tell his story of what his mom and dad had meant to him, and what a great influence his home life had had on him.

He said, "You know, Brother Dunn, going back to Fort Dix doesn't really worry me. I know I will be lonesome, and I will be homesick, but what my folks have taught me will see me through." He said, "You will never know what a thrill it was to have had my own father place his hands upon my head and give me a father's blessing. I believe I will be able to withstand all the temptation in the world," he concluded.

While we can rejoice with the first young man upon his finally catching the vision and realizing the efforts of well-meaning parents, I think we also realize that many like him who have received the advantages of close relationship with their parents are never fortunate enough to make his discovery. How much more desirable, in our understanding of the gospel, that our children receive early and constantly through their growing years the added strength, security, comfort, and closeness of our love and concern.

Conference Report, April 1967, pp. 88-89.
