Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"Thanks for Getting Me Started Thinking"

I am often privileged in my particular assignment to visit each year with hundreds of our youth who leave home to attend college, who enter military service, and those who go on missions for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. It is amazing how free these young people are to talk about their homes and family life. And almost without exception I have noticed that as they recall home, those of them who are secure and well-adjusted will invariably mention three qualities as being stabilizing forces in their lives. First, they always mention love and concern for them by their parents; second, communication and harmony between parent and child; and third, the spiritual level which characterizes the home.

It is interesting to me to note that those who are experiencing more than their share of problems definitely indicate the absence of one or more of these three qualities.

Let me share briefly with you a letter, one of many that I receive from some of these young people. I think he expresses so well the importance of these qualities:

"Dear Brother Dunn:

"Since having the chance to visit with you last month, I've done a lot of thinking about the things we discussed—the meaning of life, my goals for the future, my homesickness, and my efforts to adjust to being on my own—and I've felt impressed to write and tell you some of these things. Here I am hundreds of miles away in a completely new environment, and I'll admit I've been pretty down in the dumps at times, plenty homesick and wondering just what my next step would be. More than once I'd have given almost anything to be back at that kitchen table with the family, finishing off one of Mom's good meals. I wouldn't even have minded my folks wanting to know where I was going and when I'd be home—it used to really bug me but somehow now I'm glad they worried.

"I guess what I'm trying to write is that since being here I'm actually appreciating home and my folks in a different way than ever before. I'm grateful for the time that they've taken to worry about the little things, the talks we've been able to have about any crazy thing that was on my mind, the freedom I felt to go to them with my problems. It seems like they were always pretty fair about judging me when I made mistakes, too.

"I especially appreciate both Mom and Dad being so careful about living the principles of the gospel that they believed in and helping us to do the same. While there were times when I resented it, somehow it seems much easier now for me to discipline myself, to stick to what I should do in organizing my time, thinking, and life.

"I appreciate, too, the companionship we had as a whole family—the night each week we got together to talk about family problems and what we did about them, the times we went fishing together, prayed together, the get-togethers with cousins—mostly the things I guess I have taken for granted all of my life. Somehow, as ordinary as all of these everyday experiences are, thinking about them actually gives me the faith and courage I need right now when I've got so much adjusting to do and so many things to accomplish. I seem to have a new desire to live up to the things my folks have been trying to prepare me for all of these years.

"In some ways, even though I miss home, thinking out these things makes me feel better than I ever have before. I know I have lots to do, and I want to do it. And realizing that my family is behind me as they always have been gives me the strength I need and didn't know I had. Unfortunately, I have seen some out here whose home life has not been like mine, and now I understand better the value of the training I've had.

"Thanks for getting me started thinking—I just hope my parents can know how much the stability of our home has meant to me and how very much I love them."

Conference Report, October 1965, pp. 117-18.
