Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"Keep Him in Cambridge"

Finally, the Savior said, Take all that I have given you, harness it, discipline it, and then give it to the world. Give thyself.

Let me just conclude with a little experience I had recently in New England.

I think one of the greatest thrills that a mission president experiences is to receive a new missionary. I received notice from the First Presidency that eight young men were to be assigned to New England. Shortly they arrived. This was a great treat for Jeanne and me, as we greeted these new missionaries in the mission home. One by one, as they came in, we tried to set them at ease.

The first one was a brilliant-looking boy. I won't describe him, but I thought, "Thank heaven he is here." The second was just like him, and the third and the fourth. Now this, I thought, will put our mission on top.

Then I got down to number seven, and I don't mind telling you some of the concerns of my heart. I thought, This will be a challenge. I couldn't believe it; and unlike the counsel that President Tanner gave us not to judge our neighbors, here I was judging him. I thought, This kid just doesn't have the image.

My wife gave me a glance, and her look said, "Good luck for the next two years."

Let me just describe him to you. He was wearing a shirt that was size 17; his neck was an 11. I could have pulled out his collar and put another elder in it. He had on a coat that he inherited from his dad, and you couldn't see his hands. He had a trench coat that he got from an uncle from World War I, and he had a haircut that was an Idaho original.

The New England Mission contains six of the United States and four provinces of Canada, including Labrador. As my wife and I lay in bed that night, she said, "What are you going to do with him?"

I said, "It's time to open up Labrador." I thought I had to protect the Church's image from this interesting-looking elder.

Well, that morning before I made my assignments, I knelt in prayer—thank the Lord for prayer—and I asked the Lord what I should do now; and the Spirit whispered, "Keep him in Cambridge."

And I said, "Spirit, I won't." I said, "I am the president of this mission."

And the Spirit seemed to respond with the counsel, "Yes, but you will keep him in Cambridge."

Cambridge is a very sophisticated area, with all of those universities and art centers. Well, I kept him. When I went down to breakfast, my two assistants were sitting there; and they said, "What are you going to do with him?"

I said, "We are going to keep him in Cambridge."

And they said, "President, you are kidding."

I said, "I have been seeking guidance all night, and we will keep him in Cambridge."

Two days later I got a call from a distinguished professor. I haven't time to give you the details. He said, "Paul, Friday night may I be baptized?"

I questioned him a bit. He had been through several score of missionaries the past nine years. I said, "What happened?"

He said, "This little fellow you sent me." (He was referring to my new elder.) And then he described the experience.

He said, "No sooner had he and his companion entered the office and shook my hand when he asked, 'Would you mind if we have a word of prayer?'" (This was a meeting over in his school office.) The professor said, "Not if it will do you any good." Then he remarked, "Before I could get back to my desk, this little fellow fell on his knees and started to talk to the Lord." And he said, "Paul, I looked up three times to see if the Lord was standing there." He said, "I don't know what happened to me; you describe it, but I had the most wonderful feeling come over me, and I now know what the Spirit is. I want to be baptized."

We baptized him, and he is doing a fine work for the Church and is a great asset on campus. It was all accomplished because this young elder from Idaho, whom I had misjudged, guided by the Spirit, gave himself to the Lord.

And I learned as President Tanner has taught us. Don't judge! "Within the oyster shell uncouth, the purest pearl may hide, but oft you'll find a heart of truth within a rough outside."

The Lord bless us, young brethren, to remember who we are, to control ourselves, and to give it to the Lord.

"Know Thyself, Control Thyself, Give Thyself," The Ensign, July 1972, p. 95.
