Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"Control Thyself"

My father used to say, "Paul, there are dozens of rules for success, but none of them work unless you do."

Cicero said, "Control thyself." I had the opportunity in World War II to bat against the immortal Bob Feller in a servicemen's game. If you ever want a lesson in humility, bat against Feller. Bob Feller had a unique distinction as a sixteen-year-old boy. He could take a 9 1/2-inch, 5-ounce baseball and throw it from 60 feet 6 inches, 105 miles an hour.

Now that may not impress you, but you go to bat and you're very impressed. To those of you who may not understand that velocity, a 9-inch baseball is the size of an aspirin tablet at 60 feet 6 inches, at 100 miles per hour; I submit to you, it makes a difference which side of the plate he throws it.

Bob Feller at age sixteen had a problem. He lacked control. He was a great athlete. He had tremendous capacity. He was born to succeed. He knew himself, but he hadn't disciplined his great talent of speed, so that it was questionable as to whether he would stick in the majors.

But Bob Feller became the great athlete he was because he listened to wise counsel. He had great coaches, and one of them took him aside one day and said, "Bob, it really doesn't matter whether you throw 105 miles an hour or 95. If you will take a little speed off your pitch and put the ball where it belongs, you will succeed!"

We call that control in baseball, and you little leaguers know how important control is to a pitcher. Bob listened and became the strike-out artist of his era.

You don't know Jim Rusick, I think, unless you are related to him. I played ball with Jim. Jim Rusick was a sixteen-year-old boy on the Hollywood High School baseball team. He could throw a 9 1/2-inch baseball 105 miles an hour, but he wouldn't listen to counsel. He didn't learn to control the talent that he had, and Jim has never been heard of since.

It's one thing to be born with ability to succeed; it's another thing to harness it and to control it.

My young brethren, this is the purpose of the gospel of Jesus Christ, to control that which we have been born with. That is the purpose of the Church and its programs. We need to learn how to control that which God has given us.

"Know Thyself, Control Thyself, Give Thyself," The Ensign, July 1972, p. 95.
