Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"What Time Does Brother Killebrew Report?"

I am in the process of learning a verse which reads:

It's only the view from where you sit

That makes you feel defeat.

Life is full of many aisles,

So why don't you change your seat?

Get that vision again. Move over; see it from a different perspective.

As I talked to Brother Harmon Killebrew not long ago in the mission home, I asked him, "What makes for greatness?" He talked about this preparedness and enthusiasm almost in the same voice. I said, "Look, Harm, I think the world knows that you'd never even seen a major league ball game, let alone played in one, until you had signed a major league contract. How did you do it?" He replied, "You have to make your own opportunity. After school and work, I would go into a potato field, take a long, skinny bat, and hit potatoes. That makes for good practice and preparedness."

One day it came to the attention of Herman Welker, the senator from Idaho, that there was a kid in the sandlots of Payette, Idaho, who was hitting potatoes farther than professional baseball players were hitting balls. He brought this to the attention of Clark Griffith, owner of the Washington Senators. Ozzie Bluege, the great baseball scout, was sent to look into this. Unbeknownst to Harm, the community arranged a local ball game. Harmon Killebrew, this seventeen-year-old kid from a farm, hit a 9-inch 5 1/2-ounce baseball 435 feet. (It rolled further.) The Senators signed him on that alone.

It took about four or five years' preparation with potatoes and old balls to get to the top. So when you see Killebrew hit a home run at an all-star game or in a World Series, remember what it took to make him ready. In addition to being prepared, he needed real enthusiasm.

I once had Harmon talk to my missionaries at a zone conference. After the conference we had a question period. One fellow raised his hand and said, "Mr. Killebrew, I don't mean this to embarrass you, sir, but as a superstar earning as much money as you do, what is the largest fine you've ever paid?" I listened very carefully. This magnificent athlete leaned over, looked at those young men, and said, "I don't know. I haven't paid it yet."

Do you get the message, young people? All of my missionaries did not. So I jumped up very quickly, put my arm around Harm, and said, "Harm, I've played a little ball myself. Would you mind telling this crowd what time a major league ball player is to report to the park for a night game?" He replied, "Four-thirty." I asked, "What time does Brother Killebrew report?" "Two" was his answer. Do you want to know how to be a superstar? You prepare with enthusiasm.

"Plan to Succeed," BYU Speeches of the Year, October 19, 1971, p. 8.
