Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

ELDER RICHARD L. EVANS

Biographical Sketch

From 1930 until his death on November 1, 1971, Richard L. Evans delivered the "Spoken Word" on the nationwide broadcast of "Music and the Spoken Word" with the Tabernacle Choir and Organ, presented each Sunday by the CBS Radio Network from Temple Square in Salt Lake City. He was the producer and writer as well as the "voice" on this broadcast, which is the oldest continuously presented nationwide network broadcast in American radio and has won many awards and recognitions. He was also the voice on "Thought for the Day."

From 1946 to 1952 he was a feature writer for Hearst's King Features Syndicate, and his syndicated newspaper column was circulated in millions of American homes. His writings have appeared in numerous periodicals and publications, including Reader's Digest, Look, and Encyclopedia Britannica. He was the author of seventeen books, principally published by Harper of New York. His books include Volume I of Thoughts for 100 Days; An Open Door; An Open Road; Volume IV of Thoughts for 100 Days. His last major work was the Richard Evans Quote Book.

In 1929 he joined CBS's affiliate, Radio Station KSL in Salt Lake City, and he served both in business and program operations and handled many major microphone assignments.

Born in Salt Lake City in 1906, the youngest of nine children, Richard Evans lived three years in Europe. He received his B.A., M.A., and LL.D. degrees from the University of Utah, having majored in English and economics.

Broadcasting and writing added to an intense life of church and business and civic affairs. He served as president of Rotary International (1966-67).

He was a member of the Council of the Twelve; a former member of the Board of Regents of the University of Utah; past president of the University Alumni Association; at his death a member of the Board of Trustees of Brigham Young University; and a member of the Utah State Board of Higher Education.

He was a member of the Newcomen Society, the Bonneville Knife and Fork Club (which he served as president), and the Chamber of Commerce of Salt Lake City.

He was a director of the First Security Corporation, Bountiful State Bank, Bonneville International Corporation, Deseret Management Corporation, Radio Station KSL, Evans Advertising Agency, and other business and financial enterprises.

He appeared before numerous audiences in Europe, Asia, Africa, and South America and the South Pacific. This press report characterized one of his off-the-air addresses: ". . . an adroit mixture of humor, nostalgia . . . hope, inspiration. . . ."

His life was full with his wife, the former Alice Thornley, and his four sons and beloved daughters-in-law and grand-children.
