Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"Shortcuts"

I don't know why the Lord is content to let us move by the slow means, or at least by the seemingly slow means by which we sometimes seem to move. But the fact that he is content to let us move so slowly must be significant, and it may be that some of the shortcuts that are sometimes suggested would not be good for us, individually or as a church.

I recall that a personality of great brilliance named Lucifer had some very drastic shortcuts to suggest and they were rejected of our Father in heaven.

I am reminded of another story concerning a shortcut that my able associate on Temple Square, Brother Marion D. Hanks, invited to my attention some time ago. It was an incident related by the late Justice Sutherland of the United States Supreme Court. Some years ago, he recalled a group of men, who had ascended the Arch of Triumph in Paris, and one very brilliant young man among them was theorizing as to the various ways of descending. There were the stairs down which they could laboriously and slowly descend, or one could jump over the edge of the monument and thus be down much sooner. Then the brilliant young man proceeded to demonstrate his theory: he jumped over the edge, and the next day they buried him.

I think some of the shortcuts suggested these days in the world (and maybe some of the shortcuts suggested among us) may be in this category. It serves the purposes of God, apparently, to work through men, inperfect as they are. Certainly there are many things that he could accomplish more rapidly than by letting us do them in our fumbling and faltering way. Certainly he could send armies of angels to accomplish the things he has placed on our shoulders if he chose to do so. Jesus said to his own generation that God could raise up children unto Abraham from the very stones. I think all this must lead us to only one conclusion, which is basic in this church: the Lord lets us move as we move because it is his purpose and glory to bring to pass our eternal and everlasting salvation, our immortality and eternal life; and if he were to take some of these shortcuts, it might do the work without developing the individual.

Conference Report, October 1958, pp. 58-59.
