Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"The Foundational Structure"

I recall having read some time ago an item, to me astounding and almost unbelievable, from an engineer's report as to the physical characteristics of the Empire State Building—an item to the effect that in a wind of high velocity, into the upper reaches of that structure, perhaps in the topmost tower, has been built such flexibility that it will sway in an arc as much as eight inches. As I recall, it would require about an eighty-mile wind to sway it to that extent, and it would move about six and a quarter inches downwind and back to about an inch and three-quarters upwind—an almost unbelievable fact in a great and massive structure so seemingly solid. And up there it doesn't matter. It was built to take it.

But I have often thought, and have sometimes given utterance to the thought, what would happen to the Empire State Building if some earth movement or some super force of some kind should shift its foundations eight inches. It would be but the prelude to destruction.

Our lives are lived, if we are to follow the path of safety and if we are to realize those things of which we are capable, on the foundational structure of the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ, and by this test and standard all things must be proved. Now up in the upper reaches, up in the superficial structure of our lives, there are many changes that can occur without any hazard whatsoever. It really doesn't matter whether we wear double-breasted or single-breasted suits, or whether ladies' shoes have holes in the toes when they buy them or after they wear them for awhile. These are the superficial changes which can sway in the wind without any damage to the structure.

But any change which would shift the basic principles of our lives must be resisted with every legitimate means of resistance. And it is up to us to teach our youth these basic principles, so that they will be able to discriminate and judge for themselves as to what changes are good, as to what changes conform to the standards of the gospel of Jesus Christ and are on the road toward eternal progress and what changes are actually retrogressive. Those who would advocate taking men back to days of serfdom and regimentation, to days before they had won their freedom and the rights of free men, are the real reactionaries of the world, and they must be known for what they are.

Conference Report, October 1946, pp. 82-83.
