Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"No Greater Mission"

I believe there is no greater mission field, however much we may emphasize others, than there is at home and in the home.

Night before last, I read in the newspaper of a mother who had been chosen as Utah's Mother of 1947 and who had fiftyeight living descendants. I remember reading of an elderly patriarch in Utah County, some years ago, who was then living but has since died, and who then had one hundred forty-eight living descendants. I recall having seen a picture of President George F. Richards and his excellent family on the occasion of his eightieth birthday. They then numbered, as I recall, more than ninety descendants living, and they no doubt have added many more since then in these past five or six years.

What would have been the cumulative result if, many years ago, someone hadn't done his duty in the Church and had allowed one of these three whom I have mentioned to become indifferent or estranged from the Church early in life or to become offended for some reason?

When we are dealing with the life of a boy or girl, we are not dealing with an individual only. We are dealing with a whole posterity, and not with time only, but with life eternal. And there is no greater mission mothers and fathers can perform than to keep their sons and daughters close to them and close to the Church, and no greater mission that we at home can perform than to see that no one has cause for offense because of us, and that no one is allowed to lapse into indifference and inactivity, and that no one who is now inactive fails to be labored with, with all that we have to give; because we are not dealing with an individual only: we are dealing with generations and with ultimate consequences of which we have no conception.

I plead with you, my brothers and sisters, to consider this fact, and whenever you look at an individual, don't think of him just as he is, but think of the potentialities of his life and of generations to come—and never give him up.

Conference Report, April 1947, p. 97.
