Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"Brass-headed Nails"

We use much of our time in rushing around, not thinking always what we ought to be, not what it is that matters most.

Sometimes we set our hearts on things we feel we have to have, and when we get them find they don't mean as much as once we thought they would.

And so the years move by—and even while yet young we become aware that we are older than we were.

Soberingly, more than one-fourth of this year already has passed—partly in pursuit perhaps of things that don't matter very much—which reminds us of a dream that John Ruskin said he had:

"I dreamed," he said, "that I was at a child's . . . party, in which every means of entertainment had been provided . . . by a wise and kind host. . . . The children had been set free in the rooms and gardens, with no care whatever but how to pass the afternoon rejoicingly. . . . There was music . . . all manner of amusing books . . . a workshop . . . a table loaded with everything nice to eat . . . and whatever a child could fancy . . . but in the midst of all this it struck two or three of the more 'practical' children that they would like some of the brass-headed nails. With all that they could pull out they were not satisfied; and then everybody wanted some of somebody else's. And at last the really 'practical' and 'sensible' ones declared that nothing was of any real consequence that afternoon except to get plenty of brass-headed nails. . . . And at last they began to fight for nail heads, . . . even though they knew they would not be allowed to carry so much as one brass knob away with them. But no! It was Who has most nails? . . . I must have as many as you before I leave the house or I cannot possibly go home in peace. At last they made so much noise that I awoke, and thought to myself, 'What a false dream that is of children. . . . Children never do such foolish things. Only men do.'" (John Ruskin, "Little Brass Nails.")

Well, I haven't dreamed a dream as Ruskin said he did, but countless times I have searched and prayed and thought this through.

Beloved young friends, beloved older friends, where are you really going? What do you really want?

Some months ago I spoke at the funeral service of a beloved old friend. He had, I would suppose, little of the things of this life, but I heard his grandson say, "Once a week Grandfather was with all his family—grandchildren and all. He taught the gospel to them. He was never negative. He always expressed faith and encouragement. There was no 'generation gap.'"

And I thought how blessed and satisfied I would feel if a grandson of mine could sincerely say this of me when this life runs out its short, uncertain length.

Conference Report, April 1971, pp. 84-85.
