Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"Sometimes I Do Things I Know I Shouldn't Do"

About all we can take with us, after all, are the knowledge and character we have acquired, the intelligence we have developed or improved upon, the service we have given, the lessons we have learned, and the blessed assurance that we may have our life and loved ones, always and forever—as assured us by a wise and kindly Father whose children we all are. And knowing him, and what he is to us (and what we are to one another), what his purpose is in sending us here from his presence, is one of the surest safeguards against loneliness and feelings of frustration.

Some few evenings ago. I sat at dinner by the side of a distinguished, successful industrialist, who told me simply and in a few sentences how he faced the heavy problems of his life and met the decisions of each day:

"When I get up in the morning," he said, "I often feel that I can't face it, but as I get down on my knees and say simply 'God help me to do what I have to do this day,' strength comes, and I feel that I am equal to it. And I think of him as my Father, and talk to him as simply and directly as I used to talk to my father when he was here."

And then he added: "Sometimes I do things I know I shouldn't do. But when I do, I don't lie to God about my motives. I know it's no use; I know he knows my heart, my thoughts. I know what I have done, and he knows what I have done. And I don't try to deceive him or myself."

I was mellowed and humbled by the direct and simple spirit of this friend with whom I sat the other evening. He was not of my faith, but in my own earnest belief, he could not have talked to God with so much satisfaction or assurance if he had thought of him merely as a force, or as an ineffable essence, the nature and purpose of which he knew nothing—or at least nothing that would bring to him the assured feeling that he was in fact talking to his father.

Conference Report, October 1954, pp. 86-87.
