Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"The Spirit of All Truth"

A cherished friend of mine, whose life paralleled mine for many years, up to a few years ago, when there was a parting of the ways, is now in one of America's greatest institutions of learning and has achieved international eminence in his scientific field. A few weeks ago he wrote me and said: "I am conducting researches in many fields, and I am just beginning to learn the high cost of finding out the truth about anything." And he continued: "The problem is so complex that all we can do is arrive at half-truths and first approximations."

I wrote him back and said: "It must be a great comfort to you, in your work, to know that you are a member of a church that will accept everything of truth that you ever find in your researches, in whatever field of thought or activity, and all that we ask of you is to pursue them beyond that stage of halftruth and first approximations of which you have spoken and conduct them to their final end, where there will be no question about their eternal verity—to that point where the generations to come will not of necessity repudiate them."

I have a strong feeling that our young people who go into our universities and colleges should have before them constantly the promise of Moroni, that "by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things," which is repeated in substance in the Doctrine and Covenants to the effect that "the Holy Ghost . . . showeth all things and teacheth the peaceable things of the kingdom."

I never remember having gone into an examination of any consequence in my life without making it a matter of prayer. I know that the young man or young woman who approaches any problem in the academic field, or any other field, would have a great advantage if he would keep as his constant companion the spirit of our Father in heaven, which would give him an active sense of warm assurance when he was in the presence of truth and would give him a contrary feeling when he was not in the presence of truth. It wouldn't give him knowledge without study, or discovery without search, or truth without effort, but, granted that he pursued his work intelligently and diligently, he would have a great advantage in all of his findings and doings, academically and otherwise, if he made the spirit of all truth his constant guide.

Conference Report, October 1940, pp. 59-60.
