Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

ELDER HOWARD W. HUNTER

Biographical Sketch

Elder Howard W. Hunter, a member of the Council of the Twelve, was a prominent Southern California lawyer and businessman before his call to the apostleship on October 10, 1959.

A lifelong active member of the Church, he was born in Boise, Idaho, November 14, 1907, son of John William and Nellie Marie Rasmussen Hunter. After attending elementary schools and graduating from high school in Boise, he moved to California in 1928.

In June 1931, Elder Hunter married Clara May Jeffs in the Salt Lake Temple. During the depression years, with a wife and two small sons, he saw the need for more education and entered Southwestern University at Los Angeles. After completing undergraduate requirements, he attended law school and in 1939 graduated with a degree of Juris Doctor, cum laude.

After graduation he was admitted to the California State Bar and became a member of the Los Angeles Bar Association and a leading corporation lawyer in that area. Since residing in Utah he has been admitted to the Utah Bar. He is on the board of directors of several large industrial and land-holding corporations, the Beneficial Life Insurance Company, Home Fire Insurance Company, Continental Bank and Trust Company, and Deseret Federal Savings and Loan Association.

Elder Hunter is an Eagle Scout and for many years has been connected with Scouting, an integral part of the Mormon Church's youth program.

In 1940 he became bishop of the El Sereno Ward in Los Angeles and served six years. He was president of the high priests quorum in the Pasadena Stake, 1947-48; was a member of the stake high council 1948-50; and from February 1950 to November 1959 served as president of the Pasadena Stake. While serving as stake president, he was chairman of the Southern California welfare region, and, when it was divided, of the Los Angeles welfare region.

Among other Church assignments Elder Hunter is president of the Polynesian Cultural Center in Hawaii and an adviser to the Priesthood Genealogical Committee.
