Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

PRESIDENT MILTON R. HUNTER

Biographical Sketch

Author, teacher, and scholar, Milton R. Hunter has been a member of the First Council of the Seventy since April 1945.

This council, composed of seven men, has as its chief responsibility the extensive missionary program of the Church. Prior to his call to this position, President Hunter for twenty years had taught in schools in several of the western states.

He was born October 25, 1902, in Holden, Utah, a son of John Edward and Margaret Teeples Hunter. His grandparents, converts to the Church in Scotland, were among Utah's early pioneers.

After attending public schools near the place of his birth, President Hunter enrolled at Brigham Young High School in Provo, and later at Brigham Young University, where he was awarded his bachelor's degree in 1929 and his master's in 1931. He gained his doctor of philosophy degree in 1935 at the University of California.

Entering the teaching profession, President Hunter was named principal of a district school in St. Thomas, Nevada, and later he headed junior high schools in Leamington and Lake View, Utah. Following these assignments he became principal of the Church's seminary in Lyman, Wyoming, and later the seminary at Ferron, Utah. After teaching seminary in Provo, Utah, from 1934 to 1936, he became an instructor at the LDS Institute of Religion in Logan, Utah, operated in connection with Utah State University. He was serving in this capacity when he was called to the First Council of the Seventy.

Elder Hunter has written twenty-three books, principally on religious and historical subjects, and countless articles, reviews, and papers. His writings have appeared in a number of authoritative and widely read historical journals, and his book Utah in Her Western Setting was used as a textbook in Utah public schools for seventeen years. He replaced that book with one on Utah history entitled The Utah Story. It is used at the present time as the textbook in many junior high schools throughout the state.

Several other of his books have been used as texts and study manuals within the Church, including The Gospel Through the Ages. Among his books are also two volumes of Archaeology and the Book of Mormon; Christ in Ancient America; and Great Civilizations and the Book of Mormon.

President Hunter has taken ten trips throughout Mexico, five trips throughout Central America, and two tours of South America to study the numerous archaeological sites and gather evidences to sustain the Book of Mormon. The last of these tours he took during the summer of 1961.

Elder Hunter's wife is the former Ferne Gardner of Lehi, whom he married July 30, 1931, in the Logan Temple. They have six children.
