Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"The Quiche Mayas of Guatemala"

I had been informed that the Quiche Mayas of Guatemala still retained many of their ancient traditions, some of which evidently had their roots in Book of Mormon times, and so when I received the assignment to tour the Central American Mission, I wrote to President [Edgar] Wagner and requested that his missionaries arrange for me to interview some of the old Quiche Maya Indians at Totonicapan. I advised the president to have the missionaries make arrangements for me to interview someone who was well informed on the traditions of that people.

In accordance with my request, when I arrived at Totonicapan I found that the missionaries had engaged the services of a man named Jesus Caranza Juarez. Mr. Juarez was a very intelligent person. He not only spoke Quiche Maya, but he also was very apt in the use of the Spanish language. He had been initiated in all the rites and rituals of the Quiche Maya religion and had a thorough understanding of the traditions of that people. For these reasons he was an ideal person to interview.

Since I do not speak Spanish, I asked one of the missionaries to act as an interpreter. I said to the missionary, "Do not give Mr. Juarez any leading questions that might indicate to him the kind of answers that we desire to receive. I want to know the exact and accurate traditions of his people, and so I would suggest that you ask simple, straightforward questions; for example, the first question I suggest that you ask is: 'What are the Quiche Maya practices and teachings regarding marriage?'"

Once again I warned the missionary to make no explanation to Mr. Juarez but merely to give him the direct question as I had suggested. This procedure the missionary followed. In response to the foregoing question, Mr. Juarez immediately replied:

"Marriage is the most sacred, the most revered, the most holy, and the greatest of all the religious teachings and practices in the Quiche Maya religion. We have two kinds of marriages. In one kind the ceremony is performed by the priest. Only the good people marry in this kind of marriage. By good people I mean those who do not get drunk, those who do not steal nor lie, and those who are morally clean—in brief, the people who live in accordance with all the teachings of the Quiche Maya religion."

Then he said, "The priest performs the marriage ceremony for those good people; and when he marries them, they are married not only for this life but for the next world also. They remain husband and wife forever."

I was surprised, in fact astonished, to get such an explanation regarding the marriage custom of the Quiche Maya Indians. . . .

Although I was greatly surprised to find that the Quiche Maya Indians practice a form of marriage that they believe will endure throughout the next world, I was pleased to learn that such was their tradition because I have understood that every time the gospel of Jesus Christ has been on the earth in its fulness, God's true law of celestial marriage has constituted part of that gospel.

I also know that the true gospel of Jesus Christ was had in ancient America in Book of Mormon days, and certainly the Nephites would have had the true order of celestial marriage. Thus the Quiche Maya Indians of Guatemala, being descendants of the Book of Mormon peoples, have preserved in their system of marriage certain things that hold a resemblance to the true order of marriage as given by the Lord to the Nephites.

Conference Report, April 1956, pp. 50-51.
