Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"Daniel Mich Had a Vision, or a Dream"

This past January [1959] I was again assigned to tour the Central American Mission in company with President and Sister [Edgar] Wagner. Sister Hunter accompanied me on this tour.

Shortly after we arrived in Guatemala City, President Wagner told us about some very important events that had occurred in the life of a certain Cakchiquel Maya man named Daniel Mich. This good Lamanite, or Indian, had joined the Church not long before our arrival in Guatemala. After becoming a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and just prior to our arrival in the Central American Mission, Brother Mich came to Guatemala City and attended a sacrament meeting. He bore his testimony at this meeting and told the wonderful story of his experiences, which I shall retell to you today. In describing Daniel Mich's telling of his experiences and bearing his testimony, President Wagner said: "The tears rolled down Brother Mich's cheeks. There was not a dry eye in the house. The Spirit of God was there in great abundance."

The following is Daniel Mich's story. He lived in Patzicia, Guatemala, a small town not far from Lake Atitlan. A few years ago an Indian rebellion against the government officials, who were primarily of Spanish blood, took place in Patzicia. The government officials decided to put to death all the Indians who had participated in this rebellion and especially those who had instigated it.

Daniel Mich had taken no part in the rebellion; however, the government officials thought he was guilty. The Spirit of God whispered to him and told him and his brother to flee to the mountains and hide in a certain place. If they did not, they would be killed. They did as the Spirit instructed. As they arrived at the hiding place suggested by the Spirit, they lay on a ledge and looked over the precipice. Below them they could see the government officials searching for them along the mountainside.

A number of Indians were captured at this time and put to death. Daniel Mich and his brother stayed in seclusion for two years, but finally they also were captured. Conditions had changed during the two years to the extent that the Mich brothers were not killed but were thrown into prison. For four long years they lay in prison, living under the most terrible conditions. Their clothing wore out. They had a scant amount of bedding. It was very cold, and the jail was unheated. The caretakers of the prison gave them very little food; in fact, they practically starved to death. And to make matters much worse, Daniel Mich received word from his wife that she and the children were practically starved to death. During the six years' time that he was in hiding and in prison, they had not been able to make a livelihood.

In desperation, and, of course, in great grief, Daniel Mich kneeled down and prayed to God, pleading that the Eternal Father would be merciful unto him and let him die. He also prayed that the Lord would extend his mercy unto his wife and children, that they all might soon die. He pleaded with the Lord to release him and his family members from the misery and suffering that they were enduring.

But God did not let them die. Instead, Daniel Mich had a vision, or a dream, or whatever it might be called. He was going up the side of a steep mountain on a definitely defined trail. He came to a place where a side trail forked off the main trail. A man stood on the side trail and said, "Follow me."

Daniel Mich replied, "No, I cannot follow you. I must follow this trail straight ahead."

He went some distance farther, and another man stood on another trail, He also said, "Follow me."

And again Daniel Mich replied, "No, I cannot follow you. I must go straight ahead." This experience repeated itself three or four times.

Daniel Mich explained, "Finally I came to the summit, and there standing in front of me was a tall, handsome man, with beautiful white hair. He had a very kindly and beautiful smile. This man said to me, 'Daniel, follow me.' I replied, 'I will follow you,' because as I made that remark, the Spirit of God whispered to me and said, 'That man has the truth.'"

Shortly after having this dream, or vision, Daniel Mich and his brother were released from jail. They returned to their home town. Soon thereafter and possibly about a year before I visited Guatemala, missionaries came to Patzicia, Brother Mich's home town. They had not been working there long until one day the mayor sent for them to come to his office. When the missionaries arrived, they saw a large crowd of Indians, perhaps two hundred or more, collected in front of the mayor's office. As the missionaries approached, according to the description given by the missionaries, "The crowd of Indians opened as the Red Sea opened for the Israelites to go through. We walked between two columns of Indians and on into the mayor's office."

The elders said to the mayor, "You sent for us?"

"Yes, I did," was the reply.

"What do you want?" they asked.

The mayor answered, "I have here in front of me a petition signed by two hundred citizens of our community in which they demand that you young men leave town immediately and that you refrain from teaching your religion any more in our community. Will you go?"

"No, we will not go," the missionaries replied. "We will not leave this town until our mission president tells us to leave."

The elders sat silently in the mayor's office for several minutes, and then one of them asked, "What do you intend to do?"

The mayor replied, "I do not know."

Thereupon one of the missionaries suggested that he telephone the governor, and perhaps the governor could instruct him. The mayor immediately picked up the telephone, called the governor, and explained the situation.

The governor emphatically instructed, "Let those Mormon missionaries alone. They have a right to teach their religion in your town or in any other town or city in Guatemala, because we have religious freedom in our country."

After this favorable solution of the problem, the missionaries came out of the mayor's office. Once again they described the crowd, stating that it opened as the Red Sea opened for the Israelites. The elders passed between those two long lines of Indians. As they arrived at the edge of the crowd, two men approached them and said, "Will you come to our homes and talk to us?" One of the men was Daniel Mich.

The missionaries were happy to accept the invitation. They went to Daniel Mich's home and taught him the gospel. He received all they taught with much faith and sincerity. They had taught him only three or four lessons when a very important event occurred. One day while in the midst of one of the lessons, one of the missionaries opened his book, and Daniel Mich saw a photograph of a tall, handsome man, with beautiful white hair.

Brother Mich immediately and excitedly exclaimed, "This is the man! It is he whom I saw!"

Of course the missionaries wondered what he was talking about, and so they questioned him. In response he told them the wonderful story that I have just told you good people today.

Then Daniel Mich asked, "Who is this man whose photograph you have in your book?"

"His name is David O. McKay," the missionaries replied. "He is the president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. He is God's holy prophet, seer, and revelator upon the earth at the present time. He is the man who holds the keys of the kingdom of God and stands as Christ's representative in the true church and the leader in spreading the true gospel of Jesus Christ."

In deep sincerity Daniel Mich replied, "I know that all of the things you have told me are true. I know that you missionaries have the true gospel of Jesus Christ." Then he asked, "Do you know why I invited you to come to my home that day as you came out of the mayor's office?"

"Of course we do not know but would certainly like to know," they replied.

Then Daniel Mich explained, "At the time that the tall, handsome man, with beautiful white hair—whom you have told me was President David O. McKay—said to me, 'Daniel, follow me,' the Spirit of the Lord whispered to me and said, 'This man has the truth.' The Spirit also said, 'Two young men will bring you the truth,' and when you came into our town recently and began to teach your religion, I became curious. I had been watching you and attempting to find out all about you that I could. When the citizens of Patzicia signed the petition to have you thrown out of town and when you called to see the mayor, I joined the crowd in front of the mayor's office to see what would take place. And now," he said, "all the things that I believed have been verified. I know that David O. McKay is a prophet of God. I also know that you have the true religion of Jesus Christ."

Conference Report, October 1959, pp. 29-32.
