Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"Would You Steal a Cow from Your Neighbor?"

I would like to relate a little experience that I had about a year ago. A young man came into my office to be interviewed to be ordained a seventy. I asked him if he would like to be a seventy. His face lighted up with joy, and he said, "Yes, Brother Hunter, for a long time I have wanted to become a seventy. I have never been recommended before, but I do hope that I am now worthy. I do hope that you ordain me a seventy today."

After I got this gush of enthusiasm from him, I asked him a question rather point-blank. I said, "Would you steal $150 from your neighbor?" A look of indignation came over his face. If I could have read his thoughts, he probably would have been thinking, "Well, you have your nerve, Brother Hunter, to think that I would steal."

Finally he looked at me and said, "No, sir."

I wasn't exactly satisfied, and so I said, "Would you steal a cow from your neighbor?"

He shot back this reply instantly, "I wouldn't steal thirty-five cents from my neighbor."

I remarked, "This is very, very interesting to me, that you wouldn't steal thirty-five cents from your neighbor; and yet, you would rob God."

A questioning look came over his face, and he asked, "What do you mean? I don't understand you."

Thereupon I turned his recommendation card over and read these words, "Part tithe payer."

He looked at me rather flushed, and, I might say, turned a little red, twisted around in his chair a little, and finally he said to me, "Well, I guess it's this way, Brother Hunter: the Lord isn't here to check up on me. My neighbor is. If I robbed my neighbor, he would put me in jail."

I replied, "Brother, you are partly right and partly wrong. Certainly your neighbor would put you in jail if you robbed him. He should put you in jail, but when you got out of jail, your neighbor would have no more influence or claim on you. You would have paid your debt. But God also is checking up on us, and we are working with him for eternal life. He declares that eternal life is the greatest gift he has in store for man, and it is reserved for those who love him and keep his commandments. To receive eternal life in the presence of God would be worth more than all the money in the world." And I continued by saying: "Now it is my opinion and feeling that if you or I or any other Latter-day Saint feels that he must rob somebody, I think probably it would be far better to rob our neighbor than to rob God."

He replied, "Well, I've never thought of it that way before."

And then I asked, "What are you going to do in the future?"

"I am going to be a full tithe payer," came quickly the positive and unqualified answer.

I was delighted that he took that attitude, because he now understood more about the law of tithing and had reached a determination to obey it in the future.

Conference Report, October 1950, pp. 60-61.
