Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"The Dynamic Force"

On a certain occasion I had a conversation with Dr. Frederick L. Paxson, chairman of the History Department at the University of California and one of America's outstanding historians. This conversation suggests God's method of transmitting light and knowledge to his children here on earth, and so I shall use it as the basis of my talk today.

Dr. Paxson stated that it was his opinion that Brigham Young was perhaps the greatest colonizer that the world had ever known. He explained that after founding Salt Lake City, Brigham Young sent settlers in every direction from that center, resulting in colonizing an expansive desert country. Dr. Paxson stressed the point that wherever President Young told his followers to go, they went without any hesitation. Then he gave his reasons to account for Brigham's outstanding success as a colonizer.

"Brigham Young," so he explained, "was one of those rare individuals blessed with an exceedingly forceful personality. He was a man naturally endowed with unusual powers of leadership and as a result of his unusual, forceful personality, he was able to completely dominate the lives of the Latter-day Saints. Thus his followers always did Brigham's biddings."

After completing his explanation, Dr. Paxson said to me, "Am I not correct, Mr. Hunter, in my appraisal of Brigham Young, and are not these the reasons why he was successful in colonizing such a vast empire in the great West?"

I replied: "No, Dr. Paxson, in my opinion the reasons you gave are not the most vital factors that caused the Mormon leader to do such an outstanding job as a colonizer. I do agree that he possessed the powers of personality and leadership that you described, but there is another factor far more important than anything that you mentioned that completely dominated the lives of Brigham Young and his people.

"The supreme reason Brigham Young and all the Saints migrated to Utah was that each of them had in his heart a burning testimony of the truthfulness of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ. Each one accepted without any mental reservation the reality of the existence of God the Father and Christ the Son and felt a close personal relationship to them.

"It was a positive fact to each Latter-day Saint that the Eternal Father and his Only Begotten Son had appeared to Joseph Smith in the Sacred Grove, and also that other heavenly beings had appeared to the Prophet and given to him the priesthood through which he had organized the true Church of Jesus Christ. They firmly maintained that all the principles and ordinances of the gospel that had been on earth in former dispensations were revealed from heaven to the Prophet Joseph. Thus, Brigham Young and his followers maintained that Joseph had been God's mouthpiece here upon the earth—his holy prophet, seer, and revelator—just as literally as had any of the Old Testament prophets.

"Following the martyrdom of Joseph Smith, the members of the Church who migrated to Utah maintained that all the power and authority from God which had been brought by heavenly beings to Joseph had been bestowed upon his successor, Brigham Young. The Saints were positive that their pioneer leader was now God's holy anointed prophet, seer, and revelator. His word was accepted, therefore, as the word and the will of the Lord. The Saints firmly believed that they with Brigham were building the kingdom of God under divine direction from heaven.

[ep

"Thus, Dr. Paxson," I concluded, "an individual testimony of the gospel of Jesus Christ possessed by each Latter-day Saint was actually the dynamic force that caused Brigham Young and his followers to withstand mob violence and terrible persecutions in the East, to leave their homes and comforts of life, and to willingly suffer untold hardships, hunger, disease, and—for many of them—death, and endure numerous other difficulties encountered in making more than a thousand miles' trek through the wilderness to their promised land. Their positive, dynamic testimonies caused thousands of people to follow Brigham Young's suggestions, obey his instructions and commands, and successfully make 'the desert. . .blossom as the rose.'" (Isa. 35:1.)

Conference Report, October 1965, p. 80-81.
