Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"My, That Was a Narrow Escape"

I think, my brothers and sisters, we should not only avoid committing sins, but we should also avoid doing things that appear to be sinful.

When I was a young man, I heard a good woman say several times, "Don't do anything wrong. Don't do anything that even appears to be wrong."

Of course, at that time I thought that that statement was somewhat foolish; but as I have become older and have observed human nature, I have come to know that the example we set causes many people to do wrong. Our example may also cause them to do right. And so now I think that that statement is a very wise one.

Let me illustrate, with a little personal experience. A few years ago, accompanied by a welfare man, I was on the way to Seattle to a stake conference. The train stopped at Portland for the passengers to eat breakfast. As we ordered our breakfast, as usual the waitress asked if we would care for coffee. Of course, as always, we replied, "No, thank you." but when she brought the breakfast, she set two cups of coffee beside our plates and left quickly.

I said to the welfare man, "I am not going to leave this coffee beside our plates while we eat."

He replied, "We could push them aside a little distance from our plates, and I think it will be okay."

The waitress returned about then. I asked her to remove the coffee, stating that we had not ordered it. No sooner had she got away from the table with the two cups of coffee than the door opened and in walked the stake president of the Portland Stake. He spied us immediately, came over and sat down by us, and conversed with us all the time we ate breakfast.

When we got back on the train, the welfare man said, "My, that was a narrow escape. If we had had that coffee on the table, we could not have convinced that stake president that we had not ordered it and that we had not intended to drink it."

Conference Report, October 1961, p. 113.
