Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"She Instantly Fell Over Dead"

Regarding the poison in tobacco, our family learned in a very drastic way a number of years ago how poisonous tobacco was. I had a sister at that time who was thirty-seven years of age. She had twin baby girls who had whooping cough. She went with her husband to their farm about seven miles below town. They found that a milk cow had had a calf, and they wanted to take the cow and calf home. My sister did not know how to drive the car, and so her husband led a saddle horse back of the car, about three miles up to a little store. He left the car and my sister there and returned to the farm.

My sister went into the store to telephone home to her son to come down to where she was and bring her home. As she entered the store the lady back of the counter asked how her children were getting along with the whooping cough. Of course my sister replied it was terrible for them because whooping cough is extremely hard on babies. A bottle was sitting on the counter that was labeled as a certain kind of whooping cough medicine. It was half filled with some kind of black liquid that looked like whooping cough medicine. The clerk picked up the bottle and said to my sister:

"This is the best whooping cough medicine I have ever seen. I do not have any in the store right now, but I can order some for you want me to. A lady from Fillmore sent this bottle of whooping cough medicine to me today for me to give to her brother when he comes into the store."

Thereupon she handed the bottle to my sister and went over to the telephone to place the call for my sister's son. Acting in a natural way, my sister pulled the cork out of the bottle, smelled the contents, and took a taste. She said, "My, it is nasty." She fell to the floor dead. The store clerk immediately sent for the doctor. Upon arriving, he examined the contents of the bottle and said that it was nicotine—straight nicotine—one of the most deadly poisons there is in the world. The doctor said that my sister had taken one swallow of that deadly poison and it had gone straight to her brain and killed her instantly.

As far as the physical injury of tobacco is concerned it is well understood now that it is bad. But there is an effect that tobacco has upon Latter-day Saints that is far worse than the physical damage it does. I have very seldom in my life heard anyone mention these more terrible effects. Each of us has a spiritual body. Our bodies are temples of God, as the prophets have told us. We must keep the spirit body clean and pure if we are to have the Spirit of God remain with us and if we are to have the Holy Ghost as our constant companion and guide.

Jesus said, "And fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul: but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell." (Matthew 10:28.) I think that for a Latter-day Saint the use of tobacco is much more detrimental and damaging to his spirit than it is to his physical body. It has within it the power "to destroy both soul and body in hell."

You know that when someone starts to use tobacco he stops coming to church. He says that other Latter-day Saints do not want him to come to church because he uses tobacco. Of course, that is not true. We would love to have him come to church. He is a son of God and he needs the spiritual experiences found in church.

"The Eternal Quest for Happiness," BYU Speeches of the Year, May 12, 1964, pp. 5-6.
