Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"My Friend Jack"

Now may I relate a true story to you, although it is difficult for me because it still lingers as a very sad memory. Time will not permit me to give you all the details, but I sincerely hope and pray that it will impress the approaching alcoholics and the alcoholics themselves and all others so that you will never start to drink.

As a boy I was reared in a small country town. I had a very choice boy friend, whom we shall now call Jack. He and I went through school together. His parents knew my parents; his grandparents knew my grandparents. We sat in many classes together year after year. We played on the same basketball team. Both of us were guards. Jack was a fine athlete. He had the finest physique that I have ever seen in a basketball suit. He was a handsome boy with big, clear, dark-brown eyes; black, wavy hair; a school-girl complexion; beautiful, white, even teeth; a brilliant mind; and a fine disposition. Jack was a good boy. I thought a lot of Jack, and I believe he thought a lot of me.

Finally school was over and we parted. I went to one section of the state to teach school, and a year later he joined me. Neither of us was married at that time. We stayed at the same place with a wonderful judge. We slept together in the same bed. Yes, he was a very close friend and pal. However, it was during that year, I recall, that Jack began a little social drinking at parties. He did not think much of it. We never thought he would become an alcoholic. He never gave it a thought.

Springtime came, and I was married. The day after our marriage we went on to the University of California at Berkeley to school. My wife had been a teacher in the same school with my friend Jack, and she knew him very well also. The same spring that we went to California, Jack went to Colorado. I heard nothing from him for a long time. Then I learned indirectly that he was married, and then I learned later that he was divorced. Then I learned that he was drinking heavily and was an alcoholic.

Years passed, probably twenty. I had not seen my friend during those years. One night, not so long ago, my wife and I drove to my business office here in Salt Lake City. I parked my car in front of the office and right in front of a water fountain that was on the corner. My wife waited in the car while I went upstairs to sign some letters and checks. When I came back to the car, two men were standing by the water fountain. My wife had been watching these two men. They were both very drunk. When I went to get into my car, my wife asked me to look at the two men. I did, but I could not recognize either one of them. She had been watching them for some time, and then she said to me, "Look at that man. Could that be Jack?"

I did not think so at first because his hair was now snowwhite, not with wisdom and maturity, because he was a comparatively young man; but it was white with sorrow, trouble, sin, and mistakes. His eyes were not clear, beautiful brown eyes anymore, but now they were red and bloodshot. His teeth were not white and even, but now they were yellow, decayed, and some were missing. His school-girl complexion was gone. He was dressed in only a T-shirt, a pair of slacks, moccasins, and no hat. I watched him; still I could not believe it was my friend Jack. Then two or three of his movements brought some memories back to my mind, and I thought possibly it was Jack. So I stepped up to him and said, "Hello, Jack."

Then he turned and looked at me and said, "Who the heck are you?" Only he did not use "heck."

I looked at him and asked, "Don't you know me?" And he answered and said that he did not know me. Now I fully realized what liquor had done to my friend.

I said to him, "Are you Jack so and so?" He said, "Yes." When I told him who I was, he threw his arms around my neck and started to cry, and I cried with him. The other man who was with him started down the street, and I was glad to see him go because now we could have Jack in our car and talk to him.

I asked him where he stayed and where he lived, but he did not want to tell me. I asked whether he needed some money and clothes, and he said he did. I pleaded with him not to drink the next day but to come to my business office and I would help him find a job and take him to a doctor and get him some clothes. Then he cried again and said, "Will you help me?" He needed help so badly.

Later we left him where he told us to drive him. I gave him a little money, hoping that he would not spend it for liquor, but I should have known better. The next day he came to my office, but he came very drunk. I talked to him at great length, and I persuaded him to go with me to the alcoholic rehabilitation center, which was then located on Second South right above a beer parlor. We met the director of that center and talked to him for a while. . . .

Jack agreed to stay there and not leave. I called him every day. If I did not call him, he would call me. He was already making progress now. He did not even want to leave that rehabilitation center. He did not dare to leave because in order to get out of there he had to come down some stairs and pass this beer parlor. So he stayed there day and night, week after week. I did go to see him nearly every day, or he would call me. Whenever I would go out of town, which was often—nearly every weekend—Jack would call me and tell me to hurry back and to remember to pray for him, and he would pray for me. Yes, he was making great progress.

His wife had divorced him. He had lost everything but that old T-shirt, those dirty slacks, and his moccasins. He had lost his wife, his son, his daughter, his business, and his health. Weeks passed, and he continued to make progress. He did not take a drink. Finally I sent word to his wife that he was making great progress. She did not believe me, and I could not blame her. However, I asked her not to close the door, but she wanted to wait and see because she had already had so much trouble, sadness, and disappointment.

Months passed and he continued to make progress, not a drink in all that time. Later, he was made manager of that alcoholic rehabilitation center, so he could help others that came there just like he was.

To alcoholics and approaching alcoholics, I wish you could have gone to that center and seen them bring in sick men, ruined men, sad men. I have not the ability nor the strength to tell you the things that I saw in that center with those men who had been ruined by liquor. I think I hated liquor more than I had ever done before in my life because I could see what it had done to my pal.

One night I came to see him as I promised. It was not late, but he had gone to his room. They usually kept their doors open, and his door was open. It was a very modest room, as you can imagine. Just a cot, a chair, and a dresser. As I looked into his room, as his door was open and his lights were on, I saw my friend on his knees by his bed in prayer because he realized that he needed to ask God for strength. Then and there I knew he was making greater progress than I realized. There is a divine spark in every man's soul that never wholly goes out.

After weeks and months he was strong enough to leave that center. Right here I am glad to tell you that through the help of the Church, and particularly with the understanding, help, and approval of President David O. McKay, that alcoholic rehabilitation center was moved away from that beer parlor. It was moved to a decent place, and another center in this city was prepared for women.

I was not going to mention this, President McKay, but I believe I will. The credit of the Alcoholics Anonymous was not very good. They needed $160,000 to build them a new center here and one in Ogden and one in Provo and one for women here in this city. We did not think it was fair to ask the Church to give that as a grant, so we asked them to loan it to us. I do not know whether they ever expected it back or not, but President McKay was willing to help those poor men. I am glad to tell you that that $160,000 loaned by the Church, an interest-bearing note—mortgages on those places, signed by a lot of men in this state—has now been reduced to about $66,000.

Oh, the great blessing this has been to these sad, down-and-out men who come there.

Later my friend felt strong enough to go to his home in California. I again corresponded with his wife and asked her to meet his train and judge for herself the improvement that he had made. She did not want to do it, but I knew that she always loved my pal, but he had caused her so much trouble. Anyway, she agreed to meet him with her son and her daughter. I bade him goodbye here in Salt Lake City.

His wife and his children did meet him and drove him to the community where he lived, not far from Los Angeles. He rented a room in an apartment house not far from where they lived. It so happened that I was going to be in that area of Long Beach to attend a stake conference and dedicate a meeting-house. I told him and his wife that I would be there. They had not remarried yet, but they had talked some about it because she now found that he had quit his drinking.

When I came to that meeting I was thrilled to see in the congregation that morning my friend, his wife, his son, and his daughter. Oh, they looked so good! I told the people that I had some very dear friends sitting in the congregation and I would like to have them stand. They knew whom I meant, and they stood. The people did not know their background, and I thought it would be all right. When they stood I was proud of them. I now saw a different man than the one I saw on the corner by that water fountain. After the services were over, we met, exchanged greetings, and I went on my way and they went on their way.

Two or three days later I received a letter from my friend Jack. Oh, it was a wonderful letter stating that he thought that he had conquered the habit that had ruined his life and the lives of his loved ones. He told me that he had made his peace with God and he hoped that he could make up to his family the things of which he had robbed them. Then he said, "I have so much to do and so little time in which to do it." Those were his exact words.

The day after I received his letter, the telephone rang and his wife was on the phone. She asked, "Have you heard about Jack?" And I thought for a moment, "Oh, I wonder if he has started drinking again." I told her that I had not heard anything about him since I left there and since I received the letter from him. Then she told me that they had not seen him the day before nor that morning; so the owner of the apartment went to his room, unlocked the door, and found my friend dead in bed. He had died of a heart attack in his sleep. He had abused his body shamefully for those many years. But I was glad it was not the other side of the question. I was glad that she was not telling me that he had started drinking again. He told me that he thought he had made his peace with God and his family. I do not know whether he had, but I know he tried.

Conference Report, October 1965, pp. 92-95.
