Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 3 ( 1974)

"I Will Help You"

May we have the strength to extend our love and our friendship to those who perhaps need encouragement! I am thinking now of a very wonderful man in this church who had a brother who was inactive in the Church for years. The brother who was active was sorry for him and tried every way he could to help him, but to no avail.

Fortunately, the inactive brother moved into a new ward. When his name was read out in that congregation, the bishop of that ward recognized the name and called his brother, whom he knew, that night and said, "Was he your brother who just moved into our ward?"

The man said, "Yes, he is my brother, and I am going to tell you something. I do not know whether he will come to church or not because he has some habits that keep him away from church."

This bishop said, "But he was here today."

Then the brother said to the bishop, "Will you do everything you can for him?"

And the bishop said, "Of course, I will." We have some wonderful bishops in this church.

The bishop did. He called that man in and talked to him, and the man said, "I cannot become active. I do not know that I can come to church regularly." The bishop asked him why. He said, "Because I have some habits that I cannot quit."

The bishop talked to him as any bishop would. He said to the man, "Oh, I think you can quit. What is the first one?"

"Well," he said, "I have smoked for many years, and I can't quit it."

The bishop said, "Oh, yes, you can, because I will help you."

This man was grateful to the bishop and said, "What can you do, bishop?"

"Will you try to quit today?" the bishop asked.

"Yes, I will quit today."

"Then," the bishop said, "I will fast and pray for you."

"Would you do this for me, bishop?" the man asked.

"Yes," replied the bishop, "I would do that for you."

The bishop did fast and pray for several days for this man, and I do not need to tell you that the man has not indulged since the fasting of that wonderful bishop.

Conference Report, October 1962, pp. 31-32.
