Robert L. Millet, Eye Single to the Glory of God: Reflections on the Cost of Discipleship ( 1991)

PREFACE

Some twenty-five years ago I sat in the home of a friend a few hours before I was to leave Salt Lake City for a mission to the eastern United States. This friend's powerful missionary example had helped me decide to serve a mission. "Gary," I asked, "what could you say to help me be a successful missionary?"

He didn't even hesitate: "You keep an eye single to the glory of God, and you'll be successful." I thanked him for his counsel, but inwardly I felt cheated. Surely, I thought, there was something more specific that could make me a better finder, teacher, and baptizer.

I was in the mission field only two days before the import of his advice started to become evident. He could not have hit the mark more directly. Over the years since, I have discovered how vital this principle is in the work of the kingdom. The task of the disciple of Christ is to deny self, to seek the way of the Master, to be willing to forsake the manmade and the material, and to pursue with steadfastness the divine and the everlasting. For the disciple, it is the kingdom of God, or nothing. I confess that I have not always been true to this principle, but whenever I have, the power and goodness of God have flowed freely.

The brief chapters in this book about discipleship focus directly on some phase of that sacred enterprise—the call, the costs, and the fruits of discipleship. In a day when people are encouraged from all sides to "do their own thing" or to "march to a different drum," Christ invites his people to come unto him, partake of his goodness and grace, acquire his nature, and seek to obtain his mind. The irony of such complete surrender and submission is in that the true disciple is thereby put on the path that leads to absolute freedom and true self-fulfillment.

Because knowledge and understanding are cumulative, it is not always possible to identify and express specific appreciation to all those who have helped along the way. In the preparation of this manuscript—from outline and ideas to paragraphs and chapters—I owe a special debt of gratitude to Joell Woodbrey, a dear friend as well as a conscientious secretary and assistant, who has enthusiastically read each chapter and offered helpful suggestions. I thank Ron Millett, president of Deseret Book Company, for encouraging me in this project, as well as Suzanne Brady, editor, for her assistance along the way to finished product. For what follows in this volume I am indebted to friends and colleagues and teachers and Church leaders—many of whom have exemplified the principles which will be discussed herein—but I alone am responsible for the conclusions drawn from the evidence cited. This book is a private endeavor and not an official publication of either The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints or of Brigham Young University.

To walk as a disciple is to walk in the light, to forsake darkness, to cleave unto him who is the Light. To be a disciple is to seek to be changed, to open oneself to the transforming powers of Jesus the Christ. "And if your eye be single to my glory," the Lord has explained, "your whole bodies shall be filled with light, and there shall be no darkness in you; and that body which is filled with light comprehendeth all things." To become a disciple of Christ is to enter the realm of divine experience and thereby begin to see and feel things as the Master does. The disciple, the agent of the Lord, seeks in process of time to be like his Principal and eventually to be worthy of being with Him. "Therefore, sanctify yourselves that your minds become single to God, and the days will come that you shall see him; for he will unveil his face unto you, and it shall be in his own time, and in his own way, and according to his own will" (D&C 88:67-68; emphasis added).

Such is the cost and the task of the follower of Jesus Christ. And such is the transcendent privilege that comes through a life of dedicated discipleship.
