Robert L. Millet, Eye Single to the Glory of God: Reflections on the Cost of Discipleship ( 1991)

THE CALL TO DISCIPLESHIP

Chapter 1

YE ARE MY DISCIPLES

Jesus Christ calls us to his service. He bids us to follow him, to walk in his steps. Our Lord seeks to make of us disciples.

"Come, follow me" was and is the Savior's simple invitation to forsake the world, discard the irrelevant, and cling to that which is of lasting worth. It is an invitation to join him, to enjoy fellowship with him and his, and to eventually receive the promised reward of the disciple. The Master's plea is everlastingly the same: "Come unto me all ye ends of the earth, buy milk and honey, without money and without price" (2 Ne. 26:25; Isa. 55:1). Association with the Holy One is a prize which is freely bestowed. It may not be purchased with money nor bartered for in the marketplaces of the world. It is a gift, a priceless treasure granted by him to whom all things humbly bow. And yet it is to be bought with a price, a heavy price. Though we may not acquire its benefits through exchanging gold and silver, it costs us everything. Our hearts. Our lives. Herein is a victory that is achieved only through unconditional surrender.

Jehovah pronounced a scathing denunciation upon most of mankind: "My people have committed two evils; they have forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns, that can hold no water" (Jer. 2:13). All people thirst for the living waters, even those who do not know they do. And, unfortunately, many spend endless hours and needed strength in digging their own wells or searching for water when the cooling draught of the Redeemer is within easy reach. Jesus Christ offers deliverance from the superficial and the shallow. He offers a saving alternative to programs which are woefully deficient or even plainly perverse. His way, the gospel way, is easy to those who pursue it with singlemindedness. It is more difficult for those who embark on the Christian cause with hesitation or reservation. Those who have charted their course and pointed themselves toward the abundant life in Christ have their challenges, their difficulties, like anyone else. They meet these roadblocks, however, with courage and perspective, with a quiet confidence borne of the Spirit. Such individuals have no difficulty living the gospel. It is not hard. It is not burdensome. For disciples of Christ, living the gospel is a lifting and liberating experience. In the ultimate sense, President Brigham Young explained, "the man or woman who enjoys the spirit of our religion has no trials; but the man or woman who tries to live according to the Gospel of the Son of God, and at the same time clings to the spirit of the world, has trials and sorrows acute and keen, and that, too, continually.

"This is the deciding point, the dividing line. They who love and serve God with all their hearts rejoice evermore, pray without ceasing, and in everything give thanks; but they who try to serve God and still cling to the spirit of the world, have got on two yokes—the yoke of Jesus and the yoke of the devil, and they will have plenty to do. They will have a warfare inside and outside, and the labor will be very galling, for they are directly in opposition one to the other. Cast off the yoke of the enemy, and put on the yoke of Christ, and you will say that his yoke is easy and his burden is light. This I know by experience." [^1]

This is not to say that discipleship is a bed of roses. We shall certainly have our share of heartache. There will undoubtedly be moments of discouragement and seasons of loneliness. But disciples of Christ are in this for life. We live by covenant: the terms of the covenant are stipulated by our Principal, and we as agents agree to abide by them. Those who seem to feel the greatest anxiety, the deepest frustration, are those who want to take charge, to set or reset the terms of the contract, who have a better idea. In short, those persons who demand their independence, who scream the loudest, "I can handle it!" who insist on being the master of their fate—these are they who never know the quiet but steady empowerment that comes from trusting in the infinite goodness of a Greater.

Disciples are those who have disciplined themselves, who have chosen to be pupils or followers, who have agreed to be taught or trained by another. Disciples are those who have committed themselves to a course, dedicated themselves to a cause. Disciples of Christ are those who have gained the witness that the path laid out by Jesus of Nazareth is the only and true path to peace and fulfillment here and eternal life hereafter. True disciples seek not alone to imitate the deeds and actions of their Lord but also to acquire Christian attributes—to draw upon those cleansing and renovating powers of His Spirit, which transform and convert. Disciples seek the divine nature of Christ. Christian discipleship entails more than hero worship. It consists of far more than admiring a Samaritan Socrates, more than finding fascination with a Galilean Guru. Jesus Christ is the Lord Omnipotent. He was and is God. Thus "Christianity without the living Christ is inevitably Christianity without discipleship, and Christianity without discipleship is always Christianity without Christ." [^2] We see then that Christian discipleship transcends adherence to an idea, even devotion to an ideal. The power unto life and salvation is in Christ, the Person. The road of discipleship does not end in merely being with the Master, as sublime as such a reunion will be; discipleship results in being even as he is, for "when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is" (1 Jn. 3:2; Moro. 7:48).

In the end we shall surely see that the depth of our discipleship is to be gauged as much by our hearts and our desires as by the outward performance of our duties. Indeed, though some things may be ascertained only by physical evidence, some other things are hidden from the natural eye: they are known only to God. A man's heartfelt resolve to serve God at all hazards, a woman's inspired determination to do things the Lord's way, a couple's joint decision to seek first the kingdom of God—these are silent statements of the soul. They represent personal commitments to the Almighty. And one day the Eternal Father, who sees and hears in secret, shall reward such persons openly and abundantly.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith, Lectures on Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1985), 6:7.
[^2] John F. MacArthur, Jr., The Gospel According to Jesus (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Zondervan, 1988), p. 184.
