Robert L. Millet, Eye Single to the Glory of God: Reflections on the Cost of Discipleship ( 1991)

Chapter 2

HOW LONG HALT YE BETWEEN TWO OPINIONS?

The Lord, in speaking with apocalyptic finality, said: "There are save two churches only; the one is the church of the Lamb of God, and the other is the church of the devil; wherefore, whoso belongeth not to the church of the Lamb of God belongeth to that great church, which is the mother of abominations; and she is the whore of all the earth" (1 Ne. 14:10). From the eternal perspective, from where God stands, there is only the course charted by him and advocated by the Savior and his prophets. Whatsoever is more or less than the divinely established plan is either deficient or perverse. No matter the degree of sincerity, adherence to anything less than the truth leads ultimately to a diluted discipleship.

"No man can serve two masters," said the Master, "for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon" (Matt. 6:24). Holding back or giving less than is required always produces divided loyalties. We need not have our membership records in the great and abominable church in order to be disloyal to the kingdom of God; the issue is not where our records are but rather where our hearts are. The divine word is certain: "there are many called, but few are chosen," because their hearts are set upon the things of this world, rather than upon those things which have eternal worth (D&C 121:34-35).

James explained that "a double minded man is unstable in all his ways" (James 1:8). The instability comes much less from lack of native strength than from lack of concentration and focus. Whatever receives from us less than our best will bring forth less than the best results and less than the best reward. Joseph Smith thus taught that a religion that does not require the sacrifice of all things never has the power to produce the faith necessary unto life and salvation. [^1] Those who refuse to give their all to the Lord, whether by public declaration or by private volition, cannot enjoy the peace and power of single-minded obedience. Cain and his followers "loved Satan more than God" (Moses 5:13, 18, 28). It is not necessarily true that they did not love God. They may have. They simply loved Satan more! Their lives were centered upon Lucifer's enticements, upon his values, upon his rewards. Such a thing might not even be uncommon in our own day. Whenever we reserve our religion for one day in a week, we come awfully close to loving the things of a fallen world more than we love the things of the world to come.

The Lord counseled us in the Sermon on the Mount: "Enter ye in at the strait gate: for wide is the gate, and broad is the way, that leadeth to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat" (Matt. 7:13). That is, "the broad way is certainly easier. There is no precipice. There is plenty of latitude for those who want to sample the moral smorgasbord offered by the crowd on this road. There are hardly any limitations, no curbs, no boundaries. There is tolerance of every conceivable sin—just as long as you say you love Jesus. Or as long as you're religious or whatever else you want to be" [^2] On the other hand, "strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it" (Matt. 7:14). The way is not impossible, only narrow. "In fact, many commentators would say that the best contemporary expression of the narrow gate is a turnstile. Only one person can pass through at a time" [^3]

So often the prophets and seers—those who perceive things not visible to the natural eye (Moses 6:36)—are able to tear away the cobwebs of social sophistication and relativity and testify of the simple choice required of disciples of Christ. They sense that it is one way or the other. Moses demanded of Israel an answer to the eternal query: "Who is on the Lord's side?" (Ex. 32:26). Joshua likewise sounded a cry that signaled a time of decision: "Now therefore fear the Lord, and serve him in sincerity and in truth: and put away the gods which your fathers served on the other side of the flood, and in Egypt; and serve ye the Lord. And if it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose you this day whom ye will serve; . . . but as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord" (Josh. 24:14-15; compare Moses 6:33). Elijah the Tishbite asked of a people who were easily wafted about by false gods: "How long halt ye between two opinions?" Then he commanded: "If the Lord be God, follow him" (1 Kgs. 18:21).

Our hearts cannot be wedded to another endeavor. Our might or strength cannot be spent in secondary causes. Our minds cannot be committed to another enterprise. In the words of the early brethren of this dispensation, it must be the kingdom of God or nothing! Those who fail to place the Savior at the center of their lives rob all other vital relationships of the potency that might otherwise be possible. Individuals who are unduly committed to work or hobby, for example, rather than to Christ and his kingdom, cannot enjoy the sweet fruits of gospel living; nor can their spouses and children and other associates participate in that elevating influence which comes from God. "I know thy works," the Lord warned the Laodiceans, "that thou art neither cold nor hot: I would thou wert cold or hot. So then because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will spue [vomit] thee out of my mouth" (Rev. 3:15-16). People who are divided in their loyalties are prone to be half-hearted in their obedience. "There neither are nor can be any neutrals in this war," Elder Bruce R. McConkie taught. "Every member of the Church is on one side or the other. . . . In this war all who do not stand forth courageously and valiantly are by that fact alone aiding the cause of the enemy. 'They who are not for me are against me, saith our God.' (2 Ne. 10:16). We are either for the Church or we are against it. We either take its part or we take the consequences. We cannot survive spiritually with one foot in the Church and the other in the world. We must make the choice. It is either the Church or the world. There is no middle ground." [^4]

The Light of Christ is given to every person who is born into the world. This moral monitor is the source of reason and conscience, a fundamental light that can direct our lives and prepare us for a greater revelation. In the words of the prophet-editor Mormon, this light or Spirit "is given unto you to judge, that ye may know good from evil; and the way to judge is as plain, that ye may know with a perfect knowledge, as the daylight is from the dark night. For behold," he continues, "the Spirit of Christ is given to every man, that he may know good from evil" (Moro. 7:15-16). In particular, baptized members of the Church need not be confused or deceived in regard to the ways of the world and the ways of God, for "by the power of the Holy Ghost [we] may know the truth of all things" (Moro. 10:5). There need be few, if any, gray areas in the struggle between good and evil; our spiritual sensitivity to right and wrong, pertinent and irrelevant, can be refined and heightened if we hearken consistently to our consciences. By so doing, we are able to discern clearly where the Lord stands on all matters of substance.

"There are two influences in the world today," said President George Albert Smith, "and have been from the beginning. One is an influence that is constructive, that radiates happiness and builds character. The other influence is one that destroys, turns men into demons, tears down and discourages. We are all susceptible to both.

"My grandfather used to say to his family, 'There is a line of demarkation, well defined, between the Lord's territory and the devil's. If you will stay on the Lord's side of the line you will be under his influence and will have no desire to do wrong; but if you cross to the devil's side of the line one inch, you are in the tempter's power, and if he is successful, you will not be able to think or even reason properly, because you will have lost the Spirit of the Lord.'

"When I have been tempted sometimes to do a certain thing, I have asked myself, "Which side of the line am I on?' If I determined to be on the safe side, the Lord's side, I would do the right thing every time. So when temptation comes, think prayerfully about your problem, and the influence of the Spirit of the Lord will enable you to decide wisely. There is safety for us only on the Lord's side of the line.

"If you want to be happy," President Smith concluded, "remember, that all happiness worthy of the name is on the Lord's side of the line and all sorrow and disappointment is on the devil's side of the line." [^5]

It is comforting to know that we need not become holy in a day. Our quest for sainthood is gradual, and the climb is steep. Enoch's Zion was established "in process of time" (Moses 7:21), and with but few exceptions, the pure in heart become so in the same manner. Nor need we traverse the stony path to perfection alone. Indeed, we cannot. C. S. Lewis has observed that in a marvelous manner "this Helper," the Lord Jesus Christ, "who will, in the long run, be satisfied with nothing less than absolute perfection, will also be delighted with the first feeble, stumbling effort you make tomorrow to do the simplest duty. As a great Christian writer (George McDonald) pointed out, every father is pleased at the baby' s first attempt to walk [though] no father would be satisfied with anything less than a firm, manly walk in a grown-up son. In the same way, he said, 'God is easy to please, but hard to satisfy.' " [^6] The process may take time. But the determination to follow the Master, the commitment to submit to him, the desire to partake of his goodness and grace—these things may begin in an instant, suddenly, as our hearts cry out for that life which is in Christ. Discipleship begins with a decision.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 162.
[^2] In Conference Report, Apr. 1985, pp. 102, 105.
[^3] 3. MacArthur, Gospel According to Jesus, p. 182.
[^4] 4. In Conference Report, Oct. 1974, p. 44.
[^5] 5. George Albert Smith, Sharing the Gospel with Others, comp. Preston Nibley (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1948), pp. 42-43.
[^6] 6. Mere Christianity (New York: Macmillan, 1952), p. 172.
