Robert L. Millet, Eye Single to the Glory of God: Reflections on the Cost of Discipleship ( 1991)

Chapter 3

TAKE UPON YOU THE NAME OF CHRIST

There is a name which is above every other name. It is a name by which all things were created, by which the heavens and the earth exist and continue. It is the only name under heaven by which salvation comes, by which men and women are justified of sin, sanctified from sin, and redeemed to eternal glory. It is the blessed name of Jesus. It is the name disciples take, the name by which they are known.

When Adam and Eve were cast from the Garden of Eden, they called upon God by prayer, even though they had become subject to spiritual death. They received a commandment to offer sacrifice of the firstlings of their flocks. "And Adam was obedient unto the commandments of the Lord. And after many days an angel of the Lord appeared unto Adam, saying: Why dost thou offer sacrifices unto the Lord? And Adam said unto him: I know not, save the Lord commanded me. And then the angel spake, saying: This thing is a similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father, which is full of grace and truth." And then the angel sounded the clarion call, the commandment of commandments: "Wherefore, thou shalt do all that thou doest in the name of the Son, and thou shalt repent and call upon God in the name of the Son forevermore" (Moses 5:4-8; emphasis added). "All that thou doest."

All. The follower of the risen Lord is called upon to grapple with and comply with this divine directive: "all that thou doest." Disciples who are in the line of their duty are to gauge their speech, their feelings, their attitudes, their behavior—all that they do—by this glorious standard. In short, as the agents of Jesus Christ, disciples are to seek with all their heart to represent their exalted Principal with dignity and propriety.

We take the name of Christ through being born again. "Being born again," said Joseph Smith, "comes by the Spirit of God through ordinances." [^1] By exercising faith in Jesus Christ, repenting of sins, being baptized by water, and then living worthy of the companionship and sanctifying influence of the Holy Ghost, we are born again. We die as pertaining to the old ways of sin and come to live again, as new creatures, in regard to the things of righteousness. Those who experience this new birth enter into a new family relationship. They become the sons and daughters of Jesus Christ; Christ becomes the father of salvation, the source and substance of their new life. By the power of the Holy Ghost they begin to see things from Christ's point of view, to feel things as he does, to do as he does, even to receive his image in their countenances (Alma 5:14). And they take his name, the name of Christ. By it they are called and known. They become Christians in the truest sense.

Being born again and thereby taking the name of Christ are not just nice things to do. They are absolutely necessary. They are essential to true discipleship. Having returned from the agonies and sufferings of an abbreviated hell, Alma testified: "I have repented of my sins, and have been redeemed of the Lord; behold I am born of the Spirit. And the Lord said unto me: Marvel not that all mankind, yea, men and women, all nations, kindreds, tongues and people, must be born again; yea, born of God, changed from their carnal and fallen state, to a state of righteousness, being redeemed of God, becoming his sons and daughters; and thus they become new creatures; and unless they do this, they can in no wise inherit the kingdom of God" (Mosiah 27:24-26; compare Moses 6:58-60). Those who remain in the world of sin, who wander in the broad paths and refuse to come unto Christ—these are they who are lost and alone, familyless, nameless. They are spiritual orphans. Alma thus taught the people of Zarahemla that "the good shepherd doth call you; yea, and in his own name he doth call you, which is the name of Christ; and if ye will not hearken unto the voice of the good shepherd, to the name by which ye are called, behold, ye are not the sheep of the good shepherd. And now if ye are not the sheep of the good shepherd, of what fold are ye? Behold, I say unto you, that the devil is your shepherd, and ye are of his fold" (Alma 5:38-39). The Lord explained in our day: "Behold, Jesus Christ is the name which is given of the Father, and there is none other name given whereby man can be saved; wherefore, all men must take upon them the name which is given of the Father, for in that name shall they be called at the last day; wherefore, if they know not the name by which they are called, they cannot have place in the kingdom of my Father" (D&C 18:23-25).

True disciples do not travel along the path to eternal life very long before they sense the significance and seriousness of speaking and acting in the name of Christ. To take his name—in prayers, in blessings, and even in sermons—is to act by a divine investiture of authority, to do or say what our blessed Lord would do and say under the same circumstances. Thus it is that to use his name frivolously or lightly, to do something in the name of Jesus Christ that is unbecoming or inappropriate, is to take his name in vain and to come under divine censure. "Behold," the Savior declared in a modern revelation, "I am Alpha and Omega, even Jesus Christ. Wherefore, let all men beware how they take my name in their lips—for behold, verily I say, that many there be who are under this condemnation, who use the name of the Lord, and use it in vain, having not authority" (D&C 63:60-62; emphasis added).

In the ultimate sense, we take the name of Deity now on a conditional basis, in preparation for a great day when the name of God—placed upon our foreheads symbolically—will be granted permanently. Thus Elder Dallin H. Oaks explained: "It is significant that when we partake of the sacrament we do not witness that we take upon us the name of Jesus Christ. We witness that we are willing to do so. (See D&C 20:77.) The fact that we only witness to our willingness suggests that something else must happen before we actually take that sacred name upon us in the most important sense." Further, "in this sense, our witness relates to some future event or status whose attainment is not self-assumed, but depends on the authority or initiative of the Savior himself." [^2]

That future event is surely the time when the Lord seals his disciples to eternal life, when he grants unto them the blessings of exaltation, "which glory shall be a fulness and a continuation of the seeds forever and ever" (D&C 132:19). That future status is godhood. In that day "the Lamb shall stand upon Mount Zion, and with him a hundred and forty-four thousand, having his Father's name written on their foreheads" (D&C 133:18; Rev. 14:1). That group of one-hundred forty-four thousand high priests (see D&C 77:11), but representative of all who so attain, have the sacred name—meaning the title, the power, the glory, and the status—sealed upon them forevermore. These are they who are Gods, even the sons of God (D&C 76:58).

Disciples of Christ reverence and adore their Master. They know that there is power in the name, a name which represents the honor and glory of the Lord God Omnipotent. To follow Christ is to be true and faithful to the gospel covenant, to honor the sacred name under which we serve. It is to be a Christian.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] John F. MacArthur, Jr., The Gospel According to Jesus (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Zondervan, 1988), p. 112.
[^2] "Equally Yoked Together," in Charge to Religious Educators, 2d ed. (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1982), p. 27.
