Robert L. Millet, Eye Single to the Glory of God: Reflections on the Cost of Discipleship ( 1991)

Chapter 4

TAKE MY YOKE UPON YOU

To come unto Christ is to come out of the world. It is to leave behind the world we once knew. Broad roads lead to Babylon. We arrive in Zion, the place of the pure in heart, only by navigating a strait and narrow path. The gospel invitation is not only an entreaty to let the Savior come into our lives but an appeal and a command to repent and follow the only perfect Being to walk the earth. Though the Savior came to earth on a search and rescue mission, he came to save us from, not in, our sins (Alma 11:37; Hel. 5:10).

"Come unto me," the Lord pleaded, "all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light" (Matt. 11:28-30). A thoughtful New Testament scholar has written: "Jesus' hearers understood that the yoke was a symbol of submission. In the land of Israel yokes were made of wood, carefully fashioned by the carpenter's hand to fit the neck of the animal that was to wear it. Undoubtedly Jesus had made many yokes as a boy in Joseph's carpenter shop in Nazareth. This was a perfect illustration for salvation. The yoke worn by the animal to pull a load was used by the master to direct the animal.

"The yoke also signified discipleship. When our Lord added the phrase 'and learn from me,' the imagery would have been familiar to Jewish listeners. In ancient writings, a pupil who submitted himself to a teacher was said to take the teacher's yoke." [^1]

The Lord's yoke, his strengthening tie and lifeline to us, is customized—suited perfectly and precisely to those who in sincerity seek to follow him. Discipleship is personal, not competitive. Rather, he who knows the hearts and minds of men and women chooses the challenges and orchestrates the opportunities that will result in optimal learning and maximal development. To be yoked to Jesus is to be open to his tutorials, attentive to his lessons, intent finally on gaining "the mind of Christ" (1 Cor. 2:16).

There is no weight in life greater than the burden of sin. The Master beckons to us to unburden ourselves of the taints of a telestial world and adorn ourselves with the robes of righteousness. He invites us to shed the superficial, discard the ephemeral and the transient, and eschew the cheap and the gaudy. In addition, he pleads with his disciples to rise above the childish mentality that motivates people to do good for the sake of appearance or to seek salvation by their own unaided effort.

No doubt some of the greatest burdens we bear come from well-intended but misguided attempts to browbeat ourselves into righteousness. Some waste away their lives in anxiety and exhaustion, trying desperately to do it all themselves. In the meridian of time, Jesus offered hope and rest to the Jews, who were met on all sides by the taxing and ubiquitous requirements of the Law of Moses (see Acts 15:10); to these he promised alleviation of their guilt and liberation of their souls. In our day the Lord offers hope and rest to those who have tried every way but the right way to be good; to these he promises relief and comfort in return for their trust and reliance and continued faithfulness. His rest is the quiet assurance of divine approbation, that peace that comes from having been cleansed and filled.

The irony of our Lord's invitation lies in his statement that his yoke is easy and his burden light. The most onerous burden ever borne in eternity was borne by Christ. A universal fall necessitated a universal and infinite atonement, and Christ's sufferings in Gethsemane and on Golgotha are beyond mortal comprehension. Truly, he descended below all things so that he (and those whom he would lift) might ascend above all things (see D&C 88:6; Eph. 4:8-10). The awful atonement thereby opened the way for us to rest; our burdens—borne by him—become light.

Some years ago Elder Boyd K. Packer spoke of visiting a county fair in New England. "The center of attraction was the oxen pulling contest. Several teams of oxen with heavy wooden yokes were lined up to compete. A wooden sledge was weighted with cement blocks: ten thousand pounds—five tons—to begin with. The object was for the oxen to move the sledge three feet.

"I noticed a well-matched pair of very large, brindled, blue-gray animals. They were the big-boned, Holstein, Durham-cross, familiar big blue oxen of seasons past. Because of their size, of course they were the favorites.

"Each team was given three attempts to move the sledge. If they were able to do so easily, more weight was added until the teams were eliminated one by one. In turn, each team was hitched to the sledge. The teamster would position his animals carefully, pat them, chortle to them, whisper to them, and then at a goad and a loud command they would slam forward against the yoke. Either the weight would move or the oxen were jerked to a halt.

"The big blue oxen didn't even place! A small, nondescript pair of animals, not very well matched for size, moved the sledge all three times.

"I was amazed and fascinated and turned to an old New Englander in the crowd and asked if he could explain how that could happen. . . . And then he explained. The big blues were larger and stronger and better matched for size than the other team. But the little oxen had better teamwork and coordination. They hit the yoke together. Both animals jerked forward at exactly the same time and the force moved the load.

"One of the big blue oxen had lagged a second or pushed a second too soon—something like a football player being off side—and the force was spent in a glancing blow. The yoke then was twisted and the team jerked to one side and the sledge hardly moved.

"If I were to moralize, I would begin in typical Book of Mormon language, 'And thus we see' that size and strength are not enough. It takes teamwork as well." [^2]

Success and happiness in this life will derive largely from our attitude toward the yoke of Christ. If we insist that we have a better idea, if we contend that we can handle all situations ourselves, if we choose alternate paths and convenient detours, then the yoke of Christ will become a coarse collar, a confining chain. If, however, we submit to Christ, offer our whole souls as an offering unto him (Omni 1:26), and yield to the enticings and promptings of his Holy Spirit, then we shall come to glory in the freedom—rejoice in the liberty—that comes in and through his love and mercies and condescensions. "The yoke of the law," one commentator has explained, "the yoke of human effort, the yoke of works, and the yoke of sin are all heavy, chafing, galling yokes. They represent large, unbearable burdens carried in the flesh. They lead to despair, frustration, and anxiety. Jesus offers a yoke we can carry, and He also gives the strength to carry it.

"The yoke He offers is easy, and the burden He carries is light, because He is meek and lowly. Unlike the Pharisees and scribes, He does not desire to oppress us. He does not want to pile burdens on us we cannot bear, nor is he trying to show how hard righteousness can be. He is gentle. He is tender. And He gives a light burden to carry. Obedience under His yoke is a joy. It is when we disobey that the yoke chafes our neck." [^3]

"Peace I leave with you," said the Prince of Peace, "my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid" (John 14:27). Indeed, compliance with his terms, his conditions, and the requirements of his gospel covenant—all of which are given to strengthen and sanctify us—leads to freedom. "If ye continue in my word," the Redeemer counseled, "then are ye my disciples indeed; and ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free" (John 8:31-32). Thus abiding in the liberty whereby we are made free (D&C 88:86), "the peace of God, which passeth all understanding, shall keep [our] hearts and minds through Christ Jesus" (Phil. 4:7). Our souls are at rest.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] John F. MacArthur, Jr., The Gospel According to Jesus (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Zondervan, 1988), p. 112.
[^2] "Equally Yoked Together," in Charge to Religious Educators, 2d ed. (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1982), p. 27.
[^3] MacArthur, Gospel According to Jesus, p. 113.
