Robert L. Millet, Eye Single to the Glory of God: Reflections on the Cost of Discipleship ( 1991)

THE COST OF DISCIPLESHIP

Chapter 5

HE THAT LOSETH HIS LIFE

Following Christ entails looking to him. It means seeing to the welfare of others in his name. In the process—and the joy of discipleship is as much in the process, the journey, as it is in the destination—Christians discover and find themselves. In that regard the Master uttered one of the most profound ironies of the ages when he taught: "He who seeketh to save his life shall lose it; and he who loseth his life for my sake shall find it" (JST, Matt. 10:34).

It is the natural man that seeks acclaim, that requires attention, that elicits compliments, that feasts upon praise. It is the man or woman who is "without God in the world," who is "in a state of nature," who has "gone contrary to the nature of God" and thus the nature of happiness—it is this person who is so busy taking the emotional temperature, so anxious to be fulfilled. "The natural life in each of us," C. S. Lewis wrote, "is some-thing self-centered, something that wants to be petted and admired. . . . "And especially it wants to be left to itself: to keep well away from anything better or stronger or higher than it, anything that might make it feel small. It is afraid of the light and air of the spiritual world, just as people who have been brought up to be dirty are afraid of a bath. And in a sense it is quite right. It knows that if the spiritual life gets hold of it, all its self-centeredness and self-will are going to be killed and it is ready to fight tooth and nail to avoid that." [^1]

To be sure, the natural man need not be degenerate, a vicious personality, a lewd fellow of the baser sort, a criminal. In a real sense, however, all of us are natural men until we accept the revealed witness of the truth and are cleansed from our fallen condition through the atoning blood of Christ, by the power of the Holy Ghost. In that condition, desiring to please the Master and to do his will, disciples of Christ begin to forsake their own agenda and to learn and abide by the will of their Principal. Putting off the natural man (Mosiah 3:19) thus entails, among other things, the gradual acquisition of a pure heart. One with a pure heart is unconcerned about power or fame or notoriety; he finds pleasure in simple things, joy in the ordinary. Again from C. S. Lewis: "The more you obey your conscience, the more your conscience will demand of you. And your natural self, which is thus being starved and hampered and worried at every turn, will get angrier and angrier. It is as though Jesus were saying to each of us: 'Give me All. I don't want so much of your time and so much of your money and so much of your work: I want You. I have not come to torment your natural self, but to kill it. . . . Hand over the whole natural self. . . . I will give you a new self instead. In fact, I will give you Myself: my own will shall become yours.' " [^2]

In one sense, then, a person loses himself when he finds Christ, the Captain of his soul. He loses himself when he becomes less obsessed with personal whims, more directed toward divine design. She loses herself when she is willing, without let or hindrance, to dedicate herself to the Church of Jesus Christ and to labor with fidelity to assist in the establishment of the kingdom of God on earth. Luke recorded the Savior's words as follows: "For whosoever will save his life, must be willing to lose it for my sake; and whosoever will be willing to lose his life for my sake the same shall save it. For what doth it profit a man if he gain the whole world, and yet he receive him not whom God hath ordained, and he lose his own soul, and he himself be a castaway?" (JST, Luke 9:24-25; emphasis added).

The disciple loses his life when he serves his fellowman, when he places others' comfort and convenience before his own. Our Exemplar said: "I am among you as he that serveth" (Luke 22:27). King Benjamin thus instructed his people that "when ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God" (Mosiah 2:17). President Harold B. Lee shared with the Church an experience that illustrates that vital principle: "It was just before the dedication of the Los Angeles Temple. We were all preparing for that great occasion. It was something new in my life, when along about three or four o'clock in the morning, I enjoyed an experience that I think was not a dream, but it must have been a vision. It seemed that I was witnessing a great spiritual gathering, where men and women were standing up, two or three at a time, and speaking in tongues. The Spirit was so unusual. I seemed to have heard the voice of President David O. McKay say, "If you want to love God, you have to learn to love and serve the people. That is the way you show your love for God." [^3]

Service sanctifies both giver and receiver. Those who involve themselves in the work of the Master receive the approbation of the Master. Peter taught that charity prevents a multitude of sins (JST, 1 Pet. 4:8). James likewise wrote that "he which converteth the sinner from the error of his way shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of [his own] sins" (James 5:20; compare D&C 84:61). Indeed, it is through searching out (being sensitive to) and seeing to the needs of the poor—both temporally and spiritually—that disciples of Christ are able to maintain their spiritual standing before their Maker, to retain a remission of sins from day to day (Mosiah 4:11-12, 26).

In the ultimate sense, disciples are willing to give their own life—to face death—in the cause of truth if such is required. Here pretense and appearance fade away rapidly; no person in his right mind would offer to suffer death for a cause to which he or she was not absolutely committed. As Joseph Smith taught: "For a man to lay down his all, his character and reputation, his honor, and applause, his good name among men, his houses, his lands, his brothers and sisters, his wife and children, and even his own life also—counting all things but filth and dross for the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ—requires more than mere belief or supposition that he is doing the will of God." [^4]

It is not easy to die, even to die in the faith. No one wants to die, even to die the death of a martyr. And yet how else could the Lord obtain that unconditional dedication from his people so necessary to the perpetuation of a system of salvation that spans the veil? Certainly the scriptures do not "teach salvation by martyrdom. The Lord was not advising the disciples to try to get themselves killed for Him. . . . He simply says that genuine Christians do not shrink back, even in the face of death. To express it another way, the true disciple tends to follow the Lord, even at the expense of his own self." [^5] But should such be necessary, the reward is at least as great as the cost: "Let no man be afraid to lay down his life for my sake; for whoso layeth down his life for my sake shall find it again" On the other hand, "whoso is not willing to lay down his life for my sake is not my disciple" (D&C 103:27-28). And what reward shall the follower of the Nazarene find? "Whoso layeth down his life in my cause, for my name's sake, shall find it again, even life eternal" (D&C 98:13; compare 101:15, 35).

One of the sad commentaries of this modern age is that so many have lost the way—the way to happiness, the way to genuine fulfillment, the way to peace. It just may be that those who work hardest at trying to find themselves—at least according to the world's standards and methods—will, unfortunately, continue to wander in the morass of existential anguish. For, in the words of the Prophet Joseph Smith, "If men do not comprehend the character of God, they do not comprehend themselves." [^6] Those who turn to the Lord and enter into covenant with him find themselves and make their way along that strait and narrow path which leads to the abundant life. That life is worth whatever paltry price we have had to pay along the way, and in the end we shall see that there really was no sacrifice at all.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Hugh Nibley, Since Cumorah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), pp. 393-94.
[^2] John F. MacArthur, Jr., The Gospel According to Jesus (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Zondervan, 1988), pp. 86-87.
[^3] In Conference Report, Apr. 1975, pp. 75-76.
[^4] Dietrich Bonhoeffer, The Cost of Discipleship, rev. ed. (New York: Macmillan, 1963), p. 88.
[^5] Bonhoeffer, Cost of Discipleship, pp. 197-98.
[^6] In Conference Report, Oct. 1980, pp. 28-29.
