Robert L. Millet, Eye Single to the Glory of God: Reflections on the Cost of Discipleship ( 1991)

Chapter 6

WHAT WILL A MAN GIVE IN EXCHANGE FOR HIS SOUL?

Is anything in this life worth my soul? Is there any reward, any honor, any mortal station that is so deserving of my attention and my affections that I would mortgage my eternal future for them? How much is a soul worth? Can it be purchased? Traded away? Is a modern mess of pottage so appealing as to cause me to forfeit my place at the banquet of the Bridegroom? Is the devil's first article of faithlessness—that anything in this world can be acquired with money—really true, as so many contend?

We need not kneel at the shrines of wooden or stone gods to be idolatrous. We need not offer sacrifice to a lifeless deity to have forsaken the faith of our fathers. Rather, we need only devote the bulk of our time, talents, and means to the establishment or proliferation of a cause other than the gospel cause. False objects of adoration and worship may in our day take the form of real estate or portfolios or chrome or furniture or leisure, none of which is innately evil but which as ends in themselves—rather than means—consume and corrupt. Any time things take precedence over persons, particularly the Person of Christ, we are on a downward spiral of personal apostasy. We have wandered off the path of the disciple.

The Book of Mormon is a powerful witness that "wealth is a jealous master who will not be served half-heartedly and will suffer no rival—not even God." Tragically, "the more important wealth is, the less important it is how one gets it." [^1] Mammon, or money, is indeed a tyrannical master. It demands center stage; it beckons to be afforded prominence as an all-consuming passion. The craving for it is insatiable. Wants are gradually transformed into needs. Values are gradually diluted and then dissolved.

The scriptures record that there came to Jesus on one occasion a young man who sought the blessings of eternal life. He inquired of the Savior what was expected of him to achieve that end. The Lord detailed a number of the commandments, which he himself had delivered to Moses on Sinai. The response from the young man was, "All these things have I observed from my youth." Mark adds tenderly: "Then Jesus beholding him loved him"—for the fellow was a good man, a faithful man—"and said unto him, One thing thou lackest: go thy way, sell whatsoever thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and come, take up the cross, and follow me." And then comes the poignant moment of truth: "And he [the young man] was sad at that saying, and went away grieved: for he had great possessions" (Mark 10:17-22).

A Protestant commentator, John MacArthur, offered the following insight into this sad scenario: Jesus "challenged his claim to having kept the law. In effect, Christ told the young man, 'You say you love your neighbor as yourself. OK, give him everything you've got. If you really love him as much as you love yourself, that should be no problem.'

"Here is the ultimate test: will this man obey the Lord? Jesus is not teaching salvation by philanthropy. He is not saying it is possible to buy eternal life with charity. But He is saying, 'Are you going to do what I want you to do? Who will run your life, you or I?' The Lord put his finger on the very nerve of this man's existence. Knowing where his heart was, He said, 'Unless I can be the highest authority in your life, there's no salvation for you.' By placing Himself alongside the man's wealth and demanding he make the choice, our Lord revealed the true state of the young man's heart.

"Do we literally have to give away everything we own to become Christians? No, but we do have to be willing to forsake all (Luke 14:33), meaning we cling to nothing that takes precedence over Christ. We must be eager to do whatever he asks. . . . The Lord made a frontal attack on the man's weakness—the sin of covetousness, indulgence, and materialism." [^2]

"We might well ask," Elder Bruce R. McConkie observed, " 'Isn't it enough to keep the commandments? What more is expected of us than to be true and faithful to every trust? Is there more than the law of obedience?'

"In the case of our rich young friend there was more. He was expected to live the law of consecration. . . . We are left to wonder what intimacies he might have shared with the Son of God, what fellowship he might have enjoyed with the apostles, what revelations and visions he might have received, if he had been able to live the law of a celestial kingdom. As it is he remains nameless; as it might have been, his name could have been had in honorable remembrance among the saints forever." [^3]

The pitiable plight of those who trust in their riches is a type of moral myopia, a growing and blatant insensitivity to those who have less than they. In short, we can hardly notice the needy about us when our eye is single to ourselves—when we are possessed of a type of arrogant aggrandizement—and when our thoughts and feelings are preoccupied with getting more of what we already have. Surely there are few more serious setbacks to our discipleship than coveting our own property (see D&C 19:26). Didn't someone warn us once:

"Take heed, and beware of covetousness: for a man's life consisteth not in the abundance of the things which he possesseth"? He then uttered a hard saying in the form of a parable:

"And he spake a parable unto them, saying, The ground of a certain rich man brought forth plentifully: and he thought within himself, saying, What shall I do, because I have no room where to bestow my fruits? And he said, This will I do: I will pull down my barns, and build greater; and there will I bestow all my fruits and my goods. And I will say to my soul, Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for many years; take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry. But God said unto him, Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee: then whose shall those things be, which thou hast provided?"

And then the precept to be pondered: "So is he that layeth up treasure for himself, and is not rich toward God" (Luke 12:15-21). Some things simply will not be permitted through celestial customs.

Ananias and Sapphira—and the Saints of their day—learned a lesson long to be remembered. Having voluntarily entered into covenant to consecrate all they had to the Lord through the legal administrators, they secretly determined upon a plan to assure a style of living to which they had become accustomed: they "kept back" a portion of their property. But Simon Peter, moved upon by that Spirit which searcheth the hearts and thus knoweth all things (Rom. 8:27; D&C 42:17), confronted the deceptive duo with the penetrating words: "Why hath Satan filled thine heart to lie to the Holy Ghost. . . . ? Why hast thou conceived this thing in thine heart? Thou hast not lied unto men, but unto God." Both Ananias and Sapphira, exposed in their hypocrisy, fell dead at the feet of the apostles. "And great fear came upon all the church, and upon as many as heard these things" (Acts 5:1-11).

This story is harsh and dramatic. Its lesson is frightening. And it is unusual, for seldom does God strike one dead for hypocrisy. It is, however, accurate and descriptive, symbolic, if you will, of the spiritual death and alienation from things of righteousness that surely shall be for all who follow such a course.

Jesus said what he meant and meant what he said when he taught that it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven. There is no metaphor intended. No softening of this hard saying by linguistic or cultural traditions is justifiable. The Savior said what he said. "Who then can be saved?" the apostles asked. "With men that trust in riches, it is impossible; but not impossible with men who trust in God and leave all for my sake, for with such all things are possible" (JST Mark 10:22-26; compare JST Matt. 19:26; JST Luke 18:27). The issue, then, is one of trust. Reliance. Dependence. The Almighty, who promises us all that he has, asks simply that we be willing to give him all. Nothing else will do.

It is not that the Lord does not want his people to prosper. In fact, "It is not important that I should have no possessions, but if I do I must keep them as though I had them not, in other words I must cultivate a spirit of inward detachment, so that my heart is not in my possessions." [^4] The anxiety against which the Savior warns his disciples (Matt. 6:25) is concerned with future times, with my goods, with my holdings, with my ability to provide adequately. Truly "the way to misuse our possessions is to use them as an insurance against the morrow. Anxiety is always directed to the morrow, whereas goods are in the strictest sense meant to be used only for today. By trying to ensure for the next day we are only creating uncertainty today. . . . The only way to win assurance is by leaving tomorrow entirely in the hands of God and by receiving from him all we need for today." [^5]

As the disciple grows in discernment and in spiritual sensitivity, he or she comes to cherish those things that matter most and to ignore or eschew those that appeal to the senses but do little to settle and soothe the soul. The disciple begins to appreciate the counsel of a modern seer: "You need not be either rich or hold high position to be completely successful and truly happy," said Elder Boyd K. Packer. "In fact, if these things come to you, and they may, true success must be achieved in spite of them, not because of them." He continued: "The choice of life is not between fame and obscurity, nor is the choice between wealth and poverty. The choice is between good and evil, and that is a very different matter indeed." [^6]

In a modern revelation the Lord explained that "the worth of souls is great in the sight of God" (D&C 18:10). Latter-day Saints are fond of quoting this verse and then skipping down the scriptural page to those verses that speak further of the joy that comes from bringing the blessings of the gospel into the lives of many. The question might be asked: Why is the worth of souls great? In the context of what we have been discussing, why is a soul so precious? Why is it so tragic to sell one's soul and in Faustian fashion trade away the unspeakable hereafter for the unthinkable here and now? We might respond that as children of the Man of Holiness we have marvelous possibilities. As sons and daughters of God, we are possessed (although now in rudimentary form) of the attributes of godliness. The Lord provides an additional answer from scripture: "For, behold, the Lord your Redeemer suffered death in the flesh; wherefore he suffered the pain of all men, that all men might repent and come unto him. And he hath risen again from the dead, that he might bring all men unto him, on conditions of repentance. And how great is his joy in the soul that repenteth! Wherefore, you are called to cry repentance unto this people" (D&C 18:11-14). Simply stated, the soul is of infinite worth. We are not our own. We have been bought with an infinite price (1 Cor. 6:19-20), even with "the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot" (1 Pet. 1:19).

Through our Redeemer and Benefactor we may become "a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar [purchased] people; that [we] should shew forth the praises of him who hath called [us] out of darkness into his marvelous light" (1 Pet. 2:9). From this perspective, then, our absolute commitment to the Lord is a fundamental expression of gratitude to Jesus Christ, who has ransomed us. It is a statement of appreciation. But our pure love for him also places us on a path, the path of the true disciple, which leads to limitless eternal privileges in the realms ahead. "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him" (1 Cor. 2:9).

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1971), p. 91.
[^2] The Cost of Discipleship, rev. ed. (New York: Macmillan, 1963), p. 100; emphasis added.
[^3] John F. MacArthur, Jr., The Gospel According to Jesus (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Zondervan, 1988), p. 202.
[^4] Dietrich Bonhoeffer, The Cost of Discipleship, rev. ed. (New York: Macmillan, 1963), p. 88.
[^5] Bonhoeffer, Cost of Discipleship, pp. 197-98.
[^6] In Conference Report, Oct. 1980, pp. 28-29.
