Robert L. Millet, Eye Single to the Glory of God: Reflections on the Cost of Discipleship ( 1991)

Chapter 7

TAKE UP YOUR CROSS

Jesus is our pattern, our example. He bids us to follow him, to walk where he has trod. To enjoy fellowship with him and his Spirit, we must be prepared to face the alienation and loneliness of well doing; submit to the tauntings and abuse of a world that grossly misunderstands our intentions; and, if called upon so to do, walk through the valley of the shadow of death without fear or hesitation. Jesus—the great Jehovah, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob—"humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross" (Phil. 2:8). He who did all things well, who gained the mastery over life and death, even he bids us to traverse a similar path. He calls us to take up our own crosses and follow where he has led. Our Lord points out that "whosoever doth not bear his cross, and come after me, cannot be my disciple" (Luke 14:27; compare Matt. 10:38; Mark 8:34).

Though the atonement of Jesus Christ was accomplished both in the Garden of Gethsemane and on the hill of Calvary, Christians around the world frequently speak of that central act of reconciliation as "the cross of Christ." Even the Savior himself so speaks. While among his American Hebrews, Jesus explained: "Behold I have given unto you my gospel, and this is the gospel which I have given unto you—that I came into the world to do the will of my Father, because my Father sent me. And my Father sent me that I might be lifted up upon the cross; and after that I had been lifted up upon the cross, that I might draw all men unto me, that as I have been lifted up by men even so should men be lifted up by the Father, to stand before me, to be judged of their works, whether they be good or whether they be evil" (3 Ne. 27:13-14; emphasis added). It might also be appropriate to refer to the Lord's condescension—his temptations and pain and sufferings—throughout his mortal life as his cross. In this sense our Master carried his cross before and after Gethsemane.

There is a sense in which we as disciples take up our cross by applying the atoning blood of Christ, by repenting and coming unto him. Thus the death of the natural man is followed by the birth of the spiritual man and the rise to a newness of life. "Our old man is crucified with him," Paul said, "that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin" (Rom. 6:6). To the Galatians Paul likewise taught: "I am crucified with Christ: nevertheless, I live; yet not I, but Christ liveth in me" (Gal. 2:20). From the Christian perspective, then, our earthly stains were affixed (with our Savior) to Golgotha's cross (see Col. 2:14). President Joseph F. Smith thus reminded us that "having been born anew, which is the putting away of the old man sin, and putting on of the man Christ Jesus, we have become soldiers of the Cross, having enlisted under the banner of Jehovah for time and for eternity" [^1]

We take up our cross as we seek to put down our sins and thereby enter the realm of divine experience. Thus Jesus instructed those who desired discipleship: "If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross and follow me. And now for a man to take up his cross, is to deny himself all ungodliness, and every worldly lust, and keep my commandments" (JST, Matt. 16:25-26; emphasis added). Having called the Nephites to a higher righteousness than that put forward in the Law, having cautioned them specifically against immorality, Jesus said: "Behold, I give unto you a commandment, that ye suffer none of these things to enter into your heart; for it is better that ye should deny yourselves of these things, wherein ye will take up your cross, than that ye should be cast into hell" (3 Ne. 12:29-30). It is presumably in this sense that Alma counseled his errant son Corianton: "Now my son, I would that ye should repent and forsake your sins, and go no more after the lusts of your eyes, but cross yourself in all these things; for except ye do this ye can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God. Oh, remember, and take it upon you, and cross yourself in these things" (Alma 39:9; emphasis added).

There is another way in which disciples are expected to take up their cross. It may well be one of the most difficult labors of the Christian, but our involvement in this work makes us more like the Merciful One than anything else we might do. The German theologian Dietrich Bonhoeffer observed:

"While it is true that only the sufferings of Christ are a means of atonement, yet since he has suffered for and borne the sins of the whole world and shares with his disciples the fruits of his passion [sufferings], the Christian also has to undergo temptation, he too has to bear the sins of others; he too must bear their shame and be driven like a scapegoat from the gate of the city. But he would certainly break down under this burden, but for the support of him who bore the sins of all. The passion of Christ strengthens him to overcome the sins of others by forgiving them. He becomes the bearer of other men's burdens. . . . My brother's burden which I must bear is not only his outward lot, his natural characteristics and gifts, but quite literally his sin. And the only way to bear that sin is by forgiving it in the power of the cross of Christ in which I now share."

Summing up, "The call to follow Christ always means a call to share the work of forgiving men their sins. Forgiveness is the Christlike suffering which it is the Christian's duty to bear." [^2] To modern disciples in his restored Church the Lord thus instructed: "I, the Lord will forgive whom I will forgive, but of you it is required to forgive all men" (D&C 64:10).

In some ways, the call to discipleship is also a call to suffer. It is a call to bear with the trials of this life and particularly the indifference or rejection of those who despise the way of holiness. To go where Christ has gone we must be willing—at least in part—to bear what he has borne. To inherit celestial glory we must be willing to face the refining fires of suffering. The Apostle Peter encouraged the Saints of his day: "Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial which is to try you, as though some strange thing happened unto you: but rejoice, inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings; that, when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy" (1 Pet. 4:12-13). Paul counseled the Roman Saints in the same vein. "The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit," he said, "that we are the children of God: and if children, then heirs; heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ; if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together" (Rom. 8:16-17; emphasis added). Indeed, to some degree we gain fellowship with Him only through participating in what Paul called "the fellowship of his suffering." In his epistle to the Philippians, he stated: "I count all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that I may win Christ, . . . that I may know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable unto his death" (Philip. 3:8, 10).

The ungodly, and in some cases even the spiritually inexperienced, regard the path of discipleship as foolishness. Because they do not know, they assume that no one does. Because they do not feel, they generalize from their own spiritual void to their fellows. And, typically, what people are not up on, they tend to be down on. Righteousness and certitude are anathema to the agnostic, and thus true believers are scoffed or scorned for their testimonies. The disciple must be prepared to withstand the taunts of the ignorant, as well as the attacks of the perverse. Paul encouraged the Saints to "run with patience the race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith; who for the joy that was set before him endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God" (Heb. 12:1-2; emphasis added). That is to say, Jesus paid little attention to those who sought to shame him, who sought to embarrass or ridicule him for his teachings and way of life. Nephi observed that in his father's dream-vision of the tree of life, the people in the great and spacious building "did point the finger of scorn at me and those that were partaking of the fruit also; but we heeded them not" (1 Ne. 8:33; emphasis added). Jacob issued a marvelous challenge in what is certainly an experiential verse: "Wherefore, we would to God that we could persuade all men not to rebel against God, to provoke him to anger, but that all men would believe in Christ, and view his death, and suffer his cross and bear the shame of the world" (Jacob 1:8).

Taking up our cross is thus not something which takes place in a single instance, nor is it necessarily one great and final test of our discipleship. We do not work out our salvation in a day or an instant, and we generally do not pass the tests of mortality through one episode of courage or one occasion of exceptional bravery. Salvation is a process. Discipleship is a process. And taking up our cross is something we do regularly and consistently. Luke therefore records Jesus' words as follows: "If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me" (Luke 9:23; emphasis added). And so it is that "a true believer is one who signs up for life."

"The bumper-sticker sentiment, 'Try Jesus,' is a mentality foreign to real discipleship—faith is not an experiment but a lifelong commitment. It means taking up the cross daily, giving all for Christ each day with no reservations, no uncertainty, no hesitation. It means nothing is knowingly held back, nothing purposely shielded from His lordship, nothing stubbornly kept from His control. It calls for a painful severing of the tie with the world, a sealing of the escape hatches, a ridding oneself of any kind of security to fall back on in case of failure. A genuine believer knows he is going ahead with Christ until death." [^3]

And so the ever-present and persistent reminder regarding the cost of discipleship in every age and time is, "He that will not take up his cross and follow me, and keep my commandments, the same shall not be saved" (D&C 56:2). The followers of Christ walk in the steps of their Master. The road is long, and the climb is tiresome and hazardous. The compensation, however, that which awaits the faithful, is sublime. Jacob thus exulted that "the righteous, the saints of the Holy One of Israel, they who have believed in the Holy One of Israel, they who have endured the crosses of the world, and despised the shame of it, they shall inherit the kingdom of God, which was prepared for them from the foundation of the world, and their joy shall be full forever" (2 Ne. 9:18).

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Ralph Gower, The New Manners and Customs of Bible Times (Chicago: Moody Press, 1987), p. 53.
[^2] Gower, Manners and Customs of Bible Times, pp. 244-45.
[^3] The Cost of Discipleship, rev. ed. (New York: Macmillan, 1963), p. 129.
