Robert L. Millet, Eye Single to the Glory of God: Reflections on the Cost of Discipleship ( 1991)

Chapter 8

THE SALT OF THE EARTH

The Lord calls us to make a difference in the world. Things simply ought to be better because we are present. In reality, we can only make a difference if we are different. Not necessarily strange. Different. Indeed, disciples of Christ are to stand in stark contrast to those who conform, concede, and thereby compromise.

As a part of his Sermon on the Mount, Jesus taught: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, I give unto you to be the salt of the earth; but if the salt shall lose its savor, wherewith shall the earth be salted? the salt shall thenceforth be good for nothing, but to be cast out, and to be trodden under foot of men" (JST, Matt. 5:15). That the Lord had specific reference to his disciples—to baptized members of the Church who have received him and his gospel by covenant—is affirmed in a modern revelation. "When men are called into mine everlasting gospel," the Savior said in 1833, "and covenant with an everlasting covenant, they are accounted as the salt of the earth and the savor of men; they are called to be the savor of men" (D&C 101:39-40). One Bible commentator has observed: "Seasoning [in antiquity] was limited to salt, obtainable from the endless supplies in the salt hills near the Dead Sea. It was used to flavour and preserve food (Job 6:6). In New Testament times there was a thriving industry based at Magdala, where fish were salted and exported. Not until Greek and Roman times were other seasonings (spices) readily available, and this developed as trade grew." [^1] The Saints are asked to stand as a spice, a seasoning, a flavor among the bland and often tasteless elements of the world. Because they are there, things are better; like salt, the people of the Lord are empowered to bring out the best in others.

Anciently salt was believed to have healing properties (see 2 Kgs. 2:19-22). In addition, it had an important place in sacrificial offerings (Lev. 2:13), which may have been related to the Old Testament custom of using salt in a meal in which participants celebrated the signing of an agreement (see Num. 18:19). Further, "meals were an important aspect of friendship. To eat a meal with someone was to be at peace with him (Gen. 26:28-30). Salt had a particular function as part of the meal. To 'eat salt' was to be at peace—perhaps because it healed wounds." Thus "when Jesus tells us to be 'salty,' he is therefore telling us to be at peace with others." [^2] Those who have taken upon them the name of Christ—those who have received the Comforter by the laying on of hands—covenant to bear others' burdens, to mourn with those that mourn, and to comfort those who stand in need of comfort (see Mosiah 18:8-9). They have committed to be peacemakers, to be as oil on troubled waters, to serve as a soothing balm in the midst of calamity or controversy. They are as salt.

Salt is a preservative. It preserves food from corruption and keeps it wholesome and acceptable. The disciples are likewise called to be as preservatives on earth. They are called out of the world to stand as witnesses against creeping relativity and the dilution of time-honored values. They are summoned by the Savior to declare with love and boldness those principles of light and virtue, those absolute truths decreed by an all-wise God and his prophets. "Jesus calls [the disciples]," Bonhoeffer explained, "the salt of the earth—salt, the most indispensable necessity of life. The disciples, that is to say, are the highest good, the supreme value which the earth possesses, for without them it cannot live. . . . In casting out the disciples the earth is destroying its very life." [^3] A modern revelation declared: "They [the Saints] were set to be a light unto the world, and to be the saviors of men; and inasmuch as they are not the saviors of men, they are as salt that has lost its savor" (D&C 103:9-10; emphasis added). We note with interest the number of times in scripture the Lord warns the wicked that inasmuch as they cast out the prophets and the righteous element from among them, they are ripe for destruction. To dispel the nucleus of faith is to sever the very lifeline which could pull them through the storms of life into a safe harbor (see Alma 10:22-23; Hel. 13:12).

And what of those who are called out of the world but differ but little from the world? What of those whose style of life, attitude, and manner of speaking is no different from the typical natural man? What of those who have lost their savor? Elder Carlos E. Asay explained that "salt will not lose its savor with age. Savor is lost through mixture and contamination. . . . Flavor and quality flee a man when he contaminates his mind with unclean thoughts, desecrates his mouth by speaking less than the truth, and misapplies his strength in performing evil acts." [^4] Salt that does not flavor, heal, or preserve serves little useful function. It is no longer salt. It is fit only to be trodden underfoot. "When salt was collected from the Dead Sea area, some of it was good for salting and cooking, but other salt had lost its saltiness. This salt was not thrown away, however. It was stored in the Jerusalem Temple, and when the winter rains made the marble courtyards slippery, it was spread on them to reduce the slipperiness. Hence salt that has lost its saltiness is trodden under the foot of men." [^5]

The way of the disciple is the way of holiness. It is a walk away from the ways of the world. It represents a genuine refinement of the soul, a cleansing of the inner self. Disciples who look ahead to that life which is in the Lord are far less prone to look back to the sinking standards of a sick society. Those who cherish virtue come to abhor vice. Those who are alive to the things of righteousness become dead to the ways of sin. And yet the Saints are invited to make their mark on society, to leaven the loaf. And so it is that only as they first come out of the world, come to Christ, be lifted and built up and fortified in him, may they then seek to lift and build up and fortify others against the onslaught of avarice and the mountains of malevolence. Elder Asay counseled us regarding how to avoid mixture and contamination: "If it is not clean, do not think it; if it is not true, do not speak it; if it is not good, do not do it." [^6]

The Savior's use of salt as a symbol of Christian discipleship is so very appropriate. What we are, deep down to the core, is so much more important than what we appear to be. Elder Bruce R. McConkie taught:

"In the final analysis, the gospel of God is written, not in the dead letters of scriptural records, but in the lives of the Saints. It is not written with pen and ink on paper of man's making, but with acts and deeds in the book of life of each believing and obedient person. It is engraved in the flesh and bones and sinews of those who live a celestial law, which is the law of the gospel. It is there to be read by others, first, by those who, seeing the good works of the Saints, shall respond by glorifying our Father in heaven, and finally by the Great Judge to whom every man's life is an open book." [^7]

The body of Christ—the church of Jesus Christ—is made up of more than people who look nice or even who act nice. The church is composed of more than visibly obedient people, more than individuals who are ostensibly observant in their behavior. The followers of the Nazarene seek to be what they preach, to embody what they proclaim. They thereby make a difference in a world which so desperately needs them.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Ye Are the Light of the World (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1974), p. 13.
[^2] In Conference Report, Apr. 1973, p. 178; emphasis added.
[^3] Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1971), p. 373.
[^4] In Conference Report, Apr. 1980, p. 60; emphasis added.
[^5] Gower, Manners and Customs of Bible Times, p. 56.
[^6] In Conference Report, Apr. 1980, p. 60; emphasis in original.
[^7] 7. In Conference Report, Oct. 1968, p. 135.
