Robert L. Millet, Eye Single to the Glory of God: Reflections on the Cost of Discipleship ( 1991)

Chapter 9

THE LIGHT OF THE WORLD

The Lord calls us to point the way. In a world which is too often shrouded in uncertainty and doubt, the Light of Life bids us to let our light shine, to stand as beacons in the storms of the night, and to certify our discipleship by preachment and practice. Discipleship entails example. Discipleship involves standing out from the generality of mankind and standing up for what is true and right and good. We come to make a difference only when we are different, and that difference must be substantive enough to be witnessed and then acknowledged by others.

The scriptures repeatedly declare that Jesus Christ came into the world, that the Light shone in a world of darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not (John 1:5; D&C 34:2; 88:49). In one sense, that which was dark could not understand, could not grasp or perceive, that which was Light, for darkness is antithetical to light. Jesus was of all men and women most misunderstood. In another sense, darkness—the world of evil—could not conquer, could not overpower or control, that which was Light, for Jesus was and is the Lord of all—the Lord of light and darkness. His disciples will never really be understood by those who walk in the shadows. And his disciples must not, if they are to shine forth into the gloom of an apostate and hungry world, allow their light to be quenched or their influence for good to be threatened.

"Verily, verily, I say unto you," the Christ implored in his sermon on the Mount, "I give unto you to be the light of the world; a city that is set on a hill cannot be hid" (JST, Matt. 5:16). Jesus calls us to be the source of example and of edification. President Harold B. Lee warned that "any Latter-day Saint in Church circles, in military service, in social life, or in the business community is looked upon not just as an individual, but as the visible Church today. Someone has said: 'Be careful how you act, because you may be the only Standard Church Works some people may ever read.' " [^1] That is neither unfair nor unexpected. Perfect we may not be, but different we must always be.

In a world in which values and direction are set by consensus, the Savior bids his disciples to cleanse the inner vessel within themselves, work in harmony with others of the household of faith, and seek to build up and establish the cause of Zion. Zion, the society of the pure in heart, is a city of light. It stands in marked contrast to Babylon, the abode of darkness, the gathering place of the worldly and the wayward. Babylon is the city of man; Zion, the city of God. Zion is the receptacle of virtue; Babylon, the embodiment of vice. Babylon judges according to ephemeral whims and current trends; Zion, according to the rock of revealed religion. Zion thus becomes the banner, the ensign to which the honest in heart rally when they have become weary of the shifting sands of secularity. "Behold, I, the Lord, have made my church in these last days like unto a judge sitting on a hill, or in a high place, to judge the nations. For it shall come to pass that the inhabitants of Zion shall judge all things pertaining to Zion" (D&C 64:37-38).

Just as Jesus beckons his people to be the salt of the earth—to be willing and able to flavor, heal, and preserve the world—so he insists that they stand as a light to the world. He demands that they make a difference. And it is only as the light of truth burns within them, only as the light of the gospel shines forth from them, that darkness can be penetrated. "You cannot lift another soul," President Lee instructed the Saints, "until you are standing on higher ground than he is. You must be sure, if you would rescue the man, that you yourself are setting the example of what you would have him be. You cannot light a fire in another soul unless it is burning in your own soul." [^2]

In one sense, the disciples of Christ place their candles, or lamps, under a bushel basket whenever they are not true to the light they have been given. For example, the Latter-day Saints in Kirtland received a divine mandate to construct a temple to their God. They failed to move forward to fulfill this commandment in a manner that pleased the Lord. A revelation thus explained that "there are many who have been ordained among you, whom I have called but few of them are chosen. They who are not chosen have sinned a very grievous sin, in that they are walking in darkness at noon day" (D&C 95:5-6). Similarly, the Lord had explained some months earlier—and modern prophets have emphasized the same in our own time—that because of our having treated lightly the Book of Mormon and modern revelation, our minds have been darkened; a condemnation, scourge, and judgment rest upon all the children of Zion. The way of deliverance is clear: "I will forgive you of your sins with this commandment—that you remain steadfast in your minds in solemnity and the spirit of prayer, in bearing testimony to all the world of those things which are communicated unto you" (D&C 84:54-61; emphasis added). In short, we walk in darkness or hide our light whenever we fail to live up to our spiritual privileges.

In holding up the light of the gospel, we must never allow our eyes to wander. Nor must we forget who is the Source of the light. To do so is to risk the onslaught of pride and the smugness of self-security. Those who become overly impressed with themselves come to "read by the lamp of their own conceit" and, as a law unto themselves, come to "interpret by rules of their own contriving." [^3] No, we must never permit our gaze to wander far afield. "Therefore, let your light so shine before this world, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father who is in heaven" (JST, Matt. 5:18; emphasis added). We allow our light to shine—our testimonies, our witness of the truthfulness of the work in which we are engaged, and our deeds of Christian service—not that observers might commend and praise us but that they might turn their lives toward him who is the source of conviction and the personification of goodness. "Therefore, hold up your light that it may shine unto the world. Behold I am the light which ye should hold up—that which ye have seen me do" (3 Ne. 18:24). Christ is the Light. We are at best lamps, dim reflections of him. But to the degree that the light of his Spirit shines in our souls, to the degree that his image is in our countenances, to the degree that our good works motivate others to sing the song of redeeming love and glorify God, we are in the line of our duty as disciples.

Truly, the Lord is our light. As we bask in that which emanates from him, we prepare ourselves to go where his glorious light shall shine everlastingly. In speaking of the holy city, the celestialized earth, John said: "The city had no need of the sun, neither of the moon, to shine in it: for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof. . . . And [the inhabitants of the city] shall see his face; and his name shall be in their foreheads. And there shall be no night there; and they need no candle, neither light of the sun; for the Lord God giveth them light: and they shall reign for ever and ever" (Rev. 21:23; 22:4-5).

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Ye Are the Light of the World (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1974), p. 13.
[^2] In Conference Report, Apr. 1973, p. 178; emphasis added.
[^3] Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1971), p. 373.
