Robert L. Millet, Eye Single to the Glory of God: Reflections on the Cost of Discipleship ( 1991)

Chapter 10

IF THY RIGHT EYE OFFEND THEE

To come unto Christ is to forsake the carnal world. It is to put away from us all that defiles or detracts or deters. To the children of Israel in the days of Moses, Jehovah said, "Ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation" (Exo. 19:6). Indeed, since the beginning the Lord has sought to make of the people of earth "a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people," sons and daughters who would "shew forth the praises of him who hath called [them] out of darkness into his marvellous light" (1 Pet. 2:9). In order to be holy, however, the Saints were and are required to separate themselves from the ways of the world. "Go ye out from among the wicked. Save yourselves" (D&C 38:42), the Almighty pleads. That is, "Go ye out from Babylon. Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord" (D&C 133:5).

Anciently, those responsible for the handling and upkeep of sacred things, such as the Levites who assisted the priests in temple services, were expected to sanctify themselves, to see to it that they had clean hands and a pure heart. In our day, those who bear the priesthood, who, for example, attend to the sacrament, administer to the sick, baptize or confirm, labor in behalf of the living and the dead in holy temples—all such surely "bear the vessels of the Lord" and are expected to live in a manner that would in no way block or impede the flow of the Spirit of the Lord to those in whose behalf they minister. In addition, those who have received the witness of the Spirit as to the truthfulness of this great latter-day work, who have enjoyed the gifts and powers of the Holy Ghost, and who have the unspeakable blessing of having living prophets and apostles in their midst—these also are counseled to be careful how they receive that which is sacred.

"Therefore, thou art blessed from henceforth that bear the keys of the kingdom given unto you; which kingdom is coming forth for the last time.

"Verily I say unto you, the keys of this kingdom shall never be taken from you [Joseph Smith], while thou art in the world, neither in the world to come;

"Nevertheless, through you shall the oracles [revelations] be given to another, yea, even unto the church.

"And all they who receive the oracles of God, let them beware how they hold them lest they are accounted as a light thing, and are brought under condemnation thereby, and stumble and fall when the storms descend, and the winds blow, and the rains descend, and beat upon their house" (D&C 90:2-5; emphasis added).

In the Sermon on the Mount, Jesus taught that "if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out and cast it from thee; for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into hell. Or if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off and cast it from thee; for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into hell." And then the Savior explained himself: "And now this I speak, a parable concerning your sins; wherefore, cast them from you, that ye may not be hewn down and cast into the fire" (JST, Matt. 5:32-34; emphasis added). Later the Master reemphasized this principle when he said: "If thy hand or thy foot offend thee, cut it off and cast it from thee; for it is better for thee to enter into life halt or maimed, rather than having two hands or two feet to be cast into everlasting fire. And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out and cast it from thee. . . . And a man's hand is his friend, and his foot, also; and a man's eye, are they of his own household" (JST, Matt. 18:7-9; emphasis added).

In a literal sense, we would be better off not having a mouth than having one that uttered blasphemies, or bore false witness, or was a degrading influence to others. It would be better not to have feet that are swift to run to mischief or hands that shed innocent blood. But the Lord of Life is speaking not in literal terms but in metaphoric terms of the need to rid ourselves of the elements in our personality or our associations that might dilute our discipleship. Just as it is excruciatingly painful to pluck out an eye, so it is painful to excise sin from our souls. Just as having a hand or a foot cut off is terrible agony, so also is it extremely difficult to sever those associations that hinder more than help. If in the process of attempting to help lift one another's burdens, we find ourselves burdened by the same sins or difficulties, we need to lift ourselves out of the situation. It is one thing to be a second-miler and quite another to accompany someone down the broad road to destruction.

In the Prophet Joseph Smith's inspired translation of Mark's Gospel, we find the Savior's explanation of this requirement of discipleship elucidated even more. Here we see that institutionally (as a Church), as well as individually, it is necessary to maintain the sanctity of the temple of God and for individual members to be guided and safeguarded by a personal witness and commitment.

"Therefore, if thy hand offend thee, cut it off; or if thy brother offend thee and confess not and forsake not, he shall be cut off. It is better for thee to enter into life maimed, than having two hands, to go into hell.

"For it is better for thee to enter into life without thy brother, than for thee and thy brother to be cast into hell; into the fire that never shall be quenched, where their worm [torment, agony] dieth not, and the fire is not quenched.

"And again, if thy foot offend thee, cut it off; for he that is thy standard, by whom thou walkest, if he become a transgressor, he shall be cut off.

"It is better for thee, to enter halt into life, than having two feet to be cast into hell; into the fire that never shall be quenched.

"Therefore, let every man stand or fall, by himself, and not for another; or not trusting another" (JST, Mark 9:40-44; emphasis added).

Truly, "it is upon the rock of our Redeemer, who is Christ, the Son of God, that ye must build your foundation; that when the devil shall send forth his mighty winds, yea, his shafts in the whirlwind, yea, when all his hail and his mighty storm shall beat upon you, it shall have no power over you to drag you down to the gulf of misery and endless wo, because of the rock upon which ye are built, which is a sure foundation, a foundation whereon if men build they cannot fall" (Hel. 5:12).

Disciples are called to walk and live a disciplined way of life. Theirs is not a sterile asceticism, nor a rigidness and inflexibility born of fanaticism. Rather, their task is to seek to remain aloof from the elements of a fallen world that loosen our hold on eternal verities. As a Christian soldier, he clothes himself in "the whole armor of God" (Eph. 6:11-18; D&C 27:15-18); she learns to "touch not the unclean thing" (2 Cor. 6:14). In our day the Lord spoke: "Behold, I, the Lord, who was crucified for the sins of the world, give unto you a commandment that you shall forsake the world" (D&C 53:2). Disciples live in the world. They seek to better the world by their presence, but they also seek the rewards of a better world.
