Robert L. Millet, Eye Single to the Glory of God: Reflections on the Cost of Discipleship ( 1991)

Chapter 11

LET NOT THE LEFT HAND KNOW

The call to discipleship is a call to a higher righteousness. The Saints are asked to put off the natural man, put away the toys of a telestial world, and grow up in the Lord. They are summoned to be obedient, to keep the commandments, to manifest "by a godly walk and conversation that they are worthy" of membership in the Church and kingdom of God (D&C 20:69). They covenant to take upon them the sacred name of Jesus Christ, to bear the same with fidelity and devotion, and to behave as becomes Christians. In short, they covenant before God and man to see to it that their actions evidence their Christian commitment. Disciples are expected to have clean hands.

But there is more. Life in Christ is more than correct behavior, more than appropriate actions, more than what we do. It is being. It is what we are. True disciples seek that sanctifying influence that derives from the Holy Spirit, so that they come to do the right things for the right reasons. Life in Christ is characterized by pure attitudes, motives, and desires. Disciples are expected to have pure hearts. The Master thus taught:

"Verily, verily, I say that I would that ye should do alms [good deeds, service, assistance] unto the poor; but take heed that ye do not your alms before men to be seen of them; otherwise ye have no reward of your Father who is in heaven.

"Therefore, when ye shall do your alms do not sound a trumpet before you, as will hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, that they may have glory of men. Verily I say unto you, they have their reward.

"But when thou doest alms let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doeth;

"That thine alms may be in secret; and thy Father who seeth in secret, himself shall reward thee openly" (3 Ne. 13:1-4).

We might suppose that service of any kind has merit. There is, however, a spiritual motivation that impels us to righteous deeds, which sanctifies giver and receiver. When the doers of the deed are single in their intent; when the givers focus far more on the one to be assisted than on their own comfort or appearance; when the alm, the offering is made wholly for the blessing and good of the receiver, then permanent and lasting good is accomplished and those involved know that the Lord is pleased.

Service that is self-serving is something less than service. Though we may not be evil individuals, yet to do good to be seen or noticed or heard, is certainly less than noble and may be symptomatic of inner evil. For "God hath said a man being evil cannot do that which is good; for if he offereth a gift, or prayeth unto God, except he shall do it with real intent it profiteth him nothing. For behold, it is not counted unto him for righteousness. For behold, . . . it is counted unto him the same as if he had retained the gift" (Moro. 7:6-8; emphasis added). A person who does good to be seen of others already has, in the words of Christ, the reward: the praise or esteem of the observers. The unspoken part of the Master's poignant warning is essentially: "And let not such a person expect a reward hereafter!" In warning of the importance of pure motives, Elder Dallin H. Oaks has written: "Priestcraft is the sin committed by the combination of a good act—such as preaching or teaching the gospel—and a bad motive. The act may be good and visible, but the sin is in the motive. On earth, the wrong motive may be known only to the actor, but in heaven it is always known to God." [^1]

In exhorting his followers to see to it that their motive for religious observance—specifically public prayer—was noble and appropriate, Jesus said: "When thou prayest thou shalt not do as the hypocrites, for they love to pray, standing in the synagogues and in the corners of the streets, that they may be seen of men. Verily, I say unto you, they have their reward" (3 Ne. 13:5). It would seem that of all things, our pleadings and petitions to the Almighty should be free of sham or pretense, void of the desire to impress others. The prophet Zenos, as a part of a plain but powerful prayer to God, provides a touching example of communion with the Infinite:

"Thou art merciful, O God, for thou hast heard my prayer, even when I was in the wilderness; yea, thou wast merciful when I prayed concerning those who were mine enemies, and thou didst turn them to me.

"Yea, O God, and thou wast merciful unto me when I did cry unto thee in my field; when I did cry unto thee in my prayer, and thou didst hear me.

"And again, O God, when I did turn to my house thou didst hear me in my prayer.

"And when I did turn unto my closet, O Lord, and prayed unto thee, thou didst hear me.

"Yea, thou art merciful unto thy children when they cry unto thee, to be heard of thee and not of men, and thou wilt hear them" (Alma 33:4-8; emphasis added).

The Prophet Joseph Smith understood this principle clearly. His petitions were fervent, his motives pure, and the blessings of heaven thereby regular. Daniel Tyler, a young associate of the Prophet, recalled a particular occasion:

"At the time William Smith and others rebelled against the Prophet at Kirtland, I attended a meeting . . . where Joseph presided. Entering the school house a little before the meeting opened and gazing upon the man of God, I perceived sadness in his countenance and tears trickling down his cheeks. A few moments later a hymn was sung and he opened the meeting by prayer. Instead of facing the audience, however, he turned his back and bowed upon his knees, facing the wall. This, I suppose, was done to hide his sorrow and tears.

"I had heard men and women pray—especially the former—from the most ignorant, both as to letters and intellect, to the most learned and eloquent. But never until then had I heard a man address his Maker as though He was present listening as a kind father would listen to the sorrows of a dutiful child. Joseph was at that time unlearned, but that prayer, which was to a considerable extent in behalf of those who accused him of having gone astray and fallen into sin, was that the Lord would forgive them and open their eyes that they might see aright. That prayer, I say, to my humble mind, partook of the learning and eloquence of heaven. There was no ostentation, no raising of the voice as by enthusiasm, but a plain conversational tone, as a man would address a present friend. It appeared to me as though, in case the veil were taken away, I could see the Lord standing facing His humblest of all servants I had ever seen. It was the crowning of all the prayers I ever heard." [^2]

Our prayers are to God, not to men. Our yearnings for divine assistance are addressed to the Man of Holiness, not to unholy and finite men and women. Too often, as the Savior taught, those who trust "in themselves that they [are] righteous" do not enjoy the peace and ratifying seal of the Lord's acceptance upon either their prayers or their performances (see Luke 18:9-14). The esteem and approbation of the present world cannot bestow those silent but certain honors that will come in the Savior's due time to the pure in heart.

What, then, is the duty of the developing disciple? What does a man or a woman do whose motives are not absolutely pure? In short, what of many of us who hold membership in the Church of Jesus Christ? Do we sit back and avoid deeds of service because our desires are not yet sanctified? Do we refrain from home or visiting teaching, for example, because our motivation is presently clouded more by the spirit of inspection than of expectation and covenant? Certainly not. We have duties to perform, work to do in order to bear off the kingdom of God triumphant. And Zion—as well as its municipals, its citizenry—is being established "in process of time" (Moses 7:21). Simply stated, disciples do not wait to be transformed before they proceed in the work of the ministry. Missionaries do not wait in their apartments for an outpouring of the Spirit before they approach the first door. Rather, they seek to purify themselves from sin, pray intently for divine direction and power, and then proceed confidently that the needed endowment will be forthcoming when the Lord sees fit to send it.

The quest for a pure heart is the quest for pure motives and desires. Surely one of the most significant requests disciples make of their Redeemer is for a cleansing and purifying of motives, a greater desire to do the right things for the right reason. To have a situation wherein the left hand does not know what the right hand is doing is to be in a condition where there is no ulterior motivation, no hidden agenda, no selfish purposes for our actions. In one sense, then, the challenge of disciples in this regard is to rise above self, above self-regard, above self-inspection. Dietrich Bonhoeffer, in addressing a paradox in the Sermon on the Mount—the command to "let your light so shine before men" (Matt. 5:16) versus the command to "take heed that ye do not your alms before men" (Matt. 6:1)—wrote:

"How is this paradox to be resolved? The first question to ask is: From whom are we to hide the visibility of our discipleship? Certainly not from other men, for we are told to let them see our light. No. We are to hide it from ourselves. Our task is simply to keep on following, looking only to our Leader who goes on before, taking no notice of ourselves or of what we are doing. We must be unaware of our own righteousness, and see it only insofar as we look unto Jesus; then it will seem not extraordinary, but quite ordinary and natural. . . . The Christian is a light unto the world, not because of any quality of his own, but only because he follows Christ and looks solely to him. . . .

"All that the follower of Jesus has to do is to make sure that his obedience, following and love are entirely spontaneous and unpremeditated. If you do good, you must not let your left hand know what your right hand is doing, you must be quite unconscious of it. Otherwise you are simply displaying your own virtue, and not that which has its source in Jesus Christ. Christ's virtue, the virtue of discipleship, can only be accomplished so long as you are entirely unconscious of what you are doing. The genuine work of love is always a hidden work. . . . "Thus hiddenness has its counterpart in manifestation. For there is nothing hidden that shall not be revealed. For our God is a God unto whom all hearts are open, and from whom no secrets are hid. God will show us the hidden and make it visible. Manifestation is the appointed reward for hiddenness, and the only question is where we shall receive it and who will give it us. If we want publicity in the eyes of men we have our reward. In other words, it is immaterial whether the publicity we want is the grosser kind, which all can see, or the more subtle variety which we can only see ourselves. If the left hand knows what the right hand is doing, if we become conscious of our hidden virtue, we are forging our own reward, instead of that which God had intended to give us in his own good time." [^3]

To repeat, we are never justified in doing the wrong thing or ignoring the work to be done simply because we are not properly motivated. Rather, the Saints are instructed again and again to seek the Spirit, to ask for, live for, and qualify for the gifts and fruits of the Spirit, which characterize the sons and daughters of Jesus Christ (see Gal. 5:22-23; D&C 46). As that Spirit begins to live in us, to remake us, we come to love the things we before hated and to hate the things we before loved. Because the Spirit is His Spirit, the works likewise become his works. "Ye are built upon my gospel; therefore ye shall call whatsoever things ye do call, in my name; therefore if ye call upon the Father, for the church, if it be in my name the Father will hear you; and if it so be that the church is built upon my gospel then will the Father show forth his own works in it" (3 Ne. 27:9-10). Our service thereby is centered in Christ, our eye single to his glory.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] In Conference Report, Apr. 1973, p. 178.
[^2] In Hyrum and Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1974), pp. 51-52; emphasis added.
[^3] The Cost of Discipleship, rev. ed. (New York: Macmillan, 1963), pp. 176-78; emphasis added.
