Robert L. Millet, Eye Single to the Glory of God: Reflections on the Cost of Discipleship ( 1991)

Chapter 12

REMEMBER THE POOR AND THE NEEDY

Early in this dispensation the Lord delivered a profound truth in few words: "It is not given," he said, "that one man should possess that which is above another, wherefore the world lieth in sin" (D&C 49:20). More than any other record or literary work, the Book of Mormon is a harsh reminder of the potential perils of prosperity, the evils of inequality, and the sin and sadness of systems in society which divide the children of God according to their material means or their chances for learning. On the other hand, the Book of Mormon prophets are quick to point out the sublime social order that prevails when individuals acknowledge their blessings with humility before God, seek out and see to the needs of the less fortunate, and strive tirelessly to eradicate differences between people and nations. Disciples of Christ, like their Master, cannot rest while others suffer."And remember in all things the poor and the needy," comes the reminder, "the sick and the afflicted, for he that doeth not these things, the same is not my disciple" (D&C 52:40).

The care of the poor is a sign that the Spirit of the Lord is working among the Saints of God. About ninety years before the birth of Jesus Christ, a tremendous polarizing took place among the people of Nephi between those who were committed to the work of the Church and those who were not. Great numbers left the gospel path because of the hardness of their hearts, while others remained true and faithful to their trusts and enjoyed the sweet fruits of life in Christ. Mormon records:

"And they did impart of their substance, every man according to that which he had, to the poor, and the needy, and the sick, and the afflicted; and they did not wear costly apparel, yet they were neat and comely.

"And thus they did establish the affairs of the church; and thus they began to have continual peace again, notwithstanding all their persecutions.

"And now, because of the steadiness of the church they began to be exceedingly rich, having abundance of all things whatsoever they stood in need. . . . "And thus, in their prosperous circumstances, they did not send away any who were naked, or that were hungry, or that were athirst, or that were sick, or that had not been nourished; and they did not set their hearts upon riches; therefore they were liberal to all, both old and young, both bond and free, both male and female, whether out of the church or in the church, having no respect to persons as to those who stood in need" (Alma 1:27-30).

The care of the poor is more than a duty, far more than a Christian obligation. It is a royal opportunity to live the "royal law," namely, "Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself" (James 2:8). As we have suggested earlier, when such is undertaken in the true spirit of fellowship, both giver and receiver are sanctified by the effort. King Benjamin taught his people that after a person has obtained a remission of sins, that the key to retaining that justified state from day to day is to care for the poor. Note his words: "And now, for the sake of . . . retaining a remission of your sins from day to day, that ye may walk guiltless before God—I would that ye should impart of your substance to the poor, every man according to that which he hath, such as feeding the hungry, clothing the naked, visiting the sick and administering to their relief, both spiritually and temporally, according to their wants" (Mosiah 4:26).

No person walks the path of life blameless. Jesus only was perfect, in the sense that he committed no sin and took no detours. But the Lord promises his disciples that if they will look to the needs of others and offer themselves willingly as undershepherds—seeking at the same time with all their hearts to remain free from the taints of the world—he will remit their sins, pronounce them innocent at the last day, and welcome them into his presence. We are told, for example, that those who embark in the service of God, and who do so with all their heart, might, mind, and strength—we are told that they shall stand blameless before God at the last day (D&C 4:1-2). It is not that such persons would never have committed sin, or even that they would have been so busy in doing good that they were unable to do so. Rather, as an act of his mercy and grace, in combination with the good works and deeds of his disciples, the Savior justifies them, exonerates them from their misdeeds.

In a modern revelation we learn that Jesus did not receive of the fulness of the glory of his Father at the first but progressed line upon line, grace for grace, and from grace to grace. That is, he received additional strength and power from the Father as he gave himself in service to his fellowmen (grace for grace). Further, he developed from one spiritual level to a greater, until in the resurrection he gained the fulness (from grace to grace). After having described his own pathway to godhood, the Lord declared: "I give unto you these sayings that you may understand and know how to worship, and know what you worship, that you may come unto the Father in my name, and in due time receive of his fulness. For if you keep my commandments you shall receive of his fulness, and be glorified in me as I am in the Father; therefore, I say unto you, you shall receive grace for grace" (D&C 93:19-20). We learn from this passage that the essence of true worship of our Savior is emulation, imitation of the deeds he performed, of his charitable service in behalf of our brothers and sisters. In this sense, we worship him as we serve and care for them. We come to the Father and grow in spiritual graces just as he did—through service. Indeed, charity prevents a multitude of sins (1 Pet. 4:8).

And yet, given that there are millions of hungry and naked and destitute souls in the world, how are disciples to live with themselves? How are we to handle the fact that there is only so much we can do, only so many we can assist and still manage to care for our own? King Benjamin advised wisely that "all these things"—our efforts to care for the needy—must be "done in wisdom and order; for it is not requisite that a man should run faster than he has strength. And again, it is expedient that he should be diligent, that thereby he might win the prize; therefore, all things must be done in order" (Mosiah 4:27). If every family contributed regularly to every needy cause, there would be insufficient money for the family to live. If every Christian man or woman gave themselves consistently to every project designed to alleviate suffering, there would be no time to earn a living or care for their own. True disciples pray for discernment and for discretion. They seek to be as generous and giving as is appropriate and practical. To begin with, they pay their tithes and contribute generously to the fast offerings of the Church. They visit and care and pray for those assigned to their care. And they are sensitive to friends and neighbors—within or without the Church—who are in need. Beyond that, Christians seek to do what they can, knowing, as Benjamin taught, that we are all beggars before the Lord. Disciples who honestly cannot contribute say in their heart: "I give not because I have not, but if I had I would give" (Mosiah 4:19-20, 24). Even when we are not in a position to contribute dramatically to the alleviation of hunger in Africa or India, for example, there is still something we can do, something vital for those who aspire to discipleship. We can avoid as we would a plague the tendency to be indifferent, to ignore the problem because it is not in our own backyards. Further, we can teach our families or friends by precept and by example to use wisely the food and other resources we have been blessed to have. Even if we just become aware of suffering and pain, our heightened sensitivity helps us deal more tenderly, more charitably, with sufferers within our own limited reach. At least those are starting points.

Anciently the Lord "called his people Zion, because they were of one heart and one mind, and dwelt in righteousness; and there was no poor among them" (Moses 7:18). We remember that King Benjamin directed his people to care for the needs of the poor, both temporally and spiritually. Not all of those who are poor are financially insolvent. Some are poor spiritually, heavy with sin. Some are poor emotionally, burdened down with the cares of family or distraught over personal struggles or broken relationships. The disciple of Christ is called upon to be aware and attuned to such needs. "The greatest miracles I see today," President Harold B. Lee stated, "are not necessarily the healing of sick bodies, but the greatest miracles I see are the healing of sick souls, those who are sick in soul and spirit and are downhearted and distraught, on the verge of nervous breakdowns. We are reaching out to all such, because they are precious in the sight of the Lord, and we want no one to feel that they are forgotten." [^1] The disciple of Christ longs and labors for the day when all will be converted fully to the Lord; when no contentions or disputations exist to divide and scar the spirit; when men and women—made free and partakers of the heavenly gift—deal justly with one another, all because of the love of God which exists in the hearts of the people (see 4 Nephi 1:1-16). In that day Zion will be redeemed and the earth shall rest.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), pp. 240-41.
