Robert L. Millet, Eye Single to the Glory of God: Reflections on the Cost of Discipleship ( 1991)

Chapter 13

IF YE HAVE LOVE ONE TO ANOTHER

One dramatic evidence of apostasy in the world today is a growing sense of indifference toward and among the sons and daughters of God. Man's inhumanity to man is one of the signs of the times, the fulfillment of prophecy. "Because iniquity shall abound," the Savior taught before his death, "the love of men shall wax cold" (JS-H 1:30; compare D&C 45:27). "It is one evidence," Joseph Smith the Prophet explained, "that men are unacquainted with the principles of godliness to behold the contraction of affectionate feelings and lack of charity in the world." On the other hand, those who come unto Christ become as Christ. They partake of his divine nature, receive his attributes, and come to love as he loves. "The nearer we get to our heavenly Father," the modern seer went on to say, "the more we are disposed to look with compassion on perishing souls; we feel that we want to take them upon our shoulders, and cast their sins behind our backs." [^1] Disciples of Christ seek to acquire the love of Christ, for "love is one of the chief characteristics of Deity, and ought to be manifested by those who aspire to be the sons of God." [^2]

At the Last Supper, our Savior—surely heavy with anticipation in regard to the coming crisis in Gethsemane—sought to unite the Twelve. He taught them pure doctrine. He focused on matters of substance. He pleaded with them (and with the Father in their behalf) to be one. He said: "A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another." A new commandment? Had not Jesus taught them to love before? Had not Jehovah spoken of this transcendent truth over the millennia? A new commandment? Certainly not new in the sense that it was being introduced for the first time. In the words of Elder Bruce R. McConkie, the Lord "desired to emphasize anew the eternal importance of the law of love."

"Whenever the Lord has given the fulness of his gospel to any people, from the day of Adam to the present hour, it has always included the command that his saints love one another. Even under the law of Moses, the divine command was, 'thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself' (Lev. 19:18), and Jesus himself had gone so far as to say, 'Love your enemies' (Matt. 5:44). And yet when he later brought forward the law of love, giving it an entirely new emphasis and force, his words were, 'A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another' (John 13:34).

"There was nothing new about this law of love except that it was being restated anew; it was coming again—newly, as it were—to disciples of whom it had been expected all along." [^3]

John the Apostle later wrote a message that was in harmony with what had been given him: "Brethren, I write a new commandment unto you, but it is the same commandment which ye had from the beginning. The old commandment is the word which ye have heard from the beginning. Again, a new commandment I write unto you, which thing was of old ordained of God; and is true in him, and in you: because the darkness is past, and the true light now shineth" (JST, 1 Jn. 2:7-8). "By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another" (John 13:35).

Charity is the "pure love of Christ" (Moro. 7:47). To have charity is to love Christ purely and to love purely, just as Christ does. These two are certainly not unrelated, and, to some degree, we love and serve others more naturally when we love and honor the Lord. In the first sense, to have charity is to feel a profound sense of love for the Lord, to be eager to acknowledge his hand in all things, to "sing the song of redeeming love" (Alma 5:14). President George F. Richards spoke once of having seen Christ in a dream: "He spoke no word to me, but my love for him was such that I have not words to explain. I know that no mortal man can love the Lord as I experienced that love for the Savior unless God reveals it to him." [^4] Thus, as President Ezra Taft Benson observed, "To love God with all your heart, soul, mind, and strength is all-consuming and all encompassing. . . . The breadth, depth, and height of this love of God extend into every facet of one's life. Our desires, be they spiritual or temporal, should be rooted in a love of the Lord." [^5] Ethical deeds, works of faith, acts of kindness towards others—these are so much more effective and pure when grounded in the love of Deity.

It goes without saying that disciples of Christ ought to love one another. They have in common those things that matter most in life. Their view of reality ("things as they really are"—Jacob 4:13), their goals and ambitions, their hopes and dreams for here and hereafter—all these things they share with members of the Church far and wide. They are bonded together, clothed in the bond of charity, that mantle "which is the bond of perfectness and peace" (D&C 88:125). Disciples of Christ enjoy the gift that is the greatest gift available to men and women in mortality—the gift of the Holy Ghost. Love, or charity, is a gift of the Spirit, and those who cultivate that Spirit receive from time to time that heavenly endowment Mormon described as "the pure love of Christ."

The expression of the love of God is not to be limited, however, to the household of faith (D&C 121:45). We have a duty beyond the fold as well, and the Spirit, which is the source of pure love, expands our vision to see and feel as we ought. Joseph Smith taught: "There is a love from God that should be exercised toward those of our faith, who walk uprightly, which is peculiar to itself, but it is without prejudice; it also gives scope to the mind, which enables us to conduct ourselves with greater liberality towards all that are not of our faith, than what they exercise towards one another. These principles approximate nearer to the mind of God, because it is like God, or Godlike." [^6] "A man filled with the love of God," the Prophet said on a later occasion, "is not content with blessing his family alone, but ranges through the whole world, anxious to bless the whole human race." [^7] President Ezra Taft Benson has taught that "we must develop a love for people. Our hearts must go out to them in the pure love of the gospel, in a desire to lift them, to build them up, to point them to a higher, finer, life and eventually to exaltation in the celestial kingdom of God." [^8]

Service is absolutely essential if we desire to follow our Lord and Master. But that service is lasting and life-changing when it is motivated by pure love. Charity is something which must be bestowed from above; it is a gift, one which must be sought and acquired by spiritual means. "Wherefore, my beloved brethren," Mormon implored, "pray unto the Father with all the energy of heart, that ye may be filled with this love, which he hath bestowed upon all who are true followers of his Son, Jesus Christ; that ye may become the sons of God; that when he shall appear we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is; that we may have this hope; that we may be purified even as he is pure" (Moro. 7:48). It will not be sufficient to be with the Lord when he comes; the disciple desires to be like him. We will not only be righteous as he is; we will love as he does. The scope and sweeping perspective that charity grants, the spirit of liberality toward all, will have consumed and transformed the people of God, such that they feel humble but confident to dwell with him.

In a world that has lost its focus, in a time when men and women refuse to bridle their passions and thus revoke the powers of godliness within them, in an age when angst and hopelessness cloud the vision of so many, the Savior and Prince of Peace offers relief. Were it not for the promises and precious gifts of God, we might fear and despair. But we need not be startled by what man can do, for perfect love casts out fear (Moro. 8:16; 1 Jn. 4:8)—fear of failure, fear of rejection, fear of finding ourselves. The path of the disciple is the path of peace, the path of hope, the path of rest. Mormon wrote to the Saints of his day: "Wherefore, I would speak unto you that are of the church, that are the peaceable followers of Christ, and that have obtained a sufficient hope by which ye can enter into the rest of the Lord, from this time henceforth until ye shall rest with him in heaven" (Moro. 7:3). The peaceable followers of Christ, filled with love for God and man, have entered into the rest of the Lord; they possess "a settled conviction of the truth." Entering the rest of the Lord in this life consists of "entering the knowledge and love of God, having faith in his purpose and in his plan." This state is a rest "from doubt, from fear, from apprehension of danger, rest from the religious turmoil of the world." [^9]

Mormon explained that "the remission of sins bringeth meekness, and lowliness of heart; and because of meekness and lowliness of heart cometh the visitation of the Holy Ghost, which Comforter filleth with hope and perfect love, which love endureth by diligence unto prayer, until the end shall come, when all the saints shall dwell with God" (Moro. 8:26). The disciple who enters the rest of the Lord in this life is preparing for the glorious rest to come hereafter, the fulness of the glory of God (D&C 84:24). Alma thus encouraged the people of Ammonihah to "be led by the Holy Spirit, becoming humble, meek, submissive, patient, full of love and all long-suffering; having faith on the Lord; having a hope that ye shall receive eternal life; having the love of God always in your hearts, that ye may be lifted up at the last day and enter into his rest" (Alma 13:28-29). That is perhaps related to what the Prophet Joseph Smith meant when he spoke of the spiritual safeguard of possessing charity: "Many of us have gone at the command of the Lord in defiance of everything evil," he said, "and obtained blessings unspeakable, in consequence of which our names are sealed in the Lamb's book of life, for the Lord has spoken it." Then he added: "Until we have perfect love we are liable to fall and when we have a testimony that our names are sealed in the Lamb's book of life we have perfect love and then it is impossible for false Christs to deceive us." [^10]

Love is the process. Love is the product. It is the heart and core of discipleship.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Ensign, May 1990, p. 6.
[^2] "Follow the Brethren," Speeches of the Year (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1965), pp. 4-5; emphasis added.
[^3] Ensign, May 1990, p. 7.
[^4] Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1971), pp. 285-86; emphasis added.
[^5] Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988), p. 349.
[^6] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 147.
[^7] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 174.
[^8] 8. Come unto Christ (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1983), p. 96.
[^9] 9. Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1971), pp. 126, 58.
[^10] 10. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 9.
