Robert L. Millet, Eye Single to the Glory of God: Reflections on the Cost of Discipleship ( 1991)

Chapter 14

OUT OF SMALL THINGS

The lengthy trek to Zion is accomplished one step at a time. Just as we do not generally bound into the celestial kingdom after only a brief mortal experience and testing, so also we do not qualify to be called a disciple of Christ by monumental moves alone. Though in the overall scheme of things, once in a great while we as Christians may be called upon to lay down our lives in the cause of truth, far more often we are expected to live our religion daily, to perform those quiet and simple acts that over a lifetime forge an eternal character. The giant leap to godhood is undertaken by one small step at a time.

"We observe vast, sweeping world events," Elder M. Russell Ballard remarked; "however, we must remember that the purposes of the Lord in our personal lives generally are fulfilled through the small and simple things, and not the momentous and spectacular." [^1] That was a lesson Alma sought to teach to his son Helaman. In emphasizing the importance of the plates of brass in the dealings of the Nephites, Alma remarked that "they should be kept and handed down from one generation to another, and be kept and preserved by the hand of the Lord until they should go forth unto every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, that they shall know of the mysteries contained therein." It may be that Alma then focused upon the matter of simply taking good care of these records, for he said: "And now behold, if they are kept they must retain their brightness; yea, and they will retain their brightness; yea, and also shall all the plates which do contain that which is holy writ." Whether the word brightness refers to their spiritual significance or to their physical condition—being free from tarnish and corrosion, for example—we cannot tell. But in principle, at least, the latter meaning certainly has application here. "Now ye may suppose that this is foolishness in me; but behold I say unto you, that by small and simple things are great things brought to pass; and small means in many instances doth confound the wise. And the Lord God doth work by means to bring about his great and eternal purposes; and by very small means the Lord doth confound the wise and bringeth about the salvation of many souls" (Alma 37:4-7). It is as though Alma were saying: "It may not seem too significant at this point, but the physical upkeep of these records—what may seem small to some—is vital. They have been preserved in order to be read and studied, and their influence will thus be great."

Later in the same chapter Alma directed Helaman's attention to another matter—the Liahona, or compass, given by God to Lehi—to reinforce that underlying lesson. "There cannot any man work after the manner of so curious [skillful] a workmanship. And behold, it was prepared to show unto our fathers the course which they should travel in the wilderness. And it did work for them according to their faith in God . . . therefore they had this miracle, and also many other miracles wrought by the power of God, day by day." Thus the miraculous was brought to pass through the simple exercise of faith. "Nevertheless, because those miracles were worked by small means it did show unto them marvelous works." Alma then counseled Helaman to exercise simple faith in God, give heed to the words of Christ, that the people might eventually inherit "a far better land of promise," the celestial kingdom (Alma 37:38-45).

The principle that great things flow from small things was likewise taught by Nephi centuries earlier in regard to the Liahona: "I, Nephi, beheld the pointers which were in the ball, that they did work according to the faith and diligence and heed which we did give unto them. And there was also written upon them a new writing, which was plain to be read, which did give us understanding concerning the ways of the Lord; and it was written and changed from time to time, according to the faith and diligence which we gave unto it. And thus we see that by small means the Lord can bring about great things" (1 Ne. 16:28-29).

Disciples are not obsessed with the marvelous and mountain-moving works to be done; rather, they concentrate upon the task at hand, resting assured that small steps contribute eventually to the realization of the great. An experience from the Old Testament illustrates this principle beautifully. Naaman, a Syrian military leader and a good man, was stricken with leprosy. A young Israelite maid, a servant of Naaman's wife, knew of her master's condition. She also knew that deliverance from his horrid condition was possible. "She said unto her mistress, Would God my lord were with the prophet [Elisha] that is in Samaria! for he would recover him of the leprosy." Naaman finally came "with his horses and with his chariot, and stood at the door of the house of Elisha. And Elisha sent a messenger unto him, saying, Go and wash in [the Jordan River] seven times, and thy flesh shall come again to thee, and thou shalt be clean." Naaman's pride was wounded on two counts. First, why couldn't Elisha take the time to come out of the house, meet him, and then heal him by the laying on of hands? Second, Naaman reasoned: What is it about the Jordan River? Why that filthy place? "Are not Arbana and Pharpar, rivers of Damascus, better than all the waters of Israel? may I not wash in them, and be clean? So he turned and went away in a rage." And then the timeless lesson. The sensitive servants of Naaman asked the question of the ages: "If the prophet had bid thee do some great thing, wouldest thou not have done it? how much rather then, when he saith to thee, Wash and be clean?" No doubt convicted by the poignance and spirit of truthfulness in their words, Naaman humbled himself. "Then he went down, and dipped himself seven times in Jordan, according to the saying of the man of God: and his flesh came again like unto the flesh of a little child, and he was clean" (2 Kgs. 5:1-14).

Well might we ask: If the Prophet Joseph had asked me to journey to Missouri, would I have gone? If the Lord had called me to serve as an apostle, would I have accepted? If I were asked to tend the children or grandchildren of the members of the First Presidency, would I hesitate? If I had been bidden to attend the School of the Prophets, would I take along my scriptures, study and prepare ahead of time, and attend regularly? If my call to serve as a home or visiting teacher had come to me through an open vision, would I accept? Would I be faithful? "You can put it down in your little black book," Elder Boyd K. Packer has warned us, "that if you will not be loyal in the small things, you will not be loyal in the large things. If you will not respond to the so-called insignificant or menial tasks which need to be performed in the Church and Kingdom, there will be no opportunity for service in the so-called greater challenges. A man who says he will sustain the President of the Church or the General Authorities, but cannot sustain his own bishop, is deceiving himself. The man who will not sustain the bishop of his ward and the president of his stake will not sustain the President of the Church." [^2]

"A series of seemingly small but incorrect choices," Elder M. Russell Ballard pointed out, "can become those little soul-destroying termites that eat away at the foundations of our testimony until, before we are aware, we may be brought near to spiritual and moral destruction." [^3] In a similar way, the small acts of kindness, the tiny deeds of Christian service, the silent but significant efforts to control our own thoughts and feelings—these are the simple things that build character and shape human destiny everlastingly. The world takes notice of the public accomplishments, the spectacular victories. But who knows of the private battles of the soul, thousands of them, waged and won by Abraham long before he passed his greatest test on Mount Moriah to become the friend of God? Who knows of the infinite struggles, the buffetings, the adversarial onslaughts faced and overcome by the sinless Son of Man in the Garden of the Oilpress, finished before his public victory over the grave on Golgotha? Truly, the "little things" form and shape the disciple of Christ.

President Joseph F. Smith offered an insight into the significance of the small things. "After all," he said, "to do well those things which God ordained to be the common lot of all mankind, is the truest greatness.

"To be a successful father or a successful mother is greater than to be a successful general or a successful statesman. One is universal and eternal greatness; the other is ephemeral. It is true that such secondary greatness may be added to that which we style commonplace; but when such secondary greatness is not added to that which is fundamental, it is merely an empty honor, and fades away from the common and universal good in life, even though it may find a place in the desultory pages of history. Our first care, after all, brings us back to that beautiful admonition of our Savior: 'Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you' (Matt. 6:33).

"We should never be discouraged in those daily tasks which God has ordained to the common lot of man. Each day's labor should be undertaken in a joyous spirit and with the thought and conviction that our happiness and eternal welfare depend upon doing well that which we ought to do, that which God has made it our duty to do. Many are unhappy because they imagine that they should be doing something unusual or something phenomenal. Some people would rather be the blossom of a tree and be admiringly seen than be an enduring part of the tree and live the commonplace life of the tree's existence.

"Let us not be trying," President Smith concluded, "to substitute an artificial life for the true one. He is truly happy who can see and appreciate the beauty with which God has adorned the commonplace things of life." [^4]

Christian disciples seek for and obtain perspective on life. Disciples come to know that despite present difficulties or current challenges, eternal life comes to those who proceed along the strait and narrow in unspectacular but steady fashion. "Wherefore, be not weary in well-doing, for ye are laying the foundation of a great work. And out of small things proceedeth that which is great. Behold, the Lord requireth the heart and a willing mind; and the willing and obedient shall eat the good of the land of Zion in these last days" (D&C 64:33-34).

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] George Q. Cannon, Juvenile Instructor, 15 Oct. 1896, p. 618.
[^2] Ensign, May 1990, pp. 25-26.
[^3] Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1971), pp. 116-17.
[^4] In Doctrines of the Restoration: Sermons and Writings of Bruce R. McConkie, ed. Mark L. McConkie (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1989), p. 232.
