Robert L. Millet, Eye Single to the Glory of God: Reflections on the Cost of Discipleship ( 1991)

Chapter 16

NO MAN BUILDETH A TOWER

Salvation is a gift. Disciples qualify for it, however, through applying the principle of sacrifice. Membership in the Church of Jesus Christ is a serious matter. Followers of the Christ, if they expect eventually to become as he is, must be willing to encounter hardship and pain and suffering, even as their Master did. There is a cost for discipleship.

"And it came to pass, that, as they went in the way, a certain man said unto him, Lord I will follow thee whithersoever thou goest" (Luke 9:57). Truly many people so say. "Lord, I would be with thee," they proclaim. "I would be a true follower." It is as though the Redeemer asks in retort: "Would you really? Do you know what such a life entails? Are you ready to engage the trials, the abuse, the desertion? Are you prepared to pay the price?" The account from Luke continues: "And Jesus said unto him, Foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests; but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head" (Luke 9:58). The call to follow is the call to face the stark realities of discipleship—the inconvenience, the impediments, the irony. The mother of James and John once approached the Savior in regard to the future status of her two sons. "She saith unto him, Grant that these my two sons may sit, the one on thy right hand, and the other on the left, in thy kingdom." Our Lord responded soberly: "Ye know not what ye ask." And then he posed the query that must and should echo in the hearts and minds of all who aspire to fellowship with the Son of Man: "Are ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of, and to be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?" (Matt. 20:20-22).

Jesus asked: "Which of you intending to build a tower, sitteth not down first, and counteth the cost, whether he have money to finish his work? Lest, unhappily, after he has laid the foundation and is not able to finish his work, all who behold, begin to mock him, saying, This man began to build, and was not able to finish. And this he said, signifying there should not any man follow him, unless he was able to continue" (JST, Luke 14:29-31; emphasis added). A Protestant theologian has written: "The Christian landscape is strewn with the wreckage of derelict, half-built towers—the ruins of those who began to build and were unable to finish. For thousands of people still ignore Christ's warning and undertake to follow him without first pausing to reflect on the cost of doing so. The result is the great scandal of Christendom today, so-called 'nominal Christianity.' In countries to which Christian civilization has spread, large numbers of people have covered themselves with a decent, but thin, veneer of Christianity. They have allowed themselves to become somewhat involved; enough to be respectable but not enough to be uncomfortable. Their religion is a great, soft cushion. It protects them from the hard unpleasantness of life, while changing its place and shape to suit their convenience. No wonder the cynics speak of hypocrites in the church and dismiss religion as escapism." [^1]

Another minister, addressing himself to the problems of a type of "easy-believism" in the world of evangelism, said: "Modern evangelism is preoccupied with decisions, statistics, aisle-walking, gimmicks, prefabricated presentations, pitches, emotional manipulation, and even intimidation. Its message is a cacophony of easy-believism and simplistic appeals. Unbelievers are told that if they invite Jesus into their hearts, accept Him as personal Savior, or believe the facts of the gospel, that's all there is to it. The aftermath is appalling failure, as seen in the lives of multitudes who have professed faith in Christ with no consequent impact on their behavior." [^2]

The cost of discipleship must be understood by converts. "Occasionally someone is attracted to the Church," Elder Boyd K. Packer observed, "because of our welfare program. They see material security. Our answer to them is: 'Yes, join the Church for that reason. We can use all of the help we can get. You will be called upon continually to bless and assist others.' Interesting how enthusiasm for baptism often fades away." [^3] The cost must also be understood by lifetime members, for the earnest investigator and the convert are not the only ones who will be called upon to erect towers of testimony. Nor are they the only ones required to enter the battleground of faith. "What king, going to make war against another king, sitteth not down first, and consulteth whether he be able with ten thousand, to meet him who cometh against him with twenty thousand. Or else, while the other is yet a great way off, he sendeth an embassage, and desireth conditions of peace." And then the Master's powerful precept: "So likewise, whosoever of you forsaketh not all that he hath he cannot be my disciple" (JST, Luke 14:32-34).

The word of truth is as sharp and powerful as a two-edged sword. It is no respecter of persons, nor does its cutting power stop short of tender and dear relations. "Think not that I am come to send peace on earth," the Prince of Peace declared; "I came not to send peace, but a sword. For I am come to set a man at variance against his father, and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter in law against her mother in law. And a man's foes shall be they of his own household. He that loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of me: and he that loveth son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me" (Matt. 10: 34-37). There is a pathetic irony in the Savior's words. Surely no one wants families to be forever, joined and united, more than Jesus. No one wants father and mother, brother and sister, parents and children—families—to be close and at peace more than the Christ. And yet the Lord here highlights a less than pleasant point—that gospel living costs something, even occasionally the loss of family and friends. It may well result in division and variance.

Not all people in our day will receive the testimony of Jesus and the message of the Restoration nor will family members always support and sustain the loved one who chooses to follow his or her heart. Baptism into the Church may well be followed by resistance, by indifference, or even by persecution. Such is a painful and poignant reality. It is a heavy cost. With startling emphasis the Savior thus declared: "If any man come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, or husband, yea and his own life also; or in other words, is afraid to lay down his life for my sake; cannot be my disciple" (JST, Luke 14:26; emphasis added). President Gordon B. Hinckley related a touching story that illustrates dramatically the cost of discipleship.

"Mine has been the opportunity to meet many wonderful men and women in various parts of the world. A few of them have left an indelible impression upon me. One such was a naval officer from Asia, a brilliant young man who had been brought to the United States for advanced training. Some of his associates in the United States Navy, whose behavior had attracted him, shared with him at his request their religious beliefs. He was not a Christian, but he was interested. They told him of the Savior of the world, of Jesus born in Bethlehem, who gave his life for all mankind. They told him of the appearance of God, the Eternal Father, and the resurrected Lord to the boy Joseph Smith. They spoke of modern prophets. They taught him the gospel of the Master. The Spirit touched his heart, and he was baptized.

"He was introduced to me just before he was to return to his native land. We spoke of these things, and then I said, 'Your people are not Christians. You come from a land where Christians have had a difficult time. What will happen when you return home a Christian and, more particularly, a Mormon Christian?'

"His face clouded, and he replied, 'My family will be disappointed. I suppose they will cast me out. They will regard me as dead. As for my future and my career, I assume that all opportunity will be foreclosed against me.'

"I asked, 'Are you willing to pay so great a price for the gospel?'

"His dark eyes, moistened by tears, shone from his handsome brown face as he answered, 'It's true, isn't it?'

"Ashamed at having asked the question, I responded, 'Yes, it's true.'

"To which he replied, 'Then what else matters?' " [^4]

Joining and being a part of the true Church may not require martyrdom. It may not be followed by persecution or even rejection. But it might. Disciples must be willing to submit to whatever following the Master and the counsel of living oracles might entail. Regularly and consistently disciples will be asked to attend meetings and training sessions (and to support with time and patience loved ones who must do the same), to go on campouts, to work in canneries and on farms, and to contribute financially in tithes and offerings. We are called upon to visit and minister to ward or branch members, to clothe the naked and feed the hungry—in general, to lift and liberate and lighten the burdens of others, to be willing to be inconvenienced.

Eternal life, the glory of the celestial kingdom, life with God—these things cannot be had through living a life of ease. The cost of discipleship is not cheap, nor is the saving grace of Him who bought us with his blood to be reckoned as a little thing. "Cheap grace is grace without discipleship, grace without the cross, grace without Jesus Christ, living and incarnate. Costly grace is the treasure hidden in the field; for the sake of it a man will gladly go and sell all that he has. . . . It is costly because it costs a man his life, and it is grace because it gives a man the only true life. . . . Above all, it is costly because it cost God the life of his Son . . . and what has cost God much cannot be cheap for us." [^5] And yet the God of the ancients holds out to us the prize: "Verily I say unto you, There is no man that hath left house, or parents, or brethren, or wife, or children, for the kingdom of God's sake, who shall not receive manifold more in this present time, and in the world to come life everlasting" (Luke 18:29-30).

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Gospel Ideals (Salt Lake City: Improvement Era, 1953), pp. 34-35.
[^2] Cited in Spencer W. Kimball, The Miracle of Forgiveness (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1969), p. 105.
[^3] Mere Christianity (New York: Macmillan, 1952), pp. 164-65.
[^4] Cited in Come unto Christ (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1983), pp. 42-43.
[^5] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 349.
