Robert L. Millet, Eye Single to the Glory of God: Reflections on the Cost of Discipleship ( 1991)

Chapter 17

YE SHALL BE EVEN AS I AM

Fellowship with the Saints and a growing acquaintance with the Spirit should do more than build our understanding of theology. Belonging to the true Church and affiliating with those who have come out of the world should affect our hearts as much as or more than our minds. Religion is a thing of the heart, and the gospel of Jesus Christ has been restored to make of us new creatures, new creatures in Christ, men and women whose lives mirror the matchless life of the one perfect Being. What we know and believe should and must affect what we feel and what we do.

"The highest of all ideals," President David O. McKay taught, "are the teachings and particularly the life of Jesus of Nazareth, and that man is most truly great who is most Christlike.

"What you sincerely in your heart think of Christ will determine what you are, will largely determine what your acts will be. No person can study this divine personality, can accept his teachings without becoming conscious of an uplifting and refining influence within himself. . . . Members of the Church of Jesus Christ are under obligation to make the sinless Son of Man their ideal—the one perfect Being who ever walked the earth." [^1] Peter therefore explained that our Savior "suffered for us, leaving us an example, that [we] should follow his steps" (1 Pet. 2:21).

Those who forsake the world, who enter the waters of baptism to evidence their desires to eschew the world, and who take upon them the name of Jesus Christ—these should live and speak and act differently from those who have not yet come unto Christ. Latter-day Saints must be different. If the major distinguishing characteristics of the Mormons are that they refrain from smoking and drinking and that they believe in strong families—nothing more—then we have little to offer the religious world. We have no monopoly on family programs, and we are certainly not the only people in the world who believe that we should take proper care of the physical body. What we believe should and must affect what we do. The gospel, the power of God unto salvation (Rom. 1:16), either has the power to change us or it does not. Thus our true nature—our character, our personality, even our disposition—shows through, and is the best evidence of how well we have incorporated the principles and attributes of divinity into our walk and talk. We cannot rightly divide our theology from our religion, our beliefs from our behaviors. No one of us is perfect, to be sure. And yet, there just simply ought to be something different about us as a result of our having the gospel in our lives, something different about the way we treat one another.

Jesus our Lord placed people first. People before programs, people before rules and regulations. For example, "the sabbath was made for man," he said, "and not man for the sabbath" (Mark 2:27). There must be order and cleanliness in the kingdom of God, and members of the Church are expected to abide by the laws and statutes of a divinely established institution. The Church was restored for the benefit and blessing and edification of man. The Church is the auxiliary given to bless and sustain individuals and families. Jesus our Lord also placed people before his own convenience. Jesus "went into the borders of Tyre and Sidon, and entered into a house, and would that no man should come unto him." He was tired. He was weary. He needed, as do we all occasionally, a moment to himself. "But he could not deny them; for he had compassion upon all men" (JST, Mark 7:22-23). The work and glory of God are to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man (Moses 1:39). That is, God's work is people. People are ends in themselves, never means, no matter how noble the desired end.

How we act in supermarket lines, in our homes and with family members, on the crowded highway, or at the ballpark—surely those actions bespeak volumes about who and what we are. Disciples, followers of the Christ, have covenanted to allow their religion to be seen and felt on all days and at all times. Disciples come to be sensitive, caring, solicitous. James Allen, in his book As a Man Thinketh, has suggested that "circumstance does not make the man; it reveals him to himself." [^2] In that regard, C. S. Lewis has offered the following painful but pertinent insights into who and what we are:

"When I come to my evening prayers and try to reckon up the sins of the day, nine times out of ten the most obvious one is some sin against charity; I have sulked or snapped or sneered or snubbed or stormed. And the excuse that immediately springs to my mind is that the provocation was so sudden and unexpected: I was caught off my guard, I had not time to collect myself. Now that may be an extenuating circumstance as regards those particular acts: they would obviously be worse if they had been deliberate and premeditated. On the other hand, surely what a man does when he is taken off his guard is the best evidence for what sort of man he is? Surely what pops out before the man has time to put on a disguise is the truth? If there are rats in a cellar you are most likely to see them if you go in very suddenly. But the suddenness does not create the rats: it only prevents them from hiding. In the same way the suddenness of the provocation does not make me an ill-tempered man: it only shows me what an ill-tempered man I am." [^3] Christ came to earth and restored his gospel in our day so that we might become as he is, not alone in belief but also in attitude and action. President Ezra Taft Benson related a story that focuses on that matter:

"There was a little crippled boy who ran a small newsstand in a crowded railroad station. He must have been about twelve years old. Every day he would sell papers, candy, gum, and magazines to the thousands of commuters passing through the terminal.

"One night two men were rushing through the crowded station to catch a train. One was fifteen or twenty yards in front of the other. It was Christmas eve. Their train was scheduled to depart in a matter of minutes.

"The first man turned a corner and in his haste to get home to a Christmas cocktail party plowed right into the little crippled boy. He knocked him off his stool, and candy, newspapers, and gum were scattered everywhere. Without so much as stopping, he cursed the little fellow for being there and rushed on to catch the train that would take him to celebrate Christmas in the way he had chosen for himself.

"It was only a matter of seconds before the second commuter arrived on the scene. He stopped, knelt, and gently picked up the boy. After making sure the child was unhurt, the man gathered up the scattered newspapers, sweets, and magazines. Then he took his wallet and gave the boy a five-dollar bill. 'Son,' he said, 'I think this will take care of what was lost or soiled. Merry Christmas!'

"Without waiting for a reply, the commuter now picked up his briefcase and started to hurry away. As he did, the little crippled boy cupped his hands together and called out, 'Mister, Mister!'

"The man stopped as the boy asked, 'Are you Jesus Christ?'

"By the look on his face, it was obvious the commuter was embarrassed by the question. But he smiled and said, 'No, son, I am not Jesus Christ. But I am trying hard to do what He would do if He were here.' " [^4]

A number of years ago Charles M. Sheldon wrote a remarkable book entitled In His Steps about a man who decided to take seriously the Savior's injunction to live our religion. A Christian minister, impressed with the thought that the Master meant what he said when he invited us to be even as He is, challenged his congregation to make a significant pledge—a pledge that for one year they would not do anything without first asking the question, "What would Jesus do?" The story is a marvelous study in human nature as well as a testimony of the power of Christ to change human souls. It illustrates the costs and challenges and rewards of Christian discipleship. We might ask ourselves: How does following the example of my Savior affect the way I perform my service in the Church? My service in the community? How does my commitment to emulate the Lord bear upon the way I interact with those I work with in the Church? Those outside the Church? If, indeed, I were arrested on the charge of being a Christian, would there be, as someone has asked, enough evidence to convict me?

What, then, is my pattern for Christian living? How do I know what to do in every case? We are blessed to have the scriptures, particularly the four Gospels, which are testimonies of our Lord's mortal ministry. We see in experience after experience how he acted and reacted to circumstances in his life. The other books of scripture, especially the Book of Mormon, detail and delineate principles and practices, guidelines for living a Christlike life. But the Gospels contain only about a month, about thirty days, of our Savior's thirty-three years. And the other volumes of holy writ cannot provide a circumscribed course in Christianity, cannot possibly give the answer to every question we may face. No, the scriptures teach us principles, precepts which may direct our thinking and channel our resolve in a myriad of situations. Further, as members of the Church we are entitled to the gift of the Holy Ghost, that blessed moral monitor that, often working through our consciences, has been given to teach us how to proceed. The Holy Ghost is, as Joseph Smith explained, the oldest book of living scripture available to us. [^5] Nephi instructed, "Feast upon the words of Christ; for behold, the words of Christ will tell you all things what ye should do." Further, "If ye will enter in by the way," Nephi implored, "and receive the Holy Ghost, it will show unto you all things what ye should do" (2 Ne. 32:3, 5).

Finally, it is important to acknowledge that whatever changes need to be made in our character—whether in our speech, our ability to control our temper, our "sins against charity"—can be made in a lasting way only through the intervention of divine powers. Behavior modification programs are not enough. Dogged determination is not enough. Time management and goal-setting programs are not enough. Gritting our teeth and holding on in white-knuckled fashion may not be the answer. As helpful as certain human plans and procedures may be—and as important as it is that I do all in my power to bring about meaningful change in my nature—it is the Redeemer that recreates men and women. As President Ezra Taft Benson pointed out, "The Lord works from the inside out. The world works from the outside in. The world would take people out of the slums. Christ takes the slums out of people, and then they take themselves out of the slums. The world would mold men by changing their environment. Christ changes men, who then change their environment. The world would shape human behavior, but Christ can change human nature." [^6]

"If . . . what we are matters even more than what we do," C. S. Lewis observed, "if, indeed, what we do matters chiefly as evidence of what we are—then it follows that the change which I most need to undergo is a change which my own direct, voluntary efforts cannot bring about. . . . I cannot, by direct moral effort, give myself new motives. After the first few steps in the Christian life we realize that everything which really needs to be done in our souls can be done only by God." [^7] That is surely what the Lord meant when he spoke to Moroni: "If men come unto me I will show unto them their weakness. I give unto men weakness that they may be humble; and my grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them" (Ether 12:27).

It just may be that the depth of our discipleship is not to be gauged by how quickly we could prepare to leave for Missouri, or how bravely we would face the barrel of a mobster's rifle. Perhaps one of the real tests of our discipleship is the degree to which we have sought for and allowed the powers of Deity to change our hearts, renovate our souls, and point us toward people. "Ye shall be even as I am," the risen Messiah said to the Nephites, "and I am even as the Father; and the Father and I are one" (3 Ne. 28:10). As we become one with him, we come to love and forgive and extend ourselves to those who need us. Disciples are called upon to love others and to minister in their behalf. In the process they come to love others more than themselves. That is the essence of Christianity.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] In Conference Report, Oct. 1981, p. 38.
[^2] In Conference Report, Oct. 1973, p. 55.
[^3] In Conference Report, Apr. 1987, pp. 26-27; emphasis in original.
[^4] New Era, Apr. 1972, p. 7.
[^5] In Conference Report, Apr. 1988, p. 3; emphasis in original.
[^6] In Conference Report, Oct. 1985, p. 5.
[^7] Mere Christianity, p. 165.
