Robert L. Millet, Eye Single to the Glory of God: Reflections on the Cost of Discipleship ( 1991)

Chapter 18

SEEK YE FIRST THE KINGDOM OF GOD

One challenge we face on earth is to remember why we do what we do. It is not easy in a world with distractions, many of which seem to be good and noble and upright, to remain focused on fundamentals and riveted on matters of everlasting consequence. The duty of disciples is to discern and, where necessary, to discard. Knowing that we cannot do everything, the follower of the Nazarene chooses to do that which is of greatest worth. In a day when discordant voices clamor for attention, we attend ever so carefully to that voice, still and small, which offers unerring direction.

In the Sermon on the Mount, the Savior said: "The light of the body is the eye; if therefore thine eye be single to the glory of God, thy whole body shall be full of light. But if thine eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full of darkness. If therefore the light which is in thee be darkness, how great shall that darkness be" (JST Matt. 6:22-23). The word eye is frequently used in scripture to represent the heart, the disposition, the mind. When our mind is single to the glory of God, our hearts and feelings are focused upon the things that God considers important. Moses was told of the glory of God: "This is my work and my glory," Jehovah declared, "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39). To have an eye single to the glory of God is thus to be working toward that same grand goal—the immortality and eternal life of ourselves, our families, and all of the other sons and daughters of God. It is to have placed the ego on the altar of life and presented an offering to the Almighty, even that of a broken heart and a contrite spirit (3 Ne. 9:20; D&C 59:8). To have an eye single to the glory of God is to have sacrificed self in behalf of the greater good.

When we have an eye single to the glory of God we are more concerned with conversions than baptisms, honesty and inspiration than with good impressions, edifying meetings than with statistics, covenant and commitment than with position and office. Spiritual power comes to those who focus on fundamentals. Elder Dean L. Larsen observed that "the enduring strength of the kingdom is not to be found in the number of its members, the rate of its growth, or the beauty of its buildings. In God's kingdom, power is not equated with body count nor with outward routine compliance with prescribed performances. It is found in those quiet uncharted acts of love, obedience, and Christian service which may never come to the attention of official leadership, but which emulate the ministry of the Lord himself." [^1] The sanctifying powers of the Spirit flow into the lives of individuals and congregations who yield their hearts to God (Hel. 3:35). "And if your eye be single to my glory, your whole bodies shall be filled with light, and there shall be no darkness in you; and that body which is filled with light comprehendeth all things. Therefore, sanctify yourselves that your minds [note the equation of eye with mind] become single to God, and the days will come that you shall see him" (D&C 88:67-68).

Disciples seek for discernment, not alone to tell good from evil but also to sort out the less important from the more important, the fascinating from the vital. Elder Bruce R. McConkie addressed this challenge:

"I am fully aware of the divine decree to be actively engaged in a good cause; of the fact that every true principle which works for the freedom and blessing of mankind has the Lord's approval; of the need to sustain and support those who espouse proper causes and advocate true principles—all of which things we also should do in the best and most beneficial way we can. The issue, I think, is not what we should do but how we should do it; and I maintain that the most beneficial and productive thing which Latter-day Saints can do to strengthen every good and proper cause is to live and teach the principles of the everlasting gospel.

"There may be those who have special gifts and needs to serve in other fields, but as far as I am concerned with the knowledge and testimony that I have, there is nothing I can do for the time and season of this mortal probation, that is more important than to use all my strength, energy and ability in spreading and perfecting the cause of truth and righteousness, both in the Church and among our Father's other children." [^2]

The disciple of Christ must be disciplined not only in regard to the sordid but also in regard to the subsidiary. Some things matter more than others, and there simply isn't enough time in this life to do everything, especially to labor in secondary causes. The scriptures and the modern prophets have provided the guidelines for us. The Church will teach us the principles, and the Holy Ghost will reveal to us the specific practices.

The renewed emphasis by the Brethren upon the mission of the Church, the invitation to come unto Christ, the need to simplify and reduce—these things attest to the seeric vision of those called to direct the destiny of this Church. The greater emphasis upon covenants and ordinances also points up our duty to center our lives in Christ, receive and be true to those saving principles and rites that weld us to Christ and to our families, and invite all others to go and do likewise. Those Saints whose teachings and lives reflect the principle of covenant will be as a lighthouse in the midst of a stormy sea. Elder Boyd K. Packer taught this lesson to the Church in the following way:

"Several years ago I installed a stake president in England. In another calling, he is here in the audience today. He had an unusual sense of direction. He was like a mariner with a sextant who took his bearings from the stars. I met with him each time he came to conference and was impressed that he kept himself and his stake on course.

"Fortunately for me, when it was time for his release, I was assigned to reorganize the stake. It was then that I discovered what that sextant was and how he adjusted it to check his position and get a bearing for himself and for his members.

"He accepted his release, and said: 'I was happy to accept the call to serve as stake president, and I am equally happy to accept my release. I did not serve just because I was under call. I served because I am under covenant. And I can keep my covenants quite as well as a home teacher as I can serving as stake president.'

"This president understood the word covenant.

"While he was neither a scriptorian nor a gospel scholar, he somehow had learned that exaltation is achieved by keeping covenants, not by holding high position." [^3]

We can probably have our share of this world's goods if we want them. Some of the pressing questions we must face, however, are the following: Why do I want them? What function will they serve? Will they prove a blessing or a condemnation? The prophetic invitation is: "Think of your brethren like unto yourselves, and be familiar with all and free with your substance, that they may be rich like unto you. But before ye seek for riches, seek ye for the kingdom of God. And after ye have obtained a hope in Christ ye shall obtain riches, if ye seek them; and ye will seek them for the intent to do good—to clothe the naked, and to feed the hungry, and to liberate the captive, and administer relief to the sick and the afflicted" (Jacob 2:17-19; emphasis added).

If we seek first for the kingdom of God—commit ourselves to the Church and strive to be loyal to its constituted authorities, to the care of the needy, to the support of missionaries, and so forth—then our hearts are more prone to be pure, and we are more likely to deal properly and prudently with our monetary gain. In Jacob's words, disciples will seek to be prospered in order to assist others. The Old Testament records a chilling story of a prophet named Balaam who enjoyed for a season the favor and confidence of God but who, because he "loved the wages of unrighteousness," lost his birthright and fell from his high standing (see Num. 22-25, 31). Balaam knew exactly what the Lord wanted him to do, but greed and avarice turned his heart toward the god of this world. Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written of this tragic incident:

"Perhaps the Lord would let him compromise his standards and have some worldly prosperity and power as well as a testimony of the gospel. Of course he knew the gospel was true, as it were, but why should he be denied the things his political file leader could confer?

"I wonder how often some of us get our direction from the Church and then, Balaam-like, plead for some worldly rewards and finally receive an answer which says, in effect, If you are determined to be a millionaire or to gain this or that worldly honor, go ahead, with the understanding that you will continue to serve the Lord. Then we wonder why things don't work out for us as well as they would have done if we had put first in our lives the things of God's kingdom.

"What are the rewards of unrighteousness? Do they not include seeking for worldly things when these run counter to the interests of the Church?

"And don't we all know people who, though they were once firm and steadfast in testimony, are now opposing the Lord's purposes and interests on earth because money and power have twisted their judgment of what should or should not be?

"Balaam, the prophet, inspired and mighty as he once was, lost his soul in the end because he set his heart on the things of this world rather than the riches of eternity." [^4]

One of the remarkable ironies of gospel living is that we become totally free only as we submit to the will of the Lord. The plain fact is that God knows what is best for us; he can make so much more out of us than we can through our own unaided efforts. Loving God with all our hearts—keeping the first and great commandment—entails seeking and acknowledging his hand and striving to live in harmony with the plan he has established for our eternal happiness. As we come to have an eye single to the glory of God, our will begins to become God's will; our desires become God's; our joys and sorrows, God's. Truly, as President Ezra Taft Benson explained, "The great test of life is obedience to God. . . . The great task of life is to learn the will of the Lord and then do it. The great commandment of life is to love the Lord." In reality, "When we put God first, all other things fall into their proper place or drop out of our lives. Our love of the Lord will govern the claims for our affection, the demands on our time, the interests we pursue, and the order of our priorities. We should put God ahead of everyone else in our lives." [^5]

We are from another time, another place, another world. We do not have permanent residence here, at least not in this telestial tenement. When the Savior counseled his disciples to "take no thought for the morrow," what they should eat or drink or wear, he was warning against becoming too acclimated to a fallen sphere, warning against earthly anxiety and attachment to this world's worries and enticements. He who never owned a home does not ask of those who follow him to live as paupers, to exist on a subsistence level only. He does not delight in the financial struggles of his people, nor does he take pleasure in the material challenges his disciples inevitably face in a materialistic world. But he does ask that his disciples refuse to give prominence to the things of this world. He pleads with his servants to see to it that their hearts are set on nobler pursuits. No wiser and more appropriate charge, therefore, could be given the disciple than the one that states: "Seek not the things of this world, but seek ye first to build up the kingdom of God, and to establish his righteousness, and all these things"—the necessities and comforts of life—"shall be added unto you" (JST Matt. 6:38).

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] In Conference Report, Oct. 1981, p. 38.
[^2] In Conference Report, Oct. 1973, p. 55.
[^3] In Conference Report, Apr. 1987, pp. 26-27; emphasis in original.
[^4] New Era, Apr. 1972, p. 7.
[^5] In Conference Report, Apr. 1988, p. 3; emphasis in original.
