Robert L. Millet, Eye Single to the Glory of God: Reflections on the Cost of Discipleship ( 1991)

THE FRUITS OF DISCIPLESHIP

Chapter 19

MY PEOPLE WILL I PRESERVE

Disciples of the last days shall live to see a growing chasm between good and evil. The polarization between those who confess Christ before men—and thus shall be acknowledged and recommended by their Redeemer hereafter—and those who deny and defy the truth—and thus become those whom the Master shall deny and condemn hereafter (see Matt. 10:32-33)—will intensify as we approach the millennial day. The follower of the Lord is called upon to exercise discernment, to read by the lamp of the Spirit, and to know and recognize the signs of the times.

To read the signs of the times is to perceive the unfolding of God's divine drama in the final days of earth's temporal continuance; it is to have a total perspective of the plan of life and salvation and a special appreciation for the scenes incident to its consummation. It is to understand that this is the day long awaited by the prophets of old and by the messengers of heaven, when God would pour out knowledge and power from on high "by the unspeakable gift of the Holy Ghost," knowledge "that has not been revealed since the world was until now" (D&C 121:26).

On the other hand, to read the signs of the times in our day is to read the signs of wear and tear in the countenances of those who have chosen to love and give devoted service to questionable or diabolical causes. Error and wickedness take their terrible tolls upon the hearts of those who choose divergent paths; the wheels of waywardness grind away slowly but inexorably to produce a type of demented character that will never know peace of mind. To read the signs of the times is, in part, to acknowledge the profundity of Alma's words that "wickedness never was happiness" (Alma 41:10).

To read the signs of the times in this era of time is to make a decision in favor of Zion and the Church of the Lamb or in favor of Babylon and the church of the devil (1 Ne. 14:10). Each city, Zion and Babylon, makes definite requirements of its citizens, and as the end approaches, each community will insist upon the total devotion and consecration of its municipals. To read the signs of the times is to recognize that in the future fewer and fewer Latter-day Saints will be "lukewarm"; that the myopic and the misguided of the religious world will grow in cynicism and confusion; that the ungodly will, as time goes by, sink ever deeper into a despair known only to those who revel in iniquity; and that wickedness will widen and malevolence multiply until the citizens of Babylon seal themselves to him who is the father of all lies (see 2 Ne. 9:46; Alma 34:34-35; Hel. 13:32).

To read the signs of the times is to become aware also that "Zion must arise and put on her beautiful garments" (D&C 82:14); that the Church of the Lamb shall continue to require the tithes and offerings of its members until that day when a fully consecrated life is required; and that through giving all to the Lord through his Church, the Saints of the Most High shall establish a heaven on earth and eventually receive the glorious assurance of exaltation in the highest heaven.

The future of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is glorious. Many living now will see the day when those of all walks of life and from all parts of the earth, by the millions, will enter the waters of baptism and covenant to become true followers of the Christ. Temples shall dot the earth, as the prophets have foretold, and the blessings of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob—those blessings which qualify men and women to become kings and queens, priests and priestesses, shall be available to all nations, kindreds, tongues, and peoples (Rev. 5:9-10). And yet, as the work of the Lord goes forward in accelerated fashion, as the tent of Zion begins to have its stakes driven into the soil in every corner of the globe, so also shall the work of Beelzebub go forward. Nephi saw in vision that the whore of all the earth sat upon many waters, meaning she was found in every land (Rev. 17:15) and had dominion over all the earth (1 Ne. 14:11).

"The vision of the future," Elder Bruce R. McConkie warned, "is not all sweetness and light and peace. All [the good] that is yet to be shall go forward in the midst of greater evils and perils and desolations than have been known on earth at any time. " [^1] After having beheld in vision the destruction of gross wickedness in the days of his descendant Noah, Enoch cried out to God: "When shall the earth rest?" When shall the Son of Man appear to bring to an end the violence and vile affections on the face of the earth? "And the Lord said unto Enoch: As I live, even so will I come in the last days, in the days of wickedness and vengeance. . . . And the day shall come that the earth shall rest, but before that day the heavens shall be darkened, and a veil of darkness shall cover the earth; and the heavens shall shake, and also the earth; and great tribulations shall be among the children of men, but my people will I preserve" (Moses 7:58-61; emphasis added). The veil of darkness, the apostasy and wickedness of the final days, is before us. And in the midst of it all, disciples are called upon to stand fast in the faith. The Savior taught his Galilean Twelve: "There shall be men standing in that generation"—the time wherein the signs pertaining to the second coming of Christ are fulfilled—"that shall not pass until they shall see an overflowing scourge; for a desolating sickness shall cover the land." And then Jesus offered this glimmer of hope: "But my disciples shall stand in holy places, and shall not be moved; but among the wicked, men shall lift up their voices and curse God and die" (D&C 45:31-32; emphasis added).

Disciples, to be preserved from the calamities yet to come, must stand in holy places. And what are holy places? An obvious illustration of holy places is temples. The Saints remain Saints only to the degree that they receive and remain worthy of the covenants, ordinances, and instruction within the temples. The temple is the central focus of Zion. In the temple, we are schooled in the mysteries of godliness and made acquainted with a higher form of learning—learning by faith and obedience. The temple is a place of covenant, a place of renewal and recommitment, and a place of instruction, heavenly instruction. "It has become my conviction," said Elder F. Enzio Busche, "that the temple is the only 'university' for men to prepare spiritually for their graduation to eternal life. The temple is the place where the Lord wants us to make a sincere evaluation of our mortal lives. . . . We are still alive, and our probationary state is not yet over. Temples have been erected as houses of the Lord. They are standing ready to serve as instruments to our own gradual awakening to the full dimensions of truth on our inevitable road to eternity." [^2] As the intersection between the heavens and the earth, the holy temple, with its ordinances and instruction, helps to serve as a cold but gentle slap in the face for mortal men and women, an ever-present reminder of what matters most.

The church is a holy place. Those who attend regularly, take part, and find joy in its service agencies, gain the comfort and confidence to withstand opposition and discern the inroads of a morally bankrupt society. There are those, sadly, who hold membership in the Church but who feel some embarrassment about it. They feel the Church should be more progressive, more pluralistic and open to religious diversity, less "dogmatic" and more ecumenical. They are deceived and know not what they ask. To tear the Church up from its bedrock of revelation or to break its tie to absolute truths is to be a part of the shared impotence, the rational relativity of a world that has no sure foundation. It is to trade our birthright for the pan in which was once a mess of pottage. No, the restored Church has been established as an ensign, a banner around which battle-weary Saints may gather; it is a defense, a refuge "from the storm, and from wrath when it shall be poured out without mixture upon the whole earth" (D&C 115:6). In speaking of the importance of holding fast to time-honored and revealed practices within the Church, Elder Boyd K. Packer said: "I would remind [you] that it is not the privilege of those called as leaders to slide the Church about as though it were on casters, hoping to put it into the path that men or youth will be safe within it." [^3] In order to keep themselves unspotted from the sins of the world, then, disciples are to attend church, "go to the house of prayer and offer up [their] sacraments upon [the Lord's] holy day" (D&C 59:9). In speaking of the New Jerusalem, the center place of Zion, a modern revelation attested: "And the glory of the Lord shall be there, and the terror of the Lord also shall be there, insomuch that the wicked will not come unto it, and it shall be called Zion. And it shall come to pass among the wicked, that every man that will not take his sword against his neighbor must needs flee unto Zion for safety" (D&C 45:67-68). "The time is nigh," President Brigham Young warned in regard to this scriptural passage, "when every man that will not take up his sword against his neighbor must needs flee to Zion. Where is Zion? Where the organization of the Church of God is." [^4]

The home is a holy place. In fact, the Lord intends that the home become the holiest of all. Our service and involvement in the temple and the church should but prepare us for our labors in the home. President Harold B. Lee reminded us often that the most important work we would ever do in the Church would be within the walls of our own homes. [^5] The family is the most important unit in time and in eternity, and the home is the place, the setting, where family members are taught, nurtured, built up, prepared, and immunized against a spiritually hostile world. True followers of Christ sense the significance of the home and thus devote time and talents and energies to the creation of a clean, peaceful, and spiritually rewarding environment therein.

Finally, disciples stand in holy places whenever they are striving to live a life of holiness—to enjoy the revelatory and cleansing powers of the Holy Ghost and to be loyal and true to those called to direct the destiny of the Church and kingdom. President Harold B. Lee spoke of his visit to a group of Saints during the frightening times of a world war:

"I heard a group of anxious people asking, 'Is now the day for us to come up to Zion, where we can come to the mountain of the Lord, where we can be protected from our enemies?' I pondered that question, I prayed about it. What should we say to those people who were in their anxiety? I have studied it a bit, I have learned something of what the Spirit has taught, and I know now that the place of safety in this world is not in any given place; it doesn't make so much difference where we live; but the all-important thing is how we live, and I have found that the security can come to Israel only when they keep the commandments, when they live so they can enjoy the companionship, the direction, the comfort, and the guidance of the Holy Spirit of the Lord, when they are willing to listen to these men whom God has set here to preside as His mouthpieces, and when we obey the counsels of the Church." [^6]

The heaven-sent promise that the Lord would preserve his people in the last days, in the midst of wickedness and vengeance, is not necessarily a promise that all will be spared death. Rather, the assurance is that the disciple need not fear death, if such is required, as long as he or she is in the line of duty. "We do not say," Elder McConkie pointed out, "that all of the Saints will be spared and saved from the coming day of desolation. But we do say there is no promise of safety and no promise of security except for those who love the Lord and who are seeking to do all that he commands." [^7] Thus saith the Lord: "Behold, it is my will, that all they who call on my name, and worship me according to mine everlasting gospel, should gather together, and stand in holy places; and prepare for the revelation which is to come, when the veil of the covering of my temple, in my tabernacle, which hideth the earth, shall be taken off, and all flesh shall see me together" (D&C 101:22-23).

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "The Spirit of Truth," in "To Be Learned Is Good If . . . ," ed. Robert L. Millet (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1987), p. 231.
[^2] From a baccalaureate address delivered at Ricks College, 25 Apr. 1978.
[^3] "Absolute Truth," 1977 BYU Devotional Speeches of the Year, 6 Sept. 1977 (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1978), p. 138.
[^4] Look to God and Live (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1971), p. 65.
[^5] BYU Speeches of the Year, 11 Sept. 1973 (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1973), p. 91.
[^6] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 51.
[^7] In Conference Report, Apr. 1971, pp. 99, 101.
