Robert L. Millet, Eye Single to the Glory of God: Reflections on the Cost of Discipleship ( 1991)

Chapter 20

THE TRUTH SHALL MAKE YOU FREE

To be unaware or uninterested in truth—of "the knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come" (D&C 93:24)—is to lead a sheltered and shallow existence. It is to be in bondage, to be stifled. To be oblivious to that which the Spirit teaches, namely the truth—"things as they really are, and . . . things as they really will be" (Jacob 4:13)—is to be damned. Christ came to deliver us from ourselves and from Satan, to liberate us from the chains of darkness and doubt and deceit. "Then said Jesus to those Jews which believed on him, If ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed; and ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free" (John 8:31-32).

The revelations of the Restoration certify that certain truths are known only by faithfulness. To say that another way, there are some matters that may only be comprehended, and even apprehended, by righteousness, some things a wicked or careless person will never know. My friend and colleague, Joseph F. McConkie, observed: "Purity, not intellect, is the prime requisite for the knowledge of God. Knowledge that can be obtained independent of purity and righteousness is without the power of salvation. Only that knowledge that comes from God through the medium of the Holy Spirit has the power to sanctify the soul and prepare one to stand in the divine presence. Such is the 'Spirit of truth,' a spirit which the 'world cannot receive' (John 14:17)." [^1] The scriptures state that "he that keepeth [the Lord's] commandments receiveth truth and light, until he is glorified in truth and knoweth all things" (D&C 93:28). Joseph Smith likewise explained that "whatever principle of intelligence we attain unto in this life, it will rise with us in the resurrection. And if a person gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage in the world to come" (D&C 130:18-19; emphasis added).

Surely we are put here on earth to learn as much as we can in the sciences, in the arts, in languages, in history and foreign culture, and so on. And, to the degree that we can master some of these fields, we are better able to present the gospel and its truths in a manner that would be acceptable to more and more people (see D&C 88:78-80). But there is a hierarchy of truth. Some truths matter more than others. It is valuable to know of gravity or of the laws of motion. It is vital to know of the reality of a Redeemer. It is helpful to know the laws of thermodynamics; it is essential to know how to repent and call upon God, in the name of his Son, for forgiveness. "Facts are useful," Elder Neal A. Maxwell pointed out; "everlasting truths are critical. So much of real education consists of acquiring perspective about everlasting truths so that we can then manage, successfully, the transitory factual things, for tactical choices do crowd in upon us hour by hour. Knowing the facts about a bus schedule, for instance, is helpful, but such facts are clearly not the emancipating truths Jesus spoke of as being necessary to experience real freedom." [^2]

Further, some things are relative; their composition or our perspective on them may change with new discoveries or new directions. Social trends or fads or novel world views may reconstitute such "truths." Other things are absolute: they are forever fixed, immutable, unchangeable. Their innate truthfulness is not determined by popularity or consensus. Disciples come to know which truths are relative and which are absolute. "God, our Heavenly Father—Elohim—lives," stated President Spencer W. Kimball. "That is an absolute truth. All four billion of the children of men on earth might be ignorant of him and his attributes and his powers, but he still lives.

"All the people on the earth might deny him and disbelieve, but he lives in spite of them. They may have their own opinions, but he still lives, and his form, powers, and attributes do not change according to men's opinions. In short, opinion alone has no power in the matter of an absolute truth. . . . "The watchmaker in Switzerland, with materials at hand, made the watch that was found in the sand of a California desert. The people who found the watch had never been to Switzerland, nor seen the watchmaker, nor seen the watch made. The watchmaker still existed, no matter the extent of their ignorance or experience. If the watch had a tongue, it might even lie and say, 'There is no watchmaker.' That would not alter the truth.

"If men are really humble, they will realize that they discover, but do not create truth." [^3]

In an unusual directive given to the School of the Prophets, the Lord said: "And as all have not faith, seek ye diligently and teach one another words of wisdom; yea, seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom; seek learning, even by study and also by faith" (D&C 88:118; emphasis added). Most of us are familiar with learning by study. It is what we are taught to do from childhood. It consists of attuning the intellectual faculties, focusing upon the subject before us, and grasping the matters to be learned. It is a cognitive, rational process. But what of knowledge by faith? How do we acquire truth by faith? In one sense, we have already addressed this issue: there are some truths which only the faithful will come to understand. In a related way, we learn by faith when we do the will of the Lord, seeking for the ratifying and confirming influence of the Spirit, when we follow the Savior's formula of "do—then know" (John 7:16-17; compare Ether 12:6). We gain a witness of the Word of Wisdom or the law of tithing as we observe these laws, as we keep them. We come to know of the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon as we read and ponder and then pray over the doctrines and principles and precepts contained therein. Do—then know. In this manner we exercise faith—we hope for what is unseen but true (Alma 32:21)—and then come to know.

To learn by faith is to learn by revelation, to acquire insight by the Holy Spirit of God speaking directly to our souls. President Marion G. Romney said: "Such truth is not to be had through man's ordinary learning processes. His sensory powers are calculated and adapted to deal only with the things of this telestial earth. Without revelation, man's intellect is wholly inadequate for the discovery of the ultimate truth with which the gospel deals." [^4] One of the most profound statements ever made on this phenomenon of acquiring truth, or knowledge, by faith was made by President Harold B. Lee. "The acquiring of knowledge by Faith," he taught, "is no easy road to learning. It will demand continuous effort and continual striving by faith. In short, learning by faith is no task for a lazy man. Someone has said, in effect, that 'such a process requires the bending of the whole soul, the calling up from the depths of the human mind and linking the person with God. The right connection must be formed; then only comes knowledge by faith, a kind of knowledge that goes beyond secular learning, that reaches into the realms of the unknown and makes those who follow that course great in the sight of the Lord.' " [^5]

To some degree education in general frees us from ignorance and from the bondage and servitude of our own situation or plight. But this does not seem to be the kind of truth to which our Savior had reference; he spoke of saving truths. In fact, the truths that are of greatest eternal worth may not be taught by man. The Apostle John taught that because of the unction, the anointing of the Holy Ghost, which the members of the Church had received, they needed not that any man teach them certain things (see 1 Jn. 2:27). Here, as in all things, the Lord Jesus Christ is the pattern for all who seek the path of discipleship. In speaking of the time in our Lord's life between the ages of twelve and thirty, Matthew wrote: "And it came to pass that Jesus grew up with his brethren, and waxed strong, and waited upon the Lord for the time of his ministry to come. And he served under his father [presumably, Joseph], and he spake not as other men, neither could he be taught; for he needed not that any man should teach him. And after many years, the hour of his ministry drew nigh" (JST, Matt. 3:24-26; emphasis added). How wondrous it is that "by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things" (Moro. 10:5).

There is an even deeper and more profound reality associated with the Lord's statement that we shall know the truth and the truth shall make us free. As we continue in his word, as we move forward in unsensational but steadfast fashion, as we come to live by every word of God, as we seek after and acquire the gifts and fruit of the Spirit, we come to know him who is the Truth: we come to know the Lord. We can come to know about the Lord by study. We come to know the Lord only by study in combination with faith. We know the Lord as we serve him and keep his commandments (see Mosiah 5:12-13; 1 Jn. 2:3-4). Jesus said: "I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me" (John 14:6; emphasis added). It is not just that the Son of God brought light into a darkened and fallen world; he is the Light (3 Ne. 11:11). It is not just that our Savior showed us the way; he is the Way (John 14:6). It is not just that Christ made the resurrection available; he is the resurrection (John 11:25). And it is not just that Jesus of Nazareth restored the truth and taught the truth; he is the Truth. Disciples who learn from and lean on and lead others to their Master come in time to know their Master. They gain "the mind of Christ" (1 Cor. 2:16). They are thus freed, liberated from the fetters of falsehood, the prison of a limited perspective, and the distorting lens of a fallen nature. Joseph Smith observed:

"We consider that God has created man with a mind capable of instruction, and a faculty which may be enlarged in proportion to the heed and diligence given to the light communicated from heaven to the intellect; and that the nearer man approaches perfection, the clearer are his views, and the greater his enjoyments, till he has overcome the evils of his life and lost every desire for sin; and like the ancients, arrives at that point of faith where he is wrapped in the power and glory of his Maker and is caught up to dwell with Him." [^6]

Disciples of Christ soon learn that acquiring the attributes of godliness entails far more than learning some facts. We do not practice the religion of Jesus Christ by study, intellectual preparation, and theological inquiry and discovery alone. Religion is a thing of the heart as well. "True religion," Elder Bruce R. McConkie once stated, deals with spiritual things.

"We do not come to a knowledge of God and his laws through intellectuality, or by research, or by reason. They are important enough in their sphere, but when contrasted with spiritual endowments, they are of but slight and passing worth. From an eternal perspective, what each of us needs is a Ph.D. in faith and righteousness. The things that will profit us everlastingly are not the power to reason, but the ability to receive revelation; not the truths learned by study, but the knowledge gained by faith; not what we know about the things of the world, but our knowledge of God and his laws.

In sum, "Religion comes from God by revelation and deals with spiritual things; and unless and until a man has received revelation, he has not received religion, and he is not on the path leading to salvation in our Father's kingdom." [^7] It is vital that we know the truth. There is no salvation in falsehood, even in sincere falsehood. Christ is the Truth. As we grow in light and truth we grow unto him. We thereby become his.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), pp. 149-51, 298, 300, 305.
[^2] In Conference Report, Oct. 1965, p. 20.
[^3] From an address at funeral service for Elder S. Dilworth Young, 13 July 1981, typescript, p. 5.
[^4] Millennial Star, 13:362.
[^5] In The Personal Writings of Joseph Smith, ed. Dean C. Jessee (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1984), p. 239; punctuation standardized.
[^6] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 51.
[^7] In Conference Report, Apr. 1971, pp. 99, 101.
