Robert L. Millet, Eye Single to the Glory of God: Reflections on the Cost of Discipleship ( 1991)

Chapter 21

YE SHALL HAVE ETERNAL LIFE

Following baptism by water, disciples are awarded the greatest gift given to mortals—the gift of the Holy Ghost. This sacred endowment is given to direct, tutor, comfort, cleanse, and purify us, to lead us along the path of life and keep us within a whisper of the Gods. The Holy Ghost expands the mind and opens the eyes so that followers of Christ may begin to see and feel things foreign to the spiritually uninitiated. As true disciples navigating the strait and narrow path, we face the tests and challenges of life and prove through deed and dedication an absolute willingness to serve God at all hazards. Thus by faithfulness we ultimately qualify for the greatest gift in eternity—exaltation, or eternal life.

We do not travel far before we realize that we cannot stay on the path or arrive at the desired end by ourselves. We must have help. That help is what the scriptures designate as grace, the freely given, enabling power to do what we could never do unaided. The fall of Adam was a universal fall; it affected humankind and all other forms of life. An infinite power was thereby required to effect the redemption of man and earth. An infinite power required an infinite Being. And so it was that Jesus, the son of Mary and the Son of God, demonstrated the greatest act of love and mercy in time or eternity. The atoning sacrifice ransomed us from physical death through the resurrection and also made eternal life—God's life, the glory of the celestial kingdom, the continuation of the family unit (D&C 88:4; 132:19)—a possibility for those who come unto Christ and partake of the cleansing powers of his blood.

The gospel covenant consists of a two-way promise between us and our Redeemer. First, Christ promises on his part that he will justify us, pronounce us clean, innocent, free from sin and stain. As disciples, we promise that we will accept the ransoming powers of Christ, repent of our sins, trust in the Lord, and seek thereafter to live the life of one called out of the world. As disciples, we agree to perform certain works that evidence our faith, which signify by deed our commitment to the gospel covenant. We agree to receive the ordinances of salvation, keep our thoughts, actions, and speech pure and within the prescribed bounds of morality and decency, and extend ourselves in acts of Christian service to our fellow beings. And yet the scriptures affirm repeatedly the solemn truth that our works alone cannot save us, cannot lead to life eternal. They are necessary but insufficient. In short, eternal life is not, in the purest sense, something which may be earned. It is the greatest of all the gifts of God (see D&C 6:13; 14:7), something which we inherit from an all-wise and all-loving God. As disciples of Christ we seek to please our Lord and Master by doing all that we can. But all that we can is not enough, and we know it. Our reliance is thus not in the arm of flesh, not even in our own arm. Our trust and reliance are wholly in the Savior. It is by the merits and mercy and grace of the Holy Messiah—his works—that we are saved, after all we can do (see 2 Ne. 2:3, 8; 25:23; 31:19; Alma 22:14; Moro. 6:4; D&C 45:3-5). Disciples pray fervently to know their own limits, to know when they have done all that can humanly be done; then the follower turns to the Leader and supplicates Him, seeking earnestly the supplementary strength and power to accomplish the task at hand.

And what is the spiritual barometer? How do disciples know if they are on course? How may they sense that their lives and labors will eventually be acceptable to Him who is perfect? We learn in time that we need not proceed toward the goal of exaltation in the dark; we need not wait and wonder and worry; rather, "he who doeth the works of righteousness shall receive his reward, even peace in this world, and eternal life in the world to come." (D&C 59:23.) Peace here points toward the ultimate peace hereafter. Peace in this world portends the peace of eternal glory in the next world. Peace, the quiet but certain signal of divine acceptance, can be a daily indicator that the heavens are pleased and that we are on course. When the Lord speaks peace to our minds, it matters precious little what myopic mortals may think. When we feel such peace, we might well ask, as Christ did: "What greater witness can you have than from God?" (D&C 6:23.)

Isaiah taught almost thirty centuries ago: "And the work of righteousness shall be peace; and the effect of righteousness quietness and assurance for ever" (Isa. 32:17). Those in this life who conduct themselves with fidelity and devotion to God and his laws shall eventually know the peace "which passeth all understanding" (Philip. 4:7), the calming but powerful assurance that they have successfully met the challenges of mortality. These are they who as disciples of the Christ have lived by every word of God. They have made their callings and elections sure. [^1] For them the day of judgment has been advanced, and the blessings associated with exaltation in the celestial kingdom are assured. Though it is true, as President Marion G. Romney observed, that "the fulness of eternal life is not attainable in mortality, . . . the peace which is its harbinger and which comes as a result of making one's calling and election sure is attainable in this life." [^2]

Latter-day Saints who have received the ordinances of salvation—including the blessings of the temple endowment and eternal marriage—may thus press forward as true disciples in the work of the Lord and with quiet dignity and patient maturity seek to be worthy of gaining the certain assurance of salvation before the end of their mortal lives. But should we not formally receive the more sure word of prophecy—the knowledge that we are sealed to eternal life (D&C 131:5-6)—in this life, we have the scriptural promise that faithfully enduring to the end, keeping the commandments and covenants to the end of our lives, eventuates in the promise of eternal life, whether that promise be received here or hereafter. "But blessed are they who are faithful and endure, whether in life or in death, for they shall inherit eternal life" (D&C 50:5; emphasis added). In other words, as Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained, "If we die in the faith, that is the same thing as saying that our calling and election has been made sure and that we will go on to eternal reward hereafter." [^3]

These blessings are at the end of the path Nephi and Lehi saw in vision, a path not far removed from filthy waters, and certainly within earshot of the beckoning calls of those who have taken up lodging in the great and spacious building. That path leads through mists of darkness, divers temptations and allurements of the devil. But at the end of the path, for those who have held tenaciously and reverently to the rod of iron and who have maintained an eye of faith, is the fruit of the tree of life. "If ye will nourish the word," Alma said to the Zoramites, "yea, nourish the tree as it beginneth to grow, by your faith with great diligence, and with patience, looking forward to the fruit thereof, it shall take root; and behold it shall be a tree springing up unto everlasting life. And . . . by and by ye shall pluck the fruit thereof, which is most precious, which is sweet above all that is sweet, and which is white above all that is white, yea, and pure above all that is pure; and ye shall feast upon this fruit even until ye are filled, that ye hunger not, neither shall ye thirst" (Alma 32:41-42). King Benjamin spoke in the same vein of the great consummation to our discipleship which comes as we remain true and faithful to every trust. "Therefore, I would that ye should be steadfast and immovable, always abounding in good works, that Christ, the Lord God Omnipotent, may seal you his, that you may be brought to heaven, that ye may have everlasting salvation and eternal life, through the wisdom, and power, and justice, and mercy of him who created all things, in heaven and in earth, who is God above all" (Mosiah 5:15).

We are becoming here what we will be hereafter. That is to say, discipleship is the training camp for Godhood. By living the gospel in this life, we are quickened by a portion of that celestial glory which shall be bestowed in fulness in the resurrection (D&C 88:29). We are in preparation now for greater things, but we must be equipped and our souls adapted for such a transformation. We cannot be restored from negligence and indifference to glory and honor. In the words of President Lorenzo Snow, we shall find that "in the morning of the resurrection we will possess those acquisitions only which we acquired in this world! Godliness cannot be conferred but must be acquired." [^4]

Our Savior beckons, "Come, follow me." The road is long, and the costs are great. But if we desire to go where he is, we must be willing to go where he has been. Those who have tasted of the sweet fruit of the Spirit have been given a foretaste of that which is to be, and they eagerly lay down their all in the cause of truth. They are willing to go and say and be all that their beloved Master would desire of them. The Prophet Joseph Smith wrote to his wife Emma: "I will try to be contented with my lot, knowing that God is my friend; in him I shall find comfort. I have given my life into his hands. I am prepared to go at his call. I desire to be with Christ. I count not my life dear to me, only to do his will." [^5] Such is the duty and disposition of the disciple. Temporary trials fade into insignificance, however, when we ponder upon the peace and happiness now available, as well as the eternal glories that follow faithful service. "Ye cannot behold with your natural eyes, for the present time, the design of your God concerning those things which shall come hereafter, and the glory which shall follow after much tribulation. For after much tribulation come the blessings" (D&C 58:3-4). Such is the reward and the prize of the disciple. And indeed, it is worth any cost that must be paid along the way.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), pp. 149-51, 298, 300, 305.
[^2] In Conference Report, Oct. 1965, p. 20.
[^3] From an address at funeral service for Elder S. Dilworth Young, 13 July 1981, typescript, p. 5.
[^4] Millennial Star, 13:362.
[^5] In The Personal Writings of Joseph Smith, ed. Dean C. Jessee (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1984), p. 239; punctuation standardized.
