For work-related reasons, I sent my three daughters to spend 15 days with my mother in the small town of Itarema, in the Brazilian state of Ceará. The closest unit of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is about 55 miles (88 km) away—a branch in Itapipoca.

I was concerned that my daughters would not partake of the sacrament for two Sundays. My mother is a faithful member, but she would be unable to travel to church with my three daughters and my sister’s three daughters, who were also visiting.

After two weeks, I traveled on a Saturday to Itarema to retrieve my daughters. After I arrived, I asked a taxi driver, “How much would you charge to take my mother, six children, and me to and from Itapipoca tomorrow?”

His answer saddened me. It would cost nearly all the money I had brought with me. As I pondered the fare, a question came to my mind: “What is partaking of the sacrament worth to you?” I recognized the voice of the Spirit and accepted the taxi driver’s price.

I have taught my daughters that the sacrament bread and the water covered in a white tablecloth help us think of the Savior’s body and blood, what He has done for us, and the importance of remembering Him. The sacrament reminds me that He is there for me and that I want to be there with Him.

The next day when we walked into the Itapipoca Branch Primary room with six children, the Primary president seemed especially grateful. A few minutes later, friends from my home ward in Fortaleza arrived with their four children.

After Primary, we enjoyed the blessings of partaking of the sacrament and renewing our covenants with the Lord. Following the sacrament, we learned why the Primary president was so happy to see us. That Sunday the Primary was presenting the sacrament meeting program, but the Primary had only a few children.

“God answered my prayers,” the Primary president said, introducing the program. “He sent 10 more children prepared to sing and participate in the program.”

I rejoiced that I had heeded the whisperings of the Spirit the night before. Partaking of the sacrament and having that priceless spiritual experience was worth the monetary sacrifice.
