LaVonne VanOrden, Blessed by the Hymns ( 1989)

Preface

Ever since we shouted for joy in our pre-earth life (Job 38:7), singing has been an important part of the Latter-day Saint heritage. The scriptures are replete with stories of the children of God singing for comfort, support, inspiration, and as expressions of worship and joy. Moses and the children of Israel sang praises to the Lord for their deliverance from Pharoah: "Then sang Moses and the children of Israel this song unto the Lord, and spake, saying, I will sing unto the Lord, for he hath triumphed gloriously." (Exodus 15:1.) "And David spake unto the Lord the words of this song in the day that the Lord had delivered him out of the hand of all his enemies, and out of the hand of Saul." (2 Samuel 22:1.) "And at midnight Paul and Silas prayed, and sang praises unto God: and the prisoners heard them." (Acts 16:25.) And especially, the Lord Jesus Christ prepared for his ultimate sacrifice by singing a hymn. "And when they had sung an hymn, they went out into the mount of Olives." (Matt. 26:30.) In our own dispensation, the Prophet Joseph Smith, in the last moments before his martyrdom, found comfort in a hymn. The pioneer Saints in their trek westward often sang as they went. Today, our prophets and General Authorities have shared their love of the hymns and the impact they have had on their own lives. Many have given sermons using the hymns as a means of teaching the gospel. "Sometimes I feel that we get nearer to the Lord through music than perhaps through any other thing except prayer," said President J. Reuben Clark (Conference Report, October 1936, p. 111.) Many have recorded powerful experiences with hymns which have brought about conversion or increased testimony, or which have given comfort, courage, or strength by opening communication through the spirit. The Lord has said that "the song of the righteous is a prayer unto me." (D & C 25:12.) Hymn-singing, then, can be another form of communication with our Father in heaven. While we are used to thinking of singing hymns in church as another form of worship, praise, or supplication, we may not have realized that, like prayer, the communication can go in both directions: not only from us as an expression of praise, gratitude, worship, or pleading; but also to us as inspiration, guidance, comfort, or conversion. As the forces of the adversary seem to be marshalled in anticipation of the great and dreadful day of the Lord, so must we use every means available to us to fortify ourselves and our children. There is great power in the hymns of the Latter-day Saints. It is available to all, regardless of musical ability or training. Just as prayer is not limited to the articulate, neither is hymn experience limited to the musically articulate.

The stories contained in this volume show that this is usually more of a spiritual phenomenon than a musical one. Few of these recorded experiences were had by musicians. Some did not even involve music, but only the words of a hymn. That powerful, spiritual force is illustrated in the accompanying stories from Latter-day Saints. Some are by General Authorities and others by ordinary people, but all by children of our Heavenly Father. It is hoped that reading these stories will inspire and motivate us to learn and love the hymns of the Restoration and let them work their power in us.
