LaVonne VanOrden, Blessed by the Hymns ( 1989)

Yoshihiko Kikuchi

The Upper Room

Recently, while in Jerusalem, we visited the Upper Room where it is said the Savior, with his disciples, celebrated the Passover with the last supper in his mortal life. As we stood pondering, Sister Barbara Smith came to my side and asked, "Brother Kikuchi, do you think you could sing a song for us?" I began,

As I have loved you, Love one another. This new commandment: Love one another.

A strong, peaceful, and very comforting spirit overwhelmed me. I just couldn't sing anymore. I stopped and tried three more times but I just couldn't go further. "I can't, I can't!" I said and I began to cry. All of us in the room cried like little children.

Then Sister Cheryl Blanchard came to my side. "Brother Kikuchi," she said. "I'm going to help you. Let's sing together." She began singing but it was no use. I could not sing because a strong, beautiful, and profound power just overwhelmed my whole soul and body and I started to tremble. I felt unworthy to come to sit at that sacred table. As I thought of that sacred and special hour when the Savior was sharing this greatest commandment with his disciples, I saw a little Japanese boy sticking his head into the door of the chamber, observing with a trembling heart the beautiful Savior and his disciples. I felt the sweetness of the deep, profound love of the Savior although, as a little boy, I could not comprehend the deep meaning of what was taking place. I was crying for joy and happiness—I felt like John the Beloved, squeezing into the bosom of the Holy One of Israel, the Savior of the world. I know he knows how I feel about him deep inside my soul, but I wanted to tell him how much I love Him and want to follow his beautiful teachings. I recommitted myself to help establish his beautiful kingdom on this earth.

When I came back to consciousness, Cheryl was still singing and this time I followed her. We all sang that beautiful song three times there in that chamber.

As I have loved you, Love one another. This new commandment: Love one another. By this shall men know Ye are my disciples, If ye have love One to another. [^1]

We were all touched as we felt the presence of his glorious spirit. What a beautiful, wonderful day that was! [^2]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Hymns, 1985, no. 270.
[^2] Unpublished; used by permission.
