LaVonne VanOrden, Blessed by the Hymns ( 1989)

Yoshihiko Kikuchi

I'll Go Where You Want Me to Go

On a recent visit to the Holy Land, I was privileged to take a boat ride across the Sea of Galilee, from Tiberias to Capernaum. As we started across the sea on a trip that would take about fifty-five minutes, the Sea of Galilee itself was just like a mirror—beautiful and calm, with no wind. . . . It is such a beautiful, beautiful place. . . .

As we went along, I wanted to be alone from everyone to meditate—to think how this is where the Savior spent most of his time, right here around the shore of this beautiful sea. As I sat at the head of the boat with closed eyes, I could almost envision the many countless, beautiful, sacred, unforgettable, and sweet ministries of our Savior. I thanked God that I could come to this Holy Land where Jesus walked. A very special feeling came over me. In my mind, I was singing one song, "I'll Go Where You Want Me to Go."

It may not be on the mountain height Or over the stormy sea, It may not be at the battle's front My Lord will have need of me. But if, by the still, small voice he calls To paths that I do not know, I'll answer, dear Lord, with my hand in thine: I'll go where you want me to go. I'll go where you want me to go, dear Lord, Over mountain or plain or sea; I'll say what you want me to say, dear Lord; I'll be what you want me to be. [^1]

I noticed tears streaming down my face while I was humming this song and I felt the same overwhelming feeling I felt at the time President Spencer W. Kimball extended the call to me to serve as one of the General Authorities of His Church.

"The Lord has called you to serve as one of the General Authorities of His Church! Would you accept this call?" At first, I couldn't accept. But, after a struggle with myself, I did accept. At that time, the thought came to me, "I'll go where you want me to go, dear Lord." On this boat on the Sea of Galilee, I felt once again a reassurance from the Lord that my call had come directly from Him. And my response was, "Dear Lord, with my hand in thine."

I felt the Spirit of the Lord touch my heart so much. Even now, as I remember that moment on the boat on the Sea of Galilee, I cannot stop my tears. I really want to be committed to this work of the Lord. I want to tell Him in my heart, "I will go where you want me to go. I will go where you go, dear Lord, over the mountains or plains or sea." When I said that to myself on the boat on the beautiful day, my whole body chilled and I felt the Spirit of the Lord come upon me and I felt the closeness of my Savior. [^2]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Hymns, 1985, no. 270.
[^2] Joseph Walker "Words of Comfort," Church News, 28 August 1983, p. 16.
