LaVonne VanOrden, Blessed by the Hymns ( 1989)

Melvin J. Ballard

Words of Comfort

Young Elder Melvin J. Ballard was having a difficult time getting to sleep. His mission was just months old, but the cacophony of emotion that surged within him indicated he was ready for it to be over.

He had been called on a special mission to several large cities in the eastern United States, and had been serving with Elders B. H. Roberts and George D. Pyper. The three missionaries had been sent out together, but now Elders Roberts and Pyper were being sent home. Elder Ballard, the youngest of the three and the most eager to return home, was being reassigned as a traveling elder in the northern states.

"Never had I felt such emotional distress," Elder Ballard said. "I wept through much of the night, not because I begrudged my service to the Lord, but because I so missed Martha." Martha, his bride, to whom he had been married just three weeks before receiving his mission call, was expecting their first child. His longing to be with her overwhelmed him.

But when temptation from the forces of evil began to enshroud him, he turned to the Lord for help. After a prayer for peace and strength, he began to read from a little book of poetry. He came upon some words written by Mary Brown that offered the comfort he sought:

It may not be on the mountain height Or over the stormy sea, It may not be at the battle's front My Lord will have need of me. But if, by a still, small voice he calls To paths that I do not know, I'll answer, dear Lord, with my hand in thine: I'll go where you want me to go. [^1]

"I found in those words the assurance I needed," he said. "I resolved at that time to place my trust in God, and to go where He wanted me to go."

After Carrie E. Rounsefell set the poem to music, Elder Ballard, as a member of the Council of the Twelve, often sang the hymn to congregations he met with in his travels throughout the Church. [^2]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Hymns, 1985, no. 270.
[^2] "Hymns Bring Peace, Strength to Those in Need of Reassurance," Church News, 11 August 1985, p. 14.
