LaVonne VanOrden, Blessed by the Hymns ( 1989)

Melva Lee Wheelwright

My First Night Alone

The oppressing silence was more than I could bear. I tried to find company in a television news program, but the tinny, artificial sound of the old set seemed to compound my nervousness. It was my first night alone.

My husband and I had been married only six months. He had warned me that from time to time he would have to be away overnight, but I had pushed the thought deep into the back of my mind, not wanting such a day to come. I was terrified of being alone. I had been the victim of an attempted attack earlier in my life—at night—alone.

The television news began with scenes of accidents, tales of crime. Hardly comforting. The normal groans and creaks from our old house evoked visions of prowlers. I shut off the set and turned on several lights and began to pace restlessly from one room to another. Finally I realized that I couldn't face the next twenty-four hours in this frame of mind, so summoning what courage I could, I turned off the lights and went into the bedroom.

I sat on the bed and tried to get control of myself, and in desperation I cried out to the Lord to comfort me and bring peace to my frightened soul. Just as I finished my plea, I seemed to hear in my mind the strains of a simple melody, coming unbidden and at first unnoticed. But as the music continued, it captured my entire attention. It was a hymn, not a familiar one; in fact, I couldn't think of the title or the words.

I relaxed and listened intently as the hymn rang on through my heart until it broke into the final glorious stanza. At that point the words came into my mind with perfect clarity and conviction: "My noonday walks he will attend, And all my silent midnight hours defend." [^1]

In this, my own silent midnight hour, the melody faded away, but I continued to ponder those words of comfort. As I did so, my soul was filled from the center outward with a wave of sweet warmth. I knew my prayer had been answered. I rested well that night, knowing that the Lord, our Shepherd, loves all his children, and that I am one of them. [^2]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "Music Brought Me Comfort," Ensign, February 1985, p. 55; used by permission.
[^2] "My First Night Alone," Ensign, January 1976, p. 48; used by permission.
