LaVonne VanOrden, Blessed by the Hymns ( 1989)

Kathy Wilcox

Tornado

During the return journey [from an area conference in Wisconsin], we ran into a severe thunderstorm and I was separated from my husband['s truck] for ten minutes due to poor visibility. [The children and I] pulled to the highway shoulder to ask our Heavenly Father to help us know which turn to take. Within five minutes we were right behind my husband again. But the storm had not lessened, and in the blinding rain we were again separated. . . . We were now fairly isolated, traveling in unfamiliar territory, and into a storm which was rapidly getting worse. . . .

The little ones were worried despite my reassurances that we would be safe. . . . Their fears were only magnified when people told us there were tornado warnings coming from the direction we were headed and we were entirely foolish to travel this road any further.

Amid the children's tearful comments, we offered another prayer. . . . Then we continued on our way, and I decided we should start singing. We began with light-hearted fun songs and folk tunes, and finally gospel hymns. Just a few minutes after beginning the hymns a beautiful peace permeated the car, and the children one by one fell into restful sleep.

The peace was wonderful as I continued to sing, noticing all the while that I was driving toward the blackest storm I had ever seen. I felt the whispering of the Spirit to continue straight ahead. The air seemed very quiet, and the only sounds inside the car were my own beating heart and the children's quiet breathing. Never have I felt such silence. Then suddenly the blackness was all around us, and blinding rain and winds of terrible force struck the car. I gasped. Then I heard a resounding heavenly choir repeating these familiar lines:

When dark clouds of trouble hang o'er us And threaten our peace to destroy, There is hope smiling brightly before us, And we know that deliv'rance is nigh. We doubt not the Lord nor his goodness. We've proved him in days that are past. The wicked who fight against Zion Will surely be smitten at last. [^1]

. . . We did make it home safely. Although a tornado had struck, tearing out a small trailer park and ravaging everything in its path, by news reports we determined that my husband was ahead of it by only a few minutes, and I would have been in its center had the Spirit not directed me to another road. I was grateful for the sure knowledge I gained that our Father does know and love his children, that he sees the entire road map and will safely guide us to our destination if we but heed him. [^2]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Hymns, 1985, no. 19.
[^2] "Hymn of Comfort," Ensign, September 1983, pp. 63-64; used by permission.
