LaVonne VanOrden, Blessed by the Hymns ( 1989)

Richard Rust

Hymn of Comfort

I was going through an emotional crisis associated with a divorce. I was ill-prepared for this sudden change in my life. . . . "You've got to pull yourself out of this slump," [my mother] said. "This is something you can't change. You must accept it and go on with life. I'm sorry it happened. But you have the welfare of your son to think about, and when you're down it saddens him too." I knew she was right, but it was hard to focus my thoughts. . . .

Tears came easily as I wrapped myself in self-pity. I couldn't see any end to this relentless suffering. I couldn't see a future, or any hope for better times. There seemed to be no one to turn to. All the people I talked to tried to offer me comfort, but it was no use. Their sympathy only brought out more emotion. The pressure seemed to build and intensify until I thought my sanity was going to vanish. At last I cried aloud in desperation, "God help me. Give me back my wife!"

I was not accustomed to praying, but I had come to a point where I knew of no other direction to turn. There was a time when I knew how to pray and was quite active in the Church, but somehow I had slipped away and was caught up in worldly ways.

Now something was happening, though. No sooner had I cried out than a wonderful feeling came over me. I can't describe it. It was just a feeling of power encompassing me, protecting me. And then words came to me, words and vaguely familiar notes of music, words of a hymn I had heard before, but in a different time of my life. I began to sing, and as I sang, every word fell into place:

We thank thee, O God, for a prophet To guide us in these latter days. We thank thee for sending the gospel To lighten our minds with its rays. We thank thee for every blessing Bestowed by thy bounteous hand. We feel it a pleasure to serve thee, And love to obey thy command.

The verse came to me as clearly as if I had sung this hymn every day of my life. Yet I know I had not sung or even thought of it for over fifteen years. I sang it over and over, louder; I didn't care if anyone heard me. To me it was a healing force, and it gave me comfort.

When dark clouds of trouble hang o'er us And threaten our peace to destroy, There is hope smiling brightly before us, And we know that deliv'rance is nigh. We doubt not the Lord nor his goodness, We've proved him in days that are past. . . . We'll sing of his goodness and mercy. We'll praise him by day and by night, Rejoice in his glorious gospel, And bask in its life-giving light. [^1]

It was my Heavenly Father's answer to my plea, and I shall never forget the words and the spirit that permeated my soul as I sang the words and contemplated their meaning.

In the months that followed, I called upon my Heavenly Father many times to help me through the trials of that difficult time, and he was always there. I learned something from that experience. There is someone you can turn to in time of need. He didn't chastise, ridicule, or upbraid me for ignoring him for so many years. He simply let me know that he was there all the time, and all I had to do was call. . . .

Thank God for his goodness and mercy. [^2]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Unpublished; used by permission.
[^2] "Hymn of Comfort," Ensign, September 1983, pp. 63-64; used by permission.
