LaVonne VanOrden, Blessed by the Hymns ( 1989)

Paul Sutorius

Peace—If Not Plenty—Here Abides

I turned off the lights in the already deserted office and locked the back door behind me. A cold February blast met me as I walked toward the only car left in the parking lot. It was [an old] sports coupe, with the backseat taken out to accommodate all our little kids. . . . The car started on the first try and I eased . . . out into the steady stream of evening traffic. . . .

I had to face facts. No amount of positive thinking or vain hopes could make them go away. The day I had most dreaded, and hoped would never come, had arrived. The business had run its course. And although I had realized for some time that I was "riding a dead horse," I had hoped it would revive. It hadn't. I was now financially finished and faced with the burden of carrying the carcass around with me for many years. . . .

The two-lane road was thick darkness behind me. "I'm sure there are others in those passing cars who share this same sickening feeling," I thought. "There must be others like me, who are going home to tell their families that tomorrow will be different—that changes are coming, tightening up—maybe embarrassment." The family soon would know firsthand that along with the dream of success and prosperity comes the possibility of failure and loss. Whatever the reasons or rationale, they had to accept with me that I'd entered the race and lost.

As my mind turned again to the cars and trucks flowing past me into the night, I thought how easy it would be to turn the wheel ever so slightly and meet one of those huge, freight-laden semi trucks head on. . . . It might be a painless "accident" and the thought of possible insurance money for my family made it briefly tempting. Then thoughts of eternal ramifications, not to mention funerals, tear-filled eyes, and long times of loneliness overwhelmed me, and I banished the ugly plan from my mind. . . .

And now, having shut the door to my office one last time, I followed the familiar patterns of rights and lefts that would bring me home. I slowed as I approached our rented home. . . . I shut off the engine and lights and coasted to the curb across the street. It was time for mustering up. Time to get complete control of myself and forget the day. . . . Then from across the street I began to hear the sounds of our old upright piano. My wife often gathered the children around the piano before dinner and had them sing with her until daddy got home. This little practice not only kept their minds off their stomachs, but established a real atmosphere of love and unity. The sounds of their high, sweet voices drifted across the street:

There is beauty all around When there's love at home; There is joy in ev'ry sound When there's love at home. Peace and plenty here abide, Smiling sweet on ev'ry side. Time doth softly, sweetly glide When there's love at home. [^1]

Tears were now flowing freely down my face. I began to count my blessings. I was still young; I had a wife who loved and supported me in all that I strived to do; I had lovely children, my living treasures, who needed and loved me too. And to sustain and cheer us all, we had a common belief in a God whom we gratefully called Father. I was rich in the things that really mattered. For now, I would take no thought for the morrow. I owed my loved ones a smile at the end of the day, a cheerful greeting, a hug and a kiss. They deserved a reassuring attitude, one that said we could and would make it. The knowledge I had of the Savior's reality made anything possible. [^2]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Hymns, 1985, no. 110.
[^2] Unpublished; used by permission.
