LaVonne VanOrden, Blessed by the Hymns ( 1989)

Joseph Smith

A Poor Wayfaring Man of Grief

On June 28, 1844, Joseph and Hyrum were imprisoned in Carthage Jail along with Willard Richards and John Taylor, both of the Quorum of the Twelve.

We all of us felt unusually dull and languid, with a remarkable depression of spirits. In consonance with those feelings I sang a song, that had lately been introduced into Nauvoo, entitled, 'A Poor Wayfaring Man of Grief, etc.'

"The song is pathetic, and the tune quite plaintive, and was very much in accordance with our feelings at the time for our spirits were all depressed, dull and gloomy and surcharged with indefinite ominous forebodings." (John Taylor, History of the Church, 7:101.)

The afternoon was sultry and hot. The four brethren sat listlessly about the room with their coats off; and the windows of the prison were open to receive such air as might be stirring. Late in the afternoon Mr. Stigall, the jailor, came in and suggested that they would be safer in the cells. Joseph told him that they would go in after supper. . . . Hyrum Smith asked Elder Taylor to sing again, "A Poor Wayfaring Man of Grief."

Elder Taylor: "Brother Hyrum, I do not feel like singing.

Hyrum: Oh, never mind: commence singing and you will get the spirit of it."

Soon after finishing the song the second time, as he was sitting at one of the front windows, Elder Taylor saw a number of men, with painted faces, rushing round the corner of the jail towards the stairs. . . . How quickly disastrous things happened! Three minutes after the attack was commenced upon the jail, Hyrum Smith lay stretched upon the floor of the prison—dead; John Taylor lay not far from him savagely wounded; the Prophet was lying outside the jail by the old well curb—dead; the mob in consternation and disorder had fled. . . ; the plighted faith of the state was broken, its honor trailed in the dust, and a stain of innocent blood affixed to its escutcheon that will remain a blot which time cannot efface. [^1]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Eliza R. Snow, An Immortal (Salt Lake City: Nicholas G. Morgan, Sr., Foundation, 1957), pp. 27-28.
