LaVonne VanOrden, Blessed by the Hymns ( 1989)

Charles W. Penrose

School Thy Feelings, O My Brother

School thy feelings, O my brother; Train thy warm, impulsive soul. Do not its emotions smother, But let wisdom's voice control. [^1]

[This] hymn was written by President Charles W. Penrose, missionary, General Authority and poet and one of the most prolific speakers of the Church. The hymn was written . . .shortly before President Penrose was to leave England for the United States in 1861 after serving a ten-year mission. As President Penrose was to tell the congregation in a sacrament meeting a few years later, the verses were written to himself and for "giving a little counsel to myself." . . . He said: "This was written under peculiar circumstances just before I left England, after having traveled over ten years in the ministry. A sort of quiet slander had been circulated concerning me in Birmingham by an elder from Zion and it had cut me to the quick.

"There was not a word of truth in the story. An accusation was made, but there was no bottom to it, and it ruffled me. I did not care how much I might be scandalized by enemies of the Church; I had become accustomed to that. I used to say that my hide had got as tough as a hippopotamus; I did not care what an enemy said about me.

"But when an elder in the Church did that it cut me to the heart, and I felt like retaliating. But I sat down and wrote that little poem, 'School thy feelings, O my brother; Train thy warm, impulsive soul,' and so on. And that was for me.

"I did not intend it for anybody else, but it was giving a little counsel to myself."

President Heber J. Grant related some circumstances regarding the hymn at October semi-annual General Conference in 1924. He noted that the hymn had been sung in conference and said that he hoped that President Penrose, who was ill, had a radio in his room so he could have heard it.

President Grant said: " . . . I shall not take time to read, or for us to sing, the entire hymn, but I will ask the choir and congregation to arise and sing the first verse and when you go home be sure to read it all. Be sure and get it into your hearts. Be sure and make it a part of your lives, and this conference will not have been in vain." [^2]

In an article in the Improvement Era, Elder Orson F. Whitney of the Council of the Twelve gives us further insight into this unusual story:

Except for the infamy of his act, I could almost thank "the accuser of the brethren" for that "quiet slander," which wounded the poet's sensitive soul and gave us as the indirect and unintended result this beautiful hymn, which has cheered and comforted for over sixty years the hearts of tens of thousands. Moreover, I will venture to assert that the would-be destroyer of his brother's fair fame did not profit by what he had done, while the one whom he wronged was benefited by the painful experience. Thenceforth he could sympathize, as never before, with those similarly placed. . . . He went on loving and serving God, and rose step by step to positions of honor and influence, until, in the evening of a long and useful life, we find him standing on the very summit of success, one of the First Presidency of the Church.

And where are they who tried to pull him down? We don't even know their names. [^3]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] George D. Pyper, Stories of Latter-day Saint Hymns (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1939), pp. 14-16, 17.
[^2] "An Interesting Story Behind Mormon Hymn," Church News, 20 September 1969, p. 7.
[^3] 3. Orson F. Whitney, "A Hymn With a History," Improvement Era, October 1924, pp. 1110, 1112; used by permission.
