LaVonne VanOrden, Blessed by the Hymns ( 1989)

Charles W. Penrose

O Ye Mountains High

Here is the story of "O Ye Mountains High," in the author's own words. Said President Penrose: " 'Oh Ye Mountains High' was written somewhere along about 1854, published in 1856. I was walking on a dusty road in Essex. My toes were blistered and my heels, too. I had been promised that if I would stay in the mission field another year I should be released. That was the cry every year: 'Brother Penrose, if you will stay and labor another year, we will see that you are released to go to Zion.' But it kept up for over ten years. Of course I had read about Zion and heard about the streets of Salt Lake City, with the clear streams of water on each side of the street, with shade trees, and so on. I could see it in my mind's eye, and so I composed that song as I was walking along the road, and set it to a tune—the Scotch ditty, 'O Minnie, O Minnie, Come o'er the Lea;' those were the opening words. When I got to the place called Mundon, in Essex, we held a cottage meeting, and in that meeting I sang it for the first time it was ever sung. Of course the words were adapted to a person who had never been to Zion then, but it was afterwards changed in a very slight respect or two, to fit people who had gathered with the Saints. It was inspirational and seemed to please President Brigham Young."

When Johnston's army was in Echo Canyon, on its way to Salt Lake City, a Peace Commission, consisting of Governor

L. W. Powell of Kentucky, and Major Ben McCullough of Texas, was sent to Utah, arriving at Salt Lake City in June, 1858. In one of the tense meetings (June 11th) the Commissioners presented their message. Brigham Young responded and the outlook for peace seemed favorable. Edward W. Tullidge, in his History of Salt Lake City, tells what followed:

"A well-known character, O. P. Rockwell, was seen to enter, approach the ex-Governor and whisper to him. He was from the Mormon army. There was at once a sensation, for it was appreciated that he brought some unexpected and important news. Brigham arose, his manner self-possessed but severe:

" 'Governor Powell, are you aware, sir, that those troops are on the move toward the City?'

" 'It cannot be,' exclaimed Powell, surprised, 'for we were promised by the General that they should not move till after this meeting.'

" 'I have received a dispatch that they are on the march for this City. My messenger would not deceive me.'

"It was like a thunderclap to the Peace Commissioners: they could offer no explanation.

" 'Is Brother Dunbar present?' inquired Brigham.

" 'Yes, sir,' responded the one called. What was coming now?

" 'Brother Dunbar, sing "Zion." ' "

"The Scotch songster came forward and sang—'O Ye Mountains High.' "

The song deeply impressed the Peace Commissioners and after several stormy sessions a peaceful solution of the war was agreed upon. The army passed through Salt Lake City, rested temporarily on the west banks of the Jordan River, and then established Camp Floyd on the west side of Utah Lake. [^1]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Heber J. Grant, "The Power of Song," Improvement Era, May 1919, pp. 634-36; used by permission.
