LaVonne VanOrden, Blessed by the Hymns ( 1989)

John Taylor

The Brethren Were Melted to Tears

I desire to relate just one incident showing how song has the power to soothe irritated feelings and bring harmony to the hearts of men who are filled with a contentious spirit.

The incident occurred some years ago, I have been told, and it was a quarrel between two old Nauvoo veterans. These men had been full of integrity and devotion to the work of the Lord. They had been through many of the hardships of Nauvoo, and had suffered the drivings and persecutions of the Saints, as well as the hardships of pioneering, incident to the early settlement of Salt Lake Valley. These men had quarreled over some business affairs, and finally concluded that they would try and get President John Taylor to help them adjust their difficulties.

John Taylor was then the president of the Council of the Twelve Apostles. The veterans pledged their word of honor, that they would faithfully abide by whatever decision Brother Taylor might render. . . .

They called on President Taylor, but did not immediately tell him what their trouble was, but explained that they had seriously quarreled and asked him if he would listen to their story and render his decision.

President Taylor willingly consented. He said, "Brethren, before I hear your case, I would like very much to sing one of the songs of Zion for you."

Those of my readers who were acquainted with President Taylor know that he was a very capable singer, and interpreted sweetly and with spirit, our sacred hymns. He then sang one of these to the two brethren. Seeing its effect, he remarked that he never heard one of the songs of Zion but that he wanted to listen to one more, and so asked that he might sing another. Of course, they consented. They both seemed to enjoy it; and, having sung the second song, he remarked that with their consent he would sing still another, which he did, as he had heard there is luck in odd numbers. Then in his jocular way, he remarked: "Now brethren, I do not want to wear you out, but if you will forgive me, and listen to one more hymn, I promise to stop singing, and will hear your case."

The story goes that when President Taylor had finished the fourth song, the brethren were melted to tears, got up and shook hands, asked President Taylor to excuse them for having called upon him, and for taking up his time, they then departed without his even knowing what their difficulties were.

President Taylor's singing from our standard hymn book, had reconciled the brethren. The Spirit of the Lord had entered their hearts, and the hills of difference that existed between them, and evidently appeared as big as mountains, had been leveled and become as nothing. Love and brotherhood had developed in their souls, and the trifles over which they had quarreled, had become valueless in their sight. The songs of the heart had filled them with the spirit of reconciliation. [^1]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "How I Learned to Sing," In the Native American, Biographical Pamphlets, Archives of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, pp. 4-5.
