LaVonne VanOrden, Blessed by the Hymns ( 1989)

Heber J. Grant

It Was a Little Bit Remarkable

I was at a social gathering in the home of the late President George Q. Cannon, at that time the first counselor to the president of our church. They had a very splendid dinner, a splendid musical program consisting of instrumental and vocal pieces. Somebody said, "The next number on our program is a song from Brother Grant." This was said as a joke, and everybody laughed. I immediately jumped up and said, "Which of my two songs will you have, 'God Moves in a Mysterious Way, His Wonders to Perform' or 'O My Father, Thou That Dwellest'?"

We were in double parlors. Everybody where I was located said, "God Moves in a Mysterious Way." The accompanist of the evening was in the other room. I asked her to kindly come into the room where the piano was and play that hymn for me in the key of F. Now, I did not know the key of F from any other key, but I had been told that I sung both of the hymns that I had learned in the key of F. When Sister Snow came into the room where I was I whispered to her as she sat down at the piano, that when she got through playing the first verse of the hymn, (I did not mention the name of the hymn to her, taking it for granted that she had heard the request for the hymn "God Moves in a Mysterious Way") I would not know when she was through, but I said, "When you get through with the first verse of this hymn, you just hit this note on the piano, (I tapped the letter F on the piano) and I will commence singing." She did so, and I commenced singing, and my friends at the social gathering commenced laughing and screeching. I paid no attention to them but sang all six verses of "God Moves in a Mysterious Way His Wonders to Perform."

As soon as I finished, I remarked that the ladies and gentlemen present needed lessons in manners, that they had asked me to sing a song, that I had done so and had not made a single solitary mistake, referring to Sister Snow to corroborate my statement, which she did, remarking that "as soon as I started to sing you people commenced laughing and screeching, and I would like to know what you were screeching and laughing at, seeing I made no mistake in singing that song." They assured me that they could not help doing so, and asked if I knew what Sister Snow had done before I started to sing. I told them that I did, announcing that she had played the first verse of "God Moves in a Mysterious Way His Wonders to Perform." They said, "O no, she didn't, she played the first verse of "O My Father, Thou That Dwellest."

I do not wish you to think . . . that I could sing "God Moves in a Mysterious Way" and have someone accompanying me playing "O My Father"—it so happens that the first three words of "O My Father" and the first five words of "God Moves in a Mysterious Way" are on the same note and Mrs. Snow changed immediately when I started to singing a different song, so that she was really accompanying me with the proper melody as soon as I got three words out of my mouth. Inasmuch as I must have practised both of these hymns fully five thousand times before I learned to sing them, it was a little bit remarkable that I did not recognize "O My Father" when she was playing it for me. [^1]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Hymns, 1985, no. 85.
