LaVonne VanOrden, Blessed by the Hymns ( 1989)

Amanda Smith

I'll Never, No Never, No Never Forsake

The following incident was related by Amanda Smith, whose husband and son were killed, and another son seriously wounded at the Haun's Mill Massacre.

All the Mormons in the neighborhood had fled out of the State, excepting a few families of the bereaved women and children who had gathered at the house of Brother David Evans, two miles from the scene of the massacre. To this house Alma had been carried after that fatal night.

In our utter desolation, what could we women do but pray. Prayer was our only source of comfort; our Heavenly Father our only Helper. None but he could save and deliver us.

One day a mobber came from the mill with the captain's fiat:

"The captain says if you women don't stop your d—d praying he will send a posse and kill every d—d one of you!"

And he might as well have done it, as to stop us poor women praying in that hour of our great calamity.

Our prayers were hushed in terror. We dared not let our voices be heard in the house in supplication. I could pray in my bed or in silence, but I could not live thus long. This godless silence was more intolerable than had been that night of the massacre.

I could bear it no longer. I pined to hear once more my own voice in petition to my Heavenly Father.

I stole down into a corn-field, and crawled into a "stout of corn." It was as the temple of the Lord to me at that moment. I prayed aloud and most fervently.

When I emerged from the corn, a voice spoke to me. It was a voice as plain as I ever heard one. It was no silent, strong impression of the spirit, but a voice, repeating a verse of the saint's hymn:

The soul that on Jesus hath leaned for repose I will not, I cannot, desert to his foes; That soul, though all hell should endeavor to shake, I'll never, no never, no never forsake! [^1]

From that moment I had no more fear. I felt that nothing could hurt me. Soon after this the mob sent us word that unless we were all out of the State by a certain day we should be killed.

The day came, and at evening came fifty armed men to execute the sentence.

I met them at the door. They demanded of me why I was not gone? I bade them enter and see their own work. They crowded into my room and I showed them my wounded boy. They came, party after party, until all had seen my excuse. Then they quarreled among themselves and came near fighting.

At last they went away, all but two. These I thought were detailed to kill us. Then the two returned.

"Madam," said one, "have you any meat in the house?"

"No," was my reply.

"Could you dress a fat hog if one were laid at your door?"

"I think we could!" was my answer.

And then they went and caught a fat hog from a herd which had belonged to a now exiled brother, killed it and dragged it to my door, and departed.

These men, who had come to murder us, left on the threshold of our door a meat offering to atone for their repented intention. . . . The Lord had kept His word. The soul that on Jesus had leaned for succcor had not been forsaken even in this terrible hour of massacre. [^2]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Hymns, 1985, no. 85.
[^2] Marvin K. Gardner, "When Disaster Strikes," Ensign, January 1982, pp. 70-
