LaVonne VanOrden, Blessed by the Hymns ( 1989)

W. Herbert Klopfer

My Heart Was Touched

In May 1957, one hundred Saints from the German Democratic Republic spent one week in the Swiss Temple receiving their temple ordinances. They came to the temple in two specially chartered trains. They brought with them the lame, the blind, and other handicapped Saints. They had sacrificed all of their savings to make the trip. I served as a young missionary at the Swiss Temple and was overwhelmed by the demonstration of their strong faith. I felt the greatest love for them as I took charge, welcomed them, and gave them instructions regarding money, food, and accommodations.

We served them breakfast every morning. But we had to trim back to the simple foods of bread and milk since their bodies were not able to assimilate more nutritious foods. Lunches were served free of charge. I assisted them in practically every phase of temple work as they literally worked around the clock receiving their own ordinances and performing the same for as many of their deceased ancestors as time permitted. I averaged four hours of sleep each night because of the need for constant service.

My three living grandparents were part of this group. I did not know that they were coming until I saw their names on the official list. It was a joyous and memorable reunion (the last in their mortal lifetime) as I helped them receive their temple ordinances by serving simultaneously as temple worker and family proxy. I witnessed their own endowments and subsequent sealings to their deceased relatives, including my own father.

When the time of departure came, these Saints sang "How Firm a Foundation" with all their hearts as they assembled in the cultural hall of the nearby chapel for final instructions. Then, at the train station, they bid farewell by singing, "God Be With You 'Til We Meet Again." The spiritual power generated by these two hymns was enough to lift these wonderful Saints for the remainder of their mortal days. They knew that, most likely, they would not enter a temple of the Lord again while in this probationary state of life. But they had made covenants with the Lord in the Swiss Temple and now relied on the power of hymns to sustain them in their desire to live acceptable lives before their God even though deprived of many basic freedoms. [^1]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Unpublished; used by permission.
