LaVonne VanOrden, Blessed by the Hymns ( 1989)

Jay Criddle Hess

The Hymns Provided Me with the Greatest Lessons

Major Hess was a United States Air Force pilot. Shot down on August 24, 1967, he spent five and one-half years in prisoner of war camps near Hanoi and close to the Chinese border.

As a prisoner of war I was stripped of every material thing that I owned. I was isolated from any contact with the outside world. It was a bad situation to be in, but it provided me with a period of reflection and meditation such as I had never had before. . . . Some of my fellow prisoners felt alone, and they were in need of help. I felt that I had complete support from whatever source I needed. I enjoyed a closeness to God. There was no fear; it was almost a time of warmth. I suppose I really can't say there was no fear, because I well remember the nights when the guards would come and open the doors of cells around me. There was always fear that they might be coming to my door. Every night I could hear them coming to take people out for questioning or for moving to other cells. Chains rattled, people would be moaning; it was kind of a horror show.

The hymns of the Church provided me with the greatest lessons during this time. I couldn't remember all of them, of course, and even now I can't remember more than one verse of any song. But the phrases from one hymn, one verse from another, and parts of others gave me gospel lessons when I needed them.

One such phrase was "Come, come, ye Saints, no toil nor labor fear." I would think of that song on days that were tough and say to myself, "That is a great lesson for me right there. Don't fear, just do whatever you have to do." And the last verse: "And should we die before our journey's through, happy day!" There were a lot of days just like that. It would have been happiness to have died that day, but I knew that if I could make it through, then I was going to be really happy. So it gave a balance to my life in prison.

I remember once when I got hold of some paper and made a pen; using blue iodine for ink, I wrote down as many hymns as I could remember. I listed about a hundred. Hymns were used in my prayers, like the one the children sing in Primary: "Lead me, guide me, walk beside me. . . . " However, I didn't apply the words to myself, but turned them around. Don't teach me or guide me; rather, lead my children and guide them.

The first chance I got to write home, the main thing I had on my mind was to assure my family that the things that are valuable and important are those that have to do with the Church. I tried to put emphasis on family home evening, proper education, missions, temple marriage, and a family history. [^1]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Mormonism in Germany (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1970), pp. 92-95.
