LaVonne VanOrden, Blessed by the Hymns ( 1989)

Gilbert Scharffs

The Elder Started to Whistle

In July 1939 Mormon Apostle Joseph Fielding Smith toured parts of Germany. . . . As the crisis [which was to become World War II] intensified, Apostle Smith waited in anticipation. On August 24, 1939, a week before the invasion of Poland, the First Presidency of the Church ordered the . . . evacuation [of the missionaries from Germany]. . . . President Wood of the West German Mission and President Joseph Fielding Smith were in Hanover holding a missionary conference when the evacuation orders arrived. An hour and twenty minutes later the mission president was at mission headquarters in Frankfurt to direct the missionary evacuation. The plane taken by the Woods was the last civilian flight made by this aircraft before being sent to the Polish front.

There were about 150 American missionaries in the two German missions and telegrams were sent to each pair to rush to Holland. The Dutch consul in Frankfurt agreed to allow the missionaries to enter the Netherlands. . . . Early Saturday morning, the 26th, one of the elders . . .called by phone from the Netherlands border. He said, "President Wood, we have been here for six hours and the Dutch will not let us in. We haven't a dime between us. What shall we do?" The Dutch had recollections of the previous war and didn't want anyone entering their country who would have to be fed. . . . About the same time, a radio announcement was made by the government stating that "after Sunday night at midnight, August 27, the German government would not guarantee anyone his destination on German railways." The German Army was being mobilized. "I shall never forget our feelings at this time," said the mission president, and continued, "we had no telegraph, nor telephone facilities and railways were not available to us. We were not able to contact our missionaries, and we knew that most of them would be heading toward the closed Netherlands border. . . .

"We knew they would arrive there without enough money to buy tickets for Denmark," said Wood. Time was against the missionaries, because all of the railroads would be used for troop transportation within forty-eight hours. Later the president related the way some of the missionaries were rescued:

"About this time a big former football player came into our office who weighed over 200 pounds. I said, 'Brother, did you ever carry a message to Garcia?'

"He said, 'No, I haven't, but I'm willing to try.'

"I said: 'Elder, we have thirty-one missionaries lost somewhere between here and the Dutch border. It will be your mission to find them and see that they get out.' "

This elder set out for his destination with five hundred marks and tickets for Denmark and London. The president had heard that a person could get into Holland if he had tickets for Great Britain. Wood continued his account of the experience of this elder: "After four hours on the train he arrived at Cologne, which is about half way to the Dutch border. We had told him to follow his impressions entirely as we had no idea what towns these elders would be in. Cologne was not his destination, but he felt inspired to get off the train there. It is a very large station and was then filled with thousands of people. There were many students returning to England, and many people returning from vacation before the train service was to be stopped. There were so many people that to find anyone would have been next to impossible. This elder started to whistle our missionary song—'Do What Is Right, Let the Consequence Follow.'

"Down in one corner of the station was an elder, with an old couple who were also on a mission from America. They were stranded at the Cologne station and couldn't call the mission office because no more calls were being accepted. These three were able to pass through Holland with their tickets."

The elder continued toward the border and stopped in those towns where he "felt the urge and gave the 'Mormon whistle call'." He found several more missionaries in that manner. . . . Meanwhile, President Joseph Fielding Smith and his wife had left Hanover for Frankfurt by train. When they arrived, President Wood had left them a message and tickets for London via Holland. President Smith was one of the last to enter that country. [^1]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Mormonism in Germany (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1970), pp. 92-95.
