LaVonne VanOrden, Blessed by the Hymns ( 1989)

THREE

Teaching One Another with Hymns

Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom; teaching and admonishing one another in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord. (Colossians 3:16.)

Y

Ezra Taft Benson

When I Was Called as a Scoutmaster

I shall always be grateful that almost sixty-five years ago the good bishop of our ward came to me and asked me to be Scoutmaster of twenty-four boys in the Whitney Ward. . . . This was a great group of young men with a lot of musical talent.

In those days we had in the Mutual various cultural activities which were competitive. Among them were boys' choruses. Each ward was expected to have a chorus, and ofttimes the bishop would invite the Scoutmaster to take the responsibility for getting the boys out to practice. So it was in our ward.

As is often the case when a man is asked to do a job, I sought out the help of a good faithful woman who could play the piano and knew some musical technique. Under her direction we started our practices. The song to be sung in the competition was assigned by the general board and was the same throughout the Church—"The Morning Breaks; the Shadows Flee," by Parley P. Pratt.

For weeks before and after Scout meetings we prepared. Finally the time came when we would meet in competition with the ten other wards of the Franklin Stake. We were successful in winning in the stake, and then we were to meet the winners of the six other stakes in Cache Valley in the tabernacle in Logan.

I shall never forget approaching that great tabernacle that evening. We went inside and drew for places. We drew last place, which only prolonged our anxiety.

Finally the time came that our group was to march up to the platform. As our accompanist played "The Stars and Stripes Forever," those twenty-four boys went up the aisle single file and formed in a half moon on the stage while I crouched down between a couple of benches to try to give them some leadership. Then they sang as I'd never heard them sing, and of course you can imagine that I'd not be telling this story had we not won first place in Logan.

We went home literally walking on air. We were so happy that this little community of fifty families had won over the other stakes and wards of the valley.

In the first Scout meeting following our victory, those boys (never forgetting anything that is of value to them) reminded me that in a moment of anxiety I had promised them that if we won in Logan, I would take them all on a hike over the mountain thirty-five miles to Bear Lake Valley.

Since a promise made is a debt unpaid, we began planning our hike. . . . [Soon] we left on that great thirty-five-mile Scout trip to which I had made commitment as an inducement to get the boys out to practice their singing. . . . It was a glorious three weeks together with those wonderful boys out in the hills and in the mountains and on the lake. I wish I could follow for you the life of each one of those boys from that time until the present. I am proud of them.

I have made an effort to keep in touch with these boys. . . . So far as we know, [all] of the twenty-four [were] married in the temple. Some of them have gone now, but we have good reason to suppose each one did a good job in life. [^1]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Unpublished talk delivered at the 1985 Hymnbook Celebration in the Temple Square Assembly Hall, Salt Lake City, 3 September 1985; used by permission.
