LaVonne VanOrden, Blessed by the Hymns ( 1989)

Ardeth Greene Kapp

How Gentle God's Commands

Several weeks ago . . . I was asked to participate in an institute program and speak to a gathering of men in a small chapel. These men had an understanding of law, agency, freedom, blessings, choice, and accountability. To reach the chapel I had to go through tight security, present identification, be escorted by an officer of the law down a long corridor through sets of metal doors with bars which sounded a haunting echo as the metal clanged against metal. As each door in sequence closed tightly behind me, I knew I was locked in. There was no doubt in my mind about that. As I, with a friend, proceeded down the long corridor, there were odors revealing habits of enslavement. As we approached the chapel we heard a sound which seemed foreign to that setting—beautiful male voices harmonizing with feeling. Entering the meeting that was already in session, I observed each man wearing the same uniform. It wasn't a dark suit and white shirt, although I learned that more than one of them had worn a missionary suit. Their uniforms each had an identification number across the area of their hearts.

Looking at their numbers I wondered, "Who are they really?" Almost everyone was holding one of the new green hymnbooks. Would you be interested in knowing what song these men who had made choices that robbed them of their freedom and put them behind bars were singing? I wish you could hear that song sung by these men—"How Gentle God's Commands." I'll never hear that song again without reliving that experience. Listen with me to the words:

How gentle God's commands! How kind his precepts are! Come, cast your burdens on the Lord And trust his constant care. Beneath his watchful eye, His saints securely dwell; That hand which bears all nature up Shall guard his children well. Why should this anxious load Press down your weary mind? Haste to your Heav'nly Father's throne And sweet refreshment find. His goodness stands approved, Unchanged from day to day; I'll drop my burden at his feet And bear a song away. [^1]

Footnotes

"Your Inheritance: Secure or in Jeopardy?" in Brigham Young University 1986-87 Devotional and Fireside Speeches (Provo: University Publications, 1987), pp. 99-100; used by permission.

---
Notas:
[^1] "Hymns—Sermons in Four-Four Time," Church News, 28 March 1981, p. 5.
