LaVonne VanOrden, Blessed by the Hymns ( 1989)

Paul N. Davis

Preparing Myself Spiritually to Give a Patriarchal Blessing

Until recently, my Church experience had been primarily administrative—as a bishop, stake high councilor, stake executive secretary, counselor in the stake presidency, and stake president for almost ten years. However, a few years after my release as stake president I was called to be a patriarch. As a stake president I had worked closely with patriarchs and had great admiration for them but had often thought, "There's something special about those men and I know that I could never be that." So I accepted this call with some trepidation.

In all new callings I had experienced the normal quandaries of where do you go and what do you do, how do you get inspiration, and how do you know when you're guided? My personal credo has been, "Work hard to get the facts and then try to make an inspired decision in relation to everything you can possibly know." And, over twenty years, I had had the benefit of counselors to counsel with. As problems arose, of course we had prayer, but I also always enjoyed the counsel of wise men.

But this was a whole different ballgame. There was no one to counsel with. It wasn't even like setting apart missionaries, where you are dealing with people you know well and for a period of only eighteen months or two years. Now you're talking with someone regarding their eternal life, and without that basis of working knowledge. And, especially, there's no one to counsel with.

In a training meeting with our area presidency, we were told that we should "just be guided by the Spirit." I tried to get ready. I would begin by cleansing myself physically with a shower and fresh clothing. Beyond that, I was concerned and wondered, "Now, how do I do it? How do I get prepared? How do I leave the world?"

I remembered taking one of my children for a patriarchal blessing and the patriarch had some classical music playing. So I went and bought some Tabernacle Choir religious tapes and others that had Mormon hymns. Now I go into a separate room and turn on those tapes. I have them all categorized and I hope that I'm prompted in the ones that I pick out. I start listening to them and pretty soon I find myself singing along with them and sometimes even in harmony with them. There are thoughts that then start coming to me—I figure you can't draw water from an empty well and I'm hoping that those thoughts will come into my mind as I am doing the work of a patriarch. I had the mistaken impression that I would close my eyes and see and then I would just have to dictate what I would see. And others may do that but it's not my experience. And so, I generally listen to sacred music for an hour and then I read the scriptures. For me, it's a combination of sacred music and scripture reading. Sometimes I will get out the hymnbook and just read the words but usually I like to hear them sung. I want to hear the hymns that I'm familiar with, hymns that have a message to them.

There are other beautiful hymns—one of my favorites is, "Fair are the meadows, fair are the woodlands." I love that one and it's inspirational to me as far as the mood is concerned. But as for my thoughts, it does not speak to my mind in this experience. I listened to them sing "O Divine Redeemer" in one of the devotionals in the temple one time and I loved it and it was powerful and moving, but it doesn't do for me what the hymns do. The hymnbook, to me, is a sacred scriptural text, just like the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and so on. And the hymns contained in it are the ones which seem to fulfill my need to prepare my mind for my patriarchal calling. Strangely enough, in my experience, the hymns—whether sung by the choir, a soloist, by myself, or just contemplated—serve the valuable function of removing my thoughts from the cares of the world and putting me in tune with the Spirit. I don't mean to say that this is the only way it can be done, but it is the only way I know of that works for me. [^1]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "Unto All People," in Devotional Speeches of the Year, 1979 (Provo: Brigham Young University Press, 1980), p. 177; used by permission.
