LaVonne VanOrden, Blessed by the Hymns ( 1989)

Marion G. Romney

The Words of the Songs She Sang Comforted Me

As a child I lived in a land torn by a devastating revolution. As the contending forces pursued each other back and forth, I became greatly disturbed and agitated. Well do I remember when word came that the rebels were marching on Chihuahua City from Ciudad Juarez on the north and that the Federals were marching on the same city from Torreon on the south. My distress turned to fright—in fact, to terror—when they met at Casas Grandes, just ten miles away, and the shooting began. Some of our more adventuresome young men climbed to the top of the Montezuma Mountain where, through field glasses, they could watch the fighting.

Through those stirring and never-to-be-forgotten childhood experiences it was difficult for me to understand the doctrine of peace in one's heart while there was war in the land. But even then my fears were tempered some as I saw and listened to my sainted mother lull her babies to sleep. The words of the songs she sang comforted me. Some of them have been ringing in my mind through all the years of the intervening two-thirds of a century—these, for example, from "Guide Us O Thou Great Jehovah":

When the earth begins to tremble, Bid our fearful thoughts be still; When thy judgments spread destruction, Keep us safe on Zion's hill. [^1]

And these from Parley P. Pratt:

Come, O thou King of Kings! We've waited long for thee, With healing in thy wings To set thy people free. Come, make an end to sin And cleanse the earth by fire. . . . [^2]

And from W. W. Phelps:

In faith we'll rely on the arm of Jehovah To guide thru these last days of trouble and gloom, And after the scourges and harvest are over, We'll rise with the just when the Savior doth come. [^3]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Hymns, 1985, no. 27.
[^2] "Praise to the Man," Ensign, August 1983, p. 2; used by permission.
[^3] "If Ye Are Prepared Ye Shall Not Fear," Ensign, July 1981, pp. 3-4; used by permission.
