LaVonne VanOrden, Blessed by the Hymns ( 1989)

David B. Haight

In Humility, Our Savior

I wish everyone could grow up in a small town. I have so many happy memories of my boyhood. During those delightful summer and winter evenings we created most of our own activities and amusement. They were wonderful days. . . .

Sacrament meetings were very special occasions. . . .

Everyone was expected to sing the special sacrament hymn. Everyone did sing. Children were trained not only to be reverent but to know some of the words of the most familiar sacrament songs. I can still see Sister Ella Jack, who led the music, standing in full view between the sacrament table and piano, as she would pause and look over the congregation to be sure everyone had a songbook and was ready to sing. She gave special attention to see that the Aaronic Priesthood boys had songbooks. We would all sing. We were learning in our youth that to feel of the Spirit we must experience a change in our hearts, and to be in harmony on this sacred occasion required our singing the sacrament hymns. As we personally sang the words, our souls were better prepared to understand this sacred ordinance. At the Last Supper, the early Apostles joined with the Savior in singing. Matthew records, "And when they had sung an hymn, they went out into the mount of Olives." (Matt. 26:30.)

And we would sing in that sacrament meeting . . .

In humility, our Savior, Grant thy Spirit here, we pray; As we bless the bread and water In thy name this holy day. Let me not forget, O Savior, Thou didst bleed and die for me When thy heart was stilled and broken On the cross at Calvary. Fill our hearts with sweet forgiving; Teach us tolerance and love. Let our prayers find access to thee In thy holy courts above. Then, when we have proven worthy Of thy sacrifice divine, Lord, let us regain thy presence; Let thy glory round us shine. [^1]

These would be impressed upon our hearts because we had actually sung them. There come to one's soul heavenly thoughts as he joins in heavenly expressions coupled with heavenly melody. [^2]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Hymns, 1985, no. 43.
[^2] In Conference Report, April 1983, pp. 13-14; used by permission.
