LaVonne VanOrden, Blessed by the Hymns ( 1989)

Caroline Eyring Miner

Singing Sermons

My mother [Caroline Cottam Romney Eyring [^1] knew almost every song in the hymn book by heart. She was not a talented singer, but she could carry a tune with enthusiasm and some accuracy, and she loved to sing. Sometimes, on a Sunday afternoon, she would gather us around the piano, which had known better days, and, starting with "Abide With Me," we would sing through to "Dear to the Heart of the Shepherd," which, as I remember, was in those days, the last song in the book.

"Count Your Many Blessings" was a favorite of Mother's, and she impressed its message upon us. There was never anyone who was more of an optimist than she. I often thought she was thankful that she didn't have anything except the spirit of being thankful. Now I know that is truly something to be thankful for.

"Angry Words! Oh, Let Them Never From the Tongue Unbridled Slip," we learned as a duet, and its message sank deep into my heart. Family harmony was a reality in more ways than one. "Do What Is Right . . . let the consequence follow" put the fearless militancy of the crusader into our hearts. It was Mother's father's favorite and exemplified his fearlessness well. We were rewarded with a dime each for learning the words of this magnificent hymn from beginning to end.

In our home evenings we usually sang "Love at Home," page forty-nine. It was easy to find and could be counted upon to set the proper mood. The words were then sung automatically, but the phrases come back to me again and again with renewed significance. "There is joy in every sound when there's love at home. . . . Oh, there's One who smiles on high when there's love at home."

"O My Father," with its plaintive melody and its bitter sweetness of sad associations at funerals was another song Mother loved to sing. The greatest favorite, though, was "There Is an Hour of Peace and Rest."

There is an hour of peace and rest, Unmarred by earthly care; 'Tis when before the Lord I go, And kneel in secret prayer. May my heart be turned to pray, Pray in secret day by day. . . . [^2]

These "sung sermons" have stayed with me much longer than the unsung ones, maybe because I was not conscious of their being sermons at all. By contrast, I tremble to think of the "sung sermons" some of our children are getting from television and radio without supervision. Maybe, as parents, we had better start singing more sermons of our own. [^3]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "Love, from Your Daughter Barbara," Ensign, December 1976, pp. 33-34; used by permission.
[^2] Hymns, 1985, no. 144.
[^3] "Singing Sermons," Relief Society Magazine, April 1962, p. 266; used by permission.
