LaVonne VanOrden, Blessed by the Hymns ( 1989)

FIVE

Gathering the Righteous with Song

And whatsoever city thy servants shall enter, and the people of that city receive their testimony, let thy peace and thy salvation be upon that city; that they may gather out of that city the righteous, that they may come forth to Zion, . . . with songs of everlasting joy. (D&C 109:39.)

Edward Tullidge

Then Would Ring Out the Hymn of the Latter-day Saints

Much of the success of "Mormonism" in foreign lands is due to the fact that the elders, like Christ and his apostles of old, went about preaching the gospel "without purse or scrip." . . .

Though they bore the title of elders, these missionaries, especially the native ones, were generally young men from the age of twenty to thirty. Scarcely were they converted ere they were sent out to mission the land. . . .

Into the villages of England, Scotland, and Wales these youths made their way, with hymn-book and Bible in hand, but with no ministerial recommendation except a forceful, innovative intellectuality, and souls inspired with the glories of a new and conquering faith.

Alone, at eventide, they would uncover their heads, on some green bit of common, or, if on the Sabbath day, would daringly near the old village church, which well might tremble at such sacrilege, as did they literally in those bold missionary attempts, that never had been made but for youth's rich unconsciousness of inability. Then would ring out the hymn of the Latter-day Saints:

Go, ye messengers of glory, Run, ye legates of the skies, Go and tell the pleasing story, That a glorious angel flies; Great and mighty, With a message from on high! [^1]

Or perchance it would be this instead:

The morning breaks, the shadows flee; Lo, Zion's standard is unfurled! . . . The dawning of a brighter day Majestic rises on the world. [^2]

And many a village has been startled with this tremendous proclamation, from the lips of young men:

Jehovah speaks! Let earth give ear, And Gentile nations turn and live.

First the woman would come out to listen, on the threshold of her cottage, after supper; then she would draw near, and wonder about this boy-preacher—to her eyes so much like her own boy, who, perhaps, is playing at some evening games with his companions, near by. Next comes her husband, and after awhile the boys themselves leave their games, and with their sisters, gather to listen. And so are also gathered other family groups of the village to swell the impromptu congregation. This is a truthful picture, for the author is describing a literal experience. . . .

'Tis a simple story; but from that house Mormonism is destined to spread through all the village, until the aged clergyman, educated at college, in his pulpit which he has occupied for a quarter of a century, fears that boy as much as a second Goliath might have feared the stripling David.

And thus Mormonism ran from village to town, and from town to city. [^3]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "The Power and Importance of Sincere Singing," Improvement Era, March 1951, pp. 141-42; used by permission.
[^2] Hymns, 1985, no. 1.
[^3] The Women of Mormondom (New York: Tullidge & Crandall, 1877), pp. 268-72.
