LaVonne VanOrden, Blessed by the Hymns ( 1989)

George Albert Smith

Singing Softens Hearts

Many years ago, two humble elders laboring in the Southern States Mission were walking through the woods and finally came out into a clearing where there was a humble cottage, the home of friends who were not members of the Church. Overlooking this clearing was a hill covered by large trees. It had been a warm day, and when the elders arrived, instead of going into the house, they took their chairs out on the shady porch to visit with the family.

They didn't know that they were being watched or that danger threatened. They had come through a section of the country that was unfriendly, and having found a home where the family was friendly, they were grateful to the Lord for it.

They were asked to sing, and they selected the hymn, "Do What Is Right." And as they started to sing, there arrived on the brow of the hill above them a mob of armed horsemen. One of those men had previously threatened the missionaries and had kept watch for them on the road.

These armed men had come there with the determination to drive those missionaries out, but as they arrived at the top of the hill, they heard these missionaries singing. The leader of the mob dismounted and looked down among the trees and saw the roof of the house, but he could not see the elders. They continued to sing.

One by one the men got off their horses. One by one they removed their hats, and when the last note had died away and the elders had finished their singing, the men remounted their horses and rode away, and the leader said to his companions, "Men who sing like that are not the kind of men we have been told they are. These are good men."

The result was that the leader of the mob became converted to the Church and later was baptized. I never hear that hymn sung, but I think of that very unusual experience when two missionaries, under the influence of the Spirit of God, turned the arms of the adversary away from them and brought repentance into the minds of those who had come to destroy them. [^1]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Unpublished; used by permission.
