LaVonne VanOrden, Blessed by the Hymns ( 1989)

Marvin Earl Brown

We're Going to Sing!

In June 1972 when I was attending a Mission Presidents' Seminar prior to leaving for my mission in Argentina, I was privileged to interpret for President Benjamin Parra, who was the first non-English-speaking mission president ever called. It was at the final banquet that he arose to bear his testimony and related an experience he had had as a young missionary in Mexico. (I had heard of this young missionary through a mutual friend who had known him in the mission field. He was the grandson of one of the Mexican martyrs who was executed in 1912 by Pancho Villa for refusing to renounce his testimony. At the time of the execution, this martyr's wife was standing as a witness to it, holding a small child in her arms. This child had grown up to be the mother of President Benjamin Parra.)

As a young missionary, President Parra and his companion were riding on a train to go to a district conference where he, as a district president, would preside. As they rode through the night, he woke up his companion and said, "Levantese!" (Get up, get ready!) "Si, Parra." It was only about 4:00 in the morning but they got dressed. When the train stopped to pick up a can of milk, they jumped off the train. The companion then asked, "Que hacemos ahora, Parra?" (This was repeated every time the senior companion gave a little order.) "Que hacemos ahora, Parra?" (What are we going to do now?) "Caminamos!" (We're going to walk!) And they walked sixteen kilometers out across the desert through the bushes until they came to a hill. "Que hacemos ahora, Parra?" "Subimos" (We're going to climb!) And when they got to the top of this hill, "Que hacemos ahora, Parra?" "Cantamos!" (We're going to sing!) And they set their briefcases down, took out their hymnbooks, and sang four or five songs. The people from the village at the bottom of the hill gathered around them as they sang. They preached to them for four or five hours, filled a ditch, and baptized the entire village. President Parra was guided by the Spirit to this distant village and gathered the people by singing the hymns. [^1]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Marjorie P. Hinckley is the wife of Gordon P. Hinckley of the First Presidency of the Church.
