LaVonne VanOrden, Blessed by the Hymns ( 1989)

Harry E. Snow

Hymn Has Power

On a windy day in October about two years ago, an elder turned away from a home in Columbus, Mississippi. As he left, a strong wind came up suddenly and blew some of his tracts out of his hand, carrying one of them around to the rear of the house where the gardener placed it in the trash can. Later, the sister of the housewife was looking through the can for a report thrown there by mistake. She came upon the tract with the words to "O My Father" written upon it.

She glanced at it and thrilled at the harmonious chord which it struck within her heart. Secretly she believed in her heart in some life before this yet did not know it as pre-existence. So fascinated with the poem was she that she sat down and memorized it before going into the house. Two years passed, during which she kept her treasured poem. She visited at the home of a friend whom she had previously advised not to rent rooms to Mormon elders.

Against her advice they had given the elders a room and on this afternoon, Miss Agnew sat on the front porch conversing with one of the elders. She asked to see the picture story of Mormonism and was astonished to find the poem "O My Father" written on the first page. She inquired into pre-existence and the resulting conversation lasted from four o'clock in the afternoon until far into the night. When she finally left, she had the answer to her question, "where did I come from."

From that time forward, she pursued a cautious study of Mormonism, mainly because of the curious fascination it held for her. She obtained a copy of the Book of Mormon intending to condemn it, but found nothing to condemn.

She accompanied the lady missionaries to the district conference where she was privileged to hear Elder Joseph F. Merrill and President William P. Whitaker. This she did at the risk of losing her position, but said later that it would have been well worth that sacrifice just to hear those two men speak.

Soon she will enter the waters of baptism and become a member of the Kingdom of God. [^1]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Theresa Snow Hill, Erastus Snow Stories (Salt Lake City: Privately published, 1954), pp. 77-78.
