LaVonne VanOrden, Blessed by the Hymns ( 1989)

Erastus Snow

Erastus the Singer

In one of the wealthier homes in New Jersey lived a fine family, one who one day would touch the life of [Erastus Snow] very closely. The mother of the family was a regular churchgoer, a regular baptized church member. They were the cultured type of folk who would not have deigned to stop to listen to the harangue of a street vendor of the gospel. The father of the family alone did not wish to belong to any church for he didn't feel anything but irritation in the type of religion of the day. He did read his Bible and was willing that his wife be as active as she wished in her church and was more than willing that she teach her children the way of the good Lord Jesus.

This man, Nathaniel Ashby, was walking down the town's main thoroughfare one evening when he halted at the sound of a clear baritone voice coming from a hall down the street away. Stopping at the door he saw posted there a notice of a service being held there of the Church of Jesus Christ. Thinking to hear more singing, Nathaniel stepped inside just as the speaker bowed in prayer and how he prayed—"just as if the good Lord stood right at his side, not loud as if he needed to shout to make God hear his voice, but spoke as one man to another." Loving good music he was glad when the young man began another hymn, this one a favorite "I Need Thee Every Hour." For the first time he heard the story of the restored gospel, for the Elder (as you may have surmised) was [Erastus Snow]. Although he was only twenty-two years of age, he had preached many hundreds of sermons, had told the "glorious news" hundreds of times to many, many folks in these United States, and told it in such a way as to make those people think. Likely too, there had been a close connection between the close attention to his oratory, the subject matter told, and the contact with the soul he made with his singing.

When this same Nathaniel arrived home he explained to his family that if they wanted to hear the hymns of the Church sung beautifully and the gospel story told convincingly, they had better go to that street the following Thursday. The sequel to this story was that the whole family was baptized. [^1]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "Hymns Bring Peace, Strength to Those in Need of Reassurance," Church News, 11 August 1985, pp. 7, 14.
