LaVonne VanOrden, Blessed by the Hymns ( 1989)

Wm. James Mortimer

Called to Serve

When regional representatives and fulltime mission presidents met [in April 1985] during general conference, a simple event took place that will never be forgotten by those present.

The meeting itself was historic since it was the first time that all the mission presidents—those serving from around the world and those newly called who would begin service in July—and all of the Church's regional representatives had come together at one time.

But that is not what made the occasion so memorable.

The meeting in the Assembly Hall on Temple Square was filled with masterful discourses and important instructions from members of the First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve. The concluding speaker was Elder Boyd K. Packer, who had arranged the event that proved to be so profound.

Elder Packer spoke of missionary service and the importance of preparing to receive a mission call from the prophet. At an appointed moment about eighty young men and women from the Missionary Training Center entered the Assembly Hall from the rear, walking two by two, singing these words from a simple Primary song, "Called To Serve":

Called to serve Him, heav'nly King of glory, Chosen e'er to witness for his name, Far and wide we tell a Father's story, Far and wide his love proclaim. Onward, ever onward, as we glory in his name, Onward, ever onward, as we glory in his name; Forward, pressing forward, as a triumph song we sing. God our strength will be; press forward ever, Called to serve our King. [^1]

After walking through the aisles, the missionaries gathered in front of the rostrum and sang both this song again and "Carry On." Words were projected on a screen and the entire congregation joined in singing. The impact of this experience was so moving that tears were flowing and deep emotions were stirred. It was an unforgettable spiritual moment.

But why was it so memorable?

It was the impact of the music that really made the difference. The simple act of singing turned an otherwise fine meeting into a spiritually moving experience.

Good music is powerful! [^2]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "Midnight Concert," Ensign, January 1981, pp. 28-30; used by permission.
[^2] "Music's Powerful Influence," Church News, 11 August 1985, p. 16.
