LaVonne VanOrden, Blessed by the Hymns ( 1989)

Diana McFarland Brown

Midnight Concert

It was June 1961, and I was journeying with sixteen other students on a Brigham Young University travel study tour to study French in Quebec, Canada. We would be there tomorrow, and it was natural that our anticipation was mounting. As my anticipation grew, so did my apprehension: [for] the challenge I felt to be a missionary, an exemplar of gospel living. . . . At nineteen I had never really had any close associations with nonmembers. . . . it was difficult to speak of what I felt so deeply. . . .

"Let's go into the dome car and sing—practice some French songs and do some boning up," someone suggested.

We filed out of our car and into the connecting dome car. . . . We climbed the steps into the dome, and . . . found only two occupants, a young mother and her tearful little son. After the mother assured us that our singing would not disturb them, we began to sing, hesitantly and with much misuse of French accents and stumbling over words. Quickly our meager repertoire of French songs was exhausted, and we drifted comfortably into the familiar music and language of our Latter-day Saint hymns. It was comforting and strengthening to sing the hymns I'd sung since childhood, and I noticed the little boy stopped crying as we sang. Soon he fell asleep across his mother's lap.

I don't know how long we sang, but I recall the lifting of my spirit and the deepening of my conviction as we sang "I Know That My Redeemer Lives" and "O My Father," and the happiness we felt as we sang "Battle Hymn of the Republic." Finally, we ended with "Come, Come, Ye Saints," and as the last strains of "All is well" faded, we began to move quietly out of the dome.

I was first to leave the dome to descend to the lower level of the car, and I was unprepared for the sight that met my eyes. Dozens of upturned faces were looking toward us. Every seat, which had been vacant when we entered the dome car earlier, was now filled, and the people were even standing and sitting in the aisles. Unknown to us, these people had gathered to listen as we sang. A woman standing near the stairway touched my arm, and I saw that there were tears in her eyes. "You young people sing so beautifully," she said, "because you sing from your hearts. Who are you, and where do you come from?"

"We're Mormons, ma'am," I replied. "We are students from Brigham Young University in Provo, Utah."

"Mormons . . . ," she murmured.

She was right. We had sung from our hearts, and my heart was still singing. I heard myself saying, "What do you know about the Mormons?"

"Well, I have heard your lovely Tabernacle Choir," she replied.

"Would you like to know more about the Mormons?" I asked.

"Yes, I really would."

"What do I do now?" I thought in panic. "I've finally asked the Golden Questions, but where do I begin?"

Then a calm, sure voice behind me spoke, and I turned to see a returned missionary from our group reach out and take the woman's hand in a warm, firm grasp. "Perhaps you have heard of a man named Joseph Smith," he said. "Let me tell you more about him."

Soon he was telling of Joseph Smith's first vision and explaining the coming forth of the Book of Mormon. Several people who had listened to us sing stayed to hear what this earnest young member of our group had to say, and some left their names and addresses with requests for missionary contact or for copies of the Book of Mormon.

I was filled with peace and joy. I had asked the Golden Questions, and my friend, the returned missionary, had shown me where to go from there. Only a short while before, we had sung about Joseph Smith's first vision in "Oh, How Lovely Was the Morning." From their earliest years in Primary, children in the Church hear the story of "the boy's first uttered prayer." What better way to introduce the gospel than to relate that beautiful story? This experience was to guide me many times throughout the summer ahead.

In the years to come I was to learn to follow up the Golden Questions with an invitation to my home to see a film and meet the missionaries. And I have learned that there are many other effective ways to introduce the gospel to others. But I like to remember that night on the train when we sang from our hearts, unaware of our listeners. We truly did have something to sing about, and our message had been heard. [^1]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "Midnight Concert," Ensign, January 1981, pp. 28-30; used by permission.
