LaVonne VanOrden, Blessed by the Hymns ( 1989)

Ezra Taft Benson

No Strains of Music Were Ever More Welcome

Shortly after the close of World War II, Elder Ezra Taft Benson was assigned to be the president of the European Mission. Among his duties was the distribution of food and clothing from the Church in America. He traveled to Europe with Frederick W. Babbel, who gives the following account of how a famous hymn led them to the assembled saints.

Upon arriving at Karlsruhe, we made inquiries to learn where our saints might be meeting in district conference. Finally, there was pointed out to us a sizeable area of almost completely demolished buildings and we were told that they were probably meeting somewhere in that section.

Parking our car near massive heaps of twisted steel and concrete, we climbed over several large piles of rubble and threaded our way between the naked blasted walls in the general direction which had been pointed out to us. As we viewed the desolation on all sides of us, our task seemed hopeless. Then we heard the distant strains of "Come, Come, Ye Saints" being sung in German. We were overjoyed. No strains of music were ever more welcome!

We hurried in the direction of the sound of the singing and arrived at a badly scarred building which still had several usable rooms. In one of the rooms we found 260 joyous saints still in conference, although it was already long past their dismissal time. (They had already been in session over three hours that afternoon, but had been hoping and praying that we might arrive in time to meet with them.)

As we entered the room, the closing strains of this beloved Mormon hymn swelled to a crescendo of joyousness that overwhelmed us. . . . With tears of gratitude streaming down our cheeks, we went as quickly as possible to the improvised stand. Never have I seen President Benson so deeply and visibly moved as on that occasion. . . . The entire audience rose to its feet to pay silent tribute to President Benson and to get a better look at us as we moved to the front. . . . In a moment, President Benson arose and [delivered a speech]. [^1]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "A Time of Renewal," Ensign, April 1974, p. 35; used by permission.
