LaVonne VanOrden, Blessed by the Hymns ( 1989)

Susan Linford

Gird Up Your Loins!

While serving a mission in South America, I had the experience that almost every missionary has—having to get along with a companion who is very difficult to get along with. To make matters worse, at the time I received this new companion, I had been suffering from minor illnesses which were hard to control because medication was not readily available and the daily 110 degree heat seemed to intensify my discomfort. The missionary work in the city in which we were located progressed at a painstakingly slow rate. The added pressure for baptisms seemed weightier than ever and it was easy to become discouraged when the people were not interested in what we had to give them.

I remember one day in particular when I was waiting with my companion for a meeting in the chapel. I was so discouraged and unhappy. I felt like my life was so hard and I did not know how I was going to live through it. I could not keep the tears from welling up in my eyes. It happened to be July 24th in a country where there is no regard given to such an important date of celebration in our Church. Thinking of this brought on more homesickness and an even deeper yearning to find a remedy for my miserable state.

As I sat waiting in the chapel with nothing better to do than drown myself in my sorrows and self-pity, I picked up a hymn book. I happened to turn to "Come, Come, Ye Saints." My tear-filled eyes slowly read through the first verse. Then, as I read the second verse, my whole soul was struck powerfully with the true meaning William Clayton expressed in these humble words:

Why should we mourn or think our lot is hard? 'Tis not so; all is right. Why should we think to earn a great reward If we now shun the fight? Gird up your loins; fresh courage take. Our God will never us forsake; And soon we'll have this tale to tell— All is well! All is well! [^1]

This made such an impression on me. What a blessing it was to read those inspiring words of encouragement at such a time in my life!

Now, when I think back on this experience, I have to chuckle at myself for thinking I had it so bad when I really didn't at all. But how grateful I was for this beautiful hymn which helped me to put my problems in a more appropriate perspective. [^2]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "Are You True?" in Devotional Speeches of the Year, 1980 (Provo: Brigham Young University Press, 1981), pp. 43-45; used by permission.
[^2] Unpublished; used by permission.
