Have you ever seen a picture of children who look very hungry and need something to eat? Did you want to send them food?

When people’s homes are destroyed by a storm or an earthquake, do you wish you could help them?

Has a family member or friend been sick? Did you wish you could make him or her better?

How do you feel when you see someone who is hurt or treated unkindly by others? Even though you want to help, you might feel there is little you can do. Yet there is a way you can help those who are suffering from war, from need, or from evil or other hurtful things. One of the most powerful ways you can help is to pray for them.

Heavenly Father hears the prayers of his children. He understands the feelings that are in your heart. Your feelings of love and sympathy come because you are his child. As you ask Heavenly Father to bless those who are suffering, remember that he knows best how to answer your prayers. After you pray, listen carefully. He will let you know if you can help. Maybe he will prompt others to help or, in his great wisdom, answer in other ways. He loves you, and he loves the people you are praying for. When you pray for others, you are helping them in a very real and powerful way.

To make a booklet about praying for others, mount page 15 on a heavier piece of paper. Draw your own idea of someone you would like to remember in your prayers in the blank box. Then cut along the solid lines. Punch two holes in the side of each page where indicated; then put the pages in order and place the title page on top. Thread a piece of string or ribbon through the holes, and tie the ends in a bow.

1.  Invite four men to portray different prophets from the Book of Mormon. Ask each one to explain how he, as that prophet, prayed for someone or was blessed when someone prayed for him. Divide the children into four groups and have them move from “prophet” to “prophet.” Possible selections: Enos (see Enos), Alma (see Mosiah 27:8–15), Ammon, (see Mosiah 28:1, 5–9; Alma 19:22–23), Nephi (see 3 Ne. 1:11–15).

2.  Have each child fold a sheet of paper in fourths and fill each square with the name or a drawing of a family member. Let the children think about the needs of these family members and about how they could be remembered in prayer; then discuss some ideas with them. Suggest that the children share these lists with their parents.

3.  Divide the children into four discussion groups. Have each group discuss how they as children can help one of the following: people who do not have enough to eat, people whose homes have been destroyed in storms or floods, people who are sick, the prophet, and the missionaries. Write each group’s suggestions on a chalkboard. Teach the children that praying for others is a powerful way of helping and that we must always pray that Heavenly Father’s will be done (see Matt. 6:10).
