Open PDF

Lea and Mom were almost done shopping. Then Mom stopped to look at some clothes.

“I’ll be just a few minutes,” Mom said.

Lea sighed. When Mom said “a few minutes,” sometimes it meant 20!

Lea found a shelf of toys nearby. She flipped through a coloring book and then tossed a bouncy ball a few times. But that got boring pretty fast.

Then she pulled out something shiny and round. It was a yo-yo! It looked just like the one Oskar had brought to school last week. During recess he had showed everyone his fancy tricks. The tricks had names like “Walk the Dog” and “Around the World.” Lea had asked him if she could try, but Oskar wouldn’t let her.

Lea slipped the loop of the string over her finger. She let the yo-yo drop and then tugged on the string like she had seen Oskar do. The yo-yo hit the floor with a clunk. She tried again. After a few tries, she was able to bring the yo-yo back to her hand! If she could figure that out so quickly, she could probably learn to do all the tricks Oskar had done.

That’s when Lea looked at the price tag. She frowned. She didn’t have nearly that much in her money jar at home!

“I’m almost done, Lea,” Mom called.

Lea sighed. She was about to put the yo-yo back when an idea popped into her head. The yo-yo wasn’t very big. She could slip it into her pocket and keep it! The store owner wasn’t looking. No one would ever know. She could keep it forever and learn to do new tricks. And kids at school would think she was cool.

As Lea looked down at the yo-yo in her hand, she felt prickly and nervous. Her hands felt sweaty. She gripped the yo-yo tighter. What was this bad feeling? She wanted it to go away.

Then she remembered something Dad had told her before she got baptized.

“After you’re baptized, you’ll receive the gift of the Holy Ghost,” Dad had said. “The Holy Ghost helps us make good choices. He speaks to us in a still, small voice.”

“He’ll talk to me?” Lea asked.

“Not exactly,” Dad said. “It may be like a thought coming into your mind. Or a feeling coming into your heart.”

“What kind of feeling?”

“It’s different for each person,” Dad said. “But usually, when you do something good, the Holy Ghost will help you feel calm and peaceful. When there’s something dangerous, He will warn you. And when you want to do something wrong, the Holy Ghost will leave, and you’ll feel confused or unhappy.”

Lea looked down at the yo-yo. She really wanted it. But she knew the Holy Ghost was telling her that stealing was wrong.

Lea put the yo-yo back on the shelf. As soon as she did, she felt peaceful and warm. She walked back to Mom.

“I’m done,” Mom said. “Are you ready to go?”

Lea smiled. “Yes.”

As they left the store, Lea felt as light and happy as sunshine. The yo-yo might have been fun for a while. But following the Holy Ghost was something she wanted to do always.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="139168134" id="aside1_p1">One day at school I was taking a spelling test, and my teacher called out a word I had no idea how to spell. I was panicking! And I looked at someone’s paper. After the test my stomach wasn’t feeling good. I told my mom about how I looked at someone else’s paper. I knew that the feeling I got was from the Holy Ghost. I know I should always listen to the Holy Ghost.</p> <div class="bio"> <p data-aid="139168138" id="aside1_p2">Jonah J., age 8, Idaho, USA</p> </div> [/SIDEBAR]
