Have you ever said an unkind word to someone and then wished you had not? Have you ever hurt someone’s feelings because you didn’t think carefully before you acted? Do you ever feel uncertain about what you should do when someone wants you to do something you know is wrong? Have you wondered what you should do when someone hurts your feelings? In all of these situations, thinking about Jesus Christ can help you.

It is easy to do things that hurt others or ourselves when we do not think carefully before we act or when our minds are full of anger, fear, or confusion. Because our thoughts determine our actions, thinking about Jesus Christ can help us. Thoughts of his life, his example, and what he wants us to do can bring peace to our minds and help us make righteous choices.

As you think about the Savior, ask yourself, “What would Jesus Christ want me to do?” Answering this question will help each of us follow him and choose the right.

The Savior loves us and wants us to be happy. He wants us to be kind, loving, forgiving, helpful, obedient, honest, and thankful. When we do what he wants us to do, we are keeping his commandments. Following the example of Jesus Christ will help us be happy.

Carefully color the “What Does Jesus Christ Want Me to Do?” reminder. Cut it out along the outside heavy black lines; then fold it along the dotted lines. Glue the bottom tab to the inside edge of the top panel. Put your reminder in a place where you will see it often.

1.  Sing “Tell Me the Stories of Jesus” (Children’s Songbook, 57; Sing with Me, B-46). Place pictures of the Savior’s ministry on the wall, and write the following corresponding scripture references on slips of paper. Have the children discuss each set of scripture passages and find the picture that corresponds with each. Have the children tell what Jesus Christ did and how we can follow his example. Scripture and picture possibilities: (1) Mark 1:9–11; Luke 3:21–22. John the Baptist Baptizing Jesus, Gospel Art Picture Kit #208—Jesus was baptized; we can be baptized. (2) Matthew 19:13–15 [Matt. 19:13–15]; Mark 10:13–16. Christ and the Children, Gospel Art Picture Kit #216—Jesus Christ loves the little children; we can love one another. (3) Matthew 26:36–39 [Matt. 26:36–39]; Mark 14:32–36. Jesus Praying in Gethsemane, Gospel Art Picture Kit #227—Jesus prayed and submitted himself to the will of the Father; we can pray and be obedient. (4) Luke 17:11–14; John 9: 1–7. The Ten Lepers, Gospel Art Picture Kit #221; Jesus Healing the Blind, Gospel Art Picture Kit #213—Jesus showed compassion for those who were sick and afflicted; we can help those who are ill or disabled.

2.  Prepare slips of paper with the following situations written on them: (1) Your little brother is having trouble with his math homework. You are good at math. (2) Your big sister thought you wrote in her schoolbook. She was angry at you but then learned you didn’t do it. Now she’s sorry. (3) You left your bike in the driveway. Dad is not happy about it. (4) You want to buy a candy bar but will not have enough money if you pay your tithing. (5) You see a mother pushing a stroller and trying to open a door. You are by the door. Place these slips of paper in a small container. Have the children sit in a circle. Pass a beanbag or other small item around as the pianist plays “Choose the Right Way” (Children’s Songbook, 160; The Friend, June 1995, 12). When the music stops, have the child holding the item take a slip of paper from the container. Read the situation; then ask and discuss, “What does Jesus Christ want you to do?”
