Exodus 20:1-17

And God spoke all these words: “I am the Lord your God, who brought you out of

Egypt, out of the land of slavery.

You shall have no other gods before me.

You shall not make for yourself an idol in the form of anything in heaven above or on the earth beneath or in the waters below. You shall not bow down to them or worship them; for I, the Lord your God, am a jealous God, punishing the

children for the sin of the fathers to the third and fourth generation of those who hate me, but showing love to thousands who love me and keep my commandments.

You shall not misuse the name of the Lord your God, for the Lord will not hold anyone guiltless who misuses his name.

Remember the Sabbath day by keeping it holy. Six days you shall labor and do all your work, but the seventh day is a Sabbath to the Lord your God. On it you shall not do any work, neither you, nor your son or daughter, nor your

manservant or maidservant, nor your animals, nor the alien within your gates. For

in six days the Lord made the heavens and the earth, the sea, and all that is in them, but he rested on the seventh day. Therefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day and made it holy.

Honor your father and your mother, so that you may live long in the land the Lord your God is giving you.

You shall not murder.

You shall not commit adultery. You shall not steal.

You shall not give false testimony against your neighbor.

You shall not covet your neighbor's house. You shall not covet your neighbor's wife, or his manservant or maidservant, his ox or donkey, or anything that belongs to your neighbor.” (NIV)

This free eChart is taken from the pamphlet The Ten Commandments ISBN 9781596360617. The chart gives contemporary and traditional wording along with biblical and modern-day examples, as well as discussion questions. Save $5 on your $25 order enter coupon code: 5EC12 at www.rose- publishing.com.

This free e-Chart is taken from the pamphlet The Ten Commandments © 2009 Rose Publishing You may print 10 copies, but do not post on which gives contemporary and traditional wording along with

biblical and modern-day examples, as well as discussion questions. ISBN 9781596360617.

© 2012 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies, but do not post on the internet or send via email.Your friends may sign up for Free Rose Bible eCharts & Newsletters at: www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

NIV Ten Commandments Illustrated Wall

Chart

This wall chart helps children and youth understand

how God’s rules apply to their lives. Includes the “promise” about honoring parents that goes with the fifth commandment. The teaching pictures help them

understand concepts like “no other gods” and “no graven images,” making the commandments relevant for today.

Wall Chart ........... 9789901981335...........$14.99

Also available Unlaminated.

The Ten Commandments

The Ten Commandments is an ideal Bible study resource for youth and adults. This 14-panel pamphlet can be read in 30 minutes and shows both the traditional and contemporary wording of each of the 10

Commandments, a principle and the meaning of each commandment, what Jesus taught about the commandments, and why the 10

Commandments are important today.

Pamphlet ....................9781596360617 ................ $3.99

Also available as a Wall Chart. Quantity discounts available.

The Exodus

Travel with Moses and the children of Israel from

Egypt to the promised land of Canaan as found in the Bible from Exodus 12 through Joshua 7. Full color illustrations by renowned artist and illustrator Hugh Claycombe. Reproducible worksheets and teaching tips on back of this chart. Lamination will not affect the ability to photocopy worksheets.

Wall Chart ........... 9781890947552...........$14.99

Also available Unlaminated.

The Tabernacle

Study the Tabernacle for the rich Old Testament

symbolism that points to Jesus. See the parallels between the Old Testament sacrifices and priests’duties, and Jesus’service as the perfect sacrifice and perfect high priest. Wall chart is 19.5” x

26”.

Wall Chart ........... 9789901980925...........$14.99

Also available as Unlaminated.

Sign up now to receive FREE Rose Bible eCharts at www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

ROSE PUBLISHING/ASPIRE PRESS www.rose-publishing.com info@rose-publishing.com

or call (310) 353-2100

Rose Publishing, Inc., publishes full-color, easy-to-use Bible reference materials, including charts, maps, time lines and biblical reference pamphlets for pastors, Bible study leaders, new member classes & small groups.
