James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

PREFACE

IN EARLY 1997, I RECEIVED A telephone call one Saturday morning from my father, who lives in another state. Unlike most of our conversations, which deal with family updates and the like, he began this call with a rather firm declaration. "I know what your next book should be," he said. I had recently completed a book with two dear friends, the late Rex E. Lee and his wife, Janet—and I responded that I did not have plans to write another book. He continued, undeterred, "No, you need to write a biography of James E. Faust."

Though still half asleep, I knew immediately that he was right, but I asked him anyway why he would make this suggestion. His answer was simple: "Because he's a good man, and the members of the Church don't know enough about him."

Not knowing President Faust, but feeling a need to act on my father's suggestion, I passed the idea along to Sheri Dew, who is the vice-president of publishing at Deseret Book and a long-time friend. She, in turn, discussed it with Ron Millett, president of Deseret Book, and the two of them arranged to meet with President Faust and discuss the idea with him.

He listened politely and said he would consider their proposal and then let them know of his decision. Having read, some months later, his journal entry for that day, I know that his initial reaction was a preference that such a book not be done. But after several weeks of discussion with his wife, family members, and a few close associates, he informed Ron and Sheri that he would agree to have a book done—but with two conditions: First, that the biography be brief; and, second, that a selection of his teachings be included in the same volume.

Soon after the three of them visited for the second time, I was asked to meet with President Faust to discuss the possibility of our working together. To say that I drove to that appointment with trepidation would be something of an understatement, but as I was shown into his office, I learned the first of many things I did not know about President James E. Faust. As he stood and took my hand in his, he said, "Jim, how are you?"

In an instant, I decided not to begin our discussion with a deception, and so I replied, "I'm a little nervous."

With his warm smile and a characteristic wave of his hand, he said, "Oh, don't be," and with that any concern I had over meeting a man I so greatly admired simply vanished.

Beyond learning in that moment of his graciousness and warmth, I learned during the subsequent hour of his humility, his discomfort with public recognition, his thoughtful and soft-spoken manner, his humor, and his desire to stand behind—rather than in front of—the messages and sermons he has shared with millions during his ministry as a General Authority. But even with an expressed reluctance to have a book written on his life, President Faust indicated that if sharing something of his life would provide greater insight into his ministry and teachings, he would be willing to work with me on this book.

Over the next year, we met together for an hour almost every Monday morning and discussed his life. Coupled with those interviews, I reviewed the journals he has kept since his call to the Quorum of the Twelve, studied his talks, pored over his scrapbooks, and interviewed Sister Ruth Faust, each of their five children and spouses, several grandchildren, two of his brothers, and several friends and associates. In addition, I conducted interviews with several of his associates among the General Authorities.

The first time we met, President Faust indicated he thought the biographical portion of this book ought to be about 150 pages, but as we began our interviews and I tried to envision his life broken up into chapters, I felt that about 200 pages would be needed. With his acquiescence, I worked to distill a long and full life into a very brief sketch that, on the one hand, does not do justice to a great man who has made significant—and generally unheralded—contributions to his family, his community, his profession, and The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, but that, on the other hand, is in keeping with his lifelong desire to be, in his words, "a workhorse, not a showhorse."

The limitations on length created challenges in deciding what in President Faust's life to cover and what to leave out. Those decisions were mine alone, and he gave me absolute freedom to write the book as I deemed appropriate. The biography is arranged chronologically, up until President Faust's call to the Twelve, at which point, I opted to deal with his life more thematically—trying to provide enough information on selected topics to give the reader an insight into this man. As a result, vast portions of his life and ministry have not been treated, but that is always the case with biographies, no matter how long or exhaustive they may be. In addition, his absolute adherence to the confidentialities surrounding most of the work in which he is involved precluded my delving into much of what he has done as a General Authority.

These same limitations on length also seemed to dictate that I not interview many of those who know President Faust well, for had I done so I could not possibly have used any significant portion of what I would have gleaned from these interviews. As a result, there were many family members, friends, and Church leaders—both local and general—whom I did not interview, all of whom could have shared significant insights into President Faust's life and ministry. Many, no doubt, would have welcomed the opportunity to talk about a man they know so well and love so much, and I apologize that more of his associates could not have been included.

As for the collection of President Faust's teachings presented herein, these, too, represent a fraction of the countless messages he has shared throughout the world. Most of the talks he has given, unfortunately, have not been formally prepared or recorded, and so I drew from those for which a manuscript existed. Every general conference talk he has given is represented, as well as numerous talks given at firesides, devotionals, funerals, leadership meetings, and community events. My hope in preparing the two sections of this book has been that each would complement the other—that as the reader understands more of President Faust's life, he or she will have greater insight into his teachings, and vice-versa. If there is a lack of cohesiveness between the two sections, the failure is mine alone.

In the course of writing this book, I have amassed a lengthy list of those have helped me in one way or another—but in all cases significantly.

First of all, I thank my wife, Kristi, for her ongoing love, support, encouragement, humor, and friendship. These are very tangible traits, and without them I could not have undertaken this project, nor would I have ever finished it. I also thank my children—Laura (and her husband, Trevor), Shannon, Dianna, Lindsay, Stephanie, and Dana—for their patience and their willingness to share in a marvelous opportunity. I also express gratitude to my father and mother, Preston and Frances Bell, for all they have done to teach and encourage me, as well as to my four sisters and two brothers.

I appreciate the warm and gracious way in which the Faust family has welcomed me into their homes and their lives. Though neither Sister Faust nor any of the Fausts' children—Jim, Janna, Marcus, Lisa, and Robert—enjoys the very public nature of President Faust's calling any more than he does, they all (together with their spouses), were more than happy to help in any way they could. That support was invaluable during the preparation of this book. In addition, several grandchildren (and, in the case of those who are married, their spouses) shared valuable insights into their grandparents.

At one point, I asked President Faust for his advice on who among the General Authorities I should interview, and his response was, "Oh, they're all such busy men; they certainly don't need to spend their time talking about me." Despite his protestations, each of the General Authorities I called immediately agreed to meet and gave generously of his time. To President Gordon B. Hinckley and President Thomas S. Monson of the First Presidency, as well as Elder L. Tom Perry, Elder Neal A. Maxwell, Elder Joseph B. Wirthlin, and Elder Jeffrey R. Holland of the Twelve, I express sincere appreciation for their time and their insight into a man they all regard as a beloved colleague. In addition, Elder and Sister Wm. Grant Bangerter and Elder Albert Choules, Jr., emeritus members of the Seventy, gave generously of their time. Many others took time to be interviewed, including Augustus Faust, Rex Faust, Newell and Fran Stevenson, Justice Richard C. Howe, Bruce Olsen, Steve Coltrin, Bonner Ritchie, and David Galbraith. After the interviews were completed, as I then worked to bring form and shape to a rather substantial amount of material, I sought advice from several friends, including Lee Perry and Steve Brown. To each I express my thanks.

From the outset of this project, President Faust's two secretaries, Margaret Bury and Sheila Kartchner, have been invaluable in scheduling appointments, providing access to materials, and sharing insights into a man they have each come to know in a most unique way. In addition, they have provided much-needed and on-going friendship and support.

During the course of preparing this book, I have attempted to juggle my writing with my full-time responsibilities at KBYU, the public television and public radio stations affiliated with Brigham Young University. In the process, I no doubt dropped more balls than I should have, and I appreciate the understanding and support of all my colleagues at KBYU, particularly John Reim, Sterling Van Wagenen, Derek Marquis, Cathy Leifson, Duane Roberts, Anna Hirst, Sandy Ewing, Ruston Jones, Christine Nokleby, Chris Twitty, Mike Walker, and Jane Wilson. In addition, I express appreciation to Elder Merrill J. Bateman, who serves as president of BYU, for encouragement and insight given at the outset of this project.

There are numerous individuals (some unknown to me) at Deseret Book who have worked under challenging deadlines to make this book a reality. I thank Ron Millett and Sheri Dew for affording me the opportunity to work on this book. I also express my gratitude to Jay Parry and Linda Gundry for their thoughtful and thorough editing, to Kent Ware for various forms of guidance and support, to Richard Erickson and Michelle Eckersley for their tasteful and inviting design, to Patty Parkinson for her expert typography, to Anne Sheffield for overseeing the many aspects of the production process, and to Keith Hunter and his staff for helping make the public aware of the book's existence.

Finally, I express, inadequately, my appreciation to President James Esdras Faust and his wife, Ruth Wright Faust, for the opportunity to learn of and then share something of his life, which is inextricably tied to hers, with readers throughout the Church. My father was right: President Faust is a good man, and most members of the Church don't know enough about him. I knew that instinctively when my father first made the comment; I know it of a surety now. My hope is that, in some small way, this book will help to change that as it portrays a life well lived and then excerpts the teachings of one who has, throughout his life, focused his every ability on helping each of God's children come to know—and follow—their Savior more fully.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
