James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

PART I

THE LIFE OF JAMES E. FAUST

1

FAITHFUL FOREFATHERS

ON A HOT SATURDAY EVENING in 1938, Jim Faust went with two of his friends to a county fair near their home in Cottonwood, Utah. As the threesome tried their hands at various games and competitions, one of the group won a carnival strength test by swinging a hammer with enough force to ring the bell atop a tower. The prize for this feat was a cigar, and because there were three in the group, the hawker gave one to each boy.

Two of the three decided to give theirs a try, as eighteen-year-old Jim looked on in silence. Then, after a moment's contemplation, he said gently, "How are you going to feel tomorrow when you sit at the sacrament table?"fn

Some sixty years later, as James E. Faust serves as second counselor in the First Presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Marcus Faust says of his father: "Dad has an inbred, ingrained sense of right and wrong that has always guided everything he has done. There has never been any compromise within him whatsoever, when it comes to issues of right and wrong."

Those who meet James E. Faust inevitably seem to sense that part of his goodness is innate—that it has been with him from birth. In fact, one of the friends who accompanied him to the county fair recalls, "He was always a mature kid, spiritually, even at a very young age. And he did a lot to remind us of who we were and what we were."

Also evident, though, is the fact that his heritage instilled within him many of the characteristics for which he is known today.

Like many Latter-day Saints of his generation, James Esdras Faust comes from pioneer stock. He was born on Saturday, July 31, 1920, in Delta, Utah, a small desert town some 150 miles southwest of Salt Lake City. His mother had prepared a noonday meal for her sister, Angie, and other family members when she began "having pains enough to make her squirm." The only doctor in town was sent for, but he was busy delivering a cousin (who died at birth), so a midwife came and delivered the second of the five sons that would be born to George Augustus and Amy Finlinson Faust. Amy's youngest sister, Angie, who had married George's best friend and who was pregnant with her first child, later described Jim's birth: "You were thin and looked like a wrinkled little old man with not much meat on your bones. As we looked you over and wondered what name to give you, Uncle Willis said, `James Esdras, for his two uncles,' and it stuck."

No doubt as Amy held her little boy that day, her mind went back to a blessing she had received a few months earlier, as she and Angie had traveled to the Manti Temple and while there had sought blessings from the temple president. Among other things, he had told her that she would bear a son and that he would be a comfort to her throughout her entire life.

Young Jim Faust was surrounded by grandparents, great-grandparents, aunts, uncles, and cousins who lived in the towns of Delta and neighboring Oak City. And though he moved with his parents to Salt Lake City when he was three years of age, the family returned often to Oak City, where Jim heard countless stories of those faithful progenitors, on both his father's and mother's sides, who had converted to Mormonism, crossed the plains, and helped settle Utah.

The first of his maternal ancestors to join the Church was Edward Partridge, who met Parley P. Pratt, Oliver Cowdery, Peter Whitmer Jr., and Ziba Peterson in the fall of 1830. He did not immediately accept their message, but he did study the Book of Mormon and then sought out the Prophet Joseph Smith, who baptized him on December 11, 1830, in the Seneca River in the township of Fayette, New York.

In February 1831, Edward was called to be the first bishop of the Church, when, in a revelation given to Joseph Smith, the Lord directed the Prophet to select Edward Partridge," and this because his heart is pure before me, for he is like unto Nathanael of old, in whom there is no guile" (D&C 41:11).

In July of 1833, while attending to his frail wife, who had recently given birth, Bishop Partridge was forced from his home by enemies of the Church bent on driving the Saints from Jackson County, Missouri. Then, after he and Charles Allen refused to renounce their faith, the two were tarred and feathered at the hands of a mob some five hundred strong. He continued to serve faithfully and to stand firm in his testimony, yet on May 27, 1840, Edward Partridge died an untimely death at the age of forty-six in Nauvoo, Illinois.

On that same day, the Prophet Joseph recorded in his journal, "He lost his life in consequence of the Missouri persecutions, and he is one of that number whose blood will be required at their hands."fn Years later, President James E. Faust would write of the first of his many ancestors who embraced the restored gospel:

Grandfather was so tortured, humiliated, and suffered so much in his calling from lawless mobs, and was still so steadfast and faithful, that he could not possibly have doubted the genuineness of the revelation that appointed him. Like others who were close to the Prophet, he knew Joseph's heart and soul. Grandfather could not have been deceived. I believe his life and death both prove that he did not lie. His devotion, suffering, and sacrifice eloquently testify that he had implicit faith in Joseph as an inspired servant of God.fn

Among the five daughters and two sons born to Edward and Lydia Partridge was Caroline Ely, who was born in Ohio and later lived in Joseph and Emma Smith's home in Nauvoo. There she tended the Smiths' children as she watched Joseph go about his daily duties, which led her to pass on to her posterity a sure testimony of the prophetic office and calling of Joseph Smith. Two of the many who heard her testimony before her death in 1908 were Jim's mother and his Aunt Angie, who shared their great-grandmother's convictions frequently with him, his brothers, and their cousins as they were growing up.

In September of 1844, Caroline married Amasa Mason Lyman, who had been serving as a counselor to the Prophet Joseph Smith at the time of his martyrdom. Despite the urging of some who felt he had a legitimate claim to become the leader of the Church, Amasa supported the leadership of the Twelve after the death of Joseph, stating: "I do not rise to electioneer. I am gratified with the open, frank and plain exposition of President Young. . . .

". . . I believe there is no power, or officer, or means wanted to carry on the work, but what is in the Twelve. I am satisfied that no man can carry on the work, but the power that is in the Twelve. . . .

". . . I have been at the back of Joseph Smith, and will be at the back of the Twelve forever, and then we will be saved."fn

Four days later, Amasa Lyman was ordained an apostle and set apart as a member of the Twelve. He accompanied Brigham Young to the Salt Lake Valley in 1847 and helped to settle Fillmore, Utah.

On her paternal side, Amy Finlinson Faust's grandfather was George Finlinson, who, upon accepting the gospel, left his home in Thursby, England, to cross an ocean and half a continent to settle in the desert town of Fillmore, Utah. But leaving the lushly green Lake District of England for the harsh environs of Utah was not his greatest sacrifice.

At the time of his conversion, George was married to Anne Emerson, and the couple had a baby daughter. Anne, however, could not accept her husband's newfound faith and became bitter toward him and his fellow believers. When the call came in the mid-1860s for the Saints in Thursby to gather to Zion, George was determined to obey, even as Anne refused to leave her homeland. So he set sail without her or his daughter, knowing he would never see them again but feeling the obligation to heed a prophet's call.

The two did correspond for some time, and in one letter Anne expressed her concern over not knowing whether she was "a wife or a widow." George wrote back, expressing his concern for her and their daughter but telling her, "You are just any thing you have a mind to call yourself. I told you a long time ago if you want your freedom, you had it from me, and if you wanted to be my wife, you had the privilege to be so. What more could any person desire?" He then shared his convictions with her in these words:

When a man knows a road, who can persuade him it is wrong? Can any person persuade you to go around by Crofton Tole Bart to Thursby that it was the direct and nearest road, you would tell them they were mistaken. They might talk from now till twenty years from now and I will bet a dollar that they could never persuade you it was the nearest road to Thursby. It is hard for anyone to persuade a person a thing is different from what they know a thing for a certainty themselves. It is the same way with me today about Mormonism as when I left England. I told you it was true when I left England, and I will tell you it is true today. And as for you not having your freedom, you have it just as much as ever. . . . I am now a man calculated to live by true principles, which if you live by would lead you to comfort in this life and happiness in the next life. . . .

Give my love to your mother and father. I respect her yet and your father for all their kindness, and give my daughter a kiss for me.fn

Soon after his arrival in Utah, George became reacquainted with the Trimble family, who had joined the Church in Thursby and then introduced George to the gospel. Among their children was a daughter, Susan, whom George began to court and soon took as his wife. Like George, Susan had experienced something of the hostility family and friends often heaped upon those who converted to Mormonism. Before her family left their home in Thursby, she received a lengthy letter from "a sincere well-wisher and friend" who told her, in part:

Consider, Susan, the awful and terrible dangers of a long sea voyage. O what a change for you all, to be tossed on the wide, wide ocean far away from all you love, at the mercy of the wind and waves and terrible storms.

Your poor mother, what will become of her, think you—frail, feeble, and delicate as you know she is. It will be an awful,tremendous trial for her, poor woman. Indeed, it is generally thought by those who know her, that she will not be able to stand the fearful hardships of the sea. . . .

Then consider your younger brothers and sisters—what terrible distress and trouble you are going to bring upon them, poor things. O what will you think when you see those innocent children suffering from the awful pains of seasickness, and then how terrible will your condition be, and that of your mother and children, when the waves rage around your ship and threaten to dash you to pieces every moment. . . .

But if you even did get to the Salt Lake, would you be happy then? Not at all. The laws there are very bad, and murders and all sorts of crimes are common. Your money will be taken from you and you will be entirely in the power of those wicked men who are so cruelly but successfully enticing you away. They keep bloodhounds to prevent people from escaping.

It is foolish to suppose that you will be purified and saved by going to a wicked place like the Salt Lake. You know very well, Susan, that people can be good and holy in old England without leaving it.

If you believe in the Bible, you must know that God never says that he wants people to leave their quiet, comfortable homes. No, no. We are to love and serve him on our native land. What sort of men are Brigham Young and all the others of the Salt Lake, that you should be led away by them from England?fn

Brought to the restored gospel—and to the gathering place of Utah—by their faith, George and Susan drew frequently on that same source of strength as they created a new life for themselves. They settled in Fillmore, where Jim Faust's maternal grandfather, George Edward Finlinson, was born. George Edward, when he grew to maturity, met and married Mary Caroline Roper, who descended from Edward Partridge. George Edward and Mary lived in Oak City, Utah, a town some twelve miles east of Delta, and it was there that their daughter, Amy Finlinson, was born and reared. In addition to the many other characteristics the Finlinson immigrants passed on to their progeny, they passed on what Sister Ruth Faust, wife of President Faust, refers to as "the believing blood of the Finlinsons."

The lineage of Jim's father likewise had its roots in the earliest days of the Church. In fact, in the April 1997 general conference, President Faust told of his paternal ancestry as he spoke of the importance of temples and covenants:

On February 3, 1846, it was a bitter cold day in Nauvoo, Illinois. That day, President Brigham Young recorded in his diary:

"Notwithstanding that I had announced that we would not attend to the administration of the ordinances, the House of the Lord was thronged all day. . . . I also informed the brethren that I was going to get my wagons started and be off. I walked some distance from the Temple supposing the crowd would disperse, but on returning I found the house filled to overflowing.

"Looking upon the multitude and knowing their anxiety, as they were thirsting and hungering for the word, we continued at work diligently in the House of the Lord." [History of the Church, 7:579.]

And so the temple work continued until 1:30 A.M.

The first two names that appear on the fourth company of the Nauvoo Temple register for that very day, February 3, 1846, are John and Jane Akerley, who received their endowments in the Nauvoo Temple that evening. They were humble, new converts to the Church, without wealth or position. Their temple work was their final concern as they were leaving their homes in Nauvoo to come west. It was fortunate that President Young granted the wish of the Saints to receive their temple blessings because John Akerley died at Winter Quarters, Nebraska. He, along with over 4,000 others, never made it to the valleys of the Rocky Mountains.fn

Jane Akerley did make it to Utah, however, together with her daughter, Elsie Ann, who had been born in 1842, and her other children. The family settled in Fillmore, and it was there, as she stood by a well, that Elsie met a young man who had come from Heddesheim, Prussia (now Germany), and was passing through Utah on his way to the gold fields of California. Henry Jacob (H. J.) Faust was not of Elsie's faith, but he was quite taken with her, as was she with him. However, even as she shared with him her testimony of the gospel, Elsie let H. J. know that she would not marry outside her faith. H. J. did go on to California, where he spent just enough time to pan sufficient gold for a wedding band. Thereupon, he returned to Fillmore, joined the Church, and married Elsie. As they began their life together, he worked on the state capitol building in Fillmore and then on the transcontinental railroad. Later, he was called by Brigham Young to be the first bishop in Corinne, Utah.

His associations with Brigham Young continued; in fact, he later moved to Salt Lake City and built a livery stable on Second South, which included a United States courthouse on the second floor. Coincidentally, Brigham Young was tried in that courthouse after an arrest by U.S. marshals in October 1871. (President Young was acquitted of the charges.) H. J. was also active in state politics, and on July 13, 1872, during the Democratic ratification meeting held in Salt Lake City, he nominated Elder George Q. Cannon of the Quorum of the Twelve as a delegate to Congress.fn

After moving to Faust Station, Utah, where H. J. was a Pony Express rider and oversaw the outpost, he and Elsie had a son they named James Akerley Faust. James later married Maud Wetzel, whose father, Edmund Wetzel, had joined the Church in Kentucky and then moved to Utah. James and Maud Faust had two sons, James, the eldest, and George, who would marry Amy Finlinson on October 3, 1917, in the Salt Lake City Temple.

George and Amy began married life in Delta, not long after the United States had declared war on Germany and entered into World War I. On May 27, 1918, George was drafted into the army and was sent to Fort Lewis for training. As President Faust tells of his father's entering the service, he says, "Father was not a big man, but he was quite spunky and determined. And he had decided that if he was in the Army, then he was supposed to fight, although the lieutenant who was filling up the 91st Division didn't think he was big enough. So Father, who was quite athletic and fast, despite his size, said to the lieutenant, `Have you got any way to try out how good a man is?' Well, the lieutenant liked his spunk, and in three weeks he was on his way to France."

The day George set sail from New York to France, Amy gave birth to their first son, Augustus. As Amy waited for her husband's safe return, George served on the front lines of four of the major battles that were fought in France.

In a journal he kept while in France, George recorded the details of one battle in these words:

There was heavy fog, and about this time the fog began to lift and the enemy had located our position and we were shelled unmercifully. Twenty-five percent of our platoon were casualties within 30 minutes, and we were ordered to return to the trenches. And we did, with the cries of agony and gruesome dead, which a short hour previous were stalwart men, leaving us with thoughts we cannot rid ourselves of. . . .

The trenches were strewn with the dead and wounded, and first aid stations were established to care for those who could get to the trenches. However, those were only a few in comparison to the number who needed first aid. Some men were left for days and days to suffer a hundred deaths, and many died for lack of treatment.

On another occasion, he spent the night in a machine gun nest, protecting the sleeping soldiers:

My head seemed to burst with aching, and I was allowed to lie down and not be responsible for the protection of anyone's life. I slept. No blankets, no nothing, but mother earth, in the same clothes I had been in for two weeks, without having even taken off my shoes to change socks and put them right on again.

Of one all-night march, he wrote:

How I managed to make it that night without falling in my tracks is more than I can understand, unless it was that I did not use tobacco nor intoxicants of any kind and tried to live a most clean life, doing nothing to sap my vitality. But from that night until the day I write this, I have never had the pep I had before.

Despite all he had endured, George Faust's summary statement of the time spent in his country's service reflects something of what was at his core:

I am not prepared at the present time to state whether or not this service to my country was a detriment or a help to myself. From a financial standpoint, I'm sure it was a hindrance.

But if I had to do it over, I would do it the same way, because it was my duty.fn

On April 27, 1919, George was discharged from the army. Upon returning to Delta, he was finally able to see his son for the first time, and he and Amy began to rebuild their life together. Although most of his family was involved in farming, George did not have a knack for it and started a tire repair business instead. In 1920 Jim was born, and in 1923 George and Amy decided they would leave Delta and move with their two sons to Salt Lake City, where George would enroll in law school at the University of Utah as a thirty-three-year-old student.

NOTES

1999 Deseret Book Co.
