James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

2

THE SEEDS OF TESTIMONY

GEORGE FAUST'S DECISION TO ENROLL at the University of Utah Law School in 1923 did not create an easy set of circumstances for his young family. When he and Amy, together with their sons Gus and Jim, moved into a small house on Norris Court (just west of the University of Utah campus), George had no job, the family had no car, and the house was warmed by a potbelly stove and lighted by oil lamps. But George had been encouraging other veterans of World War I to take advantage of the benefits offered them, and he had concluded that he should follow his own advice.

Gus remembers those years as a struggle, but he also remembers them for the pattern they provided—as George let it be known, by both word and deed, that getting an education was not optional but essential for the Faust boys.

It was in the family's home on Norris Court that young Jim became aware of the world around him. He and Gus were soon joined by their next brother, Rex, who was brought into the world by their aunt, Ada Faust—one of the first woman doctors in Utah. (Before George completed law school, Amy had given birth to the couple's fourth son, Dan. Their fifth son, Delano, came later.)

As the boys grew, they were close and they were rambunctious. Rex recalls that they were typical boys with energy—and in need of ways to release it. He recalls one time when the boys turned a hose on in their neighbor's house, resulting in their mother's having to mop up the mess; and Gus tells of a family friend on Norris Court who predicted that the Faust boys would all end up in prison by the time they were eighteen.

Much of the family's entertainment came from their activity in the Salt Lake City Eleventh Ward, where Jim used to admire a stained-glass window depicting the First Vision. There was little money for any form of entertainment outside of ward functions, although the family was finally able to purchase a car.

"Those early cars were bad," Jim recalls. "In the winter you would snap curtains up to stay warm, and it had a glass windshield that was supposed to be clear but wasn't. It would fog up in the cold, so Mother would sew a little bag of table salt, which you had to rub on both sides of the windshield in order to get a little vision. And in those days you had to grind the valves on those cars regularly. I can remember father and his friend Preston Thatcher, who was also a law student, stripping down the motor and grinding those valves—and neither one was very mechanical."

The financial challenges were ever-present during George's time in law school, but one holiday season was particularly challenging. Young Jim's recollections of that year's Christmas are reflected in a fireside address he gave in December 1983.

Grandfather and Grandmother Finlinson knew that we would have no Christmas if we did not come down to the farm in Millard County. So all of our family took the train from Salt Lake to Leamington, Utah. Where the money came from for the tickets, I will never know.

Grandfather and Uncle Esdras met us at the railroad crossing in Leamington with a team of big horses to pull the open sleigh through the deep snow to Oak City. It was so cold that the huge horses had icy chin whiskers and you could see their breath. I remember how old Jack Frost nipped my nose and the extreme cold made it hard to breathe. Grandmother had heated some rocks and put them in the bottom of the sleigh to help keep us warm. We were wrapped and tucked into some heavy camp quilts with just our noses sticking out. Accompanied by the tinkle of bells on leather straps on the harnesses of the horses, we musically traveled from Leamington over the ten miles to Oak City where our beloved grandfather and grandmother lived. So many dear ones were there that we could hardly wait to arrive. When we got there it was warm and wonderful and exciting.

In the corner of the living room was the Christmas tree—a cedar cut from the hillside pasture. It was already partially decorated by Mother Nature with little berries which helped give it a strong smell. Our decorations were popcorn strings made by threading popcorn through a needle and a thread which had to be handled carefully or they would break and strew popcorn all over the floor.

We also had paper chains to put on the tree, made by cutting up old Sears and Montgomery Ward catalogs with the paper links pasted together with flour paste. The sticky flour paste got all over our hands, faces, and clothes. I wonder why they didn't put sugar in it! With cream it could also have been served for mush.

I do not remember any presents under the tree. Under the tree were popcorn balls made with strong, home-made molasses. When we bit into the popcorn balls, it felt like they were biting back.

On Christmas Eve we all gathered around the wood stove, enjoying the warm comfort of the fire and the pleasant aroma of the burning cedar wood. One of the uncles gave the opening prayer. We sang carols and hymns. One of our aunts read of the birth of Jesus and of the "good tidings of great joy" (Luke 2:10). "For unto you is born this day in the City of David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord" (Luke 2:11). Grandfather and Grandmother then told us how much they loved us.

The next day was Christmas, and we had a glorious dinner. But before we ate, we all got down on our knees for family prayer. I was so hungry. Grandfather prayed for the longest time. You see, he had much to pray for. He prayed for moisture because there was a drouth in the land, and the crops had been meager. The fall grain had been planted in the dusty ground. What harvest there was could not be sold for much because of the low price caused by the great depression. The taxes on the farm were delinquent because there was no money to pay them. He also prayed for our large family, his cattle and horses, pigs and chickens, turkeys—he prayed over everything.

During Grandfather's long prayer, my youngest uncle became restless and gave me an irreverent pinch, hoping that I would shout to make things more exciting.

For dinner we had a huge tom turkey stuffed with delicious dressing. There was no celery in the dressing because we had only the ingredients that could be produced on the farm. But the dressing had plenty of bread, sage, sausage, and onions. There was an abundance of potatoes and gravy and pickles, beets, beans, and corn. Because Grandfather could trade wheat to the miller for flour, there was always fresh baked bread. To stretch the food, we were encouraged to take one bite of bread for every bite of other kinds of food. We had chokecherry jelly and groundcherry jam. For dessert we had pumpkin and gooseberry pie. It was all delicious.

As I look back on that special Christmas over a lifetime, the most memorable part was that we did not think about presents. There may have been some handmade mittens or a scarf given, but I do not recall any presents. Presents are wonderful, but I found that they are not essential to our happiness. I could not have been happier. There were no presents that could be held and fondled and played with, but there were many wonderful gifts that could not be seen, but could be felt.

There was the gift of boundless love. We knew God loved us. We all loved each other. We did not miss the presents because we had all these glorious gifts. It made me feel so wonderful and secure to belong and to be part of all that went on. We wanted nothing else. We did not miss the presents at all. I never remember a happier Christmas in my childhood.fn

In 1927, George earned his degree from the University of Utah Law School and began practicing law in downtown Salt Lake. The family stayed in their home on Norris Court while he established his practice, and later George and Amy moved with their four sons to Cottonwood, some ten miles southeast of downtown Salt Lake.

"Cottonwood at that time was country," Jim says, "and we moved out there because Father wanted his boys to learn to work. So what to do? We built a chicken coop and got some chickens. We got some cows and then some sheep. We used to raise our own beef, and father would slaughter it in the fall as the weather was turning cold. Then he would cut the meat up and put it in canvas bags that he hung on nails on the north side of the porch so it wasn't in the sun."

Gus adds, "Father always found ways for us to learn to do chores. He didn't want us hanging around asking for things; he wanted us to learn that there was a relationship between work and money."

At about the same time the Fausts moved to Cottonwood, the United States was sliding into the Depression, which would last until the United States entered World War II in 1941. The Fausts were more fortunate than some, because in 1928 George had helped a young, single Catholic from Montana run for Salt Lake county attorney, and the man won. Knowing that he needed someone who knew the "territory" at his side and impressed with George's wisdom and judgment, John D. Rice made George Faust his chief deputy, which ensured a steady salary during the early years of the Depression. A few years later, George started a private practice with Judge Joseph Jeppson, with whom he continued a professional association for many years.

Jim's assessment of his father's beginning a practice during the midst of the Depression is simply, "I don't know how he ever made it."

Rex adds that his father was good-natured and friendly with all their neighbors, many of whom came to him with their problems. Knowing the tenuousness of their finances, he rarely charged them anything as he helped many save their homes—and often their marriages and families—as they tried to hold together lives devastated by the Depression.

"He'd always try to keep the families together. That was one of his great talents, and I know he saved many, many marriages in the Cottonwood area. And mercifully, he never went after fees. Many felt they should pay him in one way or another, though, and that led to a variety of barter situations.

"He got two old cows in payment once. He brought them home and we hated them, they were so hard to milk. Then he traded them to someone. He got a couple of old Buicks at one point. Years later he told me, `If I had received all the money that was owed me through those years, I could retire.'"

Although George's sons would have learned the value of hard work anyway, the Depression certainly added to the demands placed upon them. On one occasion, the boys worked with a man who built a rock wall around their property as payment for legal services. And there were the never-ending routines and chores associated with running the small, one-acre farm.

"Every summer," Rex says, "Jim and I had to take turns spading the garden—and it was a big garden. It took us about a week to get it all ready. Our father could have gotten it plowed a lot easier, but he felt his boys ought to have something to do and saw that as a good project. And, oh, our backs would ache."

Many of the chores required the boys' attention seven days a week, such as milking the cows. As Jim remembers his years growing up, he says, "Farm life is a wonderful discipline in terms of having to meet the responsibilities of the eternal each and every day. Cows have to be milked on the Fourth of July and on Thanksgiving and Christmas. That's a tremendous discipline."

His brothers maintain that Jim at times found activities that kept him from taking his turn with milking, and his boyhood friend, Newell Stevenson, says that sometimes "those poor cows didn't get milked until 10 or 11 at night. George's boys had a tendency to forget about the cows, particularly if there was something more fun to do. And usually there was."

Even so, over the course of his childhood, Jim learned the importance of responsibility and hard work. One lesson that was particularly poignant involved a little lamb his father had found in the desert and entrusted to his care, a story he would share in the April 1995 general conference priesthood session:

[After my father brought the lamb home and made me its shepherd], for several weeks I warmed cow's milk in a baby's bottle and fed the lamb. We became fast friends. I called him Nigh—why I don't remember. It began to grow. My lamb and I would play on the lawn. Sometimes we would lie together on the grass and I would lay my head on its soft, woolly side and look up at the blue sky and the white billowing clouds. I did not lock my lamb up during the day. It would not run away. It soon learned to eat grass. I could call my lamb from anywhere in the yard by just imitating as best I could the bleating sound of a sheep: Baa. Baa.

One night there came a terrible storm. I forgot to put my lamb in the barn that night as I should have done. I went to bed. My little friend was frightened in the storm, and I could hear it bleating. I knew that I should help my pet, but I wanted to stay safe, warm, and dry in my bed. I didn't get up as I should have done. The next morning I went out to find my lamb dead. A dog had also heard its bleating cry and killed it. My heart was broken. I had not been a good shepherd or steward of that which my father had entrusted to me. My father said, "Son, couldn't I trust you to take care of just one lamb?" My father's remark hurt me more than losing my woolly friend. I resolved that day, as a little boy, that I would try never again to neglect my stewardship as a shepherd if I were ever placed in that position again.fn

Jim's father was, without question, a strong disciplinarian, and he had a way of getting to the heart of a matter without wasting words. He had an unmistakable love for his boys and spent all the time with them he could. George loved to come home, change into his work clothes, and work in the yard. Or, more often, he would help Amy in the kitchen with dinner. "Father was a great cook," Jim says. "My wife, and everyone who knew him, will attest to that. She will also tell you that he dirtied every pan in the house. Mother was a good cook as well, but Father was always at her side."

George also loved to hunt and fish and took his sons, along with other family members and friends, on many memorable trips.

"I think the most miserable night of my life was courtesy of George Faust," says Newell Stevenson. "We went down to American Fork Canyon, and he showed us how to make a bed out of pine boughs. Well, I flunked pine boughs, and I spent the whole night finding a new pine bough under my back or my feet or somewhere."

Jim remembers a somewhat similar experience while on a fishing trip. "Father, my brothers, my Uncle Jim, and I went up to the Uintas to fish, and it rained every day we were there. It rained so much that all the canvas over us did was to break the raindrops into smaller drops. It wasn't pleasant experience, and I don't know why in the world we didn't pack up and come home."

Jim says, "While I do not ever recall my father using the words, `Son, I love you,' he showed his love in a thousand ways which were more eloquent than words."

He also set an example for the boys to follow, which they generally elected to do. "He tended to teach by his example, and he was very practical," Jim says. "For instance, he was in the bishopric while I was growing up, and when it would come time to go to sacrament meeting, which our ward held at 7:00 P.M., he would say, `Boys, I'm leaving for sacrament meeting. If you want a ride, you'll have to come.' There wasn't any duress. That's just what we were to do. He wasn't always lecturing us and demanding obedience from us. It was just expected."

Not long after the Fausts moved to Cottonwood, George and Amy's fifth son, Delano, was born, and the five were as typical as boys could be. "We were pretty normal," Jim says, "in the sense that we were athletic and rambunctious and wrestled and tussled and so forth. My parents, though, were very understanding. We'd wrestle on the front room furniture and tear the house up, but I don't remember either of them telling us to get off the furniture or anything like that."

Jim's mother was a very patient woman, owing in part, no doubt, to her deep spiritual strength and faith. She was an ardent student of the Book of Mormon, teaching classes in her home for women in the neighborhood and constantly quoting from it as she would teach and correct her sons. Jim recalls, "No one had to tell her that one can get closer to God by reading the Book of Mormon than by any other book. She was already there. She had read it, studied it, prayed over it, and taught from it. As a young man I held her book in my hands and tried to see, through her eyes, the great truths of the Book of Mormon to which she so readily testified and which she so greatly loved."fn

On another occasion he said of his parents, "My father was a doer and an achiever, and I hope I inherited some of his ability to work hard and get things done. But I also think I inherited from my mother a portion of the spirituality, testimony, faith, commitment, and, I hope, the milk of human kindness with which she was so richly endowed. I don't know what would have happened to us boys if she hadn't been such a steadying influence in our home."

She also helped team up with George to hold the family together during the difficult years of the Depression. As Jim would later recall,

[During the] Great Depression,. . . we had certain values burned into our souls. One of these values was gratitude for that which we had because we had so little. The Great Depression in the United States in the early Thirties was a terrible schoolmaster. We had to learn provident living in order to survive. Rather than create in us a spirit of envy or anger for what we did not have, it developed in many a spirit of gratitude for the meager, simple things with which we were blessed, like hot, homemade bread and oatmeal cereal and many other things.fn

In addition to his parents, Jim enjoyed close relationships with extended family, both in Salt Lake and back in Oak City. His Uncle Jim, who had married and had a daughter, Marguerite, only to then have his wife die when Marguerite was three, had moved back to Salt Lake from California when George found him a job at the State Fingerprint Bureau of Identification. And in those days when the pace of life was slower, Uncle Jim, Marguerite, and Grandma Faust, who helped to raise Marguerite, would spend many of their evenings in George and Amy's home.

"To Grandmother Faust," Jim says, "her grandsons were perfect, and it is a great thing in a young boy's life to have someone who thinks he's perfect."

Jim also heard his grandmother tell of listening as a young girl to Brigham Young preach in the Salt Lake Tabernacle during the prophet's later years. "She used to tell us about how he wore a red bandanna handkerchief around his head to protect him from the breezes. And then she would always share with us boys something she felt was tremendously important, which was that from her observations over an 87-year life she had observed that those who turned their backs on the leadership of the Church had not prospered spiritually or otherwise. Listening to Granny, who had known every prophet from Brigham Young through Heber J. Grant, we were taught the lesson that we should always be found sustaining the leadership of the Church."

Beyond time spent with family chores around the family's home and small farm, Jim found plenty of time for play. He quickly made friends when the family moved to Cottonwood, and there seemed to be no end to the fun they could concoct.

Because of the Depression, though, their entertainments required significant resourcefulness. Newell Stevenson remembers that while he and Jim and their friends spent a lot of time riding bikes, "we spent more time building and repairing them. We would get a frame somewhere and then wheels, a fork, and tires somewhere else, and we'd put all the parts together. But those kinds of bicycles were always breaking down.

"We were also great skiers. About a quarter of a mile from Jim's house was a rocky old hill, about 15 feet high. We'd pack the snow down, climb to the top, and then slide down. You couldn't say we skied down—we slid down. We started out with barrel staves, with a piece of shoe leather tacked on to serve as a binding. Then we'd just kick the snow off our farm boots, stick our feet into the loops, and off we'd go. One day we decided to build a ski jump that was maybe three feet high, and that was a disaster. On one of his attempts, Jim fell and broke his collarbone, and after that we just stuck with sliding down the hill."

Jim recalls Newell's great-uncle, Dr. H. S. Stevenson, coming to the house, where he and George set Jim's shoulder. "Sometime later," he adds, "I was with my father when somebody who knew about my accident started getting on me about being more careful and not causing my father the expense of paying for such foolish injuries. My father smiled and said to the man, `Oh, if he didn't do some of those things, I wouldn't have him.'"

On another occasion—a camping trip George and his boys took with several other families—Jim and his friends were out in a meadow one afternoon hunting varmints so as to protect the tender grass that sheep in the area grazed on. Somehow, Jim was accidentally shot at close range just above his knee. His friends helped him back to camp, where his father bandaged Jim's leg to control the bleeding and then drove him to Coalville, Utah, where the nearest doctor lived.

When we reached the doctor's office he laid me on an examining table. He looked at my bullet wound carefully, and then explained that it must be sterilized.

When I understood how the wound was to be sterilized, I was afraid of the pain I might have and also that I would cry. I didn't want to cry. I wanted to show my father how brave I could be. In my heart, I said a silent prayer that Heavenly Father would help me so that no matter how bad it hurt I wouldn't cry.

The doctor took a rod, about the size used to clean a gun barrel, and threaded a piece of sterilized gauze through a hole in one end like a giant needle. As my father held my hand, I gritted my teeth, shut my eyes, and tried to hold still while the doctor took the rod and pushed it through the hole in my leg. When it came out on the other side, he changed the gauze, put fresh antiseptic on it, and pulled it back through the hole. He pushed it back and forth three times.

Heavenly Father heard my silent prayer, for the operation did not seem to hurt as much as I thought it would. I didn't cry!. . .

As problems and difficulties have come into my life since, I have tried to face them by relying more on the help of our Heavenly Father than on the comfort that comes from tears. I learned the valuable lesson that the pain of life's problems doesn't seem to be so great if I don't cry about them.fn

There were other lessons the boys learned from George's love of hunting and fishing, as Jim recalls: "Although Father would take a break once in a while from work and take us with him, he would never countenance our getting out of school to go. Also, in those early days in Cottonwood, there were a lot of pheasants and other wildlife, and some folks in the neighborhood would poach. And poaching was another thing Father would not countenance. He was a man of tremendous integrity, and he was clear as to where the boundaries were."

Given the respect he had for his father, Jim was careful not to cross those lines; however, he was known to join in some of the mischievous pranks common among young boys. Newell remembers that the neighborhood kids often went to an old swimming hole on the property of Margaret O'Brien. "Sometimes the older kids would beat us over there, so we'd sneak up, tie their clothes in knots, and then let out a war whoop to make them think Maggy was coming. That led to a few quarrels with kids in the neighborhood."

One Halloween, as some of the kids in the neighborhood went about tipping over privies, Jim and Newell took some toilet paper and went over to Highland Drive, where they stretched the toilet paper across the street and held it up about three feet high as cars approached. "The idea," Jim says, "is that they would think there was some kind of barricade and slam on their brakes. The thing I remember about that is we seemed to have to wait about half an hour for a car to come by. Now, I'm sure it wasn't that long—we were impatient young boys—but it was amazing how little traffic there was back then."

He then adds, "In my own defense, I can't remember ever tipping over a privy."

Much of Jim's and his friends' lives also centered on activities and associations in the Cottonwood First Ward. In addition to the regular Sunday meetings and weekday Primary lessons and activities, Jim participated in many other activities and made close friends among both youth and adults alike.

"We had a very close-knit ward, and it was the center of our social life. It also provided us with much of our recreation. The men and the boys used to get together and play ball, which was a very nice thing. We called the married men the `Stiffs,' and the single boys were the `Limbers.'"

Jim found many examples of righteous living among the men and women he knew in his ward. He would tell, years later, of one such brother:

One of the men who had the greatest dignity and commanded the greatest respect was an old Scandinavian brother who, after walking a couple of miles, traveled by streetcar to and from work at the Salt Lake City Cemetery. His work was to water and mow the grass, tend the flowers, and dig the graves. He said little because he did not speak English well, but he was always where he should be, doing what he should do in a most dignified, exemplary way. He had no problems with ego, or with faith, for while he dug graves for a living, his work was to serve God. He was a man of little status, but of great worth.fn

Another neighbor with whom many of the young people became very close was Henry D. Moyle, who during Jim's youth served as his stake president (and lived in his ward) and who later was called to serve in the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles and then as a counselor to President David O. McKay.

President Moyle was a man of significant wealth but generous both with his means and his time. In particular, he was a great friend to the youth of the stake. Newell Stevenson recalls, "He had a lake on his property, which probably totaled nearly a hundred acres, that he used to let us swim in. That was our favorite place, although it was fed by springs and was just like ice. He also had some cute daughters we liked to hang around."

Jim also has said of President Moyle:

President Moyle. . . was our leader. He was our example. We knew we could achieve anything because President Moyle was guiding us. As we grew older, every time we applied for a job or to enter a school, we would always put down, as a reference, the name of our stake president. We knew of his personal interest in us. We knew he would help us if he could.

I have tried to analyze why President Moyle had such a profound influence in our lives. I think it was because of his personal interest in us. He was our friend. We knew that he was always there when we needed him. It was said of him that when Henry Moyle loved you, he loved you through and through.fn

Jim also became acquainted with President Moyle's father, James H. Moyle, who lived in Washington, D. C., but would spend part of each summer with his son. Jim remembers that

as a young boy in the Cottonwood Ward, I was greatly impressed when I listened to James H. Moyle tell in sacrament meeting of his having heard both Martin Harris and David Whitmer, two of the witnesses of the Book of Mormon, affirm their testimony concerning that book. . . .

When James H. Moyle visited David Whitmer, Whitmer was an old man; he was out of the Church and was living in a log cabin in Richmond, Missouri. Of this visit to David Whitmer, James H. Moyle stated in [the Salt Lake Tabernacle] on March 22, 1908:

"I went to his humble home,. . . and I told him. . . as a young man starting out in life I wanted to know from him. . . what he knew about the Book of Mormon, and what about the testimony he had published to the world concerning it. He told me in all the solemnity of his advanced years, that the testimony he had given to the world, and which was published in the Book of Mormon, was true, every word of it, and that he had never deviated nor departed in any particular from that testimony, and that nothing in the world could separate him from the sacred message that was delivered to him. I still wondered if it was not possible that he could have been deceived,. . . so I induced him to relate to me, under such cross-examination as I was able to interpose, every detail of what took place. He described minutely the spot in the woods, the large log that separated him from the angel, and that he saw the plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated, that he handled them, and that he did hear the voice of God declare that the plates were correctly translated. I asked him if there was any possibility for him to have been deceived, and that it was all a mistake, but he said, `No.'" (Quoted in Gordon B. Hinckley, James Henry Moyle, Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1951, pp. 366-67.)fn

In part from the testimonies of others—many of whom were so directly connected to early prophets, apostles, and other prominent figures in the Restoration—and in part because of his own convictions and spiritual witness, President Faust says of his convictions as a young boy, "I think I have inherited an element of believing blood, and I have to give credit to Edward Partridge and George Finlinson, together with their wives and so many others of my progenitors, for their devotion and commitment and tremendous example. Of course, I have always had a testimony and belief in the gospel. I think along the way there is always some ebbing and flowing and that faith comes in increments. But I think, like everyone else's, my testimony has benefited from one spiritual experience after another, until I have come to the point where I have a knowledge, not just a belief."

Part of that process for Jim included the usual steps of baptism, which was performed in the Salt Lake Tabernacle font, and preparing to receive the priesthood when he was twelve. He recalls:

When I was 11 years old, I looked forward eagerly to my magical 12th birthday when I could become a deacon and a Scout. My mother helped me learn the Articles of Faith, the Scout Law and Motto, and other requirements so that I would have a good start when that special birthday arrived.

Since I had no sisters, my brothers and I were given some of the inside chores as well as outside ones, such as milking and taking care of the animals. One day Mother left me to wash the dishes and clean the kitchen while she attended to a sick neighbor. I agreed to do these duties but put off doing the dishes. Time ran out and they didn't get done. In fact, they didn't even get started. When Mother came home and saw the kitchen, she put on her apron and went to the sink. She spoke only three words, which stung worse than the sting of a dozen hornets. They were the first three words of the Scout Law: "On my honor." That day I resolved that I would never give my mother cause to repeat those words to me again.fn

Soon after he turned twelve, he also received his patriarchal blessing. "Several of us boys went together, including my friend Newell Stevenson. Having my patriarchal blessing at that young age was a stabilizing influence and a restraining influence as well. My mother would read mine to me once in a while, and as a result I've always recommended that people read their often. My blessing is only three-fourths of a page in length, but, as Heber J. Grant said of his, which was of similar length, I couldn't have asked for any greater blessing."

One of his early priesthood responsibilities was as a junior companion to a ward (now home) teacher, and the lesson he had learned from the loss of his lamb helped him keep a clear focus on his priesthood responsibilities:

There were times when it was so cold or stormy and I wanted to stay home and be comfortable, but in my mind's ear I could hear my little lamb bleating, and I knew I needed to be a good shepherd and go with my senior companion. In all those many years, whenever I have had a desire to shirk my duties, there would come to me a remembrance of how sorry I was that night so many years ago when I had not been a good shepherd. I have not always done everything I should have, but I have tried.<#:

NOTES

1999 Deseret Book Co.
