James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

3

A GROWING FAITH

AS JIM GREW INTO HIS TEENAGE YEARS, his interest in adventure also increased. On May 21, 1934, just before his fourteenth birthday, he and his cousin, Asael Lyman, left Jim's home in Cottonwood to ride their bikes to Oak City, where Asael's mother was staying—a distance of one hundred fifty miles.

It took some doing to get permission from Jim's parents to undertake the journey, which the boys planned to complete in a single day. When George and Amy finally agreed, Jim needed a new tire for his bike. He obtained the necessary funds by selling a calf to his father, which, after the cost of the tire, left Jim with $1.35 to finance the trip. (Asael had thirty-five cents for his share.)

After fixing Jim's bike, the two went to bed but couldn't sleep, so they got up, dressed, and headed south just before midnight. The route was up one hill and down another, until they got to the long uphill climb to Point of the Mountain, which separates Salt Lake and Utah counties. Through that long stretch, they had to push their bikes much of the way. They were plagued by dogs that came out to chase them but were armed with a blank pistol to scare the dogs off.

The eight or so miles from Point of the Mountain to American Fork were mostly downhill, which provided the boys with a bit of a break. As they rode through the town, they asked someone for the time and found it was 3:00 A.M. They then encountered a night watchman who was suspicious of them and wondered if they had stolen the bikes and run away. When Jim told the watchman he could call his father to straighten things out, the man let them go, but not before telling the boys they'd never make it to Oak City.

As they completed the long stretch to Provo, the morning sun began to break over Mount Timpanogos. They ate some wafers for breakfast as they contemplated the hundred miles they had left to go. Just out of Springville, they bought some soft drinks at a service station and then stopped in another store in Spanish Fork. The clerk there was amazed they had made it all the way from Salt Lake City. Because of an ordinance in Spanish Fork that prohibited bike riding on the highway through town, they had to take a detour to Payson.

By the time they reached Santaquin, they encountered a stiff head wind, which, when coupled with the heat of the day, made pedaling quite a struggle. When they reached Nephi, they were beginning to get exhausted and consumed prodigious quantities of soda pop and water. Between Nephi and Levan, they encountered quite a lengthy uphill stretch and again had to walk their bikes, although the downhill stretches were refreshing.

At Chicken Creek Reservoir, they turned off to head west over Fool Creek Pass. When they stopped at the first house to ask for a drink of water, they were told they could get all the water they wanted at the railroad station, where the trains got their water.

The ride up and over Fool Creek Pass was hard, and Jim and Asael had been on the road for about eighteen hours. When they finally reached the summit, evening was beginning to fall and they still had about twenty miles to go. The downhill stretch into Fool Creek was another welcome break, until Jim hit something in the road and toppled head over heels. Then Asael hit a rock and took a spill as well. At Fool Creek Flat, where they stopped for a drink, a family urged them to stay the night and complete their journey in the morning. But the cousins were determined to press on, convinced they would set some sort of record by reaching Oak City that day.

As they started out on the final ten miles, the sun was beginning to set. In addition, the road was covered with heavy, loose gravel, making it easier to follow the cow trails that ran alongside the road. As darkness descended, the boys literally fell over in exhaustion on the side of the road, which woke them up enough that they could continue on their way.

At 10:00 P.M., almost twenty-four hours after they had left Jim's house in Cottonwood, the two cousins arrived at their grandparents' house in Oak City. Jim dropped his bike at the big gate, walked to the house, and collapsed on the lawn just as the family was getting ready for bed. The boys were filthy and their eyes were drawn, but their aunts got them some food and rubbed their black legs with alcohol to clean them up. Then Jim and Asael keeled over into bed.

News of the boys' feat spread quickly through the town, and an account of their ordeal appeared in the Millard County Chronicle, the local newspaper printed in neighboring Delta.

When Jim set out with Asael, he had no idea how hard the trek to Oak City was going to be, but he did know the way. Ever since his family had moved to Salt Lake in 1923, he and his brothers had returned each year to spend the summer with their grandparents, aunts, uncles, and cousins. ("I was related to about half the town," he says.) From his very first trip back to Oak City, his stays included two key components: healthy doses of hard work and heritage.

Spending summers in Oak City began in part because Jim's father attended summer school at the University of Utah and wasn't able to spend the time he wanted to with his sons, but they continued because of George's desire that his sons learn the meaning and value of hard work.

Grandfather Finlinson, Amy's father, owned considerable property in and around Oak City, and managing the crops, flocks, and herds was a family affair. So from an early age, Jim and his brothers joined in.

Jim's brother Gus describes their grandparents' house as "a colony," with many of their aunts, uncles, and cousins staying at the Finlinsons' home. The cousins would generally sleep out back together and would awake either to their grandfather singing, "Then wake up, and do something more / Than dream of your mansions above,"fn or to their grandmother coming in from hoeing the garden. Grandmother Finlinson also prepared a huge spread for breakfast, which the boys needed as they faced the work ahead.

"Oh, did we work," Gus says. "Grandfather had us all assigned. Sometimes I got to ride the range with him, and sometimes Jim would go. We became very close working with him, as we did with all of our relatives. He was always kind and considerate of us, but there were also certain things he expected. He used to tell us that if he caught any of us swearing, he would fill our mouths with ashes. But he didn't tell us if they would be hot or cold, and we never found out."

In like manner, Jim remembers his grandfather's stand on the Sabbath:

I confess that as a young boy, Sunday was not my favorite day. Grandfather shut down the action. We didn't have any transportation. We couldn't drive the car. He wouldn't even let us start the motor. We couldn't ride the horses, or the steers, or the sheep. It was the Sabbath, and by commandment, the animals also needed rest. We walked to Church and everywhere else we wanted to go. I can honestly say that we observed both the spirit and the letter of Sabbath worship.fn

Even with his grandfather's farming operations, Jim could see the Depression's long arm reaching to Oak City. He remembers his grandmother making the soap they would use for Saturday baths and for washing their clothes. "Her recipe," he says, "included rendered animal fat, a small portion of lye as a cleansing agent, and wood ashes as an abrasive. The soap had a very pungent aroma and was almost as hard as a brick. There was no money to buy soft, sweet-smelling soap. . . . If you had to bathe with that homemade soap, you could become wonderfully clean, but you smelled worse after bathing than before."fn

But there were other lessons Jim learned from the economic struggles his family faced:

As a boy I learned a great lesson of faith and sacrifice as I worked on my grandfather's farm during the terrible economic depression of the 1930s. The taxes on the farm were delinquent, and Grandfather, like so many, had no money. There was a drought in the land, and some cows and horses were dying for lack of grass and hay. One day when we were harvesting what little hay there was in the field, Grandfather told us to take the wagon to the corner of the field where the best stand of hay stood and fill the wagon as full as we could and take it to the tithing yard as payment of his tithing in kind.

I wondered how Grandfather could use the hay to pay tithing when some of the cows that we were depending upon to sustain us might starve. I even questioned if the Lord expected that much sacrifice from him. Ultimately, I marveled at his great faith that somehow the Lord would provide. The legacy of faith he passed on to his posterity was far greater than money, because he established in the minds of his children and grandchildren that above all he loved the Lord and His holy work over other earthly things. He never became wealthy, but he died at peace with the Lord and with himself.fn

Grandpa Finlinson did give the boys some time off from work, although Gus says he grew up believing that everyone's workday started at five in the morning and ended at nine in the evening. Jim enjoyed the time he had to play with family and friends, but he also spent considerable time reading when there was a break. "When I was a boy, I was a reader," he says, "and down on the farm my aunts used to get after me. `Why don't you go play with the boys,' they'd say. Well, I played with the boys. But I was also interested in reading and learning, so I did some of each."

Jim wasn't so serious that he couldn't get into a little trouble, though. On one Fourth of July, when he was about fourteen, he and an uncle and some friends cut a stick of dynamite in half and lit one half in the middle of the street. "We set it off just to make a little noise," he says, adding "It was a foolish thing to do." The consequence, he found, was having to face the bishop: "In that little town, there was no sheriff or marshal or justice of the peace—the bishop was everything. He was the temporal and the ecclesiastical leader of the community. As I recall, he extracted a promise from us that we wouldn't do it again, and that was all there was to that." The other half of the stick, as a result, went unused.

At about that same time Jim's summers in Oak City came to an end, as his father felt it was time he find summer jobs and earn some money. But the summers Jim spent in this tiny Utah town were times he enjoyed, and times that taught him lessons he would carry with him through his life. It also provided a direct connection to his past, as he would listen to his Uncle Bill tell of walking across the plains as a boy, or to his mother and Aunt Angie tell the stories their great-grandmother had told them about living in the home of Joseph and Emma Smith and tending their children. And he could see the effects of the gospel on family and friends, as they tried to carry forth and live up to the heritage they had been given.

In reflecting on the "believing blood" that he descended from, Jim says, "I feel heavily the responsibility of living up to the heritage of the people who paid such a great price in leaving their homes and giving their very lives for the Church that had been restored. At the same time, I do not claim any preferences or consequences as a result of my heritage, as I'm mindful of the old saying that those who are always talking about their ancestors can be a little like the potato—the best part of them is underground."

Jim was a year younger than most of the students who started at Granite High School in the fall of 1934. While Jim was in the fifth grade, which met together with the sixth grade, the teacher found, as Gus tells the story, "that Jim and his friend Newell and a few others knew more than the sixth-graders. So the teacher moved them right in with them." Being a year younger as he began high school left Jim feeling a bit on the immature side, but he followed his brother Gus's lead (Jim says Gus was "something of a star" in high school) and joined the track and football teams. "Socially and in other ways it was hard being a year younger," Jim says, "and Gus's example of reaching out and being involved was something of a stimulus for me, for which I am very grateful."

Jim ran the quarter mile and mile relay on the track team. He notes that he never once beat his big brother in a race—and that their father could beat both of them for the first forty yards of a race. On the football team, he played guard and tackle, and as a pulling guard he had to "get out and lead the interference." He lettered in both sports, and learned many valuable lessons as well.

One was that with training and perseverance, he could compete, despite not having "any exceptional ability." Another was the benefit of keeping the Word of Wisdom, and yet another was that even given all the pain associated with training, "It felt good to be a competitor."fn

During one scrimmage before a big game, Jim was having difficulty keeping the chin strap on his helmet fastened—and his helmet on. He recalls:

On one important play I received a slight jar and my helmet went rolling away, but the play was still moving and I was in the middle of it. I didn't want to leave the action of the play and go find my helmet, so I continued to press hard to tackle the ball carrier on the other side. I put my head down to bore in and try to grab the ball carrier. One of the players who was running interference for the ball carrier hit me hard, and I went down and lost consciousness.fn

In addition to living through an object lesson on the need to keep oneself protected, Jim also demonstrated his characteristic grit and determination as he jumped up after a moment and headed back into the lineup for the next play.

Through all of his activities—whether on the track or football field, or later as he became involved in debate and oration—Jim felt the constant support of his father. Newell says of George Faust, who at the time was a judge, "I don't think Gus or Jim ever played a game or ran a race that their father wasn't there. And I suspect that on a few occasions he must have reassigned the court schedule because he never missed. And that couldn't have been just by chance."

Jim quickly overcame the feelings of social inadequacy he felt upon entering Granite High and became, in the words of a young girl by the name of Ruth Wright, "a big man on campus." Although they would later marry, Jim and Ruth never dated in high school, but he knew her and was good friends with her brothers. Two years behind Jim, Ruth was likewise very active at their high school, serving as vice-president of her sophomore class, her junior class, and the student body her senior year.

"We would see each other on campus and sometimes at other functions," Jim recalls. "But Ruth didn't want for attention."

Nor did Jim, who dated frequently—often doubling with his brother Gus. "Father said we could each take the car one night for a date," Jim says, "and we quickly figured out that if we went together, we could go on two dates. What that generally meant was bringing a girl to sacrament meeting on Sunday, then bringing her over for dinner, and then going to another sacrament meeting."

Newell adds that the boys and their dates also "went to the high school dances and to Jerry Jones's Rainbow Rendezvous. In those days, we actually went and danced. We didn't go to stand in the middle of the floor."

Although George Faust's sons knew right where he stood on certain fundamentals, he also believed that his sons needed to learn to use their agency in making some of their own decisions. On one winter night, Jim learned that although his father would allow him to make many of his own decisions, he also knew what was best for his boys. As Jim tells the story:

There was a blizzard, but I had a date I didn't want to cancel. Father counseled me gently not to go, but I was young and inexperienced—and thought I was a better driver than I was. As I headed north on Highland Drive to pick up my date, I could hardly see beyond the hood of the car, and in order to make sure I didn't get hit by an oncoming car, I kept over to the right-hand side of what was then a two-lane road. As a result, I banged into a car parked off to the side.

Now, this was the family car—and we only had one. But when I got home and told my father what I had done, he just said, "Son, we're glad you weren't hurt." As I've looked back on that, I've thought he was extremely understanding because I had been extremely foolish.

To pay for his dates—and to save for a mission and college, which were two of George's absolutes—Jim worked each summer he was in high school. Given that the country was still in the thick of the Depression, he felt lucky to find whatever work he could. One job was at the Rocky Mountain Packing Corporation, where, after riding his bike the twelve miles to work, Jim caught hot cans coming off a conveyor belt for twenty-five cents an hour. He would later say, "Those of us who were favored with that job got to have the skin peel off our hands because of the heat and the moisture. I suppose you can start lower than that, but not much!"fn

The Depression left an indelible impression on Jim, who would grow up knowing how quickly fortunes could be lost, and living accordingly. He would later say:

Anybody who didn't go through that experience cannot possibly have a feeling or an understanding of the difficulty which this country, indeed the world, faced at that time. In our valley, 30 percent of the people were unemployed. People lost their homes. Our neighbors moved into a chicken coop because the mortgage on their home was foreclosed.fn

He did, however, see the members of his neighborhood and ward step in to help those hit the hardest, and he was also aware of the Church's establishment in 1936 of the Church Security Plan (now the Church Welfare Services) under the direction of the president of the Pioneer Stake in Salt Lake City, Harold B. Lee.

Jim graduated from Granite High in 1937, having benefited from wonderful teachers, coaches, and seminary teachers. At about that time, at the age of seventeen, he was called to serve as a counselor in the ward Sunday School presidency, after having served as president of his deacons and teachers quorums, and as assistant to the bishop in the priests quorum.

He remembers well Bishop T. C. Stayner, who taught Jim as a priest, and who helped him understand the importance of honesty and integrity. "He didn't follow the handbook," Jim says, "and every lesson—every single one—was be honest, keep your word, have integrity. And then it would repeat. Be honest in all your dealings, be truthful. It got to the point where it was completely predictable, and a little bit tiresome, but the message stuck."

With a mission still two years away, he enrolled at the University of Utah, where he continued to run track, working part time to support himself and save for a mission. One summer he worked as a gardener for a lady in the neighborhood, who offered him thirty dollars a month for his services. Given that 10 percent of that would go to tithing, and tuition at the university was $110 per year, he told her he couldn't make it on that, so she raised her offer to thirty-five dollars, and he took the job.

Another year, he found, as school started, that he was a bit short on money and told his father he was going to have to move away from home and get a job to cover his shortfall. "Father said, `You're doing all right,'"Jim recalls,"' and if you stay here, I'll help you a little.' So he gave me $25 to make up the shortfall."

About the time Jim was finishing his first year at the University of Utah, his brother Gus was called as a missionary to Brazil—the sixtieth missionary to go to a mission that had been opened in 1935.

A year later, Jim said to his friend, Newell Stevenson, "Newell, we've got to go talk to the bishop about our missions."

With the country just beginning to come out of the Depression, however, Jim did wonder if he would be able to go. But when the bishop called George in to see if it was possible for him to support two missionaries, he said, "Bishop, I'll tell you the same thing I told you when Gus went out. I couldn't see then how I could feed my family for the next three months, and I'm in the same position now."

As his faith combined with his father's, Jim waited for his mission call to come, thinking it might be to Germany, given that he had studied the language in high school, he was of German ancestry, and his Uncle Jim had served in Germany. But when the letter from 47 East South Temple finally did come, Jim found that he would be joining his brother in Brazil.

NOTES

1999 Deseret Book Co.
