James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

4

MISSION, MILITARY, AND MARRIAGE

TO THE NEWLY CALLED MISSIONARY from Cottonwood, Utah, Brazil seemed to be just south of the end of the earth, even though his older brother had been serving there for a year. Nevertheless, Elder Jim Faust was excited to be going, although with understandable apprehensions about the two-and-one-half years he would spend away from home. In October 1939, with no training in Portuguese but benefiting from being set apart by Elder Antoine R. Ivins, one of the seven presidents of the Seventy, Elder Faust entered the Salt Lake City Mission Home for a few days of instruction. One lesson that remained with him through the years came from Elder David O. McKay, who took a piece of chalk and wrote on the board, "It is a greater honor to be trusted than to be loved."

After finishing his stay at the mission home, Elder Faust boarded a train in Salt Lake bound for New Orleans. "When the train stopped in Soldier Summit, Utah," he recalls, "I must confess that the thought came into my mind, `Maybe you'd better get off.' But I stayed on."

In New Orleans a group of missionaries, including Elder Faust, boarded a freighter headed for Santos, Brazil, a trip that would take twenty-one days. The accommodations were spartan, at best, and the missionaries spent much of their time studying and teaching each other the gospel. They also made friends with the crew, who one day challenged the missionaries to a boxing match, "for a little diversion," Jim says. "We paired off according to weight, and we had an elder in the heavyweight class and on down. I took on the ship's doctor, and afterwards he said, `Jim, I think you cracked my rib.' It was all in fun, but when we got through with the matches, the crew had an increased respect for us."

The trip, Jim says, "was a pleasant experience and a transforming one—to leave the culture of Utah and be separated for a time and to then land down there in a country very different from the one I had come from."

In terms of size, Brazil is similar to but a bit smaller than the United States. But it was an underdeveloped country at the time—and foreign in every way. "When I got off the boat, people were talking in a strange tongue that sounded like a bunch of monkeys chattering. As a result of going with no language training, generations of missionaries were not very effective for the first six or eight months, as they had to learn the language while living in the country."fn

In 1939, the Church in Brazil was almost nonexistent, with fewer than two hundred members, most of whom were Germans who had immigrated to Brazil after World War I. The first convert baptism took place in 1929, and the Brazilian Mission was established in 1935, with proselytizing being directed almost exclusively at the German-speaking population in southern Brazil. When Elder Faust arrived, the mission president was just beginning to make an effort to teach the gospel in Portuguese.

President J. Eldon Bowers met the new missionaries as they got off the freighter in Santos, and then, because the mission did not own a car, the group took a train to Sao Paulo. There President Bowers informed Elder Faust that he would be learning Portuguese. "I couldn't understand that," Jim recalls. "Here I had spent two years trying to get a little understanding of the German language, and I was being told I would learn Portuguese. Then he sent me down to Joinvile, a German colony where all I could hear was German, and where the signs and everything else were in German. But I was supposed to be learning Portuguese. It made absolutely no sense to me at all, until I wrote home and, I guess, expressed a little dismay at why I would be sent to learn Portuguese in a German-speaking village. Well, my Uncle Jim was the one who had the vision of what the mission president had in mind. He wrote back and said, `Can't you see what he's doing? He's trying to make you a two-language missionary.'"

Elder Faust spent three and one-half months in Joinvile, learning more German and a bit of Portuguese—and learning the life and work of a missionary. The living conditions were not what the missionaries from the United States were used to, and the missionaries' diet consisted of "rice and beans—without any onions or bacon or flavoring of any kind," Jim says. "What saved us, though," he adds with characteristic optimism, "was the delicious fruit that is found in Brazil. Bananas were so cheap that you could buy a whole stalk for three and a half cents. Papayas grew wild, and we could pick them out of our own backyard. Then there were the pineapples and oranges. So we missionaries would get together about three times a week and mix up a Brazilian fruit salad, which consisted of all the fruit we could find, plus a little sugar, and which gave us a welcome break from the rice and beans."

The missionaries either rode bikes or used public transportation, paying a penny to ride the street cars (buses cost about half a cent more). Elder Faust's expenses amounted to under twenty-five dollars a month, and since his father sent twenty-five dollars, Elder Faust tried to save a little each month in case of medical problems or some other emergency. "When Gus returned home," Jim adds, "my father wrote me and said he could send me thirty dollars. But I still saved some each month and had enough to buy an old Model A Ford when I returned home."

Elder Faust's adjustment to the climate of Brazil was not immediate, and for some time he was affected adversely by the heat and humidity of the tropics. He developed a rash, which doctors suggested he treat by bathing in oatmeal, and he was constantly tired and dragging. Still, he did his best to keep going and to do the work he had been called to do.

One afternoon, however, he was particularly tired as he and his companion headed up the lane to their apartment. Just as they were going to turn off and take a quick side trip to the post office, Elder Faust heard what he describes as "a loud message. A voice in my head said, `Go home. You're tired. You need to rest. You don't feel good. Let your companion go the post office, and you'll feel refreshed.'

"I didn't listen to that entreaty; I stayed with my companion. And later I learned why it was best that I had. But, more important, what I learned that day was that the voice of Satan can be reasonable and entreating. It wasn't harsh or discordant, and it certainly wasn't irrational. But had I responded to his encouragement, there could have been something of a cloud over my mission."

As Adolf Hitler invaded Poland in the fall of 1939, which brought about the beginning of World War II, the Brazilian government began to place restrictions on the activities and meetings of Germans living in the country, which had an effect on missionary work. Those restrictions accelerated President Bowers's plans to assign more missionaries to work among Portuguese-speaking Brazilians, and Elder Faust was transferred to Curitiba, to serve with a senior companion from Salt Lake City by the name of Elder William Grant Bangerter.

Elder Bangerter had formed a close association with Elder Faust's brother earlier in his mission and had stayed overnight with Elder Faust while he was serving in Joinvile. While there, Elder Bangerter says, "I saw a picture he had of a girlfriend, and I made the comment, `She won't wait.' And that, of course, wasn't the one he married."

Elder Bangerter adds, "I knew a little of his family back-ground, and when we were assigned, I was ready to be well impressed with him, which was not hard. He was a serious and devoted missionary, and eager to make a success of his calling. In fact, when we first came together in Curitiba, I had been working with a dynamic companion; and because of the way we worked, he and I were on the top of the list of the mission's comparative reports. Jim's first few months had been slower than he had wanted, and when we were assigned he said, `How do you get your name on the top of the list so you can feel like you're accomplishing what we were called here to do?' I told him it was just a matter of going to work, and he said, `I'd sure like to be up that way."

The task was a formidable one, however, as there were no members of the Church in Curitiba, the Book of Mormon was not available in Portuguese, there was no regular teaching plan, and, as Brother Faust would later say, "The Lord was not smiling on the Latin people at that time."

Jim Faust's grandson, Jason Coombs, who served in the Brazil Curitiba mission from 1997 to 1999, provides this perspective: "Imagine prospective converts asking my Grandfather and Elder Bangerter, `So, how many people are of this Church?' and them having to respond, `Well, in this city, you are going to be the first.'"

During one year of Elder Faust's mission, the seventy or so missionaries laboring in Brazil had a total of three convert baptisms among them.

"Unlike Samuel Smith," Jim adds, "we did not have the Book of Mormon in hand to leave with any who might be interested in our message, and the tracks we had were way over the people's heads. For instance, we had a tract about a God who speaks in modern times and one on eternal salvation, but I just had the feeling we weren't connecting. While these people were Christians, many of them were illiterate and they had no scriptural background. So, we prayed mightily that we could get the Book of Mormon published, and that did come in due course. Not surprisingly, it was only after the Book of Mormon was translated into Portuguese that the great harvest of converts came.

"What I also learned was that we were not effective proselyters, except for the personal testimonies that we bore. I think that was the only thing that saved us as missionaries—our individual witnesses and testimonies. You can give people all the doctrinal teachings in the world, but until they are touched by the Spirit, it doesn't connect."

The work was, without question, slow, but Elder Bangerter points out that "we served at a time when no one expected much success from their missions, and so no one thought the work to be difficult. I think we achieved more than we realized at the time, but converting vast numbers of people was not an uppermost thought in our minds."

Elder Bangerter and Elder Faust worked hard, however, and upon being assigned to serve together, they began going door to door, seeking opportunities to share their message with the citizens of Curitiba.

Their first day out was February 10, 1940, and as Elder Faust told the story:

It was my first day tracting, and I could speak no Portuguese. We started up the street and Elder Bangerter, my senior, took all of the houses for a block or so. Then he turned to me and said, "This is your house." Fear struck in my heart. Since there were no doorbells, I clapped my hands together beyond the fence to get the attention of someone in the residence. Usually the maid responded. An older gray-haired lady leaned out of the window and asked in Portuguese, "What do you want?" I was in complete agony. I turned to my companion for help, but he kept his head down, marking in the tracting book. The passing seconds seemed like ages. In my heart, I prayed that I would be delivered. Just about then, she said, "Would you like to come in?" My feelings changed from agony to ecstasy.fn

Other missionaries did most of the teaching of the Valeixo family, and the grandmother, mother, and children were baptized after Elders Bangerter and Faust had left Curitiba. But the family members, who were the first Mormons baptized in a city that in 1998 had ten stakes, would always remember the two young missionaries from Salt Lake City who introduced them to the restored gospel of Jesus Christ.

The two missionaries, together with the other missionaries assigned to Curitiba, continued their efforts, and they got to the point where they felt the need to arrange for a sacrament meeting that investigators could attend. So they rented a hall and built the benches for the investigators to sit on. On Saturday night, as they finished their preparations, they decided to varnish the benches, which didn't dry completely. The only two non-Mormons who came were the landlady of the hall and her sister, and when they stood up at the close of the meeting, there was varnish all over their dresses, which was quite upsetting to the women. They did, however, allow the missionaries to continue renting the facility.

After Elder Bangerter was transferred, Elder Faust had another companion, who one Sunday afternoon took off on a walk by himself. For some reason, as he was taking photographs of the governor's palace, he was arrested and thrown in jail. When the missionary didn't come home that night, Elder Faust and the other missionaries concluded that he must be in jail. When they went to the jail to inquire, the officials wouldn't tell them anything, so the group of missionaries stood outside and began singing, "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet." Upon hearing the song, the incarcerated missionary stuck his head out the window, and the elders were finally able to arrange for his release.

Jim adds, "I should have stayed with him, but I don't recall that I was invited to go."

As is the case with all missionaries, Elder Faust looked forward to letters from home, which arrived three to four weeks after they were mailed. He notes that in addition to receiving regular letters from his mother, his father wrote him every single week during his mission and during his time in the military as well. Elder Faust also wrote faithfully and in one letter thanked his father for making the sacrifices needed to support him and his brother on their missions. His father wrote back, "Don't feel sorry for us. We've eaten too much, we bought a new car, and we're getting along just fine."

Despite the size of Brazil, the missionaries labored in relatively few cities, and Jim and Gus were able to see each other twice before Gus returned home. During their first meeting, in addition to the visiting one might expect of two brothers who were very close before their missions, Jim suggested that they run a race, for old times' sake. "I hadn't been out too long," Jim says, "and I decided that if I was ever going to beat him, it had to be then. But Gus declined the invitation." (Gus admits that he knew he would get beaten and that he was determined his record of never losing to his little brother would stand.)

It came as no surprise to those who knew him that Elder Faust was called to serve in various leadership positions during the course of his mission, including the call of district president in Belo Horizonte and then in Sao Paulo, which made him the presiding officer over all the missionaries and members in those cities.

The calls were not something he had expected, however: "My patriarchal blessing does indicate that I would `preside among the people,' and when I received those callings on my mission, I felt that part of my blessing had been fulfilled. But I certainly did not expect any such callings, and my feeling then, as with the callings I have received since, was, `Why me?' I was understandably concerned about being adequate and being able to lead and to motivate. What I learned in Brazil is that the essential ingredient in leadership is found in what the Savior said: `Come, follow me.' You have to lead. And the leader has to know where he is going and then have the strength to take his people with him. Sometimes they go kicking and screaming, but I'm always glad when we get there."

Elder Faust served in those positions without the benefit of handbooks or manuals of any kind, which helped him learn two important lessons in leadership: "My ability to lead in the mission field—and in every calling I have had since—came from working with the scriptures and from remembering that there is a place where you can always get an answer—and that is when you get down on your knees and pray hard enough that an answer will come and bring a solution to the problems.

"Another important lesson I learned is that Church leaders have to have absolute integrity. The Saints, for instance, used to pay their tithing to me, and the mission president expected me to use the money to pay the rent for the halls. I had the tithes of the Saints in my possession, and I had to be a wise steward over those funds, accounting properly (at a time when there weren't the procedures and safeguards we have today) and making sure there was no defalcation or loss by theft. That was a worry to me because I didn't have a safe or safety deposit box. But I always made sure that I could account for every cruzeiro that was donated."

Elder Faust also benefited from his associations with what few members of the Church there were in Brazil—and in so doing, he gained a love for the Latin Americans that has never wanted. He recounts this experience from his service in Sao Paulo:

One day, my companion and I went out to visit a poor sister who was widowed. . . .

". . . we arrived at a humble home in a very isolated area. This home had a dirt floor and open windows without any glass. The wind and the flies could come right through. Never before in my life had I been in a home where people live with open windows and a dirt floor. Despite this, the house was clean and neat, curtains were hung, and the boards on the inside of the house were whitewashed. Despite being primitive, the home had a cozy feeling about it. We asked after this poor window's health and well-being. She seemed quite happy and contented. We then began to have something of a gospel lesson. She participated freely. We thought that we were the teachers, but it soon became apparent that she knew more than we did. Her faith was deep, and her knowledge of the great eternal truths of where we came from, who we are, and where we are going was very profound. . . .

This poor widow on the outskirts of Sao Paulo made the most of her straitened circumstances—circumstances that could not easily be changed. She realized that she should not make her life miserable by wishing it were otherwise. . . . This impoverished woman enjoyed her independence, and she owed no one any money. She was industrious and thrifty. She crocheted beautiful cloths which were sold in the city to satisfy her simple wants, but she was not poor in spirit. She was rich in the things that really matter.fn

It was in the home of another member sister, on December 7, 1941, that Elder Faust heard over the radio that Pearl Harbor had been bombed and the United States would be entering World War II. "That was very ominous news," he says. "I knew I was going to be into it as soon as I returned home." The news also resulted in his staying an extra three months in Brazil. "Those were unsettling times," he adds, "but I got to have an extra long mission, which was a great blessing."

With German submarines plying the waters of South America, returning to the States by boat was not an option, and military personnel had priority on all airlines, which could only operate during daylight hours. When the time did come for Elder Faust to return home in June 1942, he had to fly standby the whole way. As a result, it took him five days to get to Miami, flying from Rio de Janeiro to Barreiros to Natal to Belam, Brazil, to Maracaibo, Venezuela, and finally to Miami, Florida. From Florida, Elder Faust took a train to Rock Springs, Wyoming, where his parents (knowing he would be drafted almost immediately) picked him up and spent some time together as they drove the rest of the way home.

"I was grateful to be home," he says, "and in part my gratitude was heightened by the fact that I knew what was ahead of me in terms of the military and World War II."

He was also profoundly grateful for the experiences he had had in Brazil and says that "the mission experience was one I was not sure I would have because of the economic circumstances of my family."

He is also quick to add that the blessings he received from having served and the work done by those early missionaries cannot be measured in terms of convert baptisms. "I baptized one man," he says, "and that was not a success story. My first companion, likewise, only baptized one person, and he thought his mission was a failure. But when I attended his funeral not long ago, a letter was read that he had received twenty years after his mission from the man he baptized, who indicated he had been true and faithful and had raised his family in the Church. I have since learned that from that family there are two stake presidents serving in Brazil and a bishop serving in Provo, Utah. Likewise, how can I say my mission was not successful when Brother Bangerter and I found the first family to join the Church in Curitiba? We may not have taught and baptized them, but we found them."

Even before returning home to await induction into the military, Elder Faust and several other missionaries were made aware of opportunities with the U.S. government that would keep them from the draft. As Elder Faust recalls:

We were told that Hitler planned to conquer the United States by coming up through South America. In an effort to stop what was called the Nazi Fifth Column activity, the United States Government, through the State Department, was recruiting Americans who knew the language, country, and culture. They would perform diplomatic work, including intelligence gathering.

Some of us who were completing our missions were offered positions in the State Department, and some were named as viceconsuls of the United States. We were offered pay at a rate of about twenty times what our parents were sending us, and fifteen times what draftees in the armed forces of the United States were paid. Those who accepted this invitation could live out the war safely and comfortably without eating Spam or K-rations; they would not be shot at and would have plenty of money to spend.

One of my companions who was offered such a position asked his parents about the advisability of accepting such employment. My companion's father went to see President J. Reuben Clark, Jr. The counsel received from the First Presidency was that we all should come home and be subject to the draft. We were encouraged not to put ourselves in a position of compromising our standards inconsistent with our callings and priesthood. We were too young, inexperienced, and immature to understand fully what President Clark already knew. . . .

In my immature mind, I could rationalize that there was more than one way to fight a war. Was it not justifiable to do anything, literally anything to thwart the efforts of the hated Nazis? Were we not justified in doing anything and everything to defeat such an evil empire which was seeking world domination? I questioned which was more honorable: to be drafted into the armed forces, where I may have to shoot someone and be shot at, or be in civilian life and fight the Nazis in a more subtle form of opposition. . . .

A great principle was involved, however: it is important always to follow the counsel of the prophets of the Lord. That requires some courage and faith.fn

Upon returning home, Jim waited to receive his induction notice, which arrived within six weeks. In the meantime, he bought a Model A Ford with money saved during his mission and resumed what he knew would be a short-lived social life as a civilian. One of the first young women he asked out was Ruth Wright, with whom he had been acquainted at Granite High and who was working for Jim's uncle at the State Fingerprint Bureau. "Ruth," Jim recalls, "had my uncle's great respect and admiration, in part because she was working to help take care of herself, as well as to help her mother pay the mortgage on their home. Uncle Jim kept telling me I needed to come up to his office and see this Ruth Wright. When I did, she was so engaging that I completely bewitched."

Ruth was from a family of four boys and four girls and says, "I had a special spot in the family, being the sixth of the eight children. Three older sisters spoiled me with hand-me-downs and love, then two older brothers and two younger brothers all teased, protected, and looked after me."fn

When Ruth was a young girl, her father was called to serve a mission, which meant he would have to leave behind his wife, who was pregnant with their eighth child, and their seven children. Ruth shares something of the challenges her mother faced: "We had sixteen cows that had to be milked two times a day. There were fences to be mended, hay to be bought, and the household chores to be done. Mother baked bread daily and tended to the garden, from which we harvested our food. Then she sold eggs and milk to supplement our income." When asked if she ever heard her mother complain, Ruth responds, "I don't think she knew she could complain! She accepted these burdens—at least what I would call burdens—as a calling from the Lord. And when I saw my mother's faith, I just figured that's what I had to do."

Ruth was well-liked and active in high school and also had qualities that ran far deeper than the outward indications of her popularity. One year, she ran for queen of one of the high school dances but lost to another girl. Then the committee did a recount of the votes and found that Ruth had, in fact, won. When they told her, she asked that they keep the results quite so the other girl's feelings wouldn't be hurt.

In addition to working after graduating from high school, Ruth attended the University of Utah for two years, eager to gain as much education as she could.

When Jim showed up at his uncle's office, Ruth was pleased to renew her acquaintance with him—and was also pleased to accept his invitation to come over for Sunday dinner a few days later. She took that to be a good indication that he valued and was proud of his family, and she enjoyed a lavish meal that George prepared for the young couple, as well as for Jim's brothers and other relatives.

The two began to date regularly after that Sunday dinner, although Jim's induction into the Army Air Corps came soon after that first date. "I knew what I had to do when I returned from my mission," Jim says, "and my notice came soon enough. My father did what he could to orient me, and he told me, `Son, I'm going to give you different advice than I've ever given you before. When you're in the army, eat everything you can, sleep every chance you can, and don't volunteer for anything.' That proved to be good advice."

Fortunately for his and Ruth's budding relationship, Jim was sent to Fort Douglas in Salt Lake City for his indoctrination and then to nearby Camp Kearns for basic training. The close proximity of the two bases made it possible for them to go out, usually once a week.

In between dates with Jim, however, Ruth was busy dating several other young men, which created a bit of a dilemma when Jim proposed marriage. "I accepted his proposal without hesitation," Ruth says, "but at the same time he was asking, another young man was coming to pick me up for a date. When he arrived, I drove around the block with him to tell him I wouldn't be able to go out after all."

Jim knew there was competition and adds that he felt he held little interest for someone like Ruth, being a private in the army and earning only fifty dollars a month as such. Ruth remembers the sentiments he expressed to her mother in these words: "Sister Wright, I have nothing, I am nothing, but I love your daughter and want to ask for your blessing to marry her."

Jim adds, "I knew full well I had nothing to offer, and to make matters worse, during the war you never knew what was going to happen. Well, when I asked for Ruth's mother's blessing, she said, `Jim, I think as much of you as I do of Will Erekson.' (Will was Ruth's brother-in-law and had become my stake president after President Moyle.) That just blew me away, to use today's vernacular. I didn't believe it then and I don't believe it now, but it was one of the finest encouragements I've ever received in my life. I was glad that I knew Will, though, as I don't think I would have made the grade except that in Ruth's mother I had a friend in court."

With Ruth having accepted his proposal, Jim sold his Ford for seventy-five dollars and put a little money with it to buy an engagement ring. Their courtship, interrupted as it was by Jim's military obligations, "was delightful in some ways but terrible in others," Ruth recalls, referring to the fact that soon after they became engaged Jim was transferred to the Chanute Field Army Base in Illinois for further training.

Because of his language experience, Jim was assigned to an intelligence division and enrolled in cryptographer's school. One night he was assigned to guard some barracks that had been fumigated, and as he stood in the cold winter's air, he noticed that there were no officers assigned to the duty—and he knew that they were all "in their beds, warm and comfortable":

As I walked around my post, I meditated and pondered the whole miserable, long night through. By morning I had come to some firm conclusions. I was engaged to be married and knew that I could not support my wife on a private's pay. In a day or two, I filed my application for Officer's Candidate School. Shortly thereafter, I was summoned before the board of inquiry. . . .

The questions asked of me at the officers' board of inquiry took a very surprising turn. Nearly all of them centered upon my beliefs. "Do you smoke?" "Do you drink?" "What do you think of others who smoke and drink?" I had no trouble answering these questions.

"Do you pray?" "Do you believe that an officer should pray?" The officer asking these last questions was a hard-bitten career soldier. He did not look like he had prayed very often. I pondered. Would I give him offense if I answered how I truly believed? I wanted to be an officer very much so that I would not have to do all-night guard duty and KP and clean latrines, but mostly so my sweetheart and I could afford to be married.

I decided not to equivocate. I admitted that I did pray and that I felt that officers might seek divine guidance as some truly great generals had done. I told them that I thought that officers should be prepared to lead their men in all appropriate activities, if the occasion requires, including prayer.

More interesting questions came. "In times of war, should not the moral code be relaxed? Does not the stress of battle justify men in doing things that they would not do when at home under normal situations?"

I recognized that here was a chance perhaps to make some points and look broad-minded. I suspected that the men who were asking me this question did not live by the standards that I had been taught. The thought flashed through my mind that perhaps I could say that I had my own beliefs, but I did not wish to impose them on others. But there seemed to flash before my mind the faces of the many people to whom I had taught the law of chastity as a missionary. In the end I simply said, "I do not believe there is a double standard of morality."

I left the hearing resigned to the fact that these hard-bitten officers would not like the answers I had given to their questions and would surely score me very low. A few days later when the scores were posted, to my astonishment I had passed.fn

In December 1942, Jim was shipped off to Florida to attend officer's school—and to await what he knew would be the orders to ship overseas. He and his fiance discussed their plans through the mail and came to the conclusion that they wanted to be married before his next transfer. But there appeared to be no way for him to return to Salt Lake City to be married in the temple, so they concluded that Ruth would go through the temple in Salt Lake and then come to Florida, where they would be married by a Mormon bishop. Accepting that reality was hard for Ruth and for Jim, who had been promised in his patriarchal blessing that he would be married in the temple; but they could see no other alternative and made arrangements accordingly.

As Jim was nearing the completion of his training in Florida, he received orders to report to Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, where he would attend interrogating school. He was also told that in order for him to fit with the military's schedule, he would be given a ten-day furlough.

Ruth recalls, "I received a telegram two days before I was to leave for Florida, telling me to stay in Salt Lake, for we would be married in the temple after all. It was as if a miracle had happened, and I really believe that it did. Jim was one of the few officers at his school to be given a furlough."fn

There still remained the challenge of getting home, and Jim quickly found that there were no airline reservations to be had and that the trains and buses were all booked as well. He hitchhiked to Denver, where he was able to catch a bus to Salt Lake, and on April 21, 1943, he and Ruth were married for eternity in the Salt Lake Temple.

There was no reception—in fact, only Ruth's mother and grandmother and Jim's parents attended the ceremony—but the newlyweds were grateful just to be able to begin married life as they had always hoped and prayed to begin it.

After spending a day or two in Salt Lake City, the newlyweds traveled across the country to Pennsylvania, where they rented a single room in a home, sharing the bathroom down the hall with the other tenants.

In many ways, the two scarcely knew each other as they began life together; in fact, during their engagement Ruth expressed concern to her brother-in-law Will Erekson that she didn't know Jim very well. He simply responded, "Ruth, I've been married to your sister for thirteen years, and I don't know her very well either!"

Jim looks at their early days together and says, "It was good in many respects to be away from home and have to work together on the adjustments common to all marriages. We were alone and had to depend on each other. We couldn't even find a branch of the Church. And with the expense of traveling together back East, we went on thin rations for some time. There were weeks when we'd run out of money and live on milk and crackers until payday. It was just Ruth and me, and it brought us closer together."

The Fausts spent about two months in Pennsylvania, and then Jim received his orders to report to San Francisco, where he would board a Liberty ship headed for Suez, Egypt. Ruth accompanied him to California and then returned home to Utah, where she stayed with her mother and worked as a secretary for the army. (Jim notes that he and Ruth were broke when he finished his time in the military because they crossed the United States ten times in an old Ford that burned a quart of oil for every five gallons of gas.)

The trip to Suez ended up taking eighty-three days, during which time Jim and Ruth had no contact with each other. Jim had one friend on board, John Knasavich, whose wife stayed with Ruth while she was in San Francisco. There were four other officers on board—two German speaking and two Italian speaking—and there was one enlisted man who was Greek. The ship was operated by a British crew.

About 1,100 miles off the coast of New Zealand, the crew received orders to locate and rescue a tanker that had burned out and was just wallowing in the sea. "It was quite large," Jim recalls, "and the Liberty ship wasn't. We had orders to tow it in to Auckland, but when we would tie ropes to it, they would snap. We finally got two that held, but then we encountered terrible storms. We only averaged about three knots per hour, and it took us thirty days to pull the tanker into Auckland. Of course, that rescue mission added considerable time to our trip."

During his brief stay in Auckland, Jim went to visit Elder Matthew Cowley, who was the mission president of New Zealand. Elder Cowley mentioned to him that Jim's bishop back in Cottonwood had married Beatrice Going, who came from a well-known LDS family in New Zealand. "Brother Cowley said to me, `You ought to go up and meet those folks—they might convert you,'" Jim recalls. "I thought I was converted but went up to see what he meant. They were wonderful people and were very kind to me. Percy Going had cleared this whole valley and was raising cows and sheep. I was fortunate enough to be there on a Sunday and spent the day with the family in church. They met in a little chapel they had built, and it was fast Sunday. The testimonies went all day, with a break for lunch, and everyone took a turn. I learned from Elder Cowley that this branch had 100 percent full-tithe payers, and it was, indeed, a wonderful, converting experience."

On his last night in Auckland, Jim met a Dr. Horn from Salt Lake City, who invited him to go with him to a movie. During the show, Dr. Horn heard Jim wheezing, and he told Jim to come see him in the morning so he could treat him for what was an obvious bronchial infection. But Jim had to ship out the next morning, and with no doctor on board the ship, his condition went untreated.

Not surprisingly, Jim was the only LDS soldier on board the ship, and he would often spend a portion of his Sundays at the bow of the ship, reading scriptures and singing hymns. Most days, he would spend a considerable amount of time reading; and every single day, he wrote a letter to Ruth. The letters were, of necessity, short, written on the one-page V-mail stationery supplied by the military, but each contained a bit of news and a lot of Jim's feelings for his new bride. (He would later say, "I didn't have anything to think about on that boat for eightythree days, and I got a little romantic.") A letter dated September 8, 1943, read:

My Beloved Wife,

The days go by quite rapidly, but I miss hearing from you so much it seems as though in a way I am not living.

Anyway, I am thinking of you all of the time, and feel within myself that things will be alright. As long as both of us are healthy, I guess we shouldn't kick.

I can't help worrying about you though, because not hearing from you makes it that way. How are Sherm and Rex? How is your stomach? How is your family?

We have been teaching the Germans aircraft recognition, then I study awhile, and the time passes. I don't let things bother me, like the other three.

Well, little lady, again today I want to remind you that I love you, and appreciate you, and pray for you. You are mine forever.

Stay just the way you are, and smile in the mirror for me.

With all my love, Esfn

One of the last letters he wrote was dated November 8, 1943:

Dear Ruthy,

Well, by the looks of things this will be about the last letter on board this ship. I can hardly realize that the trip is about over.

All my hopes for the present are in expectation of mail, which I pray is there. We have had a safe passage and everything is alright.

I'll cable you first thing, and will get these letters off as soon as possible.

I love you my dear sweet wife, and hope you are alright. I worry about you, although I think you are able to take care of yourself. You are all I have, you know. Write me all of the news.

I love you, Es

When Jim arrived in Egypt, he mailed all the letters he had written to Ruth, and several weeks later, her mother called her while she was at work to tell her she had received eighty-three letters from her husband. Ruth recalls, "By this point, I hadn't heard from Jim for over three months, and I was almost a basket case. When I told my boss that I had finally received mail from my husband, he let me take the afternoon off. So I went home and read every one of those eighty-three letters."

Upon arriving in Egypt, Jim was attached to the headquarters of the army in the Middle East. Not long after, he received orders signed by General Dwight D. Eisenhower to report to the Supreme Headquarters for the European area. But at about the same time, Jim developed an infection in one of his toes, and while he was having it examined, the doctor could tell he was having difficulty breathing and discovered that he was still suffering from the residual effects of pneumonia. Thereupon, the doctor told him he wasn't going anywhere and put him in the military hospital for treatment. Jim recounts an incident that occurred in the hospital:

The hospital was staffed with native orderlies who were to keep the hospital clean, change the beds, and generally be of help to the patients. Because of the prevalence of malaria and its carrier, the mosquito, we slept under large mosquito nets which hung from the ceiling and covered the whole bed. One night as I went to bed I slipped my wallet under my pillow and drifted off to sleep.

Some time later in the night I was awakened and startled to feel some hands slipping under my bedclothes. I suspected that a thief was after my wallet. I instinctively grabbed one of the hands and switched on the light. My wallet slipped out from under the pillow. To my surprise, I held the arm of the native boy who was the orderly assigned to clean my room. All he said in defense of his action was, "Don't worry. I am a disciple." He could tell from the look on my face that I did not understand. In further explanation, he said simply, "I am a disciple. I am a Christian. I do not want your purse. I was only tucking the mosquito netting around your bed to protect you from the mosquitoes while you slept." I came to know that this young man was not only a Christian, he was a disciple.fn

Even with being placed on limited duty, Jim's assignments took him across Africa to Khartoum, Sudan, and then to Accra, Ghana. After spending about six months in the Middle East and traveling across much of the continent of Africa (a country he would later have responsibility for as president of the International Mission), Jim was reassigned stateside, which was welcome news to him and Ruth.

His first assignment upon returning to the States was in Orlando, Florida, where he received additional training in intelligence, and he was then transferred to Camp Ritchie in Maryland. "I was assigned to be an ordnance officer, in charge of maintaining machinery and equipment. My father was good with his hands and could fix anything, but I inherited none of his abilities that way and knew nothing about machinery. But I had some men who did, and I learned that you don't have to know everything yourself if you have good people around you who do."

One of the responsibilities of the group Jim oversaw was to analyze German equipment that had been captured and sent over to his base. "We'd work around the clock to try and figure out the impedimenta the Germans had developed. And sometimes we'd drive their vehicles around. I did struggle, though, with not knowing much about what I was doing, so one day I asked a friend who was the head of another section if he could get me transferred over. That request was turned down."

While Jim was based at Camp Ritchie, he and Ruth lived in Waynesboro, Pennsylvania, which had a small ward they attended. There they met the stake patriarch, William G. Stoops, about whom Jim would later say:

Brother Stoops worked at a machine shop in the little town of Waynesboro, Pennsylvania. Everyone called him Pappy. He was a kindly, gentle, wonderful, exemplary member of the Church. All who met him honored and admired him. One time a nonmember with whom he worked said something like this: "I don't know much about the Mormon Church. I have never met with the missionaries, and I have never studied the doctrine. I have never been to one of their services, but I know Pappy Stoops, and if the Church produces men like Pappy Stoops, it has to have much good in it." We never know the power of our own example for either good or bad.fn

In August 1945, soon after the war ended in Europe, Jim was discharged with the rank of first lieutenant, and he and Ruth moved back to Utah. Having been married for more than two years and wanting to get on with his life, Jim had all but decided that he wouldn't return to school and would find another way to begin making a living. He recalls, "When I told my father that I didn't think I would return to school, he said, with his characteristic directness, `What can you do?' That cut me to the bone, and it didn't take me long to get my application in to the University of Utah Law School."

NOTES

* Within his family, Jim went by Es (short for his middle name, Esdras) in his younger years.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
