James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

5

LOCAL LEADERSHIP

WHEN JIM ENROLLED IN THE University of Utah Law School in the fall of 1945, he did so with his father's example firmly in mind, as well as the examples of other lawyers he greatly admired, such as James H. and Henry D. Moyle.

Jim had watched his father pursue a private practice that focused on helping people out of their predicaments rather than on amassing as many billable hours as possible. Jim had also seen his father serve honorably as a judge for Utah's Third District Court, a position his father later left because of the need to stand for election at the end of each term and his determination to remain independent of the campaign contributions that came, in large part, from the lawyers who argued their cases before him.

Jim had also grown up aware of the absolute integrity of President Henry D. Moyle. In addition, he had heard of a blessing James H. Moyle had received from President John Taylor prior to his leaving for the East to study law. In that blessing President Taylor had given this counsel:

We say unto thee, this is a dangerous profession, one that leads many people down to destruction; yet, if [thou] wilt, with clean hands and a pure heart, fearing God and working righteousness, with a desire to maintain the truth and to defend the rights of the Church and Kingdom of God on earth; if thou wilt abstain from corruption and bribery and covetousness, and from arguing falsely and on false principles. . . and if [thou] wilt dedicate thyself unto God every day and ask for His blessing and guidance, the Lord God will bless thee in this calling; and thou shalt be blessed with wisdom and intelligence, and with the light of revelation; and thou shalt be an instrument in the hands of God to assist in protecting the rights and liberties and immunities of His people. . . .

We set thee apart on these conditions and under these circumstances to go forth, as [thou] hast desired, to study and become acquainted with all the principles of law and equity; and we say unto thee, if [thou] wilt abstain from chicanery and fraud and from covetousness, and if thou wilt cleave to the truth God will bless thee.fn

Jim considered this inspired counsel a guideline in his own studies and later in his professional work.

Upon entering law school, Jim came under the tutelage of Dean William H. Leary, who had been dean of the school when George Faust had attended more than thirty years earlier. Dean Leary was known for his plain-spoken nature, and Jim recalls, "He used to tell my dad, `You wouldn't have gotten in if you hadn't come in with a bunch of sheep.' I think I was in the same situation."

Dean Leary was also well known for his caustic responses to those who were unprepared or who asked what he determined to be a dumb question. On more than one occasion he'd say to a student, "That is such a stupid question, I'd tear my hair out if I had any left." But beyond such comments, which were aimed at the smarter and the poorer students alike, Jim remembers, "He taught us that a fundamental purpose of going to law school was learning to think straight. So that's what I tried to do."

One of Jim's friends in law school was Richard C. Howe, who, in 1998, was appointed chief justice of the Utah Supreme Court. The two would study together in the afternoons as Jim waited for Ruth to finish work, and then he would pick her up, go home for dinner, and continue his studies at their little apartment, often late into the night. Justice Howe recalls, "He was always well organized as a law student, and he was always prepared. He was also very interested in the subject and studied hard. It's my impression, though, that he never studied on Sunday."

Jim and Richard also worked together for the Salt Lake City roads department, fixing roads in the summer and running snow plows in the winter. In addition, Jim received military serviceman benefits, and with Ruth's income, they were able to pay their way.

As the Fausts' years in school passed by, there was one major concern and frustration in their life together. From the time of their marriage in April 1943, Ruth and Jim had wanted to have children but hadn't been able to do so.

In describing this period, Ruth says, "During those early years of our marriage, my greatest desire and dream was to be a mother, and that was what I prayed for most longingly. As the months turned into years and we still hadn't been able to have children, we would pray and pray, and then we would fast, and then we would pray some more. We went to doctors, we went to the temple, we kept praying, but still there were no children."

Jim says of that time, "The fact that we weren't able to have children was a great concern to both of us, but Ruth was particularly upset; she was so baby-hungry. We finally sought counsel from Will Erekson, who was Ruth's brother-in-law and had been my stake president. He indicated that Elder Charles A. Callis of the Quorum of the Twelve seemed to have a spiritual gift to bless couples to have children, so with the appropriate permission, we sought a blessing from the hands of Elder Callis. He first gave me a blessing, and then he and I gave Ruth a blessing, with him as voice.

"Things went from bad to worse over the next few months, with the doctor continuing to run tests and Ruth unable to get pregnant. Finally, we went out to Bingham to see Dr. Richards, and he said, `Ruth, you're pregnant.' All she could say was, `Really?'"

The Fausts' first son, James H. (who immediately was given the nickname of "Jimmy") was born May 30, 1947, the night before one of Jim's law school finals. "I only got a C on that test," he says, but he rejoiced with Ruth in the arrival of their first child.

At about that time, Jim and Ruth had concluded that for the forty-eight dollars they were paying in rent each month for their basement apartment, they could buy a house by obtaining a G.I. (serviceman's) loan. Jim arranged with Algot Johnson, who was the Sunday School president Jim had served as a counselor to, to build a small brick house for his family in his old Cottonwood neighborhood.

Justice Howe remembers well Jim's decision to build a house, which was contrary to the advice one of their law professors had given his class. "Willis Ritter, who later became a federal judge and was something of a notorious character, one day got off the subject and said, `I want to warn you students about buying a house at these inflated prices. There's a danger that if the real estate market falls, you're going to be stuck with a heavy mortgage.' Of course, nothing could have proved to be more wrong than that prediction; in fact, Jim mentioned to me once that when he added on a couple of bedrooms about ten years later, he paid more for the addition than he had for the original structure."

Soon after moving back to his old ward, Jim was called to serve as a stake high councilor, and not long after, he was called by Elder Harold B. Lee to serve as a counselor in his ward's bishopric. "During that interview," Jim recalls, "Elder Lee asked me if Ruth and I had playing cards in our home. I said, `Yes, we do,' and explained that my former missionary companions and I got together socially and played the game of Hearts. He didn't tell me to get rid of the cards. What he said was, `From this day forward, you must not only avoid evil, you must avoid the very appearance of evil.' I don't know that I've always done that, but I've tried. And I do try. But I learned from that interview that it is incumbent upon all of us—as leaders and as members of the Church—to not do anything in our personal conduct that would give anybody else license to do something they have seen us do."

Those first years out of law school were an act of faith, Jim says. "My income was $110 a month, and $48 of that went to our house payment. Our car was paid for, but we had to take care of gas, oil, food, clothing, and medical insurance. In addition, Jimmy had to have a special formula because he couldn't tolerate milk. That cost a dollar a can, and it seemed like he drank a can a day. Finally, Ruth's brother was going on a mission, and we agreed to pay $10 a month, which we just did not have. But we paid our tithing, and somehow—somehow—we were able to do it. Sometimes we got to the point where we didn't have a dollar left; but through faith, it worked."

Not surprisingly, Jim was much more inclined to count on faith pulling them through than some of the other means that presented themselves. Once, during their early years of marriage, he and Ruth stopped in Las Vegas one night on their way to California with Ruth's brother. As they checked into the hotel, each was given a roll of nickels to get them started at the slot machines, and while Ruth and her brother contemplated giving their luck a try, Jim let them know he would have no part of it. In fact, he took them out to the street, where he tossed his nickels into the gutter. "I told them, `That's what you'd be doing—just throwing money away.' We drove through Las Vegas a number of times after that, but nobody ever saw me put a nickel in a slot machine."

After going to school year-round, Jim graduated from law school in the spring of 1948, at the same time earning his bachelor's degree, the last two years of which he completed during that same three-year period. Not long after his graduation, two significant events occurred in Jim and Ruth's life.

The first took place as the ward in which Jim and Ruth lived grew to the size where it needed to be divided. As the new boundaries were drawn, the Fausts' home ended up in the new Cottonwood Second Ward, and Jim was sustained as its bishop on May 8, 1949. Most ward members had known him from the time he was a little boy ("warts and all," he says), and now he would preside over them as their bishop.

Jim tells of a ward member who, in good humor, made the comment that his call must have come from the Lord, because the members of the ward wouldn't have picked him; but Ruth tells of an elderly man, highly respected in the ward, who took Jim aside after the ward had sustained him to tell him in private that he would, without any hesitation, support him in every way that he could.

Likewise, Jim's brother Gus, who had just moved from the ward and knew its members, says that no one was surprised by the call of this twenty-eight-year-old and that the ward accepted him without equivocation.

If there had been any tendency on Jim's part to feel a bit of pride in the call that came at such a young age, his father set him straight that evening at Sunday dinner. As the family gathered, Jim recalls, "He let me know that just because I had been called as bishop I wasn't any better than anybody else, I wasn't to take myself too seriously or too piously, and I wouldn't be receiving any special preference among his sons."

(When an interviewer pointed out, years later, that from the day he left on his mission until the day he was called as bishop there had not been a moment's rest, President Faust quipped, "And there never has been since.")

Bishop Faust selected two fine men as counselors: Farron Cutler, who was several years older, and his boyhood friend Netwell Stevenson, who had returned from a mission to Hawaii, served in the military, married, and moved back to Cottonwood. He also recognized immediately that he could fulfill his responsibilities as bishop appropriately only if he had the support of his wife, who had given birth to their second child, Janna, just before his call.

At about this same time, two of Jim's friends, Leo Glover and Elder Henry D. Moyle, suggested that he ought to consider running for a seat in the Utah State House of Representatives. "I took their advice and ran, and darned if I didn't get elected."

With all that he had to manage, Bishop Faust did what he could to help his wife with their children, but his legal, legislative, and Church responsibilities limited the time he was home. Being keenly aware that Ruth "had the principal burden of taking care of the family," he found somewhat unconventional ways to help, such as taking one of the children up on the stand to sit with him during sacrament meeting each week, so that Sister Faust would have a somewhat lighter load.

Although those who knew him felt that Jim was imminently qualified to serve as bishop, he felt inadequate and humbled by the call. He was, however, grateful for the experiences he had had as a district leader in Brazil, for the brief time he had spent as a high councilor and as a counselor in a bishopric, and for the training he received at the Friday night sessions of general conference, where President David O. McKay would sometimes draw from 1 Tim. 3 to instruct the bishops in their callings.

Newell Stevenson adds, "He knew what his source of strength was as a young bishop. We would often stop in the middle of a bishopric meeting, and we would kneel in prayer if there was something we couldn't decide upon or agree upon. He was very humble and prayerful, and he had very strong spiritual instincts that enabled him to do the right things and do them well."

Brother Stevenson also says of his leadership style, "He never rushed into anything. He wouldn't put matters off, either; in fact, there were some difficult matters he dealt with that had been unhandled issues in the ward for years. But he didn't hurry into things just because this or that was the way he thought it ought to be. More than once, I saw him change his mind completely as we would sit together in council and talk matters through. His other counselor and I would sometimes have different opinions, and he would never move ahead until we all agreed—and often it would be his opinion that had changed."

At the time Bishop Faust served in the Cottonwood Second Ward, bishops were responsible for raising ward budgets, building funds, and other assessments; and because the area where he lived was growing so rapidly, the financial demands were significant. "I think the greatest challenge I had was raising the funds," he says. "But I learned not to make assessments to people. I learned to call them in and visit with them and tell them the challenge we had. Then I would suggest a range of contributions we needed and leave it up to them. I found our ward members were more generous when approached that way than if I had made an assessment. The hardest part of that was convincing myself it could be done, but the faith of the people was great enough that if given the opportunity, they would come through. And I still believe that is true."

One of those who helped Bishop Faust learn to rely on the faith and devotion of those he served was Elder Moyle, who lived in his ward. "Elder Moyle used to come in for tithing settlement and write out his check to `Bishop James E. Faust'—he took the scripture literally that tithing should be paid to one's bishop. As he would hand me his check, he would always say, `Bishop, this is a full tithe and a little bit more, because that's the way we've been blessed.' Well, given my concern for budgets and so on, I decided I thought I'd see how he felt about the ward budget. So, I asked him—and I got straightened out. He said, `Bishop, everything I have is yours, in the name of the Lord.' That was a very humbling thing for a young bishop to hear from one of the apostles, and that was Henry D. Moyle."

Bishop Faust was open to lessons from all quarters, one of which came as he sang in the ward choir:

We had a good choir because our leader, Brother Alex Anderson, was a good leader. He, however, encouraged the bishop to sing in the choir. I felt that as a measure of support for Brother Anderson and the others. . . I would try to sing with the choir. Things went from bad to worse. Brother Anderson liked to invite the choir members to improve their talents by singing solos. One Sunday during choir practice he asked that the bishop sing a small solo. I found it very difficult to turn Brother Anderson down in front of the choir when the others who were not very good singers made a 100 percent effort. So during sacrament meeting they sang and I tried. I was literally so frightened and upset that the paper trembled in my hands. I could hardly hold it. I felt embarrassed and I felt humiliated. All of my mask of dignity was gone. After the meeting as I walked down the aisle I was met with warm smiles and expressions of understanding and support. Someone said, "Bishop, it surely makes us feel good to see you scared." That day the bishop became more human.fn

In reflecting on that day years later, he would add, "Instead of thinking you have to do everything perfectly as a leader, you do the best you can. And sometimes when you're doing the best you can, you find that you can't do everything as well as you'd like. But people are forgiving of our weaknesses and shortcomings, and they don't expect us to be perfect, especially when we're willing to laugh at ourselves and admit we're human."

There were many such lessons that Bishop Faust learned as he served, but there was also much that he contributed to the members of his ward, starting with those with whom he served in the ward leadership.

Brother Stevenson tells of a financial clerk Bishop Faust helped to mentor: "When this man was called, he had never had a checking account or written a check in his life. But Jim took time to teach him the fundamentals, and he turned out to be one of the most faithful, dedicated, and accurate clerks I've ever known.

"We had another member of the ward who was older and who had received assistance from the Church for years. Jim worked with him very patiently and made sure he did some work to go along with the help he was receiving. Well, this man became frustrated at one point that he didn't have some of the luxuries of life, so he wrote a letter of complaint to the president of the Church. Of course, the letter came back to Jim to handle, so Jim took me and we went to this man's house to talk with him. The man was mortally chagrined when we showed up, and although some bishops might have been perturbed with him, Jim didn't raise his voice or any such thing—he just very sweetly and quietly asked this man what he wanted that he wasn't receiving."

Part of Bishop Faust's ability to relate to and serve the members of his ward came from the fact that he got to know the members so well, but part came from his willingness to look past the obvious and see the potential in people. One example was a man Jim had known as a boy. Because of his family's circumstances, Jim's friend had not graduated from high school, and he began hauling gravel for contractors, a job that did little to improve his situation. He had also drifted some as a teenager but then married a good woman who helped to settle him down.

Bishop Faust called this man as the Aaronic Priesthood adviser, and he says, "He took his calling seriously. He literally wore out the handbook, studying it. He had a notebook filled with dates when all the young men in the ward would reach the age to be advanced in the Aaronic Priesthood. He kept good track of the young men."

After Bishop Faust was called into the state presidency, he was involved in calling this man as a member of his ward's bishopric. "He needed a little nudging to become a full tithe-payer, but he responded faithfully, as he had done before." Subsequently, President Faust recommended this man, in whom many might not have seen much potential years before, to be the bishop of their ward.fn

"Jim would never leave something undone or put anything aside because it was hard—he just did it," Brother Stevenson says of his friend's time as bishop.

During his first two years as bishop, Jim also worked hard at building up his law practice and at serving as a state legislator. But when it came time for him to stand for reelection in the fall of 1950, he concluded that he wouldn't run. From the perspective of many who have known him over the years, Jim gained invaluable insight into politics and legislative processes during that two-year term, but he says, "That turned out to be something of a disaster. I had only been practicing for a very short time, and being in the legislature just about sank me because I wasn't able to take care of my practice. It was an engrossing experience—and an enlightening one—but I concluded that I just didn't have time to take care of my clients."

(For his participation in a sixty-day legislative session, which also took about a month of his time before and after, he received the sum of $300—which put his monthly income for what amounted to a four-month commitment at about $35 a month less than he had earned while in law school.)

Justice Howe also points out that Jim had taken on an assignment as an inheritance tax appraiser as part of his legal practice and felt that those responsibilities might conflict with his position as a legislator. "The Utah Constitution provides that a legislator shall not hold any other office of profit or trust," Justice Howe explains, "and I think Jim—in wanting to avoid any appearance of impropriety—felt there might be a problem in his doing both."

Even without the challenges associated with serving as a state legislator, Jim's family, professional, and Church obligations continued to place almost unlimited demands on his time as the responsibilities associated with each continued to grow. Then, after almost seven years as bishop, he was called as a counselor to President G. Carlos Smith in the Cottonwood Stake presidency.

Having served on the high council, President Faust had some perspective on the stake and its activities, but being a member of the stake presidency broadened his view considerably.

One important lesson he learned during his time as a counselor was the need to delegate. The stake had a large welfare farm, and when harvest time came, President Smith was in Europe and the other counselor, Heber Peterson, was likewise out of town. President Faust was new in his calling and wanted to fulfill his obligations, but he also had commitments at work that couldn't be postponed. He worried considerably about how he would arrange to get the crops in, but then, "all of a sudden one night," he says, "I decided that we had a wonderful, gifted high council and that the best thing for me to do was to not even show up at the stake farm. We had men of exceptional ability and talent, and so I gave them the assignment and asked them to give me a report every night on the progress. Even with the machinery breaking down and everything else that can go wrong with a harvest, we got the grain in."

He also became acquainted with many other Church members and leaders in the Salt Lake Valley, including a counselor in the Millcreek Stake presidency by the name of Gordon B. Hinckley.

During those early years of Church leadership, which took up virtually every night of the week, Jim worked hard during the day to build up his practice. Upon graduating from law school, he had been invited by his father's friend and former associate, John D. "Jack" Rice, to "hang his hat" in Jack's offices; and in exchange for free rent and access to the law library, Jim performed research and other duties for Jack as he began to take on clients of his own.

His approach to the law was careful, thoughtful, and conservative, owing in part to the advice his father had given him over the years and the example he had set as a lawyer. As one fundamental, Jim tried always to follow his father's counsel to begin a case by getting the complaint down right in the first place so that he wouldn't have to spend time amending it later. He learned another fundamental from Henry D. Moyle, who told him as he began practicing, "You take care of your office and your office will take care of you." It was also his nature to follow the counsel found in the Latin phrase res ipsa loquitur ("Let the matter speak for itself"), and he was never known for courtroom drama or theatrics, preferring instead to present a solid case and allowing the jury to then do its job. (He acknowledges that he once wished he could win all his cases but quickly learned that such would not be the case—and that accepting that fact kept him from lapses of judgment and ethics.)

Coupled with such underlying philosophies, he knew that, although it was his job to argue a particular position, "not everything in life is black or white. There are other colors and shades of black or white. It is important that we not judge. I have learned in my many years in the arena of life that we don't always have all the facts, and that being slow to judge will save us from the effects of the principle enunciated by the Savior: `Judge not, that ye be not judged."'

His son, Robert, would later say of his father's approach to the law, "He told me once that `what's right and what's wrong is different than what's legal, and I've tried to practice law at a standard higher than what's legal. If it's wrong, you don't do it, even if it's legal."' And his friend, Justice Howe, who worked with Jim on several cases, has said, "I know of occasions when he turned down work because he didn't feel comfortable with the case. He wanted to feel good about the person's cause, that it was just."

Throughout his career, he would receive assignments from the State Bar to perform pro bono work, and his first case involved a young defendant who had stolen a motorcycle and taken it across state lines. The case was assigned to Judge Tillman D. Johnson, who was well into his nineties, and when the case was called and Jim approached the bench with his client, the venerable judge looked down and said, "Which one of you is the accused?"

In another case he was involved with early in his career, Jim watched as his associate, John Rice, took on a cause that few lawyers would have pursued as aggressively. "He represented a derelict woman in a divorce case, which he took all the way to the Utah Supreme Court, and there he gave the most eloquent oral argument to the Court I ever heard. He said, `My client is a drunk. She has been abandoned by her husband, her family, her church, and everyone except her lawyer. I took her case to keep her from being taken advantage of.' Jack was a deliverer, and he received a pittance for his work.fn

He would say in ensuing years that although there are some who joke that the "A" students in law school make the professors, the "B" students make the judges, and the "C" students make the money, "President Marion G. Romney and I proved that adage wrong, because President Romney didn't become a professor and I didn't make a fortune. My primary interest in the practice of law was just to take care of my family and have time to fulfill my Church callings."

While President Faust was serving as a counselor in the Cottonwood Stake presidency, he watched his quiet little community grow by leaps and bounds, and the day inevitably came in 1955 when the stake needed to be divided. As the boundaries for the new stake were drawn, it occurred to him that President Smith and the other counselor resided in the old stake and he resided in the new. But he did not want to entertain the thought that he might be called. Nor did Sister Faust, who had her hands full with Jimmy and Janna, as well as with Marcus, who was born in February 1953, and with Lisa, who was born in November 1954.

She supported her husband in every way that she could, her children remembering that he would arrive home from work at about six, eat dinner with the family, and then change into a clean white shirt and head off to stake meetings—every night of the week.

Sister Faust's children, who were as rambunctious as could be in church, tell of her admitting in later years that there were weeks when she would wrestle them through the meetings and then say to herself, "I'm not going back to Church until the children learn to behave." Then, of course, she'd "repent" and be back the next week. They also say they never knew during those years the burden she carried; she would always greet her husband with a kiss, make sure he had a warm meal, and then send him off to his meetings with a smile and a kiss.

When Elder Henry D. Moyle came to divide the stake he had once presided over, he interviewed and asked for recommendations from the ward and stake leaders, and he then sought to know who the Lord would have serve as the new stake president. He felt inspired to call James E. Faust. Not surprisingly, that had been the answer Elder Moyle had received from virtually all the men he had interviewed. So, after calling President Faust to serve, Elder Moyle handed him the slips of paper on which other leaders had written their recommendations and quipped, "Well, Jim, even if we don't want you, your brethren do."

Overwhelmed with the new responsibility, President Faust took strength from knowing that the call had come from the Lord—and that he had the support of the members of the stake. Sister Faust, likewise, was overwhelmed; and, fearing the pressures this call would place on her young family, she initially shed tears. Then, she says, "I grew up that day."

As was customary, Jim, Ruth, and their children had Sunday dinner with his family later that day, and Rex Faust remembers his father giving Jim much the same advice he did when Jim was called as a bishop. This time, however, the counsel was directed toward Jim and Ruth's young children, as well. "There's one thing about it," George said. "You don't need to get the swelled head. It's just another calling, and none of you are any better than anyone else."

To Jim's sorrow, George Faust died not long after his son's call. George had sustained serious injuries in an automobile accident that he never quite recovered from, and he passed away some months after having a heart attack. His death created a significant void in Jim's life, as he had always been able to count on his father's sage advice and candor.

The challenges this thirty-five-year-old stake president faced were many, with one of the most significant being the need to build more buildings. President Faust first sought out property, ultimately acquiring ten sites that could be built upon. Then the stake began to build, following a program in which the Church would match financially the stake's labor. One of President Faust's high councilors, Leon Miller, was part owner of Standard Buildings Supply Company and proposed that with donated labor, the stake could complete a building for about $30,000 cash.

President Faust recalls, "We organized the labor, and we had electricians, masons, carpenters, and laborers like myself. We would mobilize the whole stake and concentrate on a particular building. The Cottonwood Sixth Ward building was built in seven months, principally with donated labor. The bishop of that ward was a contractor, and he served as the contractor on that building. At one point, he came to me and said, `President, I don't think we're going to make it,' and I said, `Let's go back to work.' We got it done, even though the night before the dedication, there were people cleaning all night long.

"We were not a large stake, but we all worked together. We even had non-Mormons come over and help. One fellow who lived in the neighborhood came over on a Tuesday night, and then he came back Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, and Saturday. It wasn't long before he wanted to be baptized, and he ended up a bishop in the Church. We hadn't asked him to help; he just came and felt the spirit of fellowship."

During President Faust's almost thirteen years as stake president, the stake completed five chapels and a stake center.

Building chapels was not the only demand on the members' time; they also were involved in a cattle operation, as well as other welfare responsibilities. The brethren looked forward to two cattle drives each year, as they would move their herd from its summer grazing land in Park City to winter pastures sixty miles south. One spring, President Faust and his son Jimmy went up to Park City for the branding operation, and as President Faust held a big calf down, "it objected, raised its head, and hit me in the mouth." When Jimmy saw that his father had lost his four upper front teeth, he put on his overcoat to leave. "I said, `What are you doing?"' President Faust recalls, "and he said, `We're going home, aren't we?' I said, `No, we're going to stay here and finish the job."' (When the two returned home, Jim said to Ruth, "I'm just glad it wasn't one of the Adult Aaronics the calf kicked.")

Justice Howe, who lived in President Faust's stake during his years as stake president, remembers that his friend was "a very effective leader who was well organized but who didn't make a big noise." And while most of President Faust's nights were taken up with meetings, Justice Howe says his friend "hated long organizational meetings. He used to tell me that you could accomplish a lot in an hour—if you were well organized, didn't talk too much, and settled right down to business."

President Faust's son-in-law Scott Smith, whose father served as a bishop in the stake, adds that he could be firm when he needed to be and "ran a very tight ship. My father told me of one meeting at which the bishops and high councilors were called in to review and then sustain the stake budget. One bishop had a problem with the percentage of the budget his ward would have to raise and expressed his concern. President Faust listened and then gently reminded the bishop of the role of inspiration in making decisions for the stake. He then asked for a sustaining vote, and every hand went up."

During his years as stake president, Jim Faust became well acquainted with almost all of the General Authorities, many of whom came and visited his stake during the then-quarterly conferences.

Elder Harold B. Lee was one who had taken a special interest in Jim when he served in the legislature, and he visited the Cottonwood Stake several times during the time President Faust served as its president. After his first visit, Elder Lee recorded in his journal, "I. . . was delighted with the excellent spirit in evidence, with President James Faust presiding." After another visit, he wrote, "This is one of our better stakes under the direction of President Jim Faust. The leaders are younger and more responsive. The Seventies Quorums had given names of nonmember missionary prospects to Church members, who were requested to invite these members to the first session of the Conference where the center section of the chapel was reserved for them. They estimate that no less than 100 nonmembers were in attendance.fn

Another visiting authority was Elder Thomas S. Monson, then a junior member of the Twelve, who recalls, "I found an administrator who had everything in order. I also like to have things orderly, so we got along very well right from the start. And his wife is a fabulous cook."

His visit occurred during the Vietnam War, and Elder Monson spoke to the priesthood leadership in the Saturday night session about the need for staying in touch with the servicemen from their wards. He told of how, as a young bishop, he had written to the fifteen young men from his ward who were serving in the Korean War, and how he heard back periodically from all but one.

He then shared that as he was dictating yet another letter to the soldier he had never heard from, the sister in the ward who was helping him said, "Bishop, don't you ever get discouraged? This is the fifteenth consecutive month you've written to Brother Bryson, and he's never replied." Elder Monson told the leaders his response was, "That's okay, we'll write him again." Then he told them of the response he received to that letter, which read as follows:

Dear Bishop:

I have received a letter from you. Quite a few, in fact. I'm slow in replying. I'm not much at writing letters, but I get the magazine. My group leader came by recently, and I've been ordained a priest.

After the meeting, as Elder Monson was shaking hands with some of those in attendance, up walked Brother Bryson, whom Elder Monson had not seen since he went into the military. When Elder Monson told President Faust of the chance meeting, he replied, "Oh, yes, he's one of our elders quorum presidents."

Another memorable visit was when Elder Hugh B. Brown visited President Faust's stake the week before Elder Brown was called as a member of the Twelve. As the two men walked to Elder Brown's car, President Faust asked if he had any personal advice, to which Elder Brown replied, "Yes. Stick with the Brethren." President Faust would later recall, "He did not choose to elaborate or explain, but he left that indelible message: Have the simple faith to follow the Brethren.fn

Many others came to President Faust's stake, including Joseph Fielding Smith, Spencer W. Kimball, Stephen L Richards, N. Eldon Tanner, Howard W. Hunter, and Gordon B. Hinckley.

President Faust had formed a close association with Elder Hinckley, beginning when they both served as counselors in neighboring stake presidencies and then continuing as they served as presidents of their stakes. Coincidentally, President Faust was invited to give the invocation in the general conference session at which Elder Hinckley was sustained as an Assistant to the Twelve.

The Fausts also formed a special bond with President and Sister Tanner, who lived in the same ward, and the two families became close friends. President Faust says of President Tanner, "He was a man of few words, but when he spoke, you listened. He dedicated the chapel we built in seven months, and his one observation on what we had accomplished was, `It's all leadership,' which was an impressive lesson."

On another occasion, President Tanner asked President Faust to handle a delicate, difficult situation. When President Faust told him he felt incapable of dealing with it and thought it ought to be handled by a General Authority, President Tanner just said, "Well, you can be fair, can't you?"

The lessons and examples the visiting General Authorities imparted stayed with President Faust as he moved into other leadership responsibilities, and of these experiences, he says, "It was a marvelous thing to have been instructed by the prophets of God. I've always felt I should have done better in my responsibilities, given the great men who taught me."

Having the association they did with visiting authorities was a unique experience for the Faust children, who numbered five when Robert was born in 1957; but they were typical children nonetheless, and Jim and Ruth faced very much the same challenges as the other parents they knew in Cottonwood.

Raising their children took time and work, but Sister Faust expresses something of the basic premise she and her husband followed: "Each child who came into our home was a very special gift of God, in answer to prayer and the blessing we received early in our marriage. The very word family is sacred to us, as it represents our children and what they are—and what we love about each of them. They were a handful, which is normal; but for us as parents, family time was and is sacred."

Sister Faust tells of joining a social club when her children were young, which took her away from the home more than she had anticipated. She finally withdrew so that she could be at home more and says of her decision, "It's hard to ask the Lord to bless us if we're not doing our job."

Even with President Faust's demanding schedule, he tried to follow his father's example and took every opportunity to be with his children at special events. On Saturday, a day he often spent at his law office, he would wake the children up and assign them chores for the day before leaving, so that Ruth would have help—and wouldn't have to worry about getting the children organized. As with his stake, at home he also ran a tight ship, and the children knew that only when their chores were done could they play.

During the summer months, the children spent a good deal of time in the yard, which their father wanted to keep up as an example to the members of his stake. (Although the Fausts' home was on a lot nearly one acre in size, the children mowed the lawn with a push mower for several years and always had to move hoses to do the watering.) The family also had a large garden area, which sons and daughters alike helped care for. Robert recalls that he and Jimmy, in particular, hated working in the garden, and he once asked his father why he liked it so much. "He told me that in the practice of law you don't always see the tangible results of your efforts and hard work, but with a garden there is immediate satisfaction. I told him I didn't have that same need—but he still made me work in the garden."

There was also another area on the Fausts' property where Jim would sometimes go, when he had a little time, to dig or till. As Lisa recalls, it seemed to be a place where he could relax—and not worry so much about outcomes. "Sometimes we'd plant flowers there," she says, "but basically it was dirt. Even so, he would often change into his work clothes and just rototill the area."

As far as being handy around the house, Jim just wasn't. Sister Faust acknowledges the help of many kind neighbors who made repairs that Jim couldn't, and her children note that she baked a lot of pies in exchange.

As the children grew, it was understood that they would be active in the Church and obedient to the commandments. Robert tells of his father's placing great emphasis on the children's preserving their reputations and telling them, "If you ruin your reputation, you don't have anything." But, Robert says, he was much more concerned with the substance of a person's behavior than with outward form. "There were people in his ward when he served as bishop who didn't always come to church, but they paid their tithing. He felt that if they were paying their tithing, he knew where their heart really was. He was more concerned about those who came every week and professed their commitment to the Church but who didn't pay their tithing. That was a signpost for what he considered to be substantive indications of the true beliefs of their hearts.

"He saw to it that we went to church, but he wouldn't press things to the point where he was fanatical or where his approach would push us away from the Church."

As a recently returned missionary, the Fausts' oldest son, Jim, shared with his father the observation that sometimes it seemed to him that there are some who go to church each Sunday but who don't seem to implement in their lives the teachings they hear. Jim says his father thought for a moment and said, "You know, it's a little bit like the man who sits down at the piano and practices every day, but never learns the song."

Robert also recalls his father once saying, "The family does not exist for the Church; the Church exists for the family." And Janna tells of a time when she was receiving pressure to play on the ward softball team, which she didn't want to do. "Dad told me, `You don't have to do that; you can be here to help your mother instead."'

Marcus points out, however, that while his father could be flexible on some matters, he has always lived his life by certain absolutes—such as integrity, loyalty, honesty, and obedience to the commandments—and that he expected his children to do likewise. "My father has a very well defined and ingrained set of principles by which he lives and always has lived, from a very young age. He's very rigid in his adherence to these principles."

As an example of one of his father's absolutes—unfailing loyalty—Marcus tells of how Jim, from an early age, went with his father to have his hair cut by a fellow named Sam, one of George's old army friends. That tradition continued with Jim's own sons, although Marcus noticed that as the barber got older and his eyesight poorer, his father would first have Sam cut his hair, then schedule an appointment with another barber to have Sam's mistakes cleaned up.

Even with Jim and Ruth's best efforts, though, Jimmy, Janna, Marcus, Lisa, and Robert were still very much kids. On one hot summer day, Robert threw a brick through his window to get a little more air into the room. When it came time for their father to come home, Marcus helped Robert put a book in his pants, knowing he would be getting a spanking. Upon seeing the outline of the book, however, Dad began to laugh, and there never was a spanking.

Ruth tells of another occasion when the children wanted to plant a flower garden, so she took them to a nursery to pick out their flowers. "Marc planted his, but a couple of hours later, I noticed they were all gone. When I asked him what had happened, he said, `Maybe they growed down,' and then added, `but don't look over by the fence."'

As Jim and Ruth reared their children, both remembered the lessons they had learned growing up during the Depression, and neither had desires for much beyond a comfortable home and moderate lifestyle. The children were well aware of their father's frugality, and Janna recalls that while her father "felt a tremendous responsibility to provide for our family and worked very hard, he was always careful financially and avoided debt like a plague. His profession was such that he only got paid when he worked—or when a settlement would come in. He could go a long time working on a case without receiving any payment, and then get a fee that would cover two or three years' worth of work. Mom and Dad couldn't allow themselves to live beyond their means or to have any debt because they didn't know if they could service it. As a result, when my mother had Robert, after fourteen years of marriage, we were still hanging our clothes out to dry in the winter."

Another insight into—and endorsement of—President Faust's provident lifestyle was shared by President Gordon B. Hinckley in the October 1998 general conference of the Church. President Hinckley said this of the Fausts' early years of marriage:

He had a mortgage on his home drawing 4 percent interest. Many people would have told him he was foolish to pay off that mortgage when it carried so low a rate of interest. But the first opportunity he had to acquire some means, he and his wife determined they would pay off their mortgage. He has been free of debt since that day. That's why he wears a smile on his face, and that's why he whistles while he works.fn

Jim did always drive a nice car, and his children remember that it was always spotlessly clean. Having a good vehicle was possible because Ruth's brother, Owen Wright, owned a car dealership and, in partial exchange for Jim's legal services, provided him with a new car every two years. One year, Owen brought a new Cadillac out to the Fausts' home and parked it in the garage for Jim to find when he returned home from work. Jim's response was not what Owen had expected, however: He wouldn't drive it. The car sat in the garage until Owen could pick it up and replace it with something more practical and, in Jim's view, less ostentatious.

Part of his decision stemmed from wondering how the members of his stake would feel seeing him driving around in a Cadillac. But part grew out of what he acknowledges as "a provident lifestyle, born of two things: a desire to follow the counsel of the Brethren, and fear. My fear came from living through a depression, and I am a strong believer that the people in this day and time have forgotten the story of the years of plenty followed by the years of famine."

President Faust's concern for the cleanliness of whatever car he drove did result in at least one vivid family memory. While on one of their regular family vacations, Jim noticed tar on the carpet of the car. So he lined everyone up and checked their shoes, all of which were clean. Finally, he checked his own shoes—and thereon found the source of the tar. "He didn't say a word," Lisa says. "He just got some solvent, cleaned the tar off his shoe, and we were on our way."

In addition to learning lessons in provident living, the Faust children learned repeatedly that they were not to expect any preferential treatment because their father was the stake president. Marcus tells of one stake conference at which the visiting authority decided to call some people out of the audience to bear their testimonies. As he instructed President Faust's counselor to call upon Marcus, who was then seminary president at Bonneville Junior High, President Faust overheard them, stopped the meeting, and, in a quite exchange on the stand, vetoed the idea. "They called on someone else," Marcus explains, "because Dad did not want it to appear that he was using his position to promote his family."

President Faust's children do acknowledge some unique opportunities to associate with various General Authorities, however, and Lisa tells of going with her parents and her high school boyfriend (now her husband) to visit Hugh B. Brown, who by this time was becoming quite elderly. As they visited, President Faust commented on how beautiful an Oriental rug was, to which President Brown replied, "It is, isn't it. I think I'll take that with me to heaven." Then he chuckled and said, "That's presumptuous, to think I'm going to heaven. I'll probably show up at the pearly gates with that rug under my arm, and St. Peter will look at me and look at the rug and tell me where to go."

President Faust shared in a good laugh and then said, "President Brown, if you're not getting in, there's no hope for the rest of us."

One thing President Faust shared with his two mentors, Presidents Tanner and Brown, was their philosophical orientation toward the Democratic party. Even after not seeking reelection in 1950, Jim continued to be very active in state and national politics. Among his various endeavors, he helped manage a campaign for Senator Frank Moss. He summarizes his political orientation by explaining, "I am a conservative on fiscal and property matters, and I am a liberal in terms of human values and human rights. I believe what is said in the Book of Mormon, that the Lord values all of his children equally—black and white, bond and free, male and female, Jew and Gentile—and that the Lord likewise has compassion for the heathen. As a result, I like to see all people enjoy every advantage, every blessing, every opportunity that comes to them by reason of citizenship. I also support what has been said by the Brethren—that it is in the interests of the Church to have a twoparty system and not to have one party that is exclusively LDS and the other party exclusively non-LDS. Both locally and nationally, the interests of the Church and its members are served when we have two good men or women running on each ticket, and then no matter who is elected, we win."

President Faust served as president of the Utah State Bar Association from 1962 to 1963, maintaining that the only reason he won that election was because all the older lawyers thought they were voting for his father. He also served as a member of President John F. Kennedy's Civil Rights Commission in the early 1960s and attended a reception in the White House Rose Garden in that capacity. Jim recalls, "After he had given us our charge, President Kennedy came up to Scott Matheson (who later became governor of Utah) and me and asked if we would like to see his office. He pointed the way, and Scott and I walked into the Oval Office unattended; there was no one guarding it as there is today. As we looked around the room, Mrs. Lincoln, President Kennedy's secretary, came in, introduced herself, and asked if we'd like to see the rest of the executive offices, which we did. You certainly couldn't do that now!"

In 1968, after having served almost thirteen years as stake president, forty-eight-year-old James E. Faust was released—so that he could be called as one of the first regional representatives of the Church. President Harold B. Lee extended the call and assigned him to work with Neal A. Maxwell, also a regional representative, on the Church's new Leadership Committee under the direction of the junior member of the Twelve, Thomas S. Monson.

In some ways, the change of assignment increased Elder Faust's load, as he traveled many weekends to attend stake conferences, but Marcus recalls coming home one evening and seeing his father watching television in the den. "It was an odd feeling to see him in there, but after his release as stake president, we began to see him around the house in the evenings."

At about the same time, Elder Faust was asked to work with Elder Gordon B. Hinckley in coordinating the Church's opposition to an initiative to liberalize the state's liquor laws. (The initiative started out with widespread support but ended up being soundly defeated.)

During his four years as a regional representative, Elder Faust learned more and more about church governance and formed lasting friendships and associations. Then in October 1972, while attending a training seminar that he and his friend Neal Maxwell had helped organize, his life was unalterably changed.

NOTES

1999 Deseret Book Co.
