James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

6

WITH A HAND TO THE PLOW

IN LATE SEPTEMBER 1972, as Jim Faust was driving home from his Salt Lake City law office, he approached the intersection at 4500 South and Highland Drive. Before he could turn right onto Highland Drive, the stoplight turned from green, to yellow, to red; and at that very instant, he says, "I received a very powerful message that at the next general conference I was going to be called as an Assistant to the Twelve. It was very clear to me what the call would be, and that it would not be to the Seventy or to the Twelve at that time. It was a very powerful message."

When he arrived home a few minutes later, he went into his bedroom and shut the door. Then, he adds, "Ruth, who is very sensitive, came in and asked if anything was wrong. I told her no, but that I needed to be alone for a little while. Then I made a few notes that I put in the pocket of my suit jacket."

Ten days later, on Thursday, October 5, Elder Faust was attending to his duties at a regional representatives' seminar that he had helped arrange with Elder Neal A. Maxwell (also a regional representative), under the direction of Elder Thomas S. Monson of the Twelve. The meeting was being held in the Seventeenth Ward Chapel in downtown Salt Lake, and the keynote speaker for the morning session was President Harold B. Lee, who would be sustained the next day as the eleventh president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Elder Faust remembers that after his address, President Lee came down from the stand and greeted Elder Maxwell warmly, but that when he said hello to Elder Faust he seemed a little withdrawn. Then, as President Lee went to the back of the room, he motioned for Elder Faust to follow him. "So, I went with him to the back of the building," Elder Faust recalls, "and there I saw Henry Smith, who was the editor of the Church News, and Arthur Haycock, who was the secretary to President Lee. Both had rather serious demeanors. President Lee had me come into this little room, and he was so gracious and kind as he told me that he wanted to change my life. He then told me what a wonderful wife I have, and that the Lord had called me to serve as an Assistant to the Twelve. Among all the other emotions I felt at the time, I was grateful that the Lord had let me know ahead of time that this call was coming, because I could not have served one day without having the personal conviction that the call had come from the Lord."

Once his interview with President Lee concluded, Elder Faust went out to help Elder Maxwell make arrangements for the one o'clock session that was about to begin. Elder Maxwell recalls that upon seeing his friend, "I could tell he was shaken, and all I said, so that I didn't risk being inappropriate, was, `Am I going to lose my companion, Jim?' He teared up, and we left it at that."

As President Lee met with Elder Faust, he told him that he could tell his wife of the calling, and no one else. At the same time the regional representatives were meeting, Sister Faust, who was then serving as a stake Relief Society president, was attending a meeting in the Salt Lake Tabernacle. When her meeting ended, Elder Faust found her and took her to a quiet spot behind the organ, where he told her what had happened that morning. "She asked me if I had known about this," Elder Faust says. "I reached in my pocket and pulled out the notes I had made several days earlier as I told her what had happened that night as I drove home. Then, as we both shed tears, she said, `Why didn't you tell me?' and all I could say was, `I couldn't even admit it to myself."'

A few minutes later, Sister Faust encountered President Lee, who said to her, "The Lord has called your husband." Sister Faust's response was simply, "He couldn't have gotten any better."

Between that Thursday afternoon and Friday morning, when his name would be presented for a sustaining vote, there was little Elder and Sister Faust could do but ponder their feelings and wait for the public announcement to come. Honoring President Lee's counsel to keep the matter confidential, he suggested to his mother that she be sure to watch the morning session of general conference, but beyond that he made no mention of this life-changing event to family or friends.

During the Saturday afternoon session of conference, Elder James E. Faust was able to make his first public statement since receiving the call.

His humility was immediately evident as he said,

I have asked myself a hundred times, Why me?—because it is beyond my understanding that I should be asked to join these great brethren of the General Authorities. . .

. . . I have concluded that if there is one amongst all the General Authorities who is the weakest and the least qualified, then I can fill that position.

He then turned his attention to the gratitude he felt for family members and friends who had been instrumental in shaping his life:

With all my heart I want to thank Ruth Wright Faust for letting me share her life and giving me the hope that we can share eternity together. She is more than a wife and a sweetheart because she has become part of my very being. With all my heart I want my children to know that I cannot succeed in this calling unless I also succeed as their father, and that they will always be paramount in my life.

No man ever had a better father than did I, and I hope that I will always honor his good name. My widowed mother is among you in the television audience, and I am sure that she weeps. Many times in my childhood I have happened upon her on her knees, praying for her five sons, and I wish to tell her that this son continues to need her faith and prayers. . .

I wish President Lee to know that I sustain him, and He whom President Lee represents, with all of my devotion and all of my heart and all of my being. Under his hands I was ordained a bishop, and by him called to the stake presidency, and he has been for me all my adult life a great and beloved teacher and exemplar for all that is noble and good. President Tanner has been like a father to me, ever available, always helpful, kind, considerate, and he knows how much love and respect I have for him.

President Romney, as you know, has special qualities of inspiration and wisdom and has been a special friend and confidant, and my respect and honor for him know no bounds. I would also like to mention the profound influence that President Henry D. Moyle and President Hugh B. Brown have also had on my life. These are and have been truly great men of the earth.

I express appreciation to all the host of people who have blessed my life, those from whom I have learned, my missionary companions, those with whom I served in bishoprics, on high councils, stake presidencies, and my beloved friends, the Regional Representatives of the Twelve.

Elder Faust also allowed a bit of his wit to combine with his expression of testimony and conviction as he concluded:

As long as I remember I have had a personal witness of the divinity of Jesus Christ and of his church, and it has always been easy for me to believe and to testify. . .

I realize that life for me and mine can never and should never be the same. For twenty-two years and until last Thursday morning I have been a lawyer, and since then I have been trying to repent. Now I shall try to become one of the fishers and help these brethren cast forth and draw in the nets of eternal life. And I should like to say that if anyone has ever been offended by anything I have ever done in my church, professional, or political life, I humbly ask their forgiveness. I mentioned to a friend of mine who knew of this call that those who know me will say, "Surely James Faust was called of the Lord because no one else would have called him." . . .

Now as a humble follower of the divine Master, I bear witness to the divinity of him as the Savior of the world, and of his church as established in these days, now headed by President Harold B. Lee.fn

After Elder Faust's brief comments, President Lee, who was conducting, commented on his talk, as well as on the remarks delivered by Elder O. Leslie Stone, who had also been called as an Assistant to the Twelve:

"As we listen to these men, great in business and public life, we remember what the great prophet of the Book of Mormon said, `. . . to be learned is good if they hearken unto the counsels of God.' (2 Ne. 9:29)

"We can accept all the repentant lawyers and attorneys and businessmen there are in the world."fn

Although the Fausts were stunned by the calling that had come, Gus Faust recalls that no one in the family was surprised by the news; and Grant Bangerter, with whom Elder Faust had remained close since their missionary days, points to comments he made at the next reunion of the Brazil missionaries as typifying those who knew Jim Faust well: "I spoke what I think all the others felt—that what we had seen happen was inevitable."

In accepting the call to serve as a General Authority, Elder Faust knew his and his family's lives would be changed in significant ways. And it was his family that was of utmost concern to him, prompting him and Sister Faust to call their children and their spouses together as soon as the call was made public to discuss what it meant to them as parents. The message was simple, and it would be repeated to the family with each of his subsequent callings: "I cannot succeed as a General Authority if I don't first succeed as a husband and as a father."

Elder Faust then set out to eliminate from his life anything that might distract him from his two responsibilities. Although President Lee had told him he could take what time he needed to close his legal practice, Elder Faust moved as quickly as possible to assign his clients and cases to others, including his son Jim, who was finishing his last year of law school at the time of his father's call. "I hadn't passed the bar yet," Jim recalls, "but during my final year I tried to save all the clients I could. I took care of what I could, and there was another lawyer with whom my father had been associated who handled all the court appearances."

Elder Faust recalls that "a few weeks after I was called, I took a razor blade and went over and removed my name from the door of my law office. Someone else could have done that, but I felt I should be the one. I felt my name should be removed as soon as I was able to disengage from the law. I had to go to court only once after I was called as a General Authority, for which I was grateful. Once I had put my hand to the plow, I didn't look back. Being called as a General Authority was more than enough challenge for me."

As he took hold of the plow, Elder Faust had years of experience to draw upon in the arenas of Church leadership, the law, politics, social issues, and community service. At the same time, he felt the need for counsel and went to see his longtime friend, President Hugh B. Brown. "At the time," Elder Faust says, "President Brown was in his nineties and was not able to come to the office. So I went to his home and said, `President Brown, what advice do you have for a new General Authority?' And he just said this: `Stick with the Brethren.'"

Marcus Faust adds that his father mentioned in a private moment that he was going to attempt to pattern his ministry after that of President Brown's. "Dad loved President Brown because President Brown loved the people. He was a populist and had a common touch, which are traits I think my father shares with him."

Elder Faust adds, in acknowledging the influence President Brown had on him, that "people often thought that President Brown had a brilliant mind, which he certainly did. But his heart was bigger than his mind."

Elder Faust also recalls, with a chuckle, one other bit of advice he gleaned from President Brown: "He told me more than once, referring to the adulation that is received by the General Authorities, `It's all right to hear those nice things that are said about you, so long as you don't inhale.'"

Almost immediately, Elder Faust began to receive assignments to preside at stake conferences—and to provide leadership training for various ward and stake leadership meetings. Here again, he drew on what he had learned from the many General Authorities who had visited his stake over the years—and patterned his approach after those experiences:

"When President Lee first came to my stake, he called me and said, `Jim, we're coming out to be with you. We want to get close to you, and we want to bless your people and testify to them.' What impressed me about President Lee, President Kimball, and so many of the other Brethren was that they made me feel like they were not coming to find things wrong; they were coming to help me. I knew what was wrong in my stake—I didn't need to have somebody come and tell me. What I needed was help, and the manner in which these brethren did their teaching was enveloped in a spirit of confidence and love which I very, very much appreciated at the time and have come to hold in sacred remembrance ever since. And that was true without exception of those great leaders. They had all been in my shoes. They all understood my situation.

"So, I tried to go out in the same spirit—in the spirit of helpfulness and humility, rather than trying to find things wrong. I would check some indicators of faith, but I had learned from Elder LeGrand Richards that statistics are not as important as the trends in the statistics—where a stake has been, where it is now, and where it's going. These good brethren are doing the best they know how. It's also important to remember that they didn't ask for these callings; they were called by the Lord. I think the role of visiting authorities is to build the Saints up and strengthen them, so I'm grateful to have learned from some of the great leaders of this dispensation, men who set an atmosphere in which you wanted to listen and wanted to learn, rather than creating an adversarial relationship."

Elder Faust's adjustment to the call, as viewed by his associates among the General Authorities, seemed almost effortless. Elder L. Tom Perry, who was sustained the same day as an Assistant to the Twelve, says, "There was no adjustment at all for him. He just moved into the calling like it was second nature. Our offices were just across from each other, and our secretaries sat side by side. I moved to Utah from the East at the time of my call, and I came out of a hard-pushing retail background. Elder Faust was—and is—the kindest, gentlest man I had ever been around, and he never seemed to get excited or riled. Perhaps because I'm not as much that way, once in a while he would caution me, `We're dealing with Church people here, not business people.'"

Elder Faust's family, however, saw an increased softening as Jim moved from the legal profession to full-time Church service. Sister Faust observes that early in his legal career, her husband had a bit of the disposition of the redhead that he once was. "He and the Lord," Sister Faust observes, "decided that wasn't good for his profession or his Church work. The law can be adversarial, but then he would come home and go to his Church callings where a gentleness of the spirit is required. He knew he couldn't make the changes alone, so he put himself in the hands of the Lord."

Committing himself to the full-time service of the Lord brought about even greater sensitivity and gentleness, Elder Faust's children observe. Says Marcus, "He had been so involved in the Church, and his testimony had always been great and strong. But during his early years as a General Authority, our mother, in particular, could see the additional refinement of his spiritual development as he left the contentious arena of being a lawyer and an advocate and instead spent 100 percent of his time dealing with the affairs of the Church.

"In fact, my mother decided she needed to keep pace with him, so she started to attend Institute classes at the University of Utah."

As Elder Faust's son Jim took over his father's downtown legal practice, the two had frequent opportunities to visit over lunch and in other settings and to observe something of his adjustment to his calling. "Besides being a man of principle," Jim says, "my father is a man who doesn't chafe against the things he has to do. I went through Monticello once and learned that for some thirty years Thomas Jefferson took measurements of the weather at precisely 6:00 A.M, 12:00 noon, and 6:00 P.M. Then he recorded his findings in a journal. I remember thinking, `That's Dad!' If the Lord gave him the assignment to do that, he would be right there at the designated times, whether he was sick or felt good or found the weather uninviting. And he'd do it for as long as he was told to, whereas most of us at some point would encounter an interruption where we'd say, `What difference will it make if I don't do this? What's one day in thirty years?'

"In addition, he has a unique way of blending his ability to take on a task and get it done with his ability to not run people over with a tank as he does so. In my view, he learned many of the principles that have made him effective in his callings from his dad, while the caring and sensitivity he blends with his abilities came from the many great women he has been schooled by, particularly my mother and my paternal and maternal grandmothers."

Although he deems much of what he experienced in his first days as a General Authority too sacred to discuss publicly, Elder Faust does acknowledge, "Coming into the brotherhood of the General Authorities is a great, refining experience. I had come from a private law practice where, essentially, I was answerable only to myself and my own conscience. I learned a great and wonderful principle as I came into the body of the General Authorities and learned to work within the confines of D&C 107 of the Doctrine and Covenants, which says that the quorums of the Church have to function by the unanimous voice of their members. This requires total obedience and commitment to the president of the Church, as well as to the Quorum of the Twelve and the First Presidency. It's not like the Supreme Court, where you can have dissenting opinions. When the Brethren leave the Temple every Thursday, there is unity. That's a marvelous principle, and it takes some schooling to learn to operate within that revelation."

Elder Faust also gained greater appreciation for the abilities of those who preside over the Church—and for the source of their strength. Soon after he assumed his responsibilities as an Assistant to the Twelve, he had occasion to spend about an hour with President Lee discussing several weighty and challenging issues. After their meeting he recorded in his journal, "I was amazed at the President's grasp of difficult problems, and apologized for having to bring to him such matters of grave concern, confessing that they were problems too big for me. . . His response was, `They are too big for all of us without the help of the Lord.'"

Throughout his life, Elder Faust had come to know upon whose strength he must depend to serve effectively, but the assignments he received as a new General Authority caused him to seek an even stronger dependency on the Savior. He was immediately assigned to serve on the Church's Special Affairs Committee, which was chaired by Elder Gordon B. Hinckley and dealt with the wide range of political and social issues that affect the Church and its members. (The committee is now known as the Public Affairs Committee.) At the same time he was made chairman of the newly formed Foreign Affairs Committee and was appointed to the Board of Trustees of the Church-owned Deseret News, a daily newspaper based in Salt Lake City. Soon after, he was appointed to the board's executive committee, which included Elder Hinckley as chairman and Elder Monson as the third member.

He also received the assignment to serve as the director of the Melchizedek Priesthood MIA (MPMIA), which represented an organizational shift as President Lee formed it and the Aaronic Priesthood MIA to bring all Church auxiliaries under the priesthood umbrella and place added emphasis on the attention given to the Church's many single adults, ages eighteen and over. Two other General Authorities were assigned to serve with him—Elders Marion D. Hanks and L. Tom Perry. As the three looked for someone to assist them in their efforts, Elders Hanks and Perry suggested a young man who had just completed his doctorate at Yale University and had joined the LDS Institute faculty at the University of Utah. Elder Hanks had been his mission president, and Elder Perry had known him when they both lived in the East. And although Elder Faust had never met the man his two associates recommended, he invited Jeffrey R. Holland in for an interview and then asked him to serve as executive secretary of the MPMIA.

Although the Church had sponsored programs for single adults over the years, President Lee was very committed to a much stronger effort that would provide greater support for those unmarried members who were over eighteen and who would fall under the direction of ward and stake priesthood leaders. President Lee had spent a part of his time in the Quorum of the Twelve as a single adult, having lost his first wife in 1962; and his second wife, Freda Joan Jensen, had lived her entire adult life as a single member of the Church before marrying Elder Lee in 1963. Elder Holland recalls that the MPMIA "was a very high priority in President Lee's administration. I don't know all the reasons for that, but I just have to think he was mindful of what his second wife, Joan, had experienced as a single adult. In addition, he was so knowledgeable in matters of Church government and so priesthood oriented that I think he wanted a way for the priesthood to pay attention to and put its arms around the whole issue of the single adults in the Church, whether they were the young adults or those who were older."

As Elder Faust and his associates, under the direction of Elder Monson of the Twelve, began to develop a concept of how they would structure and implement this new organization, Elder Faust was quite concerned that they proceed from an informed position. To that end, the group spent considerable time interviewing single adults from throughout the Church, as well as their local leaders.

Elder Holland tells of how carefully Elder Faust and the others would listen to women and men of all ages and from virtually every conceivable circumstance in which single members of the Church might find themselves. "He took this assignment very personally," Elder Holland recalls, "and he invested himself emotionally and spiritually in the lives of these people. As we tried to get a feeling for the dimension and breadth of the challenges they faced, we would all see the tears and hear the pain of these people who had been through divorce or the death of a spouse, or who had not had the opportunity to marry; and leading all of that was James E. Faust. He wanted to make sure that we took the time to know the dimensions of what we were dealing with and to learn how these good people were handling their own unique situations. And although these interviews and discussions took place over a number of months, Elder Faust was never inclined to shorten a conversation or assume that we ever knew as much as we ought to know. We were to keep listening and learning all the time."

Elder Perry adds that in those settings Elder Faust had a way of "making the individual feel warm and comfortable and relaxed. And when they would leave, through his influence, I think they viewed the world as a better place than when they came in. In fact, in our years of association from 1972 on, I've never seen him in a situation where he didn't have the individual he has been interviewing feeling comfortable in his presence and inspired after leaving. He possesses a most unique talent that very few men on this earth have."

In summarizing the work that was done to establish the MPMIA program, Elder Holland points to the strengths Elder Faust brought to his assignment. "There were at least three things," he recalls. "First is a quality he brings to everything, and that is a sensitivity and a largeness of heart and a depth of compassion that would be applied to single adults as it would be to anybody, anywhere, and in any circumstance.

"A second quality is his incredible judgment. He has a gift for counsel, and it is not insignificant or surprising to me that he now serves as a counselor to the president of the Church because he is gifted in counsel, in insight, in judgment, in discernment. When you need counsel, he is there, and the more you need it, the better he is. In fact, he is at his very best when the going is the toughest.

"Third, even though he had married Sister Faust soon after his mission, he had watched his sons and daughters, his extended family, and the members of his ward and stake worry about marriage and struggle, in some cases, with the challenges of being single. And as he had watched and cared for them, he had learned from them."

Although the two had never met before their association in the MPMIA, Elder Faust and Jeffrey Holland developed an immediate bond that grew into a lifelong friendship. "Those years in the MPMIA remain to this day one of the sweet experiences of my life because I was a nobody—and I'm still a nobody—just back from graduate school, a person whom he had never met. But he took me under his wing and treated me as courteously and as thoughtfully and as lovingly as he would have treated one of his own sons. He would take me to lunch and talk to me; we'd go for walks and he would talk to me. These were kind of `ditch-bank' conversations as we would eat a bowl of soup or walk around the grounds, and they included endless teaching moments as he'd tell me of things he had learned as a high councilor or as a bishop or from President Moyle.

"I look back on that with great appreciation. I was spell-bound. But it wasn't that he was trying to regale me with his experiences or entertain me; he was trying to teach a young man in whom I guess he saw some promise. And I say that knowing he treats everyone that way. I was no different from anyone else."

Elder Perry also formed a lasting friendship that began immediately after he and Elder Faust were sustained at general conference. The Fausts were quick to invite Elder Perry and his wife, Virginia, to their home for dinner, and, Elder Perry explains, "then I understood why he is such a good man—after I met Ruth. She is just a sweet woman who has compassion for everyone. She was a great help to Virginia when we moved out from the East as she took Virginia under her arm and helped her become acquainted with so many of the sisters."

Soon after the Fausts and the Perrys became acquainted, Elder and Sister Perry shared with the Fausts something few people knew—that Virginia was undergoing treatments for a form of cancer that ultimately would take her life in December 1974.

"Virginia was one who didn't want it to be known," Elder Perry recalls, "and Ruth was one of the few people who knew that she was having this difficulty. Our own children didn't really know how serious her cancer was, and her death was a real shock to them as a result. But Ruth became Virginia's confidant, encouraging her to keep her spirits up during that period."

Elder Faust provided similar support to Elder Perry, who adds, "He would always get after me if I wasn't paying enough attention to Virginia. He is a very thoughtful man that way."

The years between October 1972 and early 1975 were busy and demanding as Elder Faust fulfilled his committee assignments, and traveled throughout the Church to preside at stake conferences and tour missions. He also learned to adjust to the scrutiny that General Authorities are inevitably subjected to as their lives and teachings become increasingly more public. He tells of an article he wrote for the Friend magazine, in which he recounted the story of being shot as a young boy and not crying as the doctor dressed his wound. "I honestly believe that if you brace up and face the wind, it's better than hunkering down or caving in. But I got a letter from someone who said that if you don't let your emotions and your feelings out, then it can have an adverse effect on your emotional well-being. Now, there may be truth to that, but I learned early on that you can't prepare talks and messages with the idea that you're not going to get any criticism."

The preparation of his public messages was something to which Elder Faust gave considerable time. Literally, as soon as one general conference address was completed, he would begin on his address for the next, working on ideas, drafts, and revisions for months before each conference in April and October. Two of the first talks he gave after responding to his call in October 1972 focused in large part on single members of the Church, and he also addressed issues relative to fathers in the Church. In April 1975, in an address titled "The Sanctity of Life," he dealt with the increasingly prevalent practice of abortion. It was a talk into which he poured his "heart and soul," knowing that because of the legalization of abortion in the United States in 1973, the members of the Church and the world in general needed to be clear on the Church's position.

In reflecting on that talk, and others in which he or other General Authorities have dealt with controversial social issues, he says, "It is not our responsibility to tell the Saints and the people of the world what they want to hear. It is our responsibility to tell them what the Lord wants them to hear. Sometimes, if all of the messages and letters concerning a talk are positive, I wonder if I have failed somewhat in my duty."

The pressure Elder Faust has felt over the years to deliver messages that would instruct, challenge, and comfort the Saints was reflected in a comment he made to Elder William Grant Bangerter, his former missionary companion, who was called as an Assistant to the Twelve in April 1975. "When I became a General Authority and was assigned to speak for the first time, he told me, `It never gets any easier,'" Elder Bangerter recalls. "And he was absolutely right."

In addition to his unending Church responsibilities, Elder Faust was careful to nurture his relationship with Sister Faust, their children and spouses, and the grandchildren that were beginning to bless his family's lives.

What little time he had away from Church assignments was spent with his family, and the evenings and available weekends were busy with visits, dinners, telephone calls, and other activities.

He would always find common ground for discussions with his family members, whether it was discussing the law with his sons (Jim by now had established his practice and Marcus was attending law school at Brigham Young University) or reading children's books and telling scripture stories to his grandchildren. His son-in-law Doug Coombs, who had married the Fausts' oldest daughter, Janna, just before Elder Faust's call as a General Authority, tells of a visit the Fausts made to San Diego, where Doug and Janna were living while Doug completed his medical internship.

"I was just a fledgling new doctor, and I took Dad to play golf one day. Because Janna and I had moved away from Utah soon after we were married, it was one of the first times I had been with him just one-on-one. And I'll never forget that as we were getting ready to tee off, he said, `Doug, tell me about electrolytes.' I've since learned that's a character trait of his—he likes to meet you on your own turf and wants to talk to you on the grounds you're comfortable with. So, he asked me about electrolytes, even though I'm sure he couldn't have been all that interested in them."

In an effort to simplify their lives somewhat, Elder and Sister Faust decided to sell their home in Cottonwood, which sat on a large lot that required constant upkeep, and move to a condominium closer to the Church Administration Building (and the airport). Not long after that move in early 1975, while he and Sister Faust were in New Zealand touring a mission, Elder Faust received a telephone call from President N. Eldon Tanner asking him to move yet again—this time to Sao Paulo, Brazil, where he would serve as the area supervisor for all of South America.

Elder Faust's reply was immediate. "That's great," he told President Tanner. "When do we go?"

NOTES

1999 Deseret Book Co.
