James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

7

BACK TO BRAZIL

THE ENTHUSIASM ELDER FAUST FELT over the call that had come to return to Brazil stemmed not only from his willingness to do whatever he was called to do but also from his love for the people of Brazil—and all of Latin America. He had maintained close contact with his missionary friends from Brazil, much of his brother Gus's professional life had been connected to Brazil, and he had watched with keen interest the progress of the Church in Latin America. (The Church was still growing slowly, but certainly faster than when Elder Faust had been there some thirty-five years before.)

There was little time to arrange for the Fausts' move to Brazil in July 1975, and there was much to be done. Sister Faust was recovering from surgery she had undergone just prior to President Tanner's call, the Fausts' son Robert was just graduating from high school, and their daughter Lisa was single (although waiting for a missionary she would later marry) and in her second year at the University of Utah. Furthermore, Elder Faust was going as one of the first area supervisors to live outside the United States and so had the additional responsibility of arranging for housing and setting up an office from which to work.

Plans and decisions were made quickly. Because of his father's situation, Robert was able to put in his missionary papers early, and his call came to serve in the Brazil Porto Alegre Mission. Lisa, much to her parents' delight, decided to move with them to Brazil, where she would continue her education through correspondence courses and help her parents in their responsibilities. (Elder Faust has since said, "Lisa served her own mission during her eighteen months in Brazil, and she and Ruth provided the only secretarial support I had, in addition to everything else they did.") And Elder Faust traveled to Brazil almost immediately to find housing for his family and begin making arrangements to preside over a vast and varied continent.

As he looked for a home in Sao Paulo, he was amazed by how expensive real estate was in that city; and the real estate agent showing him around kept taking him to large and expansive houses, complete with marble entryways and staircases. As Elder Faust struggled to select something that would be comfortable for his family and a prudent use of the Church's resources, he asked the agent for advice.

"The agent," Elder Faust recalls, "recommended several homes that had two stories and staircases made of marble (which is a cheap commodity in Brazil), but as I looked at them I said to myself, `No, that little man from Arizona, Spencer W. Kimball, is going to come down here and visit us, and he is not at all pretentious.' So I picked out a single-story house that was the cheapest of all the ones we looked at and was proximate to where the temple was to be built in Sao Paulo."

It didn't take long before the Fausts were ready to move; in fact, Lisa remembers that her father "was very anxious—driven, really—to get down there and get at his responsibility." As it happened, Robert's visa came through just two weeks after he had entered the Language Training Mission, and so arrangements were made for him to meet with his parents and sister at the Los Angeles International Airport where the family would head south together. (Robert recalls that he learned Portuguese in much the same way his father did: "They put me with native Brazilians in the middle of nowhere, and I just learned it.")

Although they left Salt Lake City as the summer was heating up, they arrived in Brazil in the middle of winter. Their house had no furniture—or furnace—when they arrived, and Elder Faust tells of how they just threw mattresses on the floor and endured the cold. After a few days, a Church physical facilities representative brought them a portable heater they could use during the day, but it presented enough of a fire hazard that they couldn't use it at night.

Sister Faust and Lisa set out to buy furnishings for the house, and in short order they had made a very comfortable home out of very little. Elder Faust, in the meantime, tried to establish an office to work out of, but tried unsuccessfully for three weeks to get a telephone line installed. He met with the head of the telephone company in Sao Paulo to no avail, and inasmuch as he kept receiving telegrams from President Ezra Taft Benson (then president of the Quorum of the Twelve) asking for his telephone number, he finally made arrangements to travel to Brasilia and meet with the minister of communications for all of Brazil.

"He was not a lawyer or a politician," Elder Faust recalls. "He was an engineer. I told him that the Church had invested a great deal of money in South America and that we wanted to build a temple in Sao Paulo. I then explained that I had responsibility over all of South America, but that without the ability to communicate I might just as well go home. This man didn't make any specific promises, but he did tell me during our visit that when he was in the service during World War II, his bunkmate was a member of the Church—and a very good friend. When I got back to Sao Paulo later that day, the telephone company had strung a line and I finally had a phone."

Elder Faust notes that Lisa seemed to learn the language by osmosis; conversely, Sister Faust acknowledges that "although I prayed for the gift of tongues, I didn't receive it." What she was blessed with, though, was an immediate love and appreciation for the people and cultures of South America. "When Lisa and I would get lost," she says, "people wouldn't just give us directions, they would have us get in our car and then lead us to where we needed to go. I also learned the importance of a touch, as I experienced the custom of kissing the person you're greeting on each cheek. I will admit that at first I didn't know if I enjoyed that custom, but I learned to love it—and to see it as a sincere form of greeting. And I learned in many different ways that you don't have to have the latest fashions or other things we sometimes work so hard for in the United States. Many of the people in those countries make do with so little, and yet they are so giving and warm and happy."

One of the immediate—and consuming—responsibilities Elder Faust faced was finding support among the Saints of South America to build the temple in Sao Paulo that President Kimball had announced at an area conference in that city the previous March. Elder Faust had accompanied Presidents Kimball and Tanner on that trip and remembers the concern, even before the announcement was made, over whether the Saints would be willing and able to raise their portion of the temple's costs (this being before the Church began paying the entire cost of temples and other buildings out of general funds). "As we met with the local leaders before the announcements was made publicly and explained that they would need to raise one-third of its cost, it was evident that nobody had the vision of what it meant to sacrifice for a temple. One of the stake presidents said, `We can raise $5,000 in our stake,' and one of the Americans in the group said, `President, I'm going to give that much.' Thus, President Kimball was a little bit uncertain as to whether to proceed with the announcement. He turned to President Tanner and asked, `Should we go forward?' and President Tanner answered, `Yes.'"

With that, the announcement was made, and Elder Faust set out to oversee construction and work with the local leaders to raise their share of the estimated $4 million that the first temple in Central or South America would cost.

At the time, inflation was rampant throughout South America, with Brazil experiencing rates of 100 percent annually and Argentina hitting 500 percent. At the outset, the fund raising did not go well, and when President Kimball asked Elder Faust at the October 1975 general conference how the Saints were responding, Elder Faust had to tell him they hadn't made as much progress as he had hoped. Elder Faust recalls President Kimball's saying, "You tell those folks that if they don't want a temple, we'll build it somewhere else." So Elder Faust went back and told the Saints, in a spirit of firmness coupled with faith, "'If you think someone is going to give you a temple, you're mistaken. Now, we've got to make up our minds whether or not we want a temple.' And bless their hearts, they did."

Given that so many had so little, seeing the Saints sacrifice so much during the two years they were there had a profound effect on Elder and Sister Faust.

The examples are endless as people worked two jobs to be able to contribute, as missionaries had their parents sell cars in order to help, as families skipped vacations and instead provided manual labor for the construction. Primary children saved their precious pennies to contribute, and adults displayed the attitude of one member who said, "I'll sell my car and my television set before I stop contributing to the temple."fn

Stake and ward leaders throughout all of South America called upon their members to contribute, and the missionaries served as emissaries as well. Because of inflation, the money donated quickly decreased in value, and so the Saints responded by donating wedding rings, precious stones, and other jewelry that had greater value. Elder Faust tells of how the Saints "took literally the call of the Lord in the Doctrine and Covenants wherein he said, `Come. . . with all your gold, and your silver, and your precious stones. . . and build a house to my name' (D&C 124:26-27)." fn

On one such occasion, two missionaries were explaining to a man in Argentina that if he had anything to give, it would be a great help in building the temple. The man brought forth his gold dental bridge to give to the missionaries, who told him they certainly couldn't take his teeth. He responded by saying, "You can't deny me the blessings I will receive by giving this to the Lord for his temple."

Upon receiving the man's bridge and hearing the story, Elder Faust paid generously for the gold and from that day on has kept the man's contribution as a reminder of countless sacrifices the Saints made. (In President Faust's current office, it is one of three items he displays on the credenza behind his desk, the others being photographs of his wife and President Hinckley.) He also purchased two of the wedding rings that were donated, which he and Sister Faust still wear, and he has said, "Ruth and I decided, as a part of our contribution to the temple, to buy this gold bridge and the two wedding rings for many times their intrinsic value. We appreciate and highly value these objects as a remembrance of the offerings of the faithful, humble people of the Church to one of our temples."fn

In both the planning and construction of the temple, Elder Faust knew that if the dream of a temple in Sao Paulo was to become a reality, all that was done had to be done in the Lord's way. Early on in the process, Elder Faust called a meeting of the local leaders to discuss what would be involved in obtaining the construction permits needed to begin the work. Emil Fetzer, who served as the Church architect at the time, tells of the meeting in which this issue was discussed: "After considerable discussion on the challenges associated with obtaining these permits, Elder Faust suggested that we go around the room and allow each of those in the meeting to express their view. As we did so, the local leaders pointed out that the permits could be obtained much more quickly if we would follow the custom of paying the local officials to move our applications through the bureaucracies—a procedure they all agreed we should follow. But when it was Elder Faust's turn to speak he said, `Brethren, we cannot, we will not, do anything that is illegal or is not right. We absolutely won't do it.' There were some protests—some of the men pointed out that that's just how business is done in South America—but we followed Elder Faust's direction. All of the permits were obtained in a timely manner."

When the actual work commenced in March 1976, Elder Faust and others continued to feel the Lord's influence in its construction. Ross Jensen came from Salt Lake City to supervise the construction, and he and Elder Faust quickly determined that although marble was inexpensive, plentiful, and beautiful, the pollution in Sao Paulo would be so corrosive that the building ought to have a facade of cast stone instead. As a result, Jim Magleby was sent to Brazil from Buehner Stone in Salt Lake City to cast the stone for the temple, which, he explained in an interview, "is like a giant puzzle. We must make 3,000 panels of 400 different sizes and shapes which, after they are finished, must fit perfectly on specific places over the exterior temple walls. Our tolerance on the size of each panel is four hundredths of an inch."fn

Brother Magleby had cast the stone for the Los Angeles and Washington, D.C., temples, but found the work in Brazil to be particularly primitive and challenging. He was sustained, however, by a dream he had years earlier in which he found himself working on a very important building where the workmen under him could not understand him and he couldn't understand them. Believing his current assignment to be a fulfillment of that dream, he set up shop in a little shack on the temple grounds and taught Brazilian laborers how to cast stone.

As the work progressed toward the spire of the temple, Brother Magleby was having difficulty figuring out how to reverse a pattern to be used on the tower. In frustration, he tried to convince himself that a minor defect where no one could see it would not make any real difference, but one night he received the inspiration he needed to correct the flaw, as well as a strong witness that this was to be the House of the Lord and that even minor flaws were unacceptable.

"Then, of course, there were cost overruns," Elder Faust adds, "and so we had to reassess the Saints. We decided that because the Saints in Sao Paulo were proximate to the temple, we had to increase each of the stakes' assessments from $55,000 to $78,000. When we called the four stake presidents in and explained the need, there was no complaint. As we were leaving, I said to President Benjamin Puerta, who had a small stake of about 2,200 members—half of which were Primary children—that I had been in his shoes and knew what this meant. He said, `Don't you worry, Elder Faust. If you need $100,000, we'll raise it.' He was the first to have his money in, and he ended up serving as the second president of the Sao Paulo Temple."

Even before construction began on the temple, Elder Faust knew what the Saints' sacrifices would bring them. At the October 1975 general conference, some five months before the ground-breaking would occur, he spoke of walking early one morning across the temple grounds, noting the pegs in the ground that marked the dimensions and layout of the temple, and pondering both the sacrifices that were being made and the blessings that would come.

He spoke of the growth of the Church in South America, which then numbered over 152,000 members and had grown by some 8,000 converts in 1974, and compared that to his missionary days when "we held our meetings in rooms that were small and unfit for the lofty message we were trying to teach." He spoke of recalling that morning, "with eyes wet with tears,. . . being told by one of our great South American stake presidents that when he comes to general conference in Salt Lake, he and his wife will have to decide which two of their five children they will bring to be sealed to them in the Salt Lake Temple. . . Now their plans have changed. They are planning to take all five children to the first temple in South America."

Then, in conclusion, he bore his testimony by stating, "The Spirit of God has been distilled and has rested mightily upon the countries in South America since the time of my youth when missionary work there was so difficult. How does the work of God go there now? Problems—there are many; challenges—they are great, but the progress is almost unbelievable. What I have said about South America can be said of many other parts of the whole world. This is a great worldwide Church, and so far we have only seen the beginning. Having seen what I have seen in South America, I cannot deny that this is the work of God."fn

Although his work on the temple consumed much of his time, Elder Faust had significant responsibilities as the presiding authority over all of South America. (In the summer of 1976, his load was reduced somewhat as President A. Theodore Tuttle assumed responsibility for the western half of South America.) He traveled frequently and extensively, organizing stakes, providing leadership training, and overseeing many other aspects of the Church in South America.

The growth of the Church in Latin America was at once a blessing, as individuals and families benefited from the gospel's influence and teachings, and a challenge, as wards and stakes were formed in areas where the majority of members were recent converts and the ranks from which to draw leaders were thin. With characteristic optimism, Elder Faust proceeded from two premises, the first being that "the gospel doesn't convert strong leaders, it makes them," and the second being that the Church in South America would benefit greatly from the returned missionaries. "President Kimball asked me once how we were going to provide the leadership for all the people who were coming into the Church and I said, `President, I couldn't sleep one night if it weren't for the returned missionaries.'"

In both cases, extensive training was called for, and Elder Faust was appreciative, yet again, of the great men he had learned from while serving as a stake president. On one occasion, he and an associate visited with a stake president who was struggling, and whose stake was struggling as well. As the two concluded their meetings and began driving back to Sao Paulo, Elder Faust's associate commented that he found it interesting that Elder Faust had not done more to correct the situation. Elder Faust listened to his observation and then said, simply, "I've been on the other side of that table."

In reflecting on that experience, he observes, "I just knew as I was working with this brother that I had to get him to a point where he was receptive to what I was trying to teach him, rather than getting on him about how low sacrament meeting attendance was, and so on. Of course, what I was trying to teach him was that he needed to raise the spirituality of the people in his stake, and that if he would do that, the other things would fall into place. That was something of a unique experience in that I don't ever remember when I took so long to get to the point where I felt like I was ready to deliver the message. We just listened for a good long time.

"This man was doing the best he could, he was just struggling. He had a stake full of people who were new in the Church, and he hadn't been too long in the Church himself. But he was doing his best, as was the case with all of these humble, great men in Latin America. In many cases they were unlettered and unlearned, but they had great spirits and faith. I remember calling a stake president and telling him that he would be expected to come to general conference, assuming he understood that the Church would pay his way, which was the practice at the time. Not knowing that, he thought for a moment and said, `That's all right. I can sell my house.'"

Elder Bangerter, who took Elder Faust's place as area supervisor in 1977, tells of how providing leadership training and helping local leaders understand the nuts and bolts of organizing everything from a high council to a Relief Society "was just in his nature. These were things he knew and had done. But there is something about Elder Faust—both during his time in Brazil and since—that is most unusual. Wherever he goes, he can draw people to him in a very warm and personal way. He just has an unusual talent to get to know people, and in the short time he was in Brazil, he got to know so many of the members so personally. He could call them by their name—and by their nickname. He has a warmth and camaraderie with people that I find unusual; in fact, I'm not sure it compares with anyone else."

During their time in Brazil, the Fausts maintained close ties with their friends and associates in Salt Lake City, and hosted a number of General Authorities who came to Brazil on assignment. Lisa remembers well sitting next to Elder Bruce R. McConkie, a more senior member of the Twelve, at a dinner for mission presidents and watching in amazement as he would look around the room and then use his spoon to flip olive pits out of the open window behind him. And Elder Faust enjoys telling of taking Elder McConkie to have his shoes shined in Sao Paulo and watching the look on the shoeshine boy's face as Elder McConkie put his size 15 shoes up to be polished. (Elder Faust paid the boy double for his efforts.)

Elder Perry, by then a member of the Twelve, tells of traveling to Brazil on his first assignment after marrying his second wife, Barbara Dayton Perry. "This was our honeymoon, even though we were out on assignment, and Jim and Ruth both did so many little things to help Barbara feel welcome and to get oriented to this new life. Then they did a great thing. Jim had arranged to fly us to Iguacu Falls so that we could have a few days alone. He hadn't told us; he just handed us the tickets and told us he was taking us to the airport for a three-day honeymoon. That is characteristic of him, to do little things that you wouldn't expect people to even think of doing."

Frequently, Elder Faust heard from his friend, Elder Hinckley, who would write with news of political affairs in Utah and other events. Inevitably, Elder Hinckley would include in his letters the statement, "I miss you. I wish you were here," as he would detail troublesome issues he was having to deal with. In subsequent years, President Hinckley would say, "When Brother Faust went to Brazil, I felt a great loss in his not being here. He's a man of wisdom, a man of judgment. He knows the political environment well. He had been in the legislature and knew his way around politics. That had been very helpful to us all, and I missed him."

As Elder and Sister Faust traveled home for the October 1976 general conference, Elder Faust was informed of a major change in Church administration, as the calling of Assistant to the Twelve was being discontinued and the First Quorum of the Seventy was established in its place. In addition, Elder Faust was called to serve as a member of the Presidency of the First Quorum of Seventy, although he was not informed as to when he would return from Brazil. However, his comments seemed to suggest that his time in Brazil would soon come to an end, and the sum of his experiences over the previous fifteen months provided the framework for his remarks on the need for a personal relationship with the Savior.

In introducing his topic, Elder Faust observed:

It has been interesting to return to this country from South America and see the billboards and signs memorializing a revolution in this country which happened two hundred years ago. In the world I think we need fewer revolutions and more revelations. In my opinion, the greatest change in South America is a spiritual revolution which is coming about as a result of the influence of this Church and of the temple now under construction in Sao Paulo—and that influence is all within the counsel of Paul to the Ephesians: "the perfecting of the saints,. . . the unity of the faith, and. . . the knowledge of the Son of God." (Eph. 4:12, 13.)

There is a great humility and timidity in my soul as I presume to speak about coming to a personal knowledge of Jesus Christ, the Redeemer of the world and the Son of God.

Recently in South America, a seasoned group of outstanding missionaries was asked, "What is the greatest need in the world?" One wisely responded: "Is not the greatest need in all of the world for every person to have a personal, ongoing, daily, continuing relationship with the Savior?" Having such a relationship can unchain the divinity within us, and nothing can make a greater difference in our lives as we come to know and understand our divine relationship with God.fn

He then outlined "five beginning, essential measures which will greatly clear the channel for a daily flow of `living water' from the very source of the spring, even the Redeemer Himself:. . . a daily communion involving prayer. . . , a daily selfless service to another. . . , a daily striving for an increased obedience and perfection in our lives. . . , a daily acknowledgment of His divinity. . . , [and] a daily study of the scriptures."fn

In conclusion, Elder Faust spoke of his own testimony of the Savior in these words:

During the years of my life, and often in my present calling, and especially during a recent Gethsemane, I have gone to my knees with a humble spirit to the only place I could for help. I often went in agony of spirit, earnestly pleading with God to sustain me in the work I have come to appreciate more than life itself. I have, on occasion, felt the terrible aloneness of the wounds of the heart, of the sweet agony, the buffetings of Satan, and the encircling warm comfort of the Spirit of the Master.

I have also felt the crushing burden, the self-doubts of inadequacy and unworthiness, the fleeting feeling of being forsaken, then of being reinforced an hundredfold. I have climbed a spiritual Mount Sinai dozens of times seeking to communicate and to receive instructions. It has been as though I have struggled up an almost real Mount of Transfiguration and upon occasion felt great strength and power in the presence of the Divine. A special sacred feeling has been a sustaining influence and often a close companion. . .

As I come to a new calling, I recognize that I am a very ordinary man. Yet I gratefully acknowledge one special gift. I have a certain knowledge that Jesus of Nazareth is our Divine Savior. I know that He lives. From my earliest recollection I have had a sure perception of this. As long as I have lived, I have had a simple faith that has never doubted. I have not always understood, yet still I have known through a knowledge that is so sacred to me that I cannot give utterance to it.fn

The following March, Presidents Kimball and Romney traveled to Sao Paulo to participate in the laying of the cornerstone for the temple. While there, President Kimball surveyed the home Elder Faust had purchased and said, "This is just right," and President Romney told him, "Jim, we need you back home."

In June 1977, his return home became official as Elder Faust received a letter from the First Presidency informing him that he was being called to serve as president of the International Mission. In this assignment, he would replace Elder William Grant Bangerter, who would in turn take Elder Faust's place as area supervisor for the eastern half of South America. The letter informed him that the change would "take effect as soon as the duties of this office can be turned over to you," and that "in this capacity, you will serve under the direction of the Missionary Executive Committee of which Elder Thomas S. Monson is chairman."

There was much that Elder and Sister Faust had given to the people of South America as they provided leadership training; as they worked to build the temple, both as manual laborers and as motivators; as they served as home and visiting teachers, in addition to the more public responsibilities they held; as they witnessed and participated in miracles that included healings and the saving of lives and souls. But as they returned to their home in Salt Lake City, they knew that, on balance, they were by far the greater beneficiaries of their stay in Sao Paulo. For they had learned, as had the pioneers who settled the valley they were returning to, that "faith is more important than life itself," Elder Faust explains. "And through those lessons, I found myself purged of worldly interests and concerns as I came to understand more fully the words of the Savior, `Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you'" (John 14:27).

NOTES

1999 Deseret Book Co.
