James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

8

AN INTERNATIONAL MISSION

The International Mission, over which Elder Faust presided as he served in the First Council of the Seventy, was established in 1972 and included those parts of the world where there were no organized stakes or missions. Almost all of the African continent was included, together with the vast countries of Egypt, India, the Soviet Union, and China. In addition, there were many smaller, scattered countries, such as Israel and Greece. Branches of the Church existed in a few of these countries; in most of the areas, however, there was no formal Church organization. For the few members there were, often their only contact with the Church was through Elder Faust and his two counselors, Edwin Q. Cannon and Keith Garner.

"Our responsibility," Elder Faust says of the duties he assumed in the summer of 1977, "was to tend to these members' needs. We were the focal point of the correspondence that would come from members and nonmembers in these countries, and they would also pay their tithing through us. I never heard much from many of these people, but every single month I would get a tithing check from them. It was very humbling to see the devotion and faith of these Saints spread all over the world."

Elder and Sister Faust traveled frequently and extensively, often enduring primitive conditions in developing countries in order to meet with individual members or small groups of Saints. "Sister Faust was a trooper," Elder Faust recalls. "We would have to stay up all night in airports to catch planes, and often the airline schedules were totally irregular."

Among the many trips they made together, Sister Faust remembers well the trips she made with Elder Faust into Eastern Europe and East Berlin, where they were struck by undersupplied markets that stocked only withered apples, cola drinks, and liquor. "It was amazing to me," she says, "how the Saints in these countries hung together. These were people who lived in constant fear, who were under suspicion, who lived in cities where it appeared as if the people just didn't care. Yet when we would hold a meeting with the Saints, the sisters would put a white tablecloth and a picture of wildflowers on the table to make the room look nice. These were often drab buildings, but when the opening prayer was offered, the Spirit would fill the rooms in abundance."

Elder Faust held the first conferences of the Church in several of these countries, and he called several couples who sacrificed to serve as special representatives in such countries as Hungary, Greece, and Poland. One couple he called to go to Warsaw, Poland, was Brother and Sister Teofilo Rebiki, whom he knew from Curitiba, Brazil, a region with a strong European influence. When the Fausts visited Brother and Sister Rebiki during the beginning of a cold Polish winter, Elder Faust found that Brother Rebiki, who had sold his home to raise the money needed to serve in Poland, did not have an overcoat or other clothes that would keep him warm during the winter. His attempt to give Brother Rebiki his own coat failed, and so upon returning to Salt Lake, Elder Faust had the Rebikis transferred to warm Portugal for the winter.

The Fausts also traveled to Egypt, Israel, and Africa, areas with which Elder Faust was acquainted from his time in the military more than thirty years earlier. In Israel, Elder Faust became acquainted with a number of members of the Church living in the Holy Land, including David Galbraith, president of the Jerusalem District of the Church and director of Brigham Young University's study abroad program in Jerusalem.

BYU had first started sending groups to the Holy Land in 1968; and in 1972, thirty-eight students, accompanied by two faculty members, spent six months studying in Iraq, Egypt, Lebanon, Jordan, and then Jerusalem. Their arrival in Jerusalem required a shift from housing small groups in local homes to renting space in the City Hotel. As the groups came regularly and as they grew in size, Brother Galbraith (who became the full-time director of the Jerusalem Center in 1973) and his associates regularly had to find larger facilities to house the groups that came, moving from homes to hotels to larger kibbutzes in the process.fn

Brother Galbraith recalls that "our group in Jerusalem was one of those little pockets of Saints that Elder Faust blessed. There were several such pockets in the Middle East, and although we were few in number, that's what the International Mission was geared to work with—just handfuls of people, whether they were in Africa or wherever."

He also adds that when Elder Faust visited this small branch in September 1977, its leaders, who also headed up BYU's study abroad center, were in the early stages of discussing with the university the possibility of building a permanent center that would be able to house the students and faculty who were studying in the Holy Land—a project with which Elder Faust would soon become intimately involved.

As Elder Faust approached his assignment to watch over a few scattered Saints in Africa, he was faced with a challenging situation created by the fact that the Church, at the time, did not ordain men of African descent to the priesthood. As a result, the Church's only official presence was in South Africa, where a mission had been established in the mid-1850s. Even there, the work had been slow (there were no missionaries in South Africa from 1865 until 1903 and again from 1915 to 1921), although by 1970 there were over 6,000 members of the Church in South Africa, and on March 22, 1970, the first stake had been organized.fn

The rest of this vast continent's roughly 600 million inhabitants were under Elder Faust's stewardship, although only a handful knew anything of the Church. Those who did, however, had a rather unique relationship with the Church.

In 1958, a Nigerian named Honesty John Ekong wrote to Church headquarters asking for information on the Church's beliefs. His request was answered by LaMar S. Williams of the Church's Missionary Department, who corresponded for a time with Mr. Ekong and then with other individuals in Nigeria who had an interest in the Church. The result was that when Elder N. Eldon Tanner visited Nigeria in 1962, he found four groups who identified themselves with The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, although none had been baptized. Elder Tanner later said:

I found they were holding services under our name and seemed to be sincere and knowledgeable about the teachings of the Church.

When speaking with the leader of the largest group, he said he had about 4,000 members in his congregation. He said they were baptized members. I explained that the priesthood was necessary in order to baptize. He said he understood that, but he wanted his people to know they were members of a church.

The leader realized black African men couldn't hold the priesthood until [a prophet] said they could. He said he knew someday, however, they would be allowed to hold the priesthood, and they were trying to live worthy of that privilege.fn

In a somewhat similar manner, the Church had unofficially taken root in Ghana, where a chapel bore the name of the Church and 456 individuals had been baptized into this group by 1978.fn

In addition to traveling through parts of Africa, Elder Faust made and maintained contact with Church members who had dealings in Africa. He learned all that he could from these associates, hoping the day would come when the Church could move into these countries. He also received frequent letters from individuals and groups in Africa, pleading that missionaries be sent and that authority be given to enable those who had already been converted to the gospel to become members of the Church.

In the early months of 1978, Elder Faust and his two counselors in the International Mission presidency were scheduled to meet with the First Presidency and discuss the Church's involvement in Africa. Elder Faust took a stack of letters he had received from Nigeria and Ghana, and on the top of the stack he put a letter from a young boy who had written that his greatest hope was to one day sit in the Salt Lake Tabernacle and there hear the Lord's prophets speak. "I explained to President Kimball and Presidents Tanner and Romney that these were the letters we had received just that month," Elder Faust recalls, "and President Kimball said he would like me to read one. I picked the one from this little boy, and as I read it, I saw a tear trickle down President Romney's cheek. I knew then that we probably could look forward to going into Africa with authority."

In addition to the issues affecting the Church's entrance into Africa, Elder Faust knew that as the Sao Paulo Temple neared completion, the Church faced similar issues in Brazil, where persons of African descent and intermarriage were prevalent.

During his time in Brazil as area supervisor, Elder Faust had often had to deal with worthy Church members who desired both priesthood and temple blessings but who were not able to receive them. On one occasion, a young man of African descent came to Elder Faust and told him of his desire to serve a mission. After careful thought Elder Faust concluded to call this young man to serve as a temple construction missionary. The young man gratefully accepted the calling, despite knowing he might never be able to enter the temple after its dedication, and Elder Faust remembers well his faithful response: "He told me during our interview that those who had Negro blood could do things more fully and completely than others. When I asked him what he meant by that, he said, `We can pay more tithing. We can pay a more generous fast offering. We can be totally faithful in attending sacrament meetings and Sunday School. It is our privilege to do that.' And there were many others who had like faith and who worked on the temple with great love and affection, even though it appeared to them that they would not be able to receive the blessings of the temple themselves."

As President Kimball, together with his associates, "witnessed the expansion of the work of the Lord over the earth" (D&C Official Declaration—2) and sought to fulfill the divine injunction to take the gospel to "all nations, kindreds, tongues and people" (D&C 42:58), he wrestled at length with the doctrine restricting those of African descent from receiving the priesthood. By his own account, he spent many hours in the Salt Lake Temple pleading with the Lord on this issue, and he also consulted with his counselors and the Quorum of the Twelve.fn In addition, he sought for Elder Faust's thoughts on more than one occasion. Finally, in early June 1978, a revelation was given granting the priesthood to "all worthy male members of the Church. . . without regard for race or color" (D&C Official Declaration—2).

Elder Faust recalls that meeting on June 8:

All of the General Authorities were summoned to the upper room of the temple for a special meeting. . . . On the way over to the meeting, I was walking with one of my fellow presidents of the First Quorum of the Seventy, because at that time I was not a member of the Twelve. My beloved associate asked me if I thought the meeting pertained to a particular current problem, and I indicated that I thought not, without making any further explanation. In my heart, however, I had the hope that such a revelation as did come might be announced. No one had indicated that such might be forthcoming; my feelings came only from the broodings of the Spirit.fn

The announcement made possible the opening of missionary work in Africa, but Elder Faust, together with the First Presidency and the Twelve, knew that in the opportunity there would also be challenges. His experiences in Brazil, first as a young missionary when the Church's rate of growth was almost imperceptible and then as a General Authority when the pace of the work was accelerating rapidly, provided Elder Faust with much-needed perspective as he and others contemplated how to introduce missionary work into Africa. He knew that it would be possible to baptize whole villages and tribes, if the Church had a mind to do so. But he had also seen the challenges associated with rapid growth in South America and felt it best to bring converts into the Church one by one—and at a pace the Church could manage—so that the enthusiastic new converts could make the transition to becoming committed, active members.

With characteristic caution and careful thought, he supported a course of action that would first send two seasoned Church leaders—Edwin Q. Cannon and Merrill J. Bateman (the latter of whom had lived and worked in Africa as a student and as a businessman)—on an exploratory visit to Ghana and Nigeria, where they were to learn what they could about the unofficial "branches" that sought an association with the Church, members scattered throughout the two countries, and the political and social climates missionaries would encounter.

On Wednesday, September 27, 1978, Elder Faust placed a telephone call to a longtime friend and legal associate, Rendell N. Mabey, asking that Ren and his wife, Rachel, meet with him that afternoon.

When the Mabeys arrived for their 3:30 appointment, they found that the meeting also included Brother Cannon and David M. Kennedy, special ambassador for the First Presidency. After some brief small talk about the growth of the Church, Elder Faust informed the Mabeys that the Brethren had concluded that the first missionaries to enter Africa should be seasoned couples with leadership experience in foreign countries and that he would like the Mabeys to consider the possibility of serving as unofficial missionaries in West Africa for a one-year period.

Although the Mabeys were ready to accept the assignment on the spot, Elder Faust asked that they take time to talk and pray together about this proposition and to then let him know of their decision.fn

As Elder Faust concluded the last meeting of the day, he no doubt knew the import of helping make the arrangements that would send the first Latter-day Saint missionaries to countries populated by more than half a billion inhabitants—many of whom had been praying for years that the fulness of the gospel would be sent to them. What he did not know was that extending this calling would bring to a close his service as a member of the Presidency of the First Quorum of Seventy.

NOTES

1999 Deseret Book Co.
