James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

PRIORITIES

MEMBERS OF THIS Church, professional and otherwise, have a balancing act to perform. How much time and effort should be devoted and dedicated to one's temporal calling as against the responsibility to one's family and the Church? This depends in part on what make of car we wish to drive, how large a home we wish to live in, and how big of a bank account to enjoy. In my life, my family and my Church callings came first. We lived carefully and I tried not to become obsessed with financial gain. These conflicting interests were accommodated and, I can honestly say, if I had to do it over, I would do it the same way. ("The Law: Calling or Trade?" address given to law firm, Salt Lake City, Utah, August 1988.)

SOME YEARS AGO I was assigned by the brethren to attend a stake conference in one of the most remote areas of Idaho. The stake president is a cattle rancher on a ranch that is up high in the mountains. In this family was a mother who had thirteen children and had [endured many] natural miscarriages. We arrived after our evening meeting. Their home was not luxurious, but comfortable and heated by a wood stove. . . . In the morning we got up and came to breakfast. The little boy, who has a different kind of a spirit, came in and the stake president said, "This is Johnny." A few minutes later, we heard somebody sawing on the front door with a saw. The stake president, without raising his voice, simply said, "Johnny, come in." He came in and the evidence was in his hand—the saw. Apparently this was not an unusual occurrence. Then came little Mary. Mary had a harelip. And they brought a little baby in, maybe six months old. This great woman had raised this family.

That morning we called on her in stake conference. She said, "We heard about Mary and nobody wanted her. We need a new truck, but when we saw her, we knew we needed her more than we needed the new truck. And then we heard about Johnny who kind of listens to a different voice. I needed a new range in the kitchen, but when we met Johnny we knew we needed him more than we needed a new range in the kitchen. And I wanted a new love seat, but we heard about the baby and we knew we needed the baby more than the love seat."

Then she went on to say, "The other evening I finished my work about midnight and my husband and all my children were asleep and I was tired. I should have gone to bed. But I sat down in the rocker and thought about my childhood dreams. When I was a young girl I wanted to be rich and famous. And then I thought about all of my children asleep and my husband and how hard he has to work to be a good father to all of these children and a good spiritual father to all of the people in the stake. And how his calling as a stake president doesn't take away from the family; it adds to it."

Then she said, "I realized that I was married to the finest man in all the world. And as I counted my children, I realized then that I wouldn't trade places with my childhood dreams of being rich and famous." (Special Interest Fireside, Salt Lake City, Utah, 29 Jan. 1978.)

WE ARE NOT only to avoid evil, not only to do good but, most importantly, to do the things of greatest worth. We are to focus on the inward things of the heart, which we know and value intuitively but often neglect for that which is trivial, superficial, or prideful. ("The Weightier Matters of the Law: Judgment, Mercy and Faith," Ensign, Nov. 1997, 53.)

THINKING CLEARLY IS often characterized as "prioritizing." But clear thinking means more than that: it is choosing the better part, not the one that will bring the most money or fame. It also means making the best use of our time. ("Learning for Eternity," BYU Speeches, 18 Nov. 1997, 3.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
