James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

PROPHETS

ALTHOUGH EVERY FAITHFUL member of the Church is entitled to receive personal revelation, there is only one man upon the earth who receives revelation for the whole Church.

Beginning with Joseph Smith, the Prophet of the Restoration, there have been living oracles of God designated to communicate minute by minute, day by day, and hour by hour, as needed, to the leaders of the Church.

President Wilford Woodruff, fourth president of the Church, said: "The Church of God could not live twenty-four hours without revelation" (Discourses of Wilford Woodruff, p. 61). ("Communion with the Holy Spirit," Ensign, May 1980, 14.)

NO ONE CAN fully understand how and why the Church has come "out of obscurity" (D&C 1:30) and blossomed without knowing some of the fundamental prophetic truths on which the Church rests. . . .

First, the keys and authority of God have been given by Him to Joseph Smith and to each of his successors who have been called as Presidents of the Church.

Second, those keys and authority are never to be given to another people, and those who have such authority are to be "known to the Church."

Third, continuing revelation and leadership for the Church comes through the President of the Church, and he will never mislead the Saints.

Fourth, individual members of the Church may receive revelation for their own callings and areas of responsibility and for their own families. They may not receive spiritual instruction for those higher in authority.

Fifth, those who claim direct revelation from God for the Church outside of the established order and channel of the priesthood are misguided. This also applies to any who follow them.

If any find themselves in this position, please know there is always an open door in the Church for those who wish to return to full fellowship with the sisters and the brethren of the priesthood. The welcome will be with open arms.

My testimony of the divinity of the callings of the presiding Brethren as the representatives of the Lord Jesus Christ flows from the deepest wellspring of my soul. For many years, I have watched the process of continuous revelation which emanates from God through the keys, authority, and under the direction of the President of the Church. I testify that this revelatory power has directed this work since April 6, 1830. That confirmation is the source of the greatest knowledge I have. ("The Prophetic Voice," Ensign, May 1996, 7.)

HOW CAN WE be so sure that, as promised, the prophets, seers, and revelators will never lead this people astray? (see Joseph Fielding Smith, in Conference Report, Apr. 1972, p. 99; or Ensign, July 1972, p. 88). One answer is contained in the grand principle found in the 107th section of the Doctrine and Covenants: "And every decision made by either of these quorums must be by the unanimous voice of the same" (107:27). This requirement of unanimity provides a check on bias and personal idiosyncracies. It ensures that God rules through the Spirit, not man through majority or compromise. It ensures that the best wisdom and experience is focused on an issue before the deep, unassailable impressions of revealed direction are received. It guards against the foibles of man. ("Continuous Revelation," Ensign, Nov. 1989, 10.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
