James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

PROPHETS, FOLLOWING THE

YOU MAY ASK, "How can I discern which of the prophetic utterances of this conference have a particular message for me?" My answer is, you can know. You can know by the whisperings of the Holy Spirit if you righteously and earnestly seek to know. Your own inspiration will be an unerring vibration through the companionship of the Holy Ghost. As the Lord spoke to Elijah, this will come, not in the great strong wind, nor in the earthquake, nor in the fire, but in a still, small voice. (See 1 Kgs. 19:11-12.) This will help us, if necessary, to make the required change in our lives and lifestyles to get onto a sure course. ("Responsibility for Welfare Rests with Me and My Family," Ensign, May 1986, 22.)

WHEN I WAS first named as a General Authority many years ago, I went to see President Hugh B. Brown, then in the First Presidency, and asked him, "President Brown, what advice have you got for a new, young, inexperienced General Authority?" This wise and venerable man responded simply and directly, "Stick with the Brethren." Who are the Brethren? The Brethren are those who hold the keys of the kingdom of God on earth. They are the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, each of whom is an apostle and prophet; the Seventy, to whom apostolic authority is given; and, in temporal matters, the Presiding Bishopric. ("The Prophetic Voice," Ensign, May 1996, 4.)

SOME HAVE SAID, "My integrity will not permit me to yield my conscience to anyone." A clear conscience is a very precious spiritual endowment when it is guided by the Holy Ghost. Ultimately, everyone has the responsibility of making their own moral decisions. However, the Prophet Joseph Smith stated that "it is contrary to the economy of God for any member of the Church. . . to receive instruction for those in authority, higher than themselves." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 21; see also D&C 28:12.)

In addition, some have claimed higher spiritual gifts or authority outside the established priesthood authority of the Church. They say that they believe in the principles and ordinances of the gospel and accept the President of the Church as the legal administrator thereof, but claim that they have a higher order which the President does not have. This is often done to justify an activity which is not in accordance with the doctrines of the Church. There can be no higher order, however, because the President of the Church both holds and exercises all of the keys of the kingdom of God on earth. The Lord has said of the President of the Church "that none else shall be appointed [to receive commandments and revelations] except it be through him." (D&C 43:3-4.) ("The Prophetic Voice," Ensign, May 1996, 6-7.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
