James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

REPENTANCE

THE DENIAL OF our own sins, of our own selfishness, of our own weakness is like a crown of thorns which keeps us from moving up one more step in personal growth. Perhaps worse than sin is the denial of sin. If we deny that we are sinners, how can we ever be forgiven? How can the atonement of Jesus work in our lives if there is no repentance? If we do not promptly remove the slivers of sin and the thorns of carnal temptation, how can the Lord ever heal our souls? The Savior said, "Repent of your sins, and be converted, that I may heal you" (3 Ne. 9:13). It is most difficult for us to pray for those who hate us, who despitefully use us, who persecute us. But by failing to take this vital extra step, however, we fail to remove some of the festering briars in our souls. Extending forgiveness, love, and understanding for perceived shortcomings and weaknesses in our wives, husbands, children, and associates makes it much easier to say, "God be merciful to me a sinner" (Luke 18:13). ("A Crown of Thorns, a Crown of Glory," Ensign, May 1991, 68.)

ONE OF THE members of our family has a remarkable dog named Ben. A few years ago, on a beautiful fall day, some of us were walking in the fields. Ben was going back and forth in front of us, sniffing the ground, tail wagging, and obviously enjoying himself. After a while we sat down on a ditch bank to rest and could feel the warmth of the autumn sun caressing us. Ben came limping up to his master and, with a pained look in his eye, held up his front paw. Ben's master gently took his paw into his hands and examined it carefully. Between two of his toes was a thorn. The thorn was carefully removed, and Ben stayed long enough to wag his tail a little more vigorously and receive a few pats on his head. He then ran off, no longer limping nor bothered by the pain. I was amazed that Ben instinctively seemed to know that the thorn needed to come out to relieve the pain and to know where to go to have it removed. Like Ben, we also seem to instinctively look for relief from the thorns of sin that inflict us. In contrast, however, we do not always seek our Master for relief; and many do not yet know who their Master is. . . .

All irritants of the flesh and the soul should be removed before they fester. However, though they ulcerate and though they torment, they can still be removed, and the healing process will take place. When the infection is healed, the soreness will leave. That process is known as repentance. Repentance and forgiveness are among the greatest fruits of the Atonement. It is not easy to remove the thorns of pride, the thistles of selfishness, the slivers of ego, and the briars of appetite. ("A Crown of Thorns, a Crown of Glory," Ensign, May 1991, 69, 70.)

SURELY, REPENTANCE IS one of the great principles of the gospel. No one is perfect, and we all have need to invoke this principle. For those who have been involved in serious transgressions, however, it is a lifesaving principle. The longer we go down the wrong road, the harder it is to come back and get on the right road. ("Beginnings," Training Film Lecture Series, 29 Jan. 1982.)

THERE IS HOPE for all to be healed through repentance and obedience. The prophet Isaiah verified that "though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow" (Isa. 1:18). The Prophet Joseph Smith stated, "There is never a time when the spirit is too old to approach God. All are [in] reach of pardoning mercy" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 191).

After full repentance, the formula is wonderfully simple. Indeed, the Lord has given it to us in these words: "Will ye not now return unto me, and repent of your sins, and be converted, that I may heal you?" (3 Ne. 9:13). In so doing, we have his promise that "He healeth the broken in heart, and bindeth up their wounds" (Ps. 147:3). ("Spiritual Healing," Ensign, May 1992, 8.)

FOR THE TROUBLED conscience in conflict with right and wrong, the only permanent help is to change the behavior and follow a repentant path. ("Unwanted Messages," Ensign, Nov. 1986, 10.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
