James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

REVELATION

PERSONAL REVELATION COMES as a testimony of truth and as guidance in spiritual and temporal matters. Members of the Church know that the promptings of the Spirit may be received upon all facets of life, including daily, ongoing decisions (see D&C 42:61). How could anyone think of making an important decision such as "Who is to be my companion?," "What is my work to be?," "Where will I live?," and "How will I live?" without seeking the inspiration of Almighty God. ("Communion with the Holy Spirit," Ensign, May 1980, 13.)

THE NINTH ARTICLE of faith [states, in part], "We believe. . . all that [God] does now reveal." For some strange reason it seems easier for many to believe the words of dead prophets rather than those of living prophets. The greatest revelator in our time has been Joseph Smith. In the difficult period between 1823 and 1843, just twenty years, 134 revelations were received, printed, and made public. . . .

. . . Line upon line and precept upon precept, new knowledge and direction have been given to the Church. . . .

. . . Much revelation received, in this time as well as anciently, has been doctrinal. Some of it has been operational and tactical. Much of it is not spectacular. President John Taylor reminds us: "Adam's revelation did not instruct Noah to build his ark; nor did Noah's revelation tell Lot to forsake Sodom; nor did either of these speak of the departure of the children of Israel from Egypt. These all had revelations for themselves" (Millennial Star, 1 Nov. 1847, p. 323).

In our time God has revealed how to administer the Church with a membership of over six million differently than when there were just six members of the Church. These differences include the use of modern technology such as films, computers, and satellite broadcasts to teach and communicate new ways to conduct missionary work in various nations; the location and building of temples; and many others.

This process of continuous revelation comes to the Church very frequently. President Wilford Woodruff stated, "This power is in the bosom of Almighty God, and he imparts it to his servants the prophets as they stand in need of it day by day to build up Zion" (in Journal of Discourses, 14:33). This is necessary for the Church to fulfill its mission. Without it, we would fail. ("Continuous Revelation," Ensign, Nov. 1989, 9-10.)

REVELATION WAS REQUIRED to establish this church. Revelation has brought it from its humble beginnings to its present course. Revelation has come like flowing, living water. Continuing revelation will lead it forward to the windup scene. But as President Clark told us, we do not need more or different prophets. We need more people with "a listening ear" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1948, p. 82).

We make no claim of infallibility or perfection in the prophets, seers, and revelators. Yet I humbly state that I have sat in the company of these men, and I believe their greatest desire is to know and do the will of our Heavenly Father. Those who sit in the highest councils of this church and have participated as inspiration has come and decisions have been reached know that this light and truth is beyond human intelligence and reasoning. These deep, divine impressions have come as the dews from heaven and settled upon them individually and collectively. So inspired, we can go forward in complete unity and accord. ("Continuous Revelation," Ensign, Nov. 1989, 11.)

THERE IS SO much continuous, ongoing revelation that comes to this people that the extent of it cannot be fully appreciated. It does not ever, however, become commonplace. As one who is involved in the calling of stake presidents, patriarchs, and other Church officers, from my own experience I think perhaps Enos said it well: "And while I was thus struggling in the spirit, behold, the voice of the Lord came into my mind." (Enos 1:10.) (Untitled address delivered at the Sidney B. Sperry Symposium on the Scriptures, Brigham Young University, 28 Jan. 1984.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
