James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

9

THE HOLY APOSTLESHIP

WHEN ELDER DELBERT L. STAPLEY died August 19, 1978, at the age of 81, Elder Faust lost a friend with whom he had shared "a close affinity and relationship." The two men, in addition to their frequent associations as General Authorities, had occasionally played golf together, along with President Tanner and Elder Franklin D. Richards. Elder Faust adds, "I loved him and appreciated him, and have nothing but the closest feeling for him."

The ensuing days between mid-August and the October general conference brought some "strange forebodings" to Elder Faust's mind, but he of course kept those private, even as several close associates indicated their sense that he might be called to fill the vacancy in the Twelve.

Then just before three o'clock on Thursday, September 28, after having spent the morning and early afternoon attending meetings of the General Authorities in the Salt Lake Temple, he received a telephone call from D. Arthur Haycock, personal secretary to President Kimball. "Jim," Brother Haycock said in a joking tone, "I want you to come down and tell me how to vote" (a reference to the upcoming state and national elections).

Elder Faust recorded the events that followed in his journal:

I immediately went down and was ushered into the office of President Kimball. The President and I were alone, and I reported a matter in the International Mission. Then he advised me that I was being called to become an Apostle and a member of the Quorum of the Twelve, and that the Brethren of the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve had just approved it. He indicated his great love and affections for my beloved Ruth, and said that she would make a welcome addition to the society of the First Presidency and the Twelve and their wives, and advised me that I could tell her and no one else.

President Kimball also indicated that he understood how I felt, for I was of course moved to tears as I indicated I would be pleased to accept, but asked how I could ever fill such a calling. He showed great compassion and love, and indicated that I could come back down and see him, if I wished. He embraced me and kissed me on the cheek, and we parted.

Elder Faust had but a moment to ponder the weight and significance of the calling he had just received; he then quickly returned to his office, where he was scheduled to conduct a meeting of the executive committee of the Deseret News board. Elder Thomas S. Monson was the first to arrive for the meeting at 3:30, and as he came in he asked his longtime friend if he had seen President Kimball. "I indicated I had," Elder Faust records. "Elder Monson then embraced me and told me how much he loved me and appreciated me, and how happy he was for me to come into the Quorum. We delayed the start of the meeting as he, in all of the love and kindness of a brother, counseled me to just be myself and for Ruth to just be herself."

As that meeting continued, Elder Faust excused himself and called another close friend, Elder Gordon B. Hinckley, to let him know he would have to miss a meeting of the Special Affairs Committee which Elder Hinckley chaired. "Brother Hinckley expressed his love and appreciation, and was most kind and gracious," Elder Faust writes.

As he concluded that call, Elder Faust received a call from President Kimball who, among other things, asked if Elder Faust had called his wife. When Elder Faust told him he had not yet had a minute to do so, President Kimball said, "I think you better call her now." Elder Faust records:

I went into Elder A. Theodore Tuttle's office because the Deseret News meeting was being held in my office, and I called Ruth. She asked if it were I who had just called, and I said no, that I thought it was the President of the Church. She had just awakened from a short nap. I advised her that I knew who the wife of the new Apostle was. She understood perfectly well and indicated her support and love and confidence, which I so desperately need.

Soon after, Elder Faust was able to conclude his business for the day and return home to be with his wife and attempt to gather his thoughts. That evening Elder Howard W. Hunter called and informed his friend that none had held his hand higher to sustain the new member of the Twelve than had he.

Elder Faust concluded his recorded thoughts for Thursday, September 27, by writing: "It is impossible to adequately express the feelings of unworthiness and inadequacy that such a call brings. I could not serve, but for the absolute conviction which I have concerning the Savior and His work upon the earth."

When Friday morning finally came after a long and largely sleepless night, Elder Faust went about his assigned duties and attended a meeting for the regional representatives. As he sat in the congregation and looked up at the members of the Twelve seated on the stand, he received several knowing looks and smiles of encouragement. After that meeting, he met briefly with President Ezra Taft Benson, president of the Twelve, and "advised him that I would continue to sustain him and would continue to accept every assignment that he gave me. He expressed his appreciation and love, for which I was grateful."

During the afternoon, he received visits from Elder Bruce R. McConkie and from Elder L. Tom Perry, who had been assigned as Elder Faust's teacher and mentor as he came into the Twelve. His last visitor of the day was Elder Boyd K. Packer, who "recalled the sweet agony of the day that he was called." He also reminded Elder Faust of a conversation they had had five years earlier as they returned home on the same airplane from conferences in California. At the time, Elder Packer had shared his impression that Elder Faust would, at some point, serve in the Twelve.

As Elder Faust walked out to his car to return home for the evening, he encountered Presidents Kimball and Romney. "President Kimball was very warm and affectionate," Elder Faust recalls, "and asked how Ruth was receiving the news. I advised him that she felt weak and quite overcome. Then I asked him if it would become easier after I was sustained, and he said yes. I asked him if that were a promise, and he said yes."

That evening the Faust home was filled with children, inlaws, and grandchildren—some of whom suspected what was transpiring and others who did not seem to be aware—and Elder Faust did his best to enjoy the evening. Then he went for a swim in their condominium's pool and sat in the whirlpool to relax, after which he went to bed and endured yet another sleepless night.

The next morning at ten o'clock, the 148th Semiannual General Conference of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was convened. As Elder Faust walked into the Tabernacle and took his seat with the seven presidents of the Quorum of the Seventy, it appeared to some who knew him that he looked "absolutely ashen." One associate later commented, "I could see that you had wrestled long and agonizingly about something," and another close friend quipped, "I wondered if we were going to need to give you artificial respiration."

Gratefully, President Kimball, in opening the conference, immediately put forth the name of James Esdras Faust to fill the vacancy in the Twelve. President Kimball then proposed the name of William Grant Bangerter to take Elder Faust's place as a president of the Quorum of the Seventy, along with Elders F. Burton Howard, Teddy E. Brewerton, and Jack H Goaslind Jr. to serve in the First Quorum of the Seventy. When the vote was unanimous in the affirmative, Elder Faust did find a measure of relief, as President Kimball had promised.

After having lunch with Sister Faust, three of their children and their spouses, and the Fausts' longtime friends, Newell and Fran Stevenson, Elder Faust returned for the Saturday afternoon session of conference, where he was scheduled to speak. The business of the conference was conducted, including the sustaining of Doctrine and Covenants—Declaration 2, the revelation on the priesthood, after which Elder Gordon B. Hinckley was the first speaker. Elder Faust followed, responding to his call in these few words:

No one has ever come to this calling with a greater sense of inadequacy than I do at this time. In the sweet agony of the pondering, in the long hours of the days and nights since last Thursday, I have had the feeling of being completely unworthy and unprepared.

I understand that a chief requirement for the holy apostleship is to be a personal witness of Jesus as the Christ and the Divine Redeemer. Perhaps on that basis alone, I can qualify. This truth has been made known to me by the unspeakable peace and power of the Spirit of God.

I acknowledge the soothing and sustaining love of my beloved Ruth, who is as much a part of me as my heart and soul. I wish to express my deep love and affection for each member of our family.

I first learned the names of the ancient and modern apostles in Primary. My mother was one of my teachers. I am certain that never in her wildest dreams did she ever think that any of those whom she taught would one day sit in the council of the special witnesses of the Lord Jesus Christ.

I was born with partial color-blindness. I have learned to love all of the people in the countries where I have been as a missionary, soldier, or General Authority, regardless of the color of their skins. I hope to be a disciple after the manner and example of President Kimball and the others in their love for all, and especially for the humble, the downtrodden, the poor, the afflicted, the needy, and the poor in spirit. I am mindful that if we forget these, we can in no way be his disciples.

He expressed his gratitude for the First Presidency, his new associates in the Twelve, those with whom he had served in the Seventy, Elder Stapley, and the other General Authorities; and he then concluded his brief remarks by pledging "to God and his prophet, President Kimball, my life and whatever energy and little ability I may have, fully and completely and without reservation, for I know that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God."fn

Even with the public announcement of his call and the sustaining vote he had received, Elder Faust continued to carry deeply personal thoughts and understandable feelings of inadequacy that would continue for days, weeks, and even months. As he walked out of the Tabernacle that day, he confided to his friend, David M. Kennedy, something of what was in his heart as he said, "David, there must be ten thousand men in this Church more able and qualified to serve in the Council of the Twelve than I am." Brother Kennedy's response brought a smile to Elder Faust's somber face as he declared, "No—fifteen thousand."fn

After the Saturday afternoon session of conference, Elder Faust arranged for his family to meet together in an upper room of the Salt Lake Temple, where he shared something of his feelings and testimony and the family had an opportunity to discuss this monumental change in Elder and Sister Faust's lives. During their time together, Elder Faust shared with his family what he had said when he was called as a General Authority six years earlier, that he could only succeed as a member of the Twelve if he first succeeded as a husband and a father. Then he committed to his family that he would do everything in his power to honor the responsibilities he had so gladly accepted.

The activities of General Conference continued on Sunday, and at the conclusion of the afternoon session, Elder and Sister Faust were taken to the temple, where he was instructed in his duties, ordained an apostle, and set apart as a member of the Council of the Twelve. At the conclusion of the meeting, he was told by members of the Twelve that this was the first time that the wife of a member of the Twelve had been present for her husband's ordination. Knowing his dependence on his sweet-heart of over three decades, Elder Faust uttered a silent prayer of gratitude for her presence.

The First Presidency and the Twelve then went across the street to the Relief Society Building, where they posed for photographs of the two presiding quorums of the Church. After a time, the First Presidency excused themselves, while the members of the Twelve continued to be photographed as a quorum. "There was a special friendship and camaraderie," Elder Faust recalls, "as well as some friendly kidding and joking, particularly toward me. I was not in the right place at one point, and Brother Packer said, `Jim has just been a member of the Quorum a very short time and he is already out of line.'" He then adds, "The great kindness and solicitude of all of the members of the Council of the Twelve toward me has been a very great teaching lesson. They were most solicitous, and most thoughtful, and most kind. It was a most significant day in my life."

Elder Faust acknowledges that it would be nice if those called to the apostleship had time "to go out into the desert, as it were," but when Monday morning came he was awake at 5:00 and in his office at 6:45. Noticing that Elder Marvin J. Ashton's light was on, he stopped by for a brief visit and then began a very full day that included countless telephone calls from friends, interviews with the media, and meetings. Toward the end of the morning, he was honored to be called into Elder McConkie's office, where he heard a report from Saul Mesias de Oliveria, who had recently returned from serving as president of the Brazil Sao Paulo Mission, and who was to be set apart as a regional representative. When Elder McConkie invited Elder Faust to set Brother de Oliveria apart in Portuguese, he was pleased to do so.

Elder Faust spent the early afternoon meeting with Elder Perry, who counseled him regarding meetings, routines, and procedures of the First Presidency and the Twelve. Then he turned his attention to the responsibilities he still carried as president of the International Mission, calling Edwin Q. and Janath Cannon to serve as a missionary couple in Nigeria and Ghana. As a fitting conclusion to his first full day as a member of the Twelve, Elder and Sister Faust met with their family for family home evening.

The next morning, Elder Faust joined with the First Presidency as they called Rendell N. and Rachel Mabey to serve a mission to Africa and as they instructed the Mabeys and the Cannons concerning the work they would be performing. Joining in the calling of the Mabeys culminated a historic occasion Elder Faust had set in motion just prior to his own call. In the process, he reflected on the privilege it had been to see the beginnings of the Lord's work on two vast continents, and he has since said, referring to the time he spent as president of the International Mission (a calling he would hold until the following January), "The blessing for me was having my own faith built and strengthened by the humble, faithful Saints all over the world who were trying to live the gospel, keep the commandments, pay their tithing, and be an example."

The first days of Elder Faust's ministry as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve had at once the effect of expanding his view of the work in which he was engaged and of reinforcing an already refined sense of spirituality and humility. Comparing his call to the Twelve with the many other presiding offices he had held, Elder Faust says, "The differences, in part, are a matter of scope. When you become a member of the Twelve, you're no longer an area supervisor for South America, as I had been as a Seventy. Members of the Twelve are, of course, Apostles to the entire world, and so there is an enlargement of your vision as you move from one quorum to another."

Of the refining effect of the calling, he explained to a reporter the day after his call, "From a personal standpoint, it's a very devastating experience. Yet at the same time, there's a sublime, comforting feeling, a healing feeling that comes." He also noted, "I don't think my feelings can be explained. I don't think anybody who has not experienced it can really have an understanding."fn (In the ensuing years, he has continued to be circumspect about the private and deeply spiritual nature of his experience, explaining simply, "There are just some things that are too sacred to share.")

Even as an acknowledged physical and spiritual pain continued for days and even weeks after his call, Elder Faust began adjusting to a new calling and responsibilities that he likens to "walking into a much larger room."

He immediately began receiving hundreds of telephone calls and letters from all over the world, as family, friends, and well-wishers extended their greetings and congratulations. Some came from close associates, including Elder Neal A. Maxwell (who would follow Elder Faust into the Twelve three years later), who wrote, "I felt [as we served as regional representatives] that I was in the presence of someone special. Time has only confirmed that for me. You will fly with a different flock now, but as you take wing know that you go with my full love, support, and, most important, my witness and trust as to your divine placement in the Twelve now at this point in history."

Others came from individuals not as well acquainted with Elder Faust, but who had been touched by his special blend of kindness and familiarity. A Church operator wrote, recalling times they had visited, "I remember you always called me `Deona' instead of `Sister Black' as everyone else did, which pleased me."

A letter he particularly treasured came from his beloved aunt, Angie Finlinson Lyman, who had been an integral part of his youth, and who, he says, stepped in when his mother died and continued to mother him. In part, she wrote, "I feel it is a great honor to our family and have wondered who is the most pleased, the relatives on this side or our loved ones on the other side. I'm sure your mother and father and Faust grandparents are very happy about it, and I am sure Grandmother and Grandfather Finlinson are very happy about it. I don't know if any of them have buttons to burst off. Maybe they just use zippers." Then she adds, "I feel very humble and feel the best way to support you is to live the best I know how, and I'm going to suggest that the other members of the family do so."

As he took on the increased demands placed on those called to the Twelve, Elder Faust continued an effort he began when called as a General Authority to eliminate anything from his life that was not central to one or the other of his two priorities—his divine trust as a member of the Twelve and his sacred responsibility as patriarch of his family, which by now included, in addition to his five children, four "children-in-love" (as the Fausts have always called their sons- and daughters-in-law) and eight grandchildren. He also immediately found himself faced with an unrelenting calendar filled with meetings, appointments, and travel, all of which he approached with genuine humility and unflagging devotion as he set out to fulfill each assignment he was given and each challenge he faced.

His first meeting with the full Quorum of the Twelve came the Thursday after his ordination, as he joined in the weekly meeting held in the Salt Lake Temple. He continued to be over-whelmed by the kindness and courtesies afforded him by each member of the First Presidency and the Twelve, noting Elder Hunter's thoughtfulness at inviting him to walk over together and President Benson's graciousness in welcoming him and encouraging him to participate fully. Elder Faust was invited by the First Presidency to respond to his call, which he did by alluding to a theme that would help define his approach through the ensuing years as he joined with his Brethren in administering the Lord's work upon the earth. "I recalled the statement of Solomon who, when he was called as Israel's king, said, `I am but a little child: I know not how to go out or come in' (1 Kgs. 3:7). I indicated that I had a like dependency upon the Lord and that I requested and hoped for the blessing of Solomon—a wise and an understanding heart."

The next morning, Elder Faust met with the First Presidency, as well as David M. Kennedy and Wilford W. Kirton (the Church's legal counsel), "regarding the challenge of bringing new resources of the Church together for the full correlation of international efforts. It is intended that the Church concentrate its resources for increased recognition and fulfilling the scriptural assignments to go into all of the world." During this meeting, President Kimball informed Elder Faust that the First Presidency was forming the Foreign Affairs Committee, upon which two members of the Twelve would serve (along with others)—Gordon B. Hinckley and James E. Faust. "Over my protestations," he recorded in his journal, "I was advised that I would become the chairman of this committee."

After having lunch with Sister Faust and several other family members, Elder Faust headed for the airport, where he learned that one leg of his flight to Cleveland (where he was to reorganize a stake presidency) had been canceled, that he was being rerouted through Chicago, but that he would be on standby for the flight from Chicago to Cleveland. He noted later, with his usual optimistic outlook, "I had no difficulty, however, and arrived in Cleveland shortly before 1:00 in the morning."

The next day, after deciding upon the new stake president and inviting him and his wife to come at 5:30 P.M. for an interview, Elder Faust was able to travel to Kirtland, Ohio, where his forbear, Bishop Edward Partridge, had lived and served with the Prophet Joseph. While there, Elder Faust and his hosts visited the Whitney store, where Joseph Smith and his family had lived for a time and where the School of the Prophets had been held, and also the Kirtland Temple.

After returning from his conference assignment in Cleveland, Elder Faust received a letter characteristic of the many he would receive over the years, as his testimony touched the souls of Saints the world over. A young convert of six years wrote, "I personally began to understand a little more the specialness of [the apostolic calling] as you bore your testimony of Jesus Christ, the Son of God. I'm sure I've heard others speak words similar to the ones you spoke, but for some reason they struck my very soul with a clarity I never before had felt. The gospel has become much clearer to me since that day because of your special witness of our Lord. . . Why it has taken me six years to reach an understanding that seems [so] simple I'll never know. But your witness as an Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ prompted an understanding of the Son of God I've never had before, and I thank you most sincerely for it."

Although humbled by such an expression, Elder Faust was more comfortable receiving such a compliment than the public and media attention that followed his call. The Monday after his conference in Cleveland, Elder and Sister Faust responded to yet another request for a newspaper interview. He noted afterwards, "Ruth and I are embarrassed with the publicity and wish it weren't required." But because it was, he responded graciously and cooperated in every way that he could.

The next Sunday found Elder Faust, accompanied by his wife, presiding at a stake conference in Payson, Utah, after which the Fausts drove back to Salt Lake City and attended a sacrament meeting and missionary homecoming for one of President Tanner's grandsons. Then it was off to yet another homecoming, and then an evening with family members. Such was the typical pattern for those Sundays when Elder Faust either did not have an assignment or could get home in time to be with family and friends.

With his call to the Twelve also came increased requests for Elder Faust to meet with individuals and provide counsel and blessings. There were, of course, more requests than he could possibly fulfill, and in those instances when he did agree to help, he made sure that the requests came through proper channels. His compassion was evident when, just days after his call, he met with the paraplegic son of a former associate and "felt that the Lord had a special blessing for such a valiant young man."

His wisdom, likewise, was evident that same day as he met with a family whose parents had filed for divorce. After counseling with the husband and wife, together and individually, he called the children in and "told them that their parents were having a difficult time, that both parents loved them and that they should love both parents." He also indicated to the children "that neither parent was totally at fault, neither one was totally free from blame, that the children should try to be part of the solution and not part of the problem, and not undertake to judge either one of their parents, but simply to love them both."

In the midst of all the demands placed upon him in those early weeks, Elder Faust moved into the office formerly occupied by Elder Stapley (and next to that of David M. Kennedy) and directed those who were redecorating to make sure their work was appropriate. "I have been telling them," he recorded, "that I want it pleasant and warm, but simple in taste—and to have the feeling that here is where a humble disciple works."

As his first month as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve drew to a close, Elder Faust was honored to accompany President Kimball and other General Authorities to the first of many temple dedications he would attend during his years in the Twelve. Although each would be important in its own right, this one had a particular significance that he contemplated as he and Sister Faust boarded an airplane in Salt Lake City and flew back to their former home—Sao Paulo, Brazil.

As the group of General Authorities and their wives attempted to make the various airline connections that would get them to Sao Paulo just hours before the dedicatory services were to begin, they encountered a delay in Porto Alegre, Brazil, that took some time to resolve. While the group waited with anticipation and concern, Elder Faust watched as President Kimball patiently took time to visit with a young man who had approached him, rather than allowing himself to be distracted by the disruption in the group's travel plans. As Elder Faust translated for President Kimball, he learned that this young man, who was employed at the airport, was a less active Church member who had married a woman of another faith. Upon hearing of his circumstances, "President Kimball spent a full ten minutes with him, encouraging him, loving him, and counseling him. In the process of that ten minutes, President Kimball embraced him three or four times and kissed him to let him know of his love. The young man was touched."

In like manner, when Elder Faust and the others arrived in Sao Paulo, with little time to spare before the first temple dedicatory session, Elder Faust was importuned by a local stake president to first come with him to a local hospital where a fifteen-year-old boy was unconscious and suffering from a serious accident. Although concerned about the time, Elder Faust sensed the need to administer to this boy, who, when they arrived at the hospital, was being hooked up to life support equipment. After a blessing was given, Elder Faust proceeded to the temple.

The dedicatory services for the Sao Paulo Temple took place over four days—October 30 through November 2. On the morning of the fourth day, as Elder and Sister Faust were enjoying breakfast with President and Sister Kimball and some of the Fausts' old Brazilian friends, President Kimball received a telephone call from Elder Boyd K. Packer, who was also in Sao Paulo for the dedication (along with Elder Hinckley). "After breakfast," Elder Faust recalls, "President Kimball invited me into his bedroom and advised me that he wanted me to conduct the dedicatory session that afternoon, and advised that I should contact Arthur Haycock for the program. He said that Elder Packer had called and indicated that since President Kimball might wish to conduct the last session, there would be only one left for one of the Twelve to conduct, and that I should conduct it because these were my people. I thought it was a very generous act."

Elder Faust spent the lunch hour "trying to familiarize myself with the way a dedicatory session should be conducted. Both Ruth and I were thrilled and excited. She reminded me that with my conducting a session, my involvement in the temple had come full circle, because I had conducted the ground-breaking ceremony, as well as the cornerstone-laying ceremony."

It was an emotional experience for both Elder and Sister Faust, as they watched the eyes of all present fill with tears as the congregation sang "The Spirit of God" and as they listened to President Kimball once again offer the dedicatory prayer.

In his modesty, Elder Faust acknowledged afterwards the "mistake" he made of recognizing that President Kimball was seated on the stand but not indicating that he was presiding at the session. Then he pointed to the abilities of Elder Packer, "who has done a heroic work in the fact that in all of his talks he has spoken in Spanish. Considering the fact that he has never lived in one of these countries, he does remarkably well!"

In addition to the dedicatory sessions, President Kimball presided at a meeting for some 1,200 missionaries, 70 percent of whom were Brazilian. Then on Saturday and Sunday, a regional conference was held at the Iberapuera Stadium, a huge complex owned by the State of Sao Paulo that seats 20,000 people. The regional conference in Sao Paulo was the last of five that President Kimball presided over on what was for him a 24,000-mile trip that took him from Salt Lake to Washington, D.C., England, South Africa, Uruguay, Argentina, and finally Brazil. Elder and Sister Faust accompanied President Kimball and those traveling with him to each of the regional conferences in South America.

Two general sessions of the conference were held during the day on Saturday, with a meeting for all women and a priesthood meeting scheduled for the evening. When the women's meeting ended at 7:00 P.M., it was raining so hard that President Kimball couldn't bear the thought of sending the women out into the deluge to wait for their husbands and fathers, so he invited them to stay for the 7:30 priesthood meeting as well.

Showing a similar sensitivity, as Elder Faust listened to the first several speakers in the Sunday morning session, he noticed that each was taking less than his allotted time. He also considered that his former mission companion and the newly called president of the Sao Paulo Temple, Finn Paulson, had not had an opportunity to speak during the six sessions of the regional conference. "It occurred to me that it would be well if we had time to hear from him," Elder Faust recalls, so he passed the suggestion to Brother Haycock, who cleared the idea with President Kimball and let the other General Authorities know. Elder Faust then turned around and held up five fingers to alert President Paulson, and moments later, Elder Packer did the same. President Paulson finally realized that he was going to be called upon, and when the time came, Elder Faust notes, "He did exceptionally well, and it was something of a special talk."

In the afternoon session, the agenda called for Elder Faust to speak just prior to President Kimball, who would be the concluding speaker. As the time approached for Elder Faust's remarks, he leaned over and told President Kimball that he would leave plenty of time for him, to which President Kimball replied that he only wanted ten minutes. "I told him that I would be sure he had more," Elder Faust recalls, "and his response was, `If you don't take enough time, I'll call on you again.'"

Using the Portuguese he had learned as a missionary and polished as an area authority, Elder Faust spoke extemporaneously, rather than from the text he had prepared. He told the thousands of Saints, many of whom had also participated in the temple dedication, that he and they must never be the same after the week they were concluding. He reminded them that the temple was not the temple of the Brazilians but that it was "the house of the Lord" and that it was for all those worthy Saints who came from any part of the world.

He then spoke of the suffering he had endured during the four weeks since his call as an apostle and shared that he continued to feel "inadequate, unworthy, incapable, weak, and poorly prepared." Even with such feelings, his love for the Savior was evident, as was the great love he felt for the Brazilians who were gathered, many of whom shed tears of joy as they listened to the testimony of one they counted as their own.

As Elder Faust took his seat and looked out over the vast audience, the hand of the Lord was evident as he considered the growth of the Church since he had left Salt Lake City for Sao Paulo thirty-nine years before. And when the conference concluded a few minutes later, with the Saints having heard the prophet's closing remarks, Elder Faust observed, "Thus came the conclusion of one of the most moving and greatest weeks of my life, during which we had meeting after meeting filled with the powerful spirit."

NOTES

1999 Deseret Book Co.
