James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

SECULARISM

MY FATHER, WHO fought in World War I, used to tell his sons, three of whom fought in World War II and one in the Korean War, that World War I was fought as the war to end all wars. He saw his sons go and come back from the other wars. Since that time, there has been in some ways a lessening of respect for human life. There is also a developing disrespect for the sacred in our society. The constitutionality of public reference to deity and prayer to God is in controversy. There seems to be developing a secular faith or religion with no moral absolutes. It is non-theistic and non-denominational. It is antagonistic to religion and rejects the religious tradition of this nation. This secular religion is not a faith or church or synagogue that worships all-mighty God or adheres to a code of moral conduct for its followers. In fact, this secular religion is in opposition to traditional religion.

The long history and tradition of this nation, which had in its roots petitions for divine guidance and its coinage stamped In God We Trust, is being challenged. Appeals for divine guidance, forgiveness, and approbation have been part of the fabric of this nation from the beginning. The first prayer in Congress was offered September 17, 1774. In his farewell address, George Washington acknowledged that "of all the dispositions and habits which lead to political prosperity, religion and morality are indispensable supports. Reason and experience both forbid us to expect that national morality can prevail in exclusion of religious principle.". . .

Thomas Jefferson, in his first inaugural address, prayed, "May that infinite power which rules the destinies of the universe lead our councils to do what is best and give them a favorable issue for your peace and prosperity." ("The Impact of World War II on Utah," World War II Commemoration, Ogden, Utah, 13 Aug. 1995.)

THE RECENT CONTROVERSY in the state and the nation regarding the constitutionality of certain public prayers casts a serious cloud over the reality and meaning of the sacred in our society.

There seems to be developing a new civil religion. The civil religion I refer to is a secular religion. It has no moral absolutes. It is non-denominational. It is non-theistic. It is politically focused. It is antagonistic to religion. It rejects the historic religious traditions of this nation. It feels strange. If this trend continues, non-belief will be more honored than belief. While all beliefs must be protected, are atheism, agnosticism, cynicism, and moral relativism to be more safeguarded and valued than Christianity, Judaism, and the tenets of Islam which hold that there is a Supreme Being and that mortals are accountable to him? If so, this would, in my opinion, place this nation in great moral jeopardy. ("A New Civil Religion," Pioneer Day Fireside, Ogden, Utah, 19 July 1992.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
