James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

SERVICE

I DON'T THINK our motivation [for service and community relations] ought to be proselyting—I think it ought to be trying to make the world a better place in which to live. Or course, we are happy to share the gospel with anyone who is sincerely interested. But it ought to be a happy consequence of what we're doing, not a primary motivation for it. (Address to Public Affairs Directors, Salt Lake City, Utah, 7 May 1991.)

TAKING UP ONE'S cross and following the Savior is always a commitment to service. When going to school I was very poor. I worked long hours in a canning factory catching steaming-hot cans for twenty-five cents an hour. I learned that selfishness has more to do with how we feel about what we have than how much we have. A poor man can be selfish and a rich man generous, but a person obsessed only with getting will have a hard time to find God. I have come to know that with any privilege comes responsibility. Most privilege carries with it the responsibility to serve, to give, and to bless. God can take away any privilege if it is not used under his omnipotent will. Meeting that challenge to give, to serve, to bless in faithfulness and devotion is the only way to enjoy the crown of glory spoken of by the original Apostles. It is the only way true meaning comes to life. We will be able to receive honors or scorn with equal serenity. ("A Crown of Thorns, a Crown of Glory," Ensign, May 1991, 70.)

SOME MONTHS AGO, as Elder Spencer J. Condie and I were in the Salt Lake airport, we unexpectedly met a devoted and faithful couple who have been friends for long years. This couple have spent a lifetime of service, meekly, faithfully, and effectively trying to build up the Church in many places in the world. Elder Condie noted, "Isn't it remarkable what people with five loaves and two fishes do to build up the kingdom of God." This kind of quiet, devoted service is surely a fulfillment of the word of God "that the fulness of my gospel might be proclaimed by the weak and the simple unto the ends of the world, and before kings and rulers" (D&C 1:23). . . .

It has been said that this church does not necessarily attract great people but more often makes ordinary people great. Many nameless people with gifts equal only to give loaves and two small fishes magnify their callings and serve without attention or recognition, feeding literally thousands. In large measure, they make possible the fulfillment of Nebuchadnezzar's dream that the latter-day gospel of Christ would be like a stone cut out of the mountain without hands, rolling forth until it fills the whole earth (see Dan. 2:34-35; D&C 65:2). These are the hundreds of thousands of leaders and teachers in all of the auxiliaries and priesthood quorums, the home teachers, the Relief Society visiting teachers. These are the many humble bishops in the Church, some without formal training but greatly magnified, always learning, with a humble desire to serve the Lord and the people of their wards. ("Five Loaves and Two Fishes," Ensign, May 1994, 4, 5.)

ANY MAN OR woman who enjoys the Master's touch is like potter's clay in his hands. More important than acquiring fame or fortune is being what God wants us to be. Before we came to the earth, we may have been fashioned to do some small good in this life that no one else can do. The Lord said to Jeremiah, "Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee; and before thou camest forth out of the womb I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee a prophet unto the nations" (Jer. 1:5). If God has a work for those with many talents, I believe he also has an important work for those of us who have few. ("Five Loaves and Two Fishes," Ensign, May 1994, 5-6.)

THERE IS [A]. . . matter which impacts both single and married members of the Church that I will briefly discuss. As we serve others, we must always be conscious of the principle of agency and the need to teach and foster self reliance. . . .

As we serve we must be careful not to create an unnecessary or unwise dependency on the part of others. Render appropriate assistance, but also teach correct principles and allow others "to act for themselves."

Please do not misunderstand. I am not suggesting that we back away from service to those in need. The Lord will hold us accountable if we do not obey His injunction that the "widows and orphans shall be provided for, as also the poor" (D&C 83:6). Surely there are many single parent homes today, created by death and divorce, where the spirit of this divine declaration applies.

The mark of discipleship is service to and love for our fellowman. Recall the words of King Benjamin that "when ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God" (Mosiah 2:17).

Paul taught the ancient Saints "to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please ourselves" (Rom. 15:1).

In modern days, the Lord Himself instructed His Saints to "succor the weak, lift up the hands which hang down, and strengthen the feeble knees" (D&C 81:5).

The challenge is to know which hands are hanging down and which knees need strengthening. ("The Responsibility of Church Leaders to Members of the Church Who Are Single," Church Satellite Broadcast, 23 Feb. 1992.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
