James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

SIN

SO-CALLED SMALL sins include the challenge to the "sin laws" which seek to control forms of gambling, alcohol, and drug consumption. Some who wish to appear broad-minded say, under the guise of not imposing religious belief, "I don't drink or gamble, but I don't think we ought to have any laws to control others that wish to." This completely ignores the health and social costs to society of the vices. They foolishly argue that laws cannot control human behavior. My long legal career has led me to conclude that all criminal laws have a moral basis. ("Trying to Serve the Lord without Offending the Devil," BYU Speeches, 15 Nov. 1994, 63.)

IT SEEMS THAT no matter how carefully we walk through life's paths, we pick up some thorns, briars, and slivers. As a young boy, when school was out for the summer and we went to the farm, off came our shoes. The shoes stayed off all summer long except for special occasions. For the first week or two, when our feet were tender, the smoothest pebble or stick would be painful. But as the weeks came and went, the soles of our feet toughened so that they could withstand almost anything in the path except thistles, of which there seemed to be more than any other weed. And so it is with life: as we grow and mature and keep close to Him who was crowned with thorns, our souls seem to get stronger in withstanding the challenges, our resolve hardens, our wills become firmer, and our self-discipline increases to protect us from the evils of this world. These evils are so omnipresent, however, that we must always walk in the paths which are the most free of the thistles of earthly temptation.

As children we used to delight in waving thistledown stalks to watch the seeds float on the wind. Only later did we realize the effects that this had on our own and neighboring gardens. Many of us delight in flirting with temptation, only later to learn how we and others have sown the seeds of our own unhappiness and how we can also affect our neighbor's happiness. ("A Crown of Thorns, a Crown of Glory," Ensign, May 1991, 68.)

I WARN YOU of a pervasive false doctrine. For want of a better name, I call it "premeditated repentance," by which I mean consciously sinning with the forethought that afterwards repentance will permit the enjoyment of the full blessings of the gospel, such as temple marriage or a mission. In an increasingly wicked society, it is harder to toy with evil without becoming contaminated. This foolish doctrine was foreseen by Nephi.

"And there shall also be many which shall say: Eat, drink, and be merry; nevertheless, fear God—he will justify in committing a little sin; yea, lie a little, take the advantage of one because of his words, dig a pit for thy neighbor; there is no harm in this; and do all these things, for tomorrow we die; and if it so be that we are guilty, God will beat us with a few stripes, and at last we shall be saved in the kingdom of God" (2 Ne. 28:8).

Of all those who teach this doctrine the Lord says, "The blood of the saints shall cry from the ground against them" (2 Ne. 28:10). ("The Voice of the Spirit," Young Adult Fireside Satellite Broadcast, 5 Sept. 1993.)

REGARDLESS OF THE saturation of wickedness around us, we must stay free from the evil of the world. ("Woman, Why Weepest Thou?" Ensign, Nov. 1996, 53.)

I FEAR THAT some of our greatest sins are sins of omission. These are some of the weightier matters of the law the Savior said we should not leave undone. These are the thoughtful, caring deeds we fail to do and feel so guilty for having neglected them. ("The Weightier Matters of the Law: Judgment, Mercy and Faith," Ensign, Nov. 1997, 59.)

TRANSGRESSION IS DEVASTATING to self-esteem, and after transgression usually comes rationalization, and often lying. This is what makes justice so violent to the offending. ("Self-Esteem: A Great Human Need," Brigham Young University Education Week address, 23 Aug. 1983.)

PERHAPS WORSE THAN sin is the denial of sin. If we deny that we are sinners, how can we ever be forgiven? How can the atonement of Jesus work in our lives if there is no repentance? If we do not promptly remove the slivers of sin and the thorns of carnal temptation, how can the Lord ever heal our souls? ("A Crown of Thorns, a Crown of Glory," Ensign, May 1991, 68.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
