James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

SINGLE ADULTS

IN SPEAKING OF adult members of the Church who are single, we are reminded of Paul's counsel to the Corinthians (1 1 Cor. 12):

"For the body is not one member, but many" (vs. 14).

" . . . there should be no schism in the body; but that the members should have the same care one for another" (vs. 25).

Each member, regardless of marital status, age, sex, race, or color is important to the body of the Church.

While we have Church programs based on age (Primary), gender (Young Women and Relief Society), and marital status (Young Single Adults, Single Members), these are designed to meet special needs. They are to foster faith and fellowship, not to create fixed categories of people who are separated from the body of the Church.

Single members are "fellow citizens . . . of the household of God" (Ephesians. 2:19). ("The Responsibility of Church Leaders to Members of the Church Who Are Single," Church Satellite Broadcast, 23 Feb. 1992.)

MOST OF THE single adult members are well adjusted to life and its problems, but they still need the loving attention from the Church and its members to reaffirm their usefulness and the love that God has for each of them. They are not problem people, but many have problems, often not of their own making. A choice friend reminds us, "If you don't have any problems, just wait awhile." ("Reaching the One," Ensign, July 1973, 86.)

THE PROPER AND rightful focus of the Church on the home and the family frequently causes the single members who have no companion and family to feel left out. One writes, "Many members of the Church treat a divorcee as if she had leprosy. I have lived in a certain LDS ward in Salt Lake for several years, where they had a widows' and widowers' party every year at Christmas time. I was never invited. I have always lived a good life and believe the Savior would have invited me. I am acquainted with some who have experienced both death and divorce, and they say that divorce is worse than death."

Still another writes, "Believe me, with the Church emphasis on families and children, we are already thoroughly aware that we are `oddballs.' It has been a real pleasure to be accepted as a normal person."

We must begin by trying to reach the one—every single individual. We want all to feel that they belong to the Church in the context of Paul's message to the Ephesians: " . . . ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but fellowcitizens with the saints, and of the household of God." (Eph. 2:19.) ("Reaching the One," Ensign, July 1973, 86.)

ISAY TO you single brethren, do not take too much counsel from your fears. Marriage is in large measure an act of faith—faith in yourself, faith in your eternal companion, and faith in God. While the sublime happiness I have known in marriage is not guaranteed, if you marry, you will more likely be happier, live longer, be healthier, live better, and make more money!

The answer lies in finding out what God expects of each of us in our circumstances—single, widowed, divorced, husband, wife, father, or mother. Let us not grope blindly for fulfillment without the vision of who we are and what we can become. ("A Vision of What We Can Be," Singles Satellite Broadcast, 12 Nov. 1995.)

YOU PRIESTHOOD AND women leaders who are gathered together tonight are among those who have been called to nurture, fellowship, and serve with the single members of the Church. . . .

Each of you has a specific responsibility to reach out in love and fellowship to the members of the Church who are single. However, as with all members of the Church—married or single—needs will vary according to individual circumstances. Look at each person individually. ("The Responsibility of Church Leaders to Members of the Church Who Are Single," Church Satellite Broadcast, 23 Feb. 1992.)

TOO OFTEN WE are thoughtless and insensitive to the feelings of these choice souls among us. One well-meaning priesthood leader, concerned about one of these choice single women, whose heart was aching for companionship and a more fulfilling life, asked, "Why don't you get a husband?" She replied in good humor, "Brother, I would love to, but I can't go pick one off a tree." ("Reaching the One," Ensign, July 1973, 87.)

OUR SISTERS, THE beloved handmaidens of God, approach the throne of the Almighty as often and surely as closely as men. We realize that there are many who are noble and faithful among us who have not all of the blessings they would wish. We should like to reassure the adult singles of the Church that they can and will, through their faithfulness, enjoy the love of God reserved for his faithful, especially for those who through no fault of their own these blessings have not been realized. Some of our most faithful members are single and unsealed. However, all of us are a part of a family unit past, present or future. Personal sanctification is available to all God's children. Our judgment will be based on our own personal righteousness; how fully we made our tithes and offerings; how faithfully we attended to our duties and how effectively we rendered personal service to our fellow beings.

All womankind can have a second birth. They can call forth that portion of divinity which is within them and bring it to its full potential. They can have their souls renewed and sanctified, and come to know and feel that they are "chosen vessels unto the Lord," even as the Lord said of Paul. (Remarks delivered at the dedication of the Eliza R. Snow Center for the Performing Arts, Ricks College, 9 Dec. 1980.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
