James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

10

A WITNESS TO THE WORLD

AS ELDER FAUST RETURNED HOME to Salt Lake City, he knew that even as the people of Brazil and South America would always hold a unique place in his heart, he was, by scriptural injunction, called to be one of a unique group of "special witnesses of the name of Christ in all the world," and to "officiate in the name of the Lord,. . . to build up the church, and regulate all the affairs of the same in all nations." He also pondered the Savior's charge that "the decisions of [the presiding quorums of the Church]. . . are to be made in all righteousness, in holiness, and lowliness of heart, meekness and long suffering, and long suffering, and in faith, and virtue, and knowledge, temperance, patience, godliness, brotherly kindness and charity" (D&C 107:23, 30, 33).

Elder Faust continued to wrestle with the weight of such a charge, and in addition to his own personal petitions of the Lord, at one point he asked his three sons, Jim, Marcus, and Robert, to administer to him so that he might find relief from the spiritual and physical agony he was enduring. He took strength and comfort from that blessing, as well as from Sister Faust, of whom he says, "No one could have a more supportive, understanding, and loving companion through all the circumstances of my life, both professionally and ecclesiastically. That's just the woof and warp of that wonderful woman."

He also was strengthened by the unique brotherhood enjoyed by members of the Twelve, a group comprising twelve different and unique individuals who adhere to the scriptural charge that "every decision made by [the First Presidency, the Twelve, and the Seventy] must be by the unanimous voice of the same" (D&C 107:27). Elder Faust adds, "These are men of experience, accomplishment, ability, and intelligence, and matters are discussed openly and candidly. Often, I have held an opinion which, after a discussion in reason and inspiration, I have completely reversed. It is a marvelous thing, after a discussion is had and everybody has expressed his thoughts and feelings, to have the president say, `Brethren, I think this is what we should do,' and to then have the confirmation that the decision is the mind and will of the Lord."

Early in his tenure in the Twelve, Elder Faust recorded his thoughts after one of the many meetings in which he saw this process unfold. "A sweet spirit of mutual respect and admiration prevailed amongst the Brethren, although they expressed themselves with divergent views. Elder Bruce R. McConkie indicated that he thought the Lord deliberately chose men of diverse backgrounds for the Council of the Twelve Apostles, citing Matthew the Publican, who was an agent of Rome, and on the other hand Simon the Zealot, who belonged to the group of zealots whose function was to overthrow the yoke of Rome."

On another occasion he added, "It is marvelous to see how the Lord chooses those who serve him. They are not all out of the same mold. They have different backgrounds, different training, different experience; yet it all comes together after an issue is discussed and prayed about, pondered and evaluated, to where there is a burning feeling in the bosom of all that it is the mind and will of the Lord."

Elder Faust found that in their many meetings it was not uncommon for one or more of the First Presidency and Twelve to miss because of travel or illness (although a quorum must be present for binding decisions to be made), but he also notes that there is always a void when one is gone. At the beginning of one meeting, Elder Faust recalls, President Romney walked by him and asked who was missing. "I said, `Howard [W. Hunter],' and he replied, `Well, he's the main one.' And so the absent members seem to be the main ones."

Of Elder Faust's early contributions to the Quorum, Elder Perry states, "I have never seen a member of the Twelve come in who was more prepared to be part of the Twelve than Elder Faust. It seemed there was no adjustment at all. When I was the twelfth man, I wouldn't dare speak. I thought that was part of the learning process—you sat there and absorbed. But he started making a contribution immediately upon coming in. Everyone recognized his stature and his keen mind, and they were very anxious to have him respond.

"In their years in the Twelve," Elder Perry continues, "there were two whom the rest of us always paid close attention to whenever they would speak: Howard W. Hunter and James E. Faust. President Hunter probably said less in the Twelve than any other member. But when he spoke, you knew you should listen. Elder Faust was the same way. He seemed to weigh an issue carefully, and then when he would come forth with his view, you could almost write it down as the course we should follow. It was that perfect."

(Elder Faust, in his modesty, would often respond to such comments by quoting President N. Eldon Tanner's father, who taught his son, "The less you say, the less you have to answer for.")

Elder Maxwell adds, "There is a tendency among some at Church headquarters to be so obedient that people don't speak up. But Elder Faust has always been willing to be candid with the Brethren. He not only has a contribution to make, he also has the courage to speak up. I valued that combination during our years of association in the Twelve, as I do to this day."

As he adjusted to being one of the Twelve, Elder Faust also gained an increased appreciation for the warmth and collegiality of the Brethren, whether in formal settings or in more personal moments.

He quickly learned that, contrary to long-standing jokes about LDS meetings running on "Mormon Standard Time," the Brethren of the Quorum were so anxious to meet together in their Thursday morning meetings in the Salt Lake Temple that they generally began fifteen minutes early. He enjoyed the opportunity to travel with his brethren and found that, as they did so, the bond they shared stood out to others. On one occasion, as he boarded a flight at the Salt Lake City International Airport with Presidents Kimball and Romney, along with Elders Hunter and O. Leslie Stone, one of the flight attendants saw the five men and remarked, "Here comes the basketball team."

Elder Faust was always quick to take note of the thoughtfulness of his associates and recorded countless small acts of kindness he observed among the Brethren. On one occasion, he received an impromptu call to come down and discuss a matter with President Kimball, who then, on the spur of the moment, asked that his counselors join them in the discussion. At the end of the meeting, President Kimball apologized to Presidents Tanner and Romney, saying, "I'm sorry to have interrupted you brethren. I know I interfered with some important work."

For his part, Elder Faust was diligent in trying not to cause offense to another, and he was quick to make amends if he felt he had done so. He once went to Elder LeGrand Richards and apologized for what he considered to be a "less than gracious comment" made in reference to the outcome of a political race. "He had not thought anything of my remark," Elder Faust records, "but I still apologized and asked for his forgiveness because I hold him in such great love and esteem."

With the same thoughtfulness he always extended to his immediate associates, Elder Faust then returned to his office and telephoned a man he had called as stake president the weekend before and apologized for a comment he felt might have been misconstrued and for not having had time to visit with the man's wife relative to the call before it was extended.

At the time of his call to the Twelve, the average age of the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve was almost seventy years old, and while Elder Faust certainly saw the blessings of strength in the General Authorities' lives, he could also see that none was immune from the vicissitudes that often accompany advancing years.

One of the early challenges he witnessed was when Elder Howard W. Hunter suffered a heart attack in 1980. Elder Faust recalls that as the two men visited, "Elder Hunter said that when he gets over this he will probably have a nervous breakdown because he doesn't have anything to do."

As the early 1980s passed, he saw more and more the problems that President Kimball and his two counselors were having, although he marveled at their ability to continue to play an active role in the leadership of the Church, despite their advancing years. Those who were ailing often coped in part by maintaining their humor, and Elder Faust recalls that in one meeting, President Hinckley (who in 1981 was called as a third counselor to the First Presidency to help carry the load) observed that President Tanner had forgotten his glasses. Upon hearing this, President Romney retorted, "That's all right—he can borrow mine. They don't do me any good!"

Other moments were more moving, such as a meeting of the First Presidency and the Twelve at which President Hinckley asked President Kimball if he had anything he wanted to say to the Brethren. "I'd like to be released," was his simple but poignant response. At the conclusion of another meeting not long after, Elder Faust recorded, "These great warriors of the First Presidency have been great exemplars to the whole Church. There are problems, though, and Brother Howard Hunter said in the Temple on Thursday, `We don't know what to pray for. The only thing we can pray for is that the Lord's will be done.'"

Not all the challenges Elder Faust observed were associated with advancing years. One Monday morning, he checked in with Elder McConkie who, the previous Saturday, had fallen off the roof of his house as he was cleaning rain gutters. "I urged him to see a doctor," Elder Faust says, "but he felt that wasn't necessary. Instead, he told me that `when a McConkie lands on his head, it doesn't hurt a thing.'"

Even at the relatively young age of sixty-two, Elder Faust faced his own set of challenges, as tests conducted in November 1982 indicated that under stress some of his heart vessels were impeded. The advice given him by his doctors, including Dr. Russell M. Nelson, a renowned heart surgeon who had operated on President Kimball several years before and who would join Elder Faust in the Twelve in April 1984, was that the condition could be treated by medication but that bypass surgery was an option that should be carefully considered.

"After some soul-searching, some prayer, and some fasting," Elder Faust wrote, "I concluded that it might be well for me to consider a bypass operation before I have had any heart damage and while I am in good health. My reason for so thinking is that even though the possibility of heart attacks might not be life-threatening, it would be difficult to manage if it happened when I am in a distant, emerging country." With that decided, he called Dr. Nelson's secretary and scheduled the surgery for Friday, November 19, in part to use the coming holiday season to recover, thereby attempting to reduce the amount of time he would be unable to carry out his Church responsibilities.

On Wednesday, November 17, Elder Faust attended various meetings during the day, then checked into the LDS Hospital in the afternoon, where he was run through various tests. ("The day was not pleasant," he wrote in his journal that day—a rare admission for a man who could almost always find a positive note upon which to end each day.)

The next morning, he left the hospital and attended the Thursday temple meeting of the First Presidency and the Twelve, returning that afternoon for the preoperative work. Then on Friday morning, Dr. Nelson spent six and one-half hours performing eight bypasses, which was more than he had anticipated but which he later told Elder Faust would ensure a healthy heart for years to come.

Elder Faust spent the next several days in the hospital, including Thanksgiving Day. He noted, in anticipation of the event, that "it has been organized for the family to go to Janna and Doug's, but I will have my turkey here at the hospital." He also observed that a friend who had come in on the same day for heart surgery had already gone home, but that "he only had four bypasses."

On Friday, President Tanner was admitted to the hospital, and in Elder Faust's view he was "doing very poorly, although he sent word up that he would see me at the office next week." Then on Saturday, Elder Faust received a telephone call, telling him of President Tanner's death. "The head nurse was visiting with me at the time," he wrote. "She is not a member of the Church, but upon hearing of his death, she broke down and cried." Although Elder Faust was released from the hospital the next day, he was unable to attend the funeral of his longtime friend and mentor—and the first member of the Church's two highest presiding quorums to die since Elder Faust had been sustained as an apostle four years earlier. He was, however, able to watch the proceedings on television, and he recorded something of his sentiments after the funeral: "There has passed from us one of the greatest men of our lifetime. To take away from each of us the influence of President Tanner would be to take away from each of us something very profound and significant in our lives."

Through the course of events surrounding President Tanner's passing—and then the death of Elder LeGrand Richards just a few weeks later—Elder Faust "felt a sense of gratefulness to belong to a group of men who have such care and solicitude for their associates."

He drew comfort and strength from his brethren—as well as his family and friends—as he endured a slower and more painful recovery than he had anticipated. Although there were days of discouragement, he still maintained his positive outlook, noting before Christmas, "I would feel normal if I had all my strength back and there was no chest pain." And he was greatly encouraged as Dr. Nelson examined him six weeks after the surgery and told him that "my life would be lengthened and be stronger and fuller, and that there would be no limitations on my activities."

The recovery process continued for many more weeks, although Elder Faust began returning to the office for the better part of each day beginning in early January. His drive to get going again was evident, as he recorded in late January that "I am anxious to have an overseas trip so that my Brethren will reclassify me and not think of me as a cripple." (From the first days following his surgery, his determination to return to normal was noted by his associates, prompting Elder Monson to send his friend a customized cartoon showing a businessman sitting up in a hospital bed, fully dressed with suit, tie, and hat. A nurse is walking into the room, saying, "Well, Mr. Faust, are we ready to go home?" This mischievous touch of humor prompted President Faust to later acknowledge, "I'm bad—but Brother Monson is worse!")

Even as Elder Faust tried to speed up the process of recovery, his brethren were sensitive to his continuing pain, which resulted in his having to follow their counsel to not go on a scheduled trip to Chile in early March. In late March, he did travel fifty miles south to preside at a stake conference in Springville, Utah, but during the April general conference two weeks later, he recalls that as he stood at the pulpit to deliver his address he thought, "Oh, I've got heart pain."

Of the periods of frustration he encountered during the months of his recovery, Elder Faust adds, "These callings rest upon us, and we just seem to be driven to fulfill our responsibilities and do the work we've been called to do." Gratefully, the week after general conference, he was able to endure a short trip to Pocatello, Idaho, for a stake conference, and the next week he traveled all the way to Eugene, Oregon. Before the month ended, however, his desire for an overseas trip was fulfilled as he flew to Hawaii for two very full days of meetings. After his return flight arrived in Salt Lake on Monday morning, he went straight to the office (as was his practice) and spent the afternoon in meetings. By the time he returned home to have dinner with Sister Faust, he recorded, "I kept falling asleep, so we couldn't have family home evening. Finally, I quit fighting it and went to bed."

Even with the fatigue and frequent pains that accompanied his recovery, Elder Faust's trip to Hawaii marked his return to the unrelenting travel schedule the Twelve keep as they administer the Lord's affairs and minister to His children throughout the world. During his nearly seventeen years in the Quorum, he circled the globe countless times, with most weeks seeing him—and, as assigned, Sister Faust—heading off to destinations ranging from St. Louis to Sri Lanka.

He faced his fair share of late arrivals and departures, canceled flights, and lost luggage. More than once, his plane sat on airport tarmacs waiting for mechanical failures to be fixed, and on one of many trips to the South Pacific, he and the other passengers had to wait for a pig to move off the runway before they could take off. He took such inconveniences in stride, however, never complaining but always noting when something went right—such as the time his and Sister Faust's plane arrived late in Chicago, causing him concern over making their connection to Frankfurt; but then he happily discovered that the plane they were to leave on was parked at the very next gate. "That would never happen again in a million years," he would note.

Upon returning from one of several extended tours of South America, he summarized his view of airplanes with this observation: "It is always tiring to ride in airplanes, but they are marvelous and make it possible for the Church to expand and do its work in the world."

One of his early international assignments as a member of the Twelve came in the summer of 1979, as he was assigned to accompany a Brigham Young University performing group on a groundbreaking tour of mainland China.

Although the university took the lead in making the arrangements for the trip, Elder Faust was involved in a number of delicate negotiations and difficult decisions. About a week before the twenty-six-member group was to leave, the university received a telegram from the Chinese authorities asking that the Young Ambassadors limit themselves to a few handheld instruments and minimal sound and lighting equipment. Bruce Olsen, who was then an assistant to President Dallin H. Oaks in charge of university relations and who oversaw the tour's arrangements, explains that the group was used to—and planning on—traveling with thousands of pounds of instruments, equipment, and costumes. Not knowing how to respond to this last-minute request, those responsible for the tour met with Elder Faust to discuss their options. "We decided that we'd just go on faith—and with all of our equipment—and that the Lord would open the way," Brother Olsen recalls.

The group got as far as Shanghai, at which point the airport officials wanted what Brother Olsen describes as "a large amount of money for us to continue on to Beijing (Peking). We worried that we would have to pay the overage for every flight we had scheduled. We decided to pay the money in Shanghai and see what happened, and it turned out that we only had to pay it once." (During the rest of the tour, the group met with no problems over its equipment and put on performances that resulted in BYU's becoming the best-known western university in China for years to come.)

Elder and Sister Faust became well acquainted with each of the student performers, providing them with spiritual uplift, encouragement, and any help that was needed with homesickness. When the heat in some cities was beyond unbearable, Elder Faust would remind the students that "when conditions become intolerable, they generally change," and Sister Faust would buy a fan for each of the young ladies. When the group headed out of a hotel on what was Father's Day in the States, Elder Faust had the sensitivity to call upon a young woman to pray who would help put the day in its proper context as she petitioned, "Heavenly Father, today is Father's Day, and we're not with our fathers. But we pray that thou wilt bless them and help them know we love them. And we thank thee for being our Eternal Father." As he listened to that prayer, Brother Olsen reflected, "I felt that Elder Faust could elicit that kind of sincerity and insight from the group because he set the tone that made the students feel comfortable expressing their deepest feelings in prayer."

Brother Olsen learned much from Elder Faust during the trip, as the two would "sit on spotlight boxes behind the scenes" and discuss all sorts of subjects. He also learned something of Elder Faust's leadership style as the group faced a quandary partway through the trip. In addition to performing, the group had planned various educational and cultural activities, including a visit to the Great Wall and the Ming Tombs. But given how the Chinese authorities had scheduled the various events and excursions, the group was faced with the prospect of having to perform on a Sunday if the students were going to see these great landmarks. "When we found out about this conflict after arriving in China," Brother Olsen recalls, "Elder Faust looked at me and said, `Well, Bruce, what are you going to do?' And I thought, `You're the member of the Twelve; what do you mean, what am I going to do?' But I could see that he expected me to make the decision and that he wasn't going to provide much guidance—or interference. Finally I said to him that if we were in Israel, we would observe the Sabbath on Saturday, which would be Sunday at home; so I proposed that we perform on Sunday and honor the Sabbath on Monday, which would likewise be Sunday back home. He listened and said, `That's a good decision.' But it was one he had me make myself."

In addition to his responsibilities with the Young Ambassadors, Elder Faust also made arrangements, with prior approval from President Kimball, to rededicate the land of China for missionary work, Elder David O. McKay having dedicated the country during his visit fifty-eight years earlier. His prayer reflected that of Elder McKay's, both in content and in the fact that both prayers were offered in the Forbidden City and expressed the hope "that thou wilt honor and recognize each of the great promises which [Elder McKay] spoke for the future benefit of this people and this great land."

After the group's performances in Peking, Elder Faust noted in his journal a sentiment that summarizes the entire experience: "For us to have had the four performances in Peking, two of which were major performances in the Red Mill Theater and in the Forbidden City, is beyond our wildest hopes and imaginations. It is amazing that the Vice Minister of China National Travel again came this evening, as did the Director of the North American Activities. He has been very loyal, very friendly, and we have gotten along very well. . . We have seen many wonderful, interesting things, and it has been quite a singular experience. I am grateful that Ruth is with me and that she takes such an interest and a delight in the things and the people that we meet."

It was a trip that would continue to open doors for both BYU and the Church for years to come, but as Elder Faust returned home his thoughts were with the students, all of whom had become close friends during their weeks together. In addition to getting to know them, he had also gathered each of their home telephone numbers, and on his first morning back in Salt Lake City, he called each of the parents to share with them something of the group's experiences, as well as his gratitude for their sons and daughters.

There were months when Elder Faust ate more meals on airplanes than he did in his home, although he was not inclined to complain. He did, however, note once the difference between the meals he was served at stake conferences and those he ate on airplanes: "The wives of the stake presidency brought a meal for us, together with lovely china. It tasted just delicious, and it caused me to wonder why a person can never get a meal like that in the hotels or on airplanes. I concluded that maybe it's because they have male chefs. I asked my wife why this was, and she said that these women prepare the food they serve with love, which I think is a substantial answer." Then he added an observation that is indicative of his appreciation for the many meals he has been served by faithful Saints the world over: "One dish that was truly outstanding was an apple strudel. It was just tremendous."

A trip that Elder and Sister Faust took in the company of Elder and Sister L. Tom Perry suggests something of the demanding schedules Elder Faust kept—as well as the experiences he had and the joy he felt in associating with the Saints.

More often than not, his departure times were scheduled at the end of busy days, which was the case on Wednesday, May 8, 1985, as Elder and Sister Faust started the day by attending the funeral for A. J. McKay, whom the Fausts had known in the Cottonwood area of Salt Lake City. In his account, Elder Faust summarizes the qualities of a man who "was not distinguished in letters or scholarship, but who was a most personable, smiling, happy, Christlike man—and one of the best family patriarchs we had in the Church." He then made brief mention of the honor he felt in being asked to speak and elaborated instead on the tribute paid by Brother McKay's daughter, Marilyn Mismash, who said: "I know how much our Father in Heaven loves us because I had a father who loved me that way."

From there, Elder Faust attended to a full day of meetings, finished packing, and visited a grandson who had just undergone surgery. Only then did he and Sister Faust head to the airport, where they and the Perrys boarded a flight to Los Angeles. In the process, they met a missionary who, like them, was traveling to Tahiti, so the Fausts and the Perrys welcomed him into their traveling party. Upon boarding their connecting flight in Los Angeles, the Fausts immediately went to sleep for the duration of the eight-hour flight, which arrived in Papeete, Tahiti, at 2:00 A.M. There, they cleared customs, visited with the local leaders who were on hand to greet them, checked into their hotel, and got what little rest they could before beginning a full day of touring the temple complex, chapel sites, and other buildings under construction.

The next day, the Fausts and Perrys were joined by Elder Robert L. Simpson and his wife, who had flown in from Australia, where Elder Simpson was serving as area president. The group attended a temple session, held a mission meeting for two hours, and then concluded the day by attending a feast and program that the local leaders had planned to precede the area conference.

On Saturday, Elder Faust and his associates met with the mission president to review the challenges associated with a far-flung mission. Afterwards, Elder Faust asked to go back and once again see the temple, which he described as "a jewel." The group then participated in a lengthy leadership meeting, which was scheduled late in the afternoon to avoid the heat of the day. At the same time, Sisters Perry, Faust, and Simpson met with a large group of sisters. Elder Faust recorded, "We had a great meeting. Elder Simpson conducted and did very well. Elder Perry has a special enthusiasm, and a way of telling stories and projecting himself. But it was hard to have two translators side by side—one in French and the other in Tahitian. Tomorrow we will have two sessions, one for each language."

Upon completing two sessions of the area conference on Sunday, the Fausts and Perrys left Monday morning for Tonga, by way of New Zealand. On the flight to Tonga, which took them across the International Date Line and resulted in their losing a day, they were seated next to a young returned missionary with whom they visited during the flight. They were greeted in Nuku' alofa, Tonga, by a group of Church leaders—together with a brass band—with whom they met before checking into their hotel.

After a fitful night's sleep, caused by sweltering heat and their room's air conditioner not working, the Fausts got themselves up and ready to catch a 7:00 A.M flight that would take them to Vava'u, Tonga. When they arrived at the airport, they learned that their flight was delayed for about an hour because the pilots had decided to sleep in. When they finally did take off from the grass runway, Elder Faust records that "the trip was the most beautiful trip I have ever seen in my life. The sun was just coming up over the water, and we were low enough to see the configuration of the ocean and the islands and the sky. We then found that arrangements had been made to fly us over two volcanoes. To our surprise (this being a small plane), the pilot came down low and pulled right into the cone of the volcano and circled around and tipped it so we could look down to see the hot lava. The mission president wanted to get another picture, so we went around again! It was so thrilling that we were not unduly concerned. The pilot had great skill."

After the plane had set down on a dirt landing strip carved out of a coconut grove, the group was greeted by a large group that had spread out mats and brought numerous leis. There was also another brass band—something Elder Faust had never experienced before this trip. Before going to a four-hour priesthood leadership meeting, Elder Faust's group was treated to a large lunch, and after the meeting, they were guests at a feast of "endless kinds of foods—turkey, chicken, pork, shrimp, lobster, and a fruit boat that was out of this world. They went through a formal ceremony in which they symbolically killed the pig for Elder Perry and then recited some of the early history of the Church in Tonga. It was quite a special occasion."

During their time in Vava'u, Elder Faust learned that the local members could find all manner of reasons for two feasts each day. He concluded that the food was healthful when, at one meeting, the closing prayer was offered by a 101-year-old woman, who pushed away the arm of a local leader who attempted to help her up to the stand. He was also reminded of the fact that, in Polynesia, "If you look at anything, it's yours," and took note of the reverence of the children, who, he said, "sat peacefully with their arms folded, not wiggling or fussing. I get the feeling that the Tongans keep a firm hand on the young people."

On the last night of their two-week tour, the Fausts witnessed firsthand the great faith of the Tongan people—a faith so prevalent throughout the Islands that Elder Faust once instructed Sister Faust, "If I'm ever sick, please call upon the Polynesians to pray for me." During the course of the day, as the members put up ten thousand chairs in the outdoors and prepared for their concluding meeting with the two visiting apostles and their wives, rain fell off and on, even as the clouds on the horizon grew darker. As Elder Faust commented during the day about what appeared to be continuing bad weather, the local leaders told him not to worry about rain. "I didn't know whether to interpret this as their having greater faith than we have, or that they wouldn't be bothered that much by the rain," Elder Faust says; but that afternoon, as the four o'clock meeting began, there not only was no rain, but the skies were clear and blue.

The next morning, as the Fausts and Perrys were getting ready to board their flight, they learned that it would be too late to make their connection in Auckland, New Zealand. As they began to explore other alternatives, they received word back that they would, in fact, be able to make their connection because the connecting flight had gotten a late start out of Sydney, Australia. However, their flight from Hawaii to Los Angeles was late arriving, which resulted in their missing the last flight to Salt Lake City that evening. When the airline offered to put the two couples up in a hotel that night—at the airline's expense—Elder Faust refused, pointing out that they were attempting to make too close of a connection (an "illegal" connection, in airline parlance) and that for the airline to pay for their rooms "wouldn't be quite right."

After the two couples boarded their flight the next morning, "we taxied out, waited, taxied some more, and waited some more," Elder Faust recalls. When the flight finally arrived in Salt Lake at 11:15 A.M., Elder Faust went straight to the office, where he took care of correspondence requiring his immediate attention and then spent the afternoon in meetings. When he arrived home shortly after 5:00, he and Sister Faust (who was just finishing up the laundry from the trip) headed out to have dinner with their son Jim and his family, and then they stopped by to visit their daughter Lisa and her family. Upon arriving home, they watched the news, Elder Faust reviewed the minutes of the meetings he had missed while abroad, and then the two finally went to bed, thus bringing to a close one of a countless number of trips the Fausts would take during his years in the Twelve.

Whether he was being treated to a Polynesian feast, a traditional American dinner of roast beef and potatoes, or the delicacies unique to countless other countries he traveled to, Elder Faust was always appreciative of the hospitality of the Saints. He especially welcomed the opportunity to stay with Church members in their homes, and he did all that he could to ensure that his host families felt comfortable having him there. On one occasion, a stake president and his wife had insisted that Elder Faust take their bedroom, and in the middle of the night, their small son came and got into bed with him. Not wanting to alarm the boy, Elder Faust simply let the boy go right to sleep next to him.

In reflecting on his many experiences with Saints throughout the world, Elder Faust has said, "It has been a nice experience to stay in the homes of our members. There are sometimes interesting circumstances, such as the stake president who had seven daughters and one bathroom, but those things work out. I am full of appreciation and gratitude for the goodness and kindness of the Saints, particularly as extended to this humble servant. For those of us who have to deal with the day-to-day, hour-to-hour challenges of the worldwide Church, it is a spiritual and healing experience to be with the Saints in their homes."

Those to whom he ministered as he traveled throughout the Church likewise felt it a blessing to have an association with Elder Faust, whether for a few minutes or over a number of years. As he visited the missions and stakes of Zion, much of his time was spent calling and training local leaders, particularly stake presidents and patriarchs, and he was mindful of his need to make those calls under the guidance of the Spirit—and with the love and encouragement that he had felt from both President Lee and President Kimball as he had been called to the offices he had held as a General Authority.

Providing some insight into the process, he notes that, for him, the experience of calling stake presidents is somewhat different from that of calling patriarchs. "In calling a stake president," he says, "the visiting authorities counsel together and with the local brethren to get their feelings and to learn something of the strengths and abilities of those in the stake. Then we take the matter to the Lord and seek for His inspiration. Interestingly, so many of the times the brethren—and sometimes their wives—have already known by the Spirit that they were going to be called, which brings to mind something Elder McConkie used to say—that the Lord isn't very good at keeping secrets."

Elder Faust was continually touched by the faith of the good men who would accept these calls, and by the faith and support of their wives. He knew from his own experience what these calls would mean to these couples—both in terms of workloads and blessings—and drew strength as he witnessed their willingness to serve and their faith in the Lord's ability to sustain them in callings they could not fulfill on their own.

On one occasion, he called a man to serve as stake president and then suggested that he take some time to consider who he might call as counselors. The man immediately recommended two men—one a bishop in the stake and one a high councilor—but Elder Faust suggested that he and his wife might wish to take a little more time to consider the decision. The two went into a room to be alone, and after about ten minutes Elder Faust looked in to see how they were coming. "I found them upon their knees in an embrace," he recounts, "with this brother speaking in a modulated, soft voice to the Lord. I don't know that they were aware of my presence, but when they finished, still on their knees, they embraced each other and kissed, and I saw a unity and love that, if it were practiced by all married couples once in a while, would result in happier families and fewer divorces."

In the case of calling patriarchs, Elder Faust explains, "When the right man was presented, the inspiration was there. It was a sudden confirmation that here is the man who should be patriarch. Just why there is that difference, I don't know that I know." He did find, as with stake presidents, that often the man knew the call was coming. He tells of interviewing a man in Idaho "who had received a witness that he was to be called some three weeks before, although from a logical standpoint that shouldn't have been because of the two patriarchs already serving in the stake."

In ordaining and setting apart patriarchs, Elder Faust also knew the source of inspiration that would enable these brethren to function in their sacred callings, and he helped each man he called learn this principle. In one instance, Elder Faust interviewed a man to determine his worthiness to serve as patriarch. When the man protested that he was incapable of serving in such a capacity, given that he had only an eighth-grade education, Elder Faust reassured him of the inspiration evident in the calling. Elder Faust recorded, "I told him to come back with his wife at 7:00 [to be set apart]."

In all that he did as he administered the affairs of the Church in the wards, stakes, and missions of Zion, Elder Faust always attempted to take the time needed to deal appropriately with whatever situation he was handling and to teach and train the Saints and their leaders with "gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned" (D&C 121:41). A myriad of letters attest to his thoughtfulness, including one written by a wife whose husband was called as a patriarch: "You didn't hurry through and you took the time to explain things to him in his important calling as stake patriarch."

Another woman wrote, after encountering Elder Faust several times at a stake conference:

I am writing of the experience I had as I watched an Apostle of the Lord bending down and shaking a very small boy's hand and telling him how glad he was to meet him, of insisting on going through an open door to a waiting group last, of having a strong arm around weak shoulders and being hugged for a long period of time, of being so personal and patient to each individual. Then after sitting down from speaking to the combined congregation for a few brief moments and being concerned that I had said the right things, to have that Apostle lean over—across our stake president and an aisle—and whisper to me, "That was marvelous, such powerful words. I'm so glad I was able to come up here and get to meet you" (and in my usual, eloquent manner, I responded by crying).

At home and as he traveled, Elder Faust also sought to perpetuate a practice he had learned from President Kimball—giving dollars to young men to help them begin their missionary funds. Once, as he was having a snack with some of his family, a young boy came up to him and asked, "Are you really James E. Faust?" Elder Faust said that he was and then asked the boy what his name was and what he was going to do when he turned nineteen. When the boy said he didn't know, Elder Faust gave him a brief lesson in the importance of missionary service—and a dollar to start his missionary fund.

Another time, as he and Sister Faust were having dinner at the home of Bruce and Christine Olsen, Brother Olsen, who was then serving as a bishop, told Elder Faust of a young boy in his ward who had recently been diagnosed with a serious, degenerative disease and asked if he might be willing to visit with the boy and give him a blessing. Elder Faust said he would be happy to, so the two men walked over to the boy's house. Brother Olsen recalls, "He went into the home and first administered love, as he always does, and then administered a priesthood blessing to this boy. When we were through, he gave the boy a dollar for his missionary fund. Now at this point, no one would have dreamed he would live long enough to go on a mission, let alone have the ability to serve, but when the boy turned nineteen he was called to serve a two-year mission at the Provo Temple and the adjacent Missionary Training Center. His parents took him every day, and although he is now in an electric wheelchair, the promise was fulfilled that Elder Faust had given him."

He would often receive reports from young men as their funds grew, with one boy writing, "Last time I wrote I told you I had approximately $200 in my missionary fund. I am happy to announce I have almost $800 now." Elder Faust's son-in-law, Scott Smith, tells of having a group of priests from Idaho stay in his and Lisa's home, and taking the group to meet Elder Faust during their visit. As Scott recalls, "One of the priests told him that ten years before he had given this boy a dollar while at a stake conference. When Dad asked him how many dollars the boy had now, he thought for a moment and said, `About $4,000,' and you could just see tears well up in Dad's eyes."

Another contribution that Elder Faust has made to the lives of many members of the Church is blessing them that they might have children, just as Elder Charles A. Callis blessed Sister Faust and him early in their marriage. "The Lord does give particular gifts to people, it seems to me," Elder Faust says. "Brother Callis had it, and we were blessed with our son, Jim. Now, these gifts come from the Lord, and those who hold the priesthood are only the vessels. But being able to bless these couples—which I have done only if it has been approved by their bishops and stake presidents—has been a humbling but satisfying part of my ministry. A woman in the Northwest had been married for eighteen years, and the stake president importuned me to give a blessing to her and her husband. She conceived and carried and delivered a beautiful little girl, and that dear sister came clear down from the Northwest just to show me that baby. I have never seen a woman look so adoringly and lovingly upon a child as that woman. But again, that's not me; that is a gift from the Lord."

Elder Faust is quick to teach, however, that those who hold the priesthood have the same priesthood he does, and tells of traveling with Elder Hugh B. Brown once to dedicate a stake center. "Elder Brown was known to have the gift of healing, and the priesthood leaders brought a number of people to him seeking blessings. For some reason, he told them, `You have the same priesthood I do,' and he didn't give any blessings. Why he didn't on that occasion, I don't know." But Elder Faust believes the local leaders learned an important lesson.

During his years in the Quorum of the Twelve, Elder Faust also had to deal with many difficult challenges as he traveled throughout the Church, and in those circumstances he could mete out the firmness and forthrightness that was called for.

As he traveled to one stake conference, he knew he would have to deal with a group of women that was spreading erroneous teachings among the members of the stake. "We proceeded to meet with some of the sisters," he recounts, "together with their bishops and husbands, who were involved in false doctrines. I came down quite hard on them, and then we interviewed the sisters individually, with their own bishops and their own husbands." The next morning, he met with the bishops in the stake to instruct them in the matter, "although we made it clear we wanted no witch hunts." On the trip home he recorded, "This was one of the most challenging stake conferences I have had since I was called either as a Regional Representative or a General Authority." Yet he responded aptly to the challenge that was placed before him.

At another conference he conducted an interview with a man who had been excommunicated, including his wife in the interview as well. As the two petitioned Elder Faust relative to the man's reinstatement, he had to tell them that the few months that had passed were insufficient for the repentance process to be complete. The wife pleaded with Elder Faust to view her husband's situation otherwise, and while he acknowledged that "her plea touched my heart, I did them a kindness by telling them what they did not want to hear."

There were many others, however, who did want to hear the advice Elder Faust had to offer, and who were then willing to follow his counsel, even when it ran counter to prevailing and popular notions. In March 1989, as Elder Faust accompanied President Hunter to California for a regional conference, he was introduced to a college freshman who had happened to come to the Saturday afternoon leadership meeting with his bishop and elders quorum president—and who was faced with a difficult decision.

Jason Johnson was a starting basketball player for a local junior college, and his team was about to play its last game of the season, a game that would determine whether it would move into state playoffs. His coach, who knew Jason was a Mormon, asked him several days before the last game if he would be willing to come to a special practice the Sunday before the Monday game. As the coach explained the situation, the team was very much in need of the extra practice, and he had scheduled it late in the day so that Jason could attend his church meetings first.

Jason explains that he was typical of many young Latter-day Saints who, on the one hand, are working to solidify their testimonies but who, on the other hand, are somewhat torn by interests such as basketball. "I told the coach that I wouldn't come to the practice, and he became quite upset and told me that if I didn't, I would not only not play in the game but that he would see to it that I never played basketball again for any school. When he said that, I began to question my decision, and the next day I asked my bishop about a meeting I had heard of where two General Authorities were going to speak, hoping that by listening to them I might get some help in making this decision."

After the first two hours of a four-hour meeting, Jason went with his bishop and elders quorum president into the cultural hall for a refreshment break, and the three began discussing, once again, Jason's options. As they did so, the elders quorum president suggested that Jason ask Elder Faust his opinion, and as Jason was responding that he certainly did not want to bother an Apostle, he suddenly found himself being introduced to Elder Faust.

"As we began to talk," Jason recalls, "he immediately disarmed me with his kindness. I was an athlete who was a bit full of himself, but I could tell that, somehow, he understood me and my situation. And as soon as I sensed that, I was ready to listen to whatever he had to say. He took my hand and walked me over to the far corner of the gym, holding onto my hand and arm as we walked. I can't remember everything he said, but I do remember very clearly knowing that he knew exactly how I felt.

"After I had explained the situation to him, he put his head down and thought for a minute. Then he looked at me and said, `When you have a moral decision like this that the scriptures don't give you an exact answer to, it's difficult.' Then there was another long pause, after which he put his hand on my shoulder and said, `Well, Brother Johnson, if you have enough faith, you won't go to practice tomorrow.' Then he walked away."

Jason chose to follow Elder Faust's advice, and the next day at church, as he partook of the sacrament, he knew he was in the right place, doing the right thing. The next day, he suited up and was ready to play, even though the coach had told him he would not use him. True to his word, the coach didn't start Jason—for the first time that season—but within a couple of minutes he changed his mind and put Jason in. "I scored 17 points and played the best game I had played all year," Jason recalls, "although our team lost by one point. Whether we won or lost, though, is not the point; in fact, I'm not sure our Heavenly Father cares much about who wins or loses basketball games. What I learned from my few minutes with Elder Faust was that an Apostle can understand an eighteen-year-old kid and that by putting my Heavenly Father first, I would be happy."

Whether he was counseling a young athlete, a newly called patriarch, or a seasoned stake president, Elder Faust taught a consistent and essential lesson as he traveled throughout the Church and ministered among the Saints—that when faith is coupled with obedience, the Lord will strengthen and bless His children in all they are called upon to do.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
