James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

SPIRITUALITY

NOT MANY MONTHS ago we were in one of the oldest cities on earth. Some of the greatest wonders of the world are there; so are crime, squalor, poverty, and filth. Our kind hosts observed as we were making our way through the teeming masses—past the overloaded donkeys, the filth, the smells—that everything was beautiful in that city if you would raise your sights and only look a foot or more above the ground.

In recent times the price of oil, gold, and other precious minerals has greatly increased. These treasures are all obtained by looking down. They are useful and necessary, but they are tangible riches. What of the treasures that are to be found by raising our vision? What of the intangible riches which come from the pursuit of holiness? Stephen looked upward: "Being full of the Holy Ghost, [he] looked up steadfastly into heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God." (Acts 7:55.) ("The Dignity of Self," Ensign, May 1981, 8.)

WITHOUT QUESTION, WE need to be informed of the happenings of the world. But modern communication brings into our homes a drowning cascade of the violence and misery of the worldwide human race. There comes a time when we need to find some peaceful spiritual renewal.

I acknowledge with great gratitude the peace and contentment we can find for ourselves in the spiritual cocoons of our homes, our sacrament meetings, and our holy temples. In these peaceful environments, our souls are rested. We have the feeling of having come home. ("Gratitude as a Saving Principle," Ensign, May 1990, 86.)

THE SPIRITUAL RICHNESS of our meetings seems to have little to do with the buildings or country in which we meet. Many years ago, we went to Manaus, Brazil, a city far upstream on the Amazon River, surrounded by jungle, to meet with the missionaries and the handful of Saints who were then in that area. We met in a very humble home with no glass panes in the windows. The weather was excessively hot. The children sat on the floor. The mission president, President Helio da Rocha Camargo, conducted the meeting and called on a faithful brother to give the opening prayer. The humble man responded, "I will be happy to pray but may I also bear my testimony?" A sister was asked to lead the singing. She responded, "I would love to lead the singing, but please let me also bear my testimony." And so it was all through the meeting with those who participated in any way. All felt impelled to bear their profound witness of the Savior and his mission and of the restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ. All who were there reached deep down in their souls to their spiritual taproots, remembering the Savior's words that "where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them." (Matt. 18:20.) This they did more as heirs to the Kingdom of God than as Brazilian members of the Church. ("Heirs to the Kingdom of God," Ensign, May 1995, 63.)

SOMEHOW, SOME WAY, we must find the healing influence that brings solace to the soul. Where is this balm? Where is the compensating relief so desperately needed to help us survive the world's pressures? The offsetting comfort in large measure can come through increased communion with the Spirit of God. This can bring spiritual healing. . . .

The sixth Article of Faith states that, among other spiritual gifts, we believe in the gift of healing. To me, this gift extends to healing of both the body and the spirit. The Spirit speaks peace to the soul. This spiritual solace comes by invoking spiritual gifts, which are claimed and manifested in many ways. They are rich, full, and abundant in the Church today. They flow from the humble and proper use of a testimony. They also come through administering to the sick following an anointing with consecrated oil. Christ is the great Physician, who rose from the dead "with healing in his wings" (2 Ne. 25:13), while the Comforter is the agency of healing.

The Lord has provided many avenues by which we receive this healing influence. . . . Our temples provide a sanctuary where we go to lay aside many of the anxieties of the world. Our temples are places of peace and tranquillity. In these hallowed sanctuaries God "healeth the broken in heart, and bindeth up their wounds" (Ps. 147:3). ("Spiritual Healing," Ensign, May 1992, 6-7.)

FOR MANY OF us, . . . spiritual healing takes place not in great arenas of the world, but in our sacrament meetings. It is comforting to worship, partake of the sacrament with, and be taught in a spirit of humility by neighbors and close friends who love the Lord and try to keep his commandments. . . .

Our sacrament meetings should be worshipful and healing, restoring those who attend to spiritual soundness. . . .

Spiritual healing also comes from bearing and hearing humble testimonies. A witness given in a spirit of contrition, thankfulness for divine providence, and submission to divine guidance is a powerful remedy to help relieve the anguish and concerns of our hearts.

I doubt that sincere members of this church can achieve complete spiritual healing without our being in harmony with the foundation of the Church, which the Apostle Paul stated is, "the apostles and prophets" (Eph. 2:20). It is also essential for us to be found sustaining our bishops and stake presidents. ("Spiritual Healing," Ensign, May 1992, 7-8.)

OF ALL THAT we might do to find solace, prayer is perhaps the most comforting. . . . The very act of praying to God is satisfying to the soul, even though God, in his wisdom, may not give what we ask for. . . . Prayer is most helpful in the healing process. . . .

We find solace in Christ through the agency of the Comforter, and he extends this invitation to us: "Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest" (Matt. 11:28). The Apostle Peter speaks of "casting all your care upon him; for he careth for you" (1 Pet. 5:7). As we do this, healing takes place, just as the Lord promised through the Prophet Jeremiah when he said, "I will turn their mourning into joy, and will comfort them, and make them rejoice from their sorrow. . . . I have satiated the weary soul, and I have replenished every sorrowful soul" (Jer. 31:13, 25). ("Spiritual Healing," Ensign, May 1992, 8.)

IN ROSELANDIA, BRAZIL, outside the great city of Sao Paulo, there are many acres of beautiful roses. When one stands on a small hill above the rose fields, the aroma is delightful and the beauty is exhilarating. The thorns on the bushes are there, but they in no way lessen the enjoyment of the sight and the smell. I would challenge all to put the thorns, slivers, and thistles we encounter in life in proper perspective. We should deal with them but then concentrate on the flowers of life, not on the thorns. We should savor the smell and beauty of the flower of the rose and the cactus. To savor the sweet aroma of the blossoms, we need to live righteous and disciplined lives in which the study of the scriptures, prayer, right priorities, and right attitudes are integrated into our lives. For members of this church, that focus sharpens inside of our temples. We will all surely encounter some of the thorns, but they are only incidental to the sweet fragrances and exquisite beauty of the blooms. ("A Crown of Thorns, a Crown of Glory," Ensign, May 1991, 70.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
