James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

TEMPLE WORK

WE DO CHERISH our temple buildings, but the buildings alone do not bless. In the history of the Church it has been necessary to leave two beautiful temples built at great sacrifice. But when the saints left, they did not leave the keys, the authority, the covenants, and the blessings; these were taken with them. It is what takes place inside of the buildings through the keys, the covenants, the ordinances, and the spirit of Elijah working under the Spirit of the Lord that blesses the Saints. ("The Covenant People of the Lord," Address to Regional Representatives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 3 Apr. 1987.)

THE DUTY, FUNCTION, and mission of the greater priesthood in relation to the ordinances of the temple was stated by the Lord:

"And this greater priesthood administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God.

"Therefore, in the ordinances thereof, the power of godliness is manifest.

"And without the ordinances thereof, and the authority of the priesthood, the power of godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh." (D&C 84:19-21.)

Of course, going to the temple is a matter of choice, but many do not realize that in order to come unto Christ receiving the ordinances of the temple is not optional, it is essential. No one will be able to come unto Christ without these steps and ordinances. ("The Key to Activity and Retention," Regional Representatives' Seminar, 31 Mar. 1989.)

THE REQUIREMENTS FOR temple attendance do not change from place to place. Where a temple is available, priesthood authority gives no greater or lesser blessings in one place than another. Temple worship is a perfect example of our unity as Church members. All of us answer the same questions of worthiness to enter the temple. All the men dress alike. All the women dress alike. We leave the cares of the world behind us as we enter the temple. Everyone receives the same blessings. All make the same covenants. All are equal before the Lord. Yet within our spiritual unity there is wide room for everyone's individuality and expression. In that setting, all are heirs to the kingdom of God. President Hunter said it well: "The key to a unified church is a unified soul, one that is at peace with itself and not given to inner conflicts and tensions." (That We Might Have Joy, p. 50.) ("Heirs to the Kingdom of God," Ensign, May 1995, 62-63.)

QUORUM LEADERS SHOULD encourage quorum members to do all [the temple work] they can without placing an unreasonable burden upon them or sending them on a guilt trip. Some may only be able to do as little as occasionally attending the temple and assisting or contributing to a family organization. Most members of the Church, however, can attend the temple regularly and identify one deceased ancestor for whom they can perform vicarious temple endowments and/or sealings. Some will be able to do much more. ("The Key to Activity and Retention," Regional Representatives' Seminar, 31 March 1989.)

RECENTLY AN OUT-OF-STATE journalist used the phrase that there were appearing" cracks in the walls of the temple," figuratively speaking, of course. By this I suppose he meant that the moorings of the Church were being shaken by a very few who do not fully sustain the leaders of the Church or keep their covenants. To dispel this perception of cracks in our members' faith, we need only to observe the joyful people who worship in any of our forty-five temples worldwide. Many are couples clutching their little bags and holding hands, and many are the unmarried, seeking the peaceful blessings of the house of the Lord. Their countenances reflect much joy and satisfaction in their lives. ("Five Loaves and Two Fishes," Ensign, May 1994, 6.)

IT WAS IN the temple that Jesus received much of his early education. It was there he revealed the spiritual insight he had received to be about his Father's business. In the temple the Savior announced his Messianic mission. Simeon came by the Spirit to the temple and there had fulfilled for him the promise by the Holy Ghost that he would not die until he had seen "the Lord's Christ" (see Luke 2:18-29). The last verse of Luke's gospel states that after the ascension the apostles "returned to Jerusalem . . . and were continually in the temple, praising and blessing God" (Luke 24:52-53). Why were the apostles continually in the temple if it was not an important part of what Christ taught? ("Coming unto Christ through the Ordinances and Covenants of the Temple," Temple Presidents Seminar, Salt Lake City, Utah, 19 Aug. 1987.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
