James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

TITHING

AS A BOY I learned a great lesson of faith and sacrifice as I worked on my grandfather's farm during the terrible economic depression of the 1930s. The taxes on the farm were delinquent, and Grandfather, like so many, had no money. There was a drought in the land, and some cows and horses were dying for lack of grass and hay. One day when we were harvesting what little hay there was in the field, Grandfather told us to take the wagon to the corner of the field where the best stand of hay stood and fill the wagon as full as we could and take it to the tithing yard as payment of his tithing in kind.

I wondered how Grandfather could use the hay to pay tithing when some of the cows that we were depending upon to sustain us might starve. I even questioned if the Lord expected that much sacrifice from him. Ultimately, I marveled at his great faith that somehow the Lord would provide. The legacy of faith he passed on to his posterity was far greater than money because he established in the minds of his children and grandchildren that above all he loved the Lord and His holy work over other earthly things. He never became wealthy, but he died at peace with the Lord and with himself. ("Opening the Windows of Heaven," Ensign, Nov. 1998, 54.)

PAYMENT OF OUR tithes and offerings can help us become independent. President Nathan Eldon Tanner said: "Paying tithing is discharging a debt to the Lord. . . .

"If we obey this commandment, we are promised that we will `prosper in the land.' This prosperity consists of more than material goods—it may include enjoying good health and vigor of mind. It includes family solidarity and spiritual increase" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1979, p. 119; or Ensign, Nov. 1979, p. 81). It is my firm belief, after many years of close observation, that those who honestly pay their tithes and offerings do prosper and get along better in almost every way. It is my testimony that in discharging this debt to the Lord, one enjoys great personal satisfaction. Unfortunately this great satisfaction will be known only by those who have the faith and strength to keep this commandment. ("Responsibility for Welfare Rests with Me and My Family," Ensign, May 1986, 21.)

THE LAW OF tithing is simple: we pay one-tenth of our individual increase annually. (See D&C 119:4.) Increase has been interpreted by the First Presidency to mean income. (See Church Handbook of Instructions, Book 1: Stake Presidencies and Bishoprics (1998), 134.) What amounts to 10 percent of our individual income is between each of us and our Maker. There are no legalistic rules. As a convert in Korea once said: "With tithing, it doesn't matter whether you are rich or poor. You pay 10 percent, and you don't have to be ashamed if you haven't earned very much. If you make lots of money, you pay 10 percent. If you make very little, you still pay 10 percent. Heavenly Father will love you for it. You can hold your head up proud." (Letter from D. Brent Clement, president of the Korea Seoul Mission, 1981.)

Why should members worldwide, many of whom may not have enough for their daily needs, be encouraged to keep the Lord's law of tithing? As President Hinckley said in Cebu in the Philippine Islands, if members "even living in poverty and misery . . . will accept the gospel and live it, pay their tithes and offerings, even though those be meager, . . . they will have rice in their bowls and clothing on their backs and shelter over their heads. I do not see any other solution." ("Opening the Windows of Heaven," Ensign, Nov. 1998, 59.)

SOME MAY FEEL they cannot afford to pay tithing, but the Lord has promised that He would prepare a way for us to keep all of His commandments. (See 1 Ne. 3:7.) To pay tithing takes a leap of faith in the beginning, but as Jesus said, "If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine." (John 7:17.) We learn about tithing by paying it. Indeed, I believe it is possible to break out of poverty by having the faith to give back to the Lord part of what little we have. ("Opening the Windows of Heaven," Ensign, Nov. 1998, 59.)

I LEARNED IN serving almost twenty years as bishop and stake president that an excellent insurance against divorce is the payment of tithing. Payment of tithing seems to facilitate keeping the spiritual battery charged in order to make it through the times when the spiritual generator has been idle or not working. ("The Enriching of Marriage," Ensign, Nov. 1977, 11.)

MEMBERS OF THE Church who do not tithe do not lose their membership; they only lose blessings. Through Malachi the Lord asks: "Will a man rob God? . . . But ye say, Wherein have we robbed thee? In tithes and offerings." (Mal. 3:8.) If we will trust in the Lord, He will open the windows of heaven to us as we give back to Him the one-tenth He asks of us. His promise is sure: "I will . . . pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it." (Mal. 3:10.) Although tithing carries with it both temporal and spiritual blessings, the only absolute promise to the faithful is "ye shall have the riches of eternity." (D&C 38:39.) ("Opening the Windows of Heaven," Ensign, Nov. 1998, 59.)

THE LORD SPEAKS of offerings in the plural. He expects us, as a condition of faithfulness, to pay our tithing and our fast offerings to help the poor and the needy. But we are privileged to make other offerings, not by way of assignment, assessment, or ecclesiastical direction. Among these are donations to the General Missionary Fund, Humanitarian Aid Fund, and the Book of Mormon Fund. We are also privileged to voluntarily contribute to building the new temples President Hinckley has announced.

Recently I received an anonymous letter from a person who made a substantial sacrifice for the General Temple Fund of the Church. She said: "I decided when I wanted to spend any money on myself I would forgo it and put the money into the temple fund. This meant no new clothes or shoes, books, hair appointments, necklaces, or anything of a personal nature until I reached my goal. I thought this would be a sacrifice, but instead I have found joy in it. It has been a rewarding and fulfilling experience."

The Prophet Joseph Smith once said, "A religion that does not require the sacrifice of all things never has power sufficient to produce the faith necessary unto life and salvation." He continues, "Those who do not make the sacrifice cannot enjoy this faith, because men are dependent upon this sacrifice in order to obtain this faith." (Lectures on Faith [1985] 69-70.) ("Opening the Windows of Heaven," Ensign, Nov. 1998, 59-60.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
