James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

11

UNASSUMING SERVICE

AS ONE OF THE PRESIDING OFFICERS of a worldwide church, Elder Faust did his part to deal with countless challenges and assignments during his years in the Quorum of the Twelve. The volume and complexity of the issues he and his brethren face would be simply overwhelming were it not for that singular source of strength with which Elder Faust has become intimately acquainted since his earliest days of service in the Church.

At the conclusion of one meeting of the Twelve during his early years in that quorum, he recorded something of the challenges the Brethren face, as well as a simple, straightforward sentiment that has been at the heart of how he has handled every assignment he has ever been given: "These are interesting times. In a worldwide Church, we have challenges and problems. The Brethren in their wisdom could not run this Church for one hour. Inspiration is so desperately needed." With that as his guide, he has sought to combine what he considers to be his "meager abilities" with the divine guidance he knows is needed to do the work of the Lord.

Those who have served with him know well the contributions Elder Faust has made to the kingdom, but he, in his humility, has opted to stand to the side when credit is given.

Says his associate Elder Neal A. Maxwell, "Elder Faust deserves the dignity of causality, but he doesn't claim it. He has facilitated many things in the Church that he wouldn't want people to feel call for any special credit directed toward him. One of his mentors, of course, was N. Eldon Tanner, who had developed that ability to a high, high degree, and I think Elder Faust is not only instinctively that way, but I think he watched President Tanner and has wanted to follow that example."

Elder Maxwell tells the story—"at my own expense"—of the two men being asked by the First Presidency to handle "a delicate political assignment. As the assignment was being given, President Tanner, who was always good to build people up, said to President Kimball and President Romney, `I can't think of two better men for this assignment,' and I, in false modesty, said, `Oh, I'm sure you can get two better men than us.' As quick as a flash, President Kimball said, `Well, while we're looking, would you mind going ahead with the assignment?'

"That is indicative of the confidence and trust the Brethren have in Elder Faust," Elder Maxwell continues, "and of the fact that he has been at the crossroads many times, but doesn't feel he needs to put up a signpost that says, `Faust was here!'"

Even when asked, Elder Faust has never been one to make an issue of who he is or where he has been, as was once the case during his early (and less recognizable) years in the Twelve when a woman encountered him on one of the Church Office Building elevators and asked him who he was. "Oh, one of the janitors," he replied jokingly.

On another occasion, Elder Faust had gone out for an early Saturday morning walk near his neighborhood and came upon a woman in a Church parking lot taking stacks of boxes into the building. When he offered to help, he learned that she was a ward Young Women president and that she and the young women were going to assemble and sell one hundred pizzas that day. The woman, on the other hand, became suspicious that he didn't know where the kitchen was and began wondering if he might be planning to mug her. It was only when he ordered two pizzas and gave the woman his name and address that she realized he was anything but a threat to her well-being.

Even as he worked not to take himself too seriously, Elder Faust worked hard to fulfill the responsibilities he was given. Elder Perry, in commenting on the qualities that underlie Elder Faust's contributions to the Church, points to at least four:

First, he understands people. Whenever we're discussing personalities, he can analyze people better than anyone I've ever been around. He just seems to have an intuitive judgment about their particular capabilities and qualifications. Second, he's a deeply spiritual man. He's close to the Lord, and any time something comes up that we can't quite agree upon, he will suggest that maybe we need a little more thoughtful, prayerful study before we can move forward. Third, he can organize thoughts in a concise, logical way, and his contributions to our discussions are always in the fewest possible words expressed in the clearest, most understandable way. Fourth, he is a very powerful speaker when he is behind the pulpit. His sermons are down to earth, they are on subjects that are meaningful and useful, and they have an uplifting, spiritual tone to them.

One of the many issues to which Elder Faust brought his talents and spiritual insight within days of being called to the Twelve was dealing with the rapidly increasing membership of the Church, particularly in areas of explosive growth such as Latin America and Africa.

In late 1980 he recorded, referring to the Church's budget for the coming year, "We have the kind of problems we have been praying for, which are growing pains. The wise administration of the Church, however, keeps us in a good position." In a subsequent interview he would offer something of the basic principles he has encouraged Church leaders to follow as they deal with a burgeoning membership: "Growth is one of our biggest blessings, as well as one of our greatest challenges. When new members are brought into the Church in great numbers, we have to make sure that the missionaries are teaching all the lessons and that those who are baptized understand and are ready to comply fully with the requirements given in Mosiah 3:19. We certainly need to make hay while the sun shines in areas of rapid growth, but that does not mean we shouldn't have some kind of reasonable assurance that every person who is baptized is sincere and has a beginning knowledge of what is required in terms of commitment, service, the Word of Wisdom, tithing, and so forth. We welcome new converts and we're grateful for them; we just hope and pray that the Spirit of the Lord touches them so they will enter on a path of faithfulness and devotion whereby the windows of Heaven can open up to them so they can receive all the blessings the Lord has for them."

Coupled with the challenge of helping to manage the growth of the Church was Elder Faust's assignment to serve on the Church's Missionary Committee, in which capacity he helped supervise the Church's entire missionary effort—and to call the ever-growing number of new missionaries. Often he would find himself assigning anywhere from three hundred to five hundred new missionaries "in a single sitting," and he readily acknowledges the inspiration that guides that process: "The calling of missionaries is a very interesting process, in that the inspiration which comes is really very confirming and almost instantaneous. Sometimes there is no logical reason for the assignment, as with those who, for example, have studied Spanish for four years and get assigned to Bulgaria. When I received my call, I fully expected to go to Germany, given my ancestry and the fact that I had studied the language, but when I opened the letter and it said I was going to Brazil, I was disappointed for about fifteen seconds, after which I didn't want to go anywhere else. Having now served as one of the prophets, seers, and revelators who is responsible for making those calls, I would say that you just can't deny the inspiration or the revelation."

In 1985, Elder Faust's assignment was shifted from the Missionary Committee to the Genealogy Committee, and there he worked, along with Elders Boyd K. Packer and Dallin H. Oaks of the Twelve, to recommend and oversee the implementation of changes made in the Church's genealogy program. "Our desire was simply to demystify genealogy. The name of the work, as a result, was changed to `Family History,' and we sought to make the process more user-friendly so that it wasn't so technical and forbidding to the average person. I don't want to take any credit for the changes that were made, but I think it's marvelous to see a simpler process and people who are now able to do much of the work from home. Our being able to supply sufficient names to keep our many temples busy is the fruit of that effort, although I would hasten to add that with all the temples being built, it is going to take many more names to keep up."

Elder Faust's longest-standing committee assignment began even before he was called as a General Authority, as he was asked to serve with Elder Hinckley on the Special Affairs Committee (the name of which was later changed to Public Affairs, a committee which now reports to the First Presidency through him). This committee's primary charge is summarized by some close to Elder Faust as bringing the Lord's work "out of obscurity and darkness" as it presents the Church, through public relations efforts, to audiences on local, national, and international levels, as it takes advantage of ongoing advances in communications technology to present the Church's message, and as it oversees the Church's involvement with political issues that have moral implications.

A public relations practitioner who has worked with Elder Faust since the early 1980s—first as a Church employee based in New York City and then as a consultant on various projects and issues—is Steve Coltrin, whose father served with Elder Faust as a missionary in Brazil. "Before there was an Elder Faust who was known to the Church, and certainly before I had ever met him," Brother Coltrin recalls, "I can remember my father telling my mother, on more than one occasion, that his former companion was someone who was absolutely real and genuine—and someone who was very comfortable with himself.

"As I came to know him through our public relations efforts, I found that these personal qualities guided all that he did in taking the message and image of the Church out to the world. Early in my professional association with the Church, I was asked to serve on an advisory group that discussed a number of issues relative to the Church's image. At one meeting, the group had a lengthy discussion about how the Church is referred to—by members and nonmembers alike—and after the meeting I made the comment to Elder Faust that perhaps it would be well for members to not refer to themselves as `Mormons' because that could take away from the respect we should have for the Savior. He listened and then said, `Well, that's interesting, Steve, but we sort of are who we are.' His comment wasn't really an endorsement or a rejection of what I (and others in the group) had said, but it was very typical of his basic philosophy—that we should be honest about who we are, no more and no less. Now, the Church has worked over the ensuing years to put more emphasis on the actual name of the Church, but I learned a great lesson from that brief exchange—that in public relations efforts of any kind, you should proceed from the truth of what you are. That isn't always the approach public relations practitioners take, but in my experience, anything else will invite disaster."

One of the many public relations issues Elder Faust helped to guide during his years in the Twelve had to do with "historical" documents brought forward by Mark Hofmann, who became well known in the early 1980s for "finding" documents relating to early Church history and who later confessed to forging the documents and to murdering two individuals in an attempt to cover up his forgeries.

After participating in a meeting of the Twelve at which the Brethren discussed a document purporting to be a blessing from Joseph Smith to his son, Elder Faust noted the comments of Elder LeGrand Richards, who told of his grandmother's experience of witnessing the Prophet's mantle falling upon Brigham Young after Joseph and Hyrum Smith's martyrdom. "Elder Richards related that nobody had any question about who should succeed the Prophet," Elder Faust wrote, "and then he added that this personal testimony was worth more than any written documentation."

Coupled with his testimony of the power of the Spirit was Elder Faust's determination, both before and after the documents were determined to be forgeries, that the Church be completely aboveboard in how it dealt with what were viewed by some as troublesome issues for the Church. One of the countless examples that shed light on his philosophy that "we are who we are" occurred as the Hofmann case was winding to a close. In a journal entry of April 10, 1986, Elder Faust writes of his involvement in preparing a press release that would detail what the Church paid for the documents it acquired from Mr. Hofmann and then adds, "We will take some criticism, but because we are being absolutely straightforward and truthful, it will, in the long run, redound to the credibility of the Church."

In matters of politics, Elder Faust explains that the Church's position is to take no position—except in those instances where a moral issue is involved. "We don't tell public officials how to do their duty," he says. "We tell them they have to answer to their own conscience. But when it comes to moral issues—such as abortion, alcohol, or gambling—then we have the right and the duty to speak out. Now, when it comes to commenting on the particulars of legislation, we are careful, remembering the adage that the legislative process is a lot like making sausage and hearkening back to Joseph Smith's statement that people need to be taught correct principles and then be allowed to govern themselves. So, we very carefully avoid expressing personal opinions and ideas to the legislature, and the Public Affairs Committee is set up so that if there is a rumor that the Church has taken a certain position, anyone can call and find out whether or not that is the case. We just do not do things in a corner. We are open and aboveboard in the positions we take on moral issues."

Beyond his own involvement as a state legislator and with other political activities, Elder Faust's involvement with the Church's institutional position on political issues came as he was asked to work, in 1968, with Elder Gordon B. Hinckley on the issue of selling liquor by the drink in the state of Utah. He continued to be involved with that and many other political issues during his years in the Twelve, and he often worked with Bonner Ritchie, a professor of organizational behavior at BYU who served for many years on the State Liquor Commission.

Brother Ritchie recalls, "As we would meet to discuss the Church's position on liquor issues, Elder Faust was as good as anyone I've ever seen at prioritizing, delineating, and defining the constructs, principles, and issues that were important to the Church. There was no ambiguity—you never wondered what he thought or what he felt was important—but he also made it plain that the Church would only get involved with issues that have an obvious moral component, and that its position would then be on the principle, not on the details."

Brother Ritchie, in part because of his professional interests, also paid close attention to Elder Faust's leadership style during their years of association. "He is a man of few words," Brother Ritchie says, "and is not given to much small talk. He states the principle, makes sure you get the message, and then moves on. He's never, ever rude, but he's very focused. He is also very careful in his use of power. I have never seen him pull rank, although he could have. I have never seen him use his power to dictate a position. Instead, he will approach an issue from the position of teaching a philosophy, a set of clear principles."

One of Brother Ritchie's most memorable insights into Elder Faust's leadership style came one night as he returned home and found a note from his son saying, "Dad, call Jimmy," with a number following. "I didn't know anyone named `Jimmy,' but I dialed the number and it was Elder Faust. I asked him later about asking my son to have me call `Jimmy,' and he said he hadn't wanted to worry my children or appear to be pretentious. Those who study leadership are always interested in men and women who have power but don't use it, and my experience with Elder Faust is that he practices the condescension spoken of in the scriptures—not in the sense of lowering oneself, but in relating to people at their level, rather than in a superior-subordinate relationship."

Bruce Olsen, who first met Elder Faust on their trip to China in 1979, is another who has seen his work from a unique vantage point. After serving in the early 1980s as a mission president, teaching at BYU, and then running the corporate communications office for a large Utah company, Brother Olsen was invited to become managing director of the Church's Public Affairs Department, in which capacity he worked closely with Elder Faust and the other members of the Public Affairs Committee. Brother Olsen observes, "Together with President Hinckley, Elder Faust has been something of a watchdog over those moral affairs that affect the Church. He was involved with and carefully guided the Church's role in defeating horse race gambling in Utah. In that campaign, the Church tried very carefully to stay back a step and give support when it was needed. It requires a delicate balance for the Church to work with people on an issue but to not be too heavy-handed—to put the finger on the scale when and where it will make a difference—and Elder Faust is one who helps the Brethren to know just how to reach that balance.

"Both within Utah and nationally," Brother Olsen adds, "Elder Faust has been a voice to keep the Church out of social issues where other churches and organizations have ended up on the rocks. There are many good people with causes who come to the Church in the hope that the Church will come down on their side and support their cause. Generally, the Church's response is that it chooses not to get involved, and Elder Faust has been one of those voices on the Public Affairs Committee that has carefully guided those decisions."

Representative of the Church's involvement in those issues it decides to weigh in on, Elder Faust once recorded, referring to the Church's efforts to not allow pari-mutuel betting in Utah, "This is a moral issue. The Church has a right and a duty to speak out. Even some of our own people speak of `free agency,' yet the phrase `free agency' does not appear in the scriptures. What does is `moral agency,' and we have determined to support the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve in their effort to not permit gambling to come into the state."

Several weeks later, when a local newspaper accused Elder Faust of "chastising" the state legislature for its position on the issue in a large public meeting, Elder Faust noted, "Fortunately, I have a tape of my remarks, and I said no such thing. But what to do about it is a question."

The conclusion he came to was characteristic of Elder Faust's quiet ways, as he privately informed the publisher of the newspaper that an error had been made, opting not to make the issue any more public than it already was. When the publisher called to apologize, Elder Faust indicated that he was not interested in a printed retraction; and when the publisher then asked if he could obtain a copy of the tape, Elder Faust indicated that he might be willing to send it, "on the condition that he not be too hard on the reporter."

During his more than three decades of involvement with the Public Affairs Committee, Elder Faust has been at the center of countless issues and decisions, but Brother Olsen points to two particular decisions that Elder Faust has helped to shepherd along.

The first was the decision, in the early 1990s, to retain the services of the Edelman Agency, a worldwide public relations firm enlisted to help the Church in its efforts to takes its message to broader audiences and, in the words of its head, Dan Edelman, "to correct the myths and falsehoods about the Church." Brother Olsen explains, "Working with the Edelman Agency has given the Church a breadth that we used to lack. It has given us contacts in the world that we didn't have before. The idea of building bridges through getting the Brethren out to meet with prominent people in their own settings, including the editorial boards of large media organizations, has come about as a result of Edelman's involvement. Much of what the Church has seen President Hinckley do in dealing with the media has been the result of the efforts of the Edelman group, and then-Elder Faust was a key, behind-the-scenes sponsor of that initiative."

The second initiative Brother Olsen points to is the logo of the Church that was introduced in the late 1990s and places a very clear visual emphasis on the focal point of the Church, Jesus Christ. "Elder Faust was very much in favor of that effort," Brother Olsen recalls. "From the first time he saw the treatment that is now used, he liked it—and then gently sponsored it as it moved through the channels of approval."

Elder Faust is also known for the bridges he has built with the members and leaders of other faiths—both in and outside of Utah. Within Utah, where members of the Church comprise the majority of the population, he has been especially concerned that Church leaders and members maintain constructive relationships, whether in their own neighborhoods or within the circles of influential ecclesiastical or political leaders. During one community event Elder and Sister Faust attended, a leader of one of the Protestant churches in the state made some very derogatory remarks about the LDS church. Sister Faust recalls, "I became steamier and steamier as he went on, but Jim just listened patiently. Afterwards, he went up to this man and said, `Now, Reverend, if you feel that way, we must be doing something wrong. I'd like for us to have lunch together so that you can let me know what your concerns are.' They did, and the two have been good friends ever since."

In matters of partisan politics, with which he was once involved, Elder Faust maintained an active personal interest after being called as a General Authority but also made sure to have absolutely no involvement, except as assigned by the Church. As he would watch local and national elections, he was always concerned about candidates and their supporters conducting themselves appropriately. During one particularly heated election season he noted, "The political pot is boiling, with both sides claiming excesses on the other side. It is a disappointment when the campaigns degenerate, and I have been disappointed in the way some of our people have acted. At one of our Church schools, students were rude to a senate candidate, and at another, they were very impolite to the governor's wife. They injure the cause they are trying to promote when they go to excess."

Regarding his own party affiliation subsequent to being called as a General Authority, he once recorded, "I'm glad I am past being involved in politics on either side. I can honestly say now that I am neither a Democrat nor a Republican; I am an Apostle."

Elder Faust did, however, maintain a more active involvement with the legal community, both in and outside of Utah, particularly as the Apostle would deliver talks to legal groups in which he emphasized the need for dignity, integrity, and decency on the part of all who practice at the bar.

He didn't mind joking about his profession, as was the case when he quoted Benjamin Franklin as saying, "God works wonders now and then; behold, a lawyer, an honest man." But he would hasten to enjoin his listeners to adhere to the highest of ethical standards as he would note, "The State and the nation can survive with an occasional lapse of moral integrity from the executive and legislative branches, but it cannot survive with a corrupt judiciary."fn

In speaking to a group of BYU law students, Elder Faust dealt with an issue he knew they would one day face:

I alert you that if you practice law you must be prepared to answer people who ask how you can be a good member of the Church and a lawyer. This question stems not only from misunderstanding but also from the fact that the law and lawyers are generally controversial, and many of our court and administrative proceedings are adversarial in nature. The Prince of Peace did not advocate controversy, but he was involved in it. The adversary system, imperfect as it is, has evolved as the best means of extracting the truth out of controversy. Is not truth to be sought above other virtues?

Lay people will ask how you reconcile your religious convictions with being an advocate for a "criminal" or a "crook." Many forget the fundamental principle that people are presumed innocent until convicted. I sincerely believe that no committed member of the Church who is trying to keep the laws of God needs to compromise his or her religious and moral convictions in the practice of law. The canons of ethics, with which I hope you will become fully acquainted, support and are in harmony with the moral teachings of the Church. These ethical standards fully encourage many of the moral principles of our Church, specifically those high standards of honesty, integrity, loyalty, truthfulness, and sincerity.

In my opinion there need be no conflict between what the Savior has taught through the Church and what you do as a professional lawyer. Indeed, if you are careful about observing the high moral standards the Church represents, you will stand out in your profession. Sir Thomas More did. Although he was beheaded, he fitted well the description of Job, "a perfect and an upright man, one that feareth God, and escheweth evil. . . and. . . holdeth fast his integrity" (Job 2:3). fn

Even as the years passed, Elder Faust remembered well certain principles he learned from the practice of law, and he could be quite specific in advising his audiences on fundamental principles they should follow. A list he presented to a group of graduating law students contained not only sound advice for these future lawyers, but also an interesting insight into the man making the suggestions:

First, honesty isn't the best policy, it is the only policy.

Second, never commingle the client's money with your own. My years with the Bar Association taught me that more lawyers are disciplined for violation of this rule than any other kind of professional wrongdoing.

Third, always take the high ground. Another way to say this is, keep your own soul. It is important to move to the higher ground, particularly when economic pressure might force a compromise in your moral position. My law school dean, Dean William H. Leary, a devout Catholic, explained it this way: "When it is three weeks before Christmas and you have no money for Christmas presents for the children, rather than yield to the temptation to do something cheap or shoddy to get a fee in, you get down on your knees and ask for divine help."

Fourth, don't make an enemy of your opponent. Emotion runs high, especially in litigation. Civility and respect for an opposing opinion will get justice for your client more readily than unreasonable belligerency.

Fifth, don't overstate your case. Don't understate it either, but if you overstate it, you may have to eat your own words. This could give you a terrible stomachache, and—worse yet—destroy your credibility.

Sixth, give some of your time to your client. Do not charge him for all of the time you spend learning your trade. Careful preparation more than brilliance is the key to success in the law.

Seventh, don't let your client or his cause compromise your integrity. If you lie to a judge or a fellow attorney even once, you are irreparably injured. Integrity is the portion of truly great lawyers.

Eighth, pray for wisdom.fn

Certainly, the most public part of Elder Faust's ministry while a member of the Twelve has come twice each year—April and October—as he participates in and speaks at the general conferences of the Church. No matter how many times he has addressed an ever-enlarging international audience, he has remained convinced of the advice he gave to Elder W. Grant Bangerter in 1975: "It never gets any easier."

Elder Faust's preparations for the addresses he would deliver each conference would inevitably begin almost as soon as one conference would end, with ideas being developed and drafts being written and rewritten over the course of four or five months. As an Apostle, rarely was Elder Faust assigned a topic, and, he says, "The hardest part is to come up with an appropriate subject, which comes only through the still, small voice of inspiration." After completing work on the final draft for one talk just days before conference, Elder Faust recorded, "I don't know why it is so hard for me to bring it all together, but I am sure it is to bring home to me over and over again how dependent I am upon the Lord for His help."

Even with months of advance preparation, which included rehearsing each talk to ensure that it fit exactly the time he was allotted, Elder Faust experienced his share of unexpected situations that required him to make last-minute adjustments. After the April 1985 conference, he recorded, "I spoke next to last; and as I looked down at the clock when I was just getting into the talk, I noticed that I only had four minutes left." Not wanting to cut into Elder Packer's time, Elder Faust made drastic cuts as he went along, noting, "Fortunately, it came along satisfactorily, although I felt I left out an important part. But on balance it was a good experience because I felt a little more confident in being able to handle an emergency situation up there." (Although he delivered a condensed version, the talk, which dealt with the Resurrection, was published in its entirety.)

During the April 1990 general priesthood session of conference, as Elder Faust listened to President Thomas S. Monson's talk on being our brother's keeper, he discovered that Elder Monson was using a story about the Martin Handcart Company that was central to the talk Elder Faust had planned to give Sunday afternoon. "I had to shift gears and substitute the story of Emma Batchelor," he recorded, "so I got up early and worked on it. Margaret Bury [his secretary] was good enough to come down and get it ready for the teleprompter and translators."

Underlying the many talks he has delivered have been at least two guiding philosophies. The first is an intrinsic part of Elder Faust's character and was stated in these simple words delivered at the April 1987 general conference of the Church: "I come prayerfully to this pulpit—not to judge, but to teach and to caution." He is never reluctant to teach the doctrines he feels the world needs to hear—hard though they may be to some, at times—but it has never been his intent to judge or condemn; rather, he has sought to lift and inspire.

The second is found in a moment shared by his son, Marcus, who, in preparing an address he was to deliver to a group of legal scholars, faxed a draft to his father, asking for his reaction. "When I got the manuscript back," Marcus recalls, "he had written at the end, `So what?' Initially, I was crushed, but when I asked him about his comment, he apologized for not explaining what he had meant and then told me, `Whenever I write something or prepare a talk, I ask myself that question when I'm done. I use it to force myself to consider, what does this really mean? Is this just a nice gathering of thoughts and stories, or is there something here that is going to help and guide people?' By that standard, Dad will make sure that every sermon he gives provides an answer to the question, `So what?'"

At the conclusion of each general conference, Elder Faust would feel enormous relief, both from the weight of having to address a worldwide gathering and from the crush of meetings and responsibilities that accompany conference. He would often note in his journals his thoughts on his talks in words such as, "I was grateful I didn't embarrass the Church." In addition, he and Sister Faust established a tradition when he was first called as a General Authority of spending Sunday evening with as many family members as could come. His children tell of him almost always lying on the floor in front of a fire as the younger grandchildren would climb on him and as those who wished to would reflect on the messages they had heard in general conference.

The time he spent with his family on those Sunday evenings provided a much needed respite from the work that preceded and followed each general conference. Perhaps more important, though, the time he spent in those Sunday evening settings captured the individual reality of the vast work with which he was involved, as he, with his family—along with so many other faithful families throughout the Church—gathered together to share their testimonies and to encourage each other in their efforts to live lives more closely aligned with the teachings of the Savior and His prophets and apostles.

NOTES

1999 Deseret Book Co.
