James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

VALUES

I SPEAK OF the importance of keeping covenants because they protect us in a world that is drifting from time-honored values that bring joy and happiness. In the future this loosening of moral fiber may even increase. The basic decency of society is decreasing. In the future our people, particularly our children and grandchildren, can expect to be bombarded more and more by the evils of Sodom and Gomorrah.

Too many families are being broken up. Good is called evil, and evil is called good. (See Isa. 5:20.) In our present "easiness of the way" (Alma 37:46), have we forgotten the elements of sacrifice and consecration that our pioneer forebears demonstrated so well for us? It may be that, as Wordsworth suggested:

The world is too much with us; late and soon, Getting and spending, we lay waste our powers:. . . We have given our hearts away, a sordid boon!. . . For this, for everything, we are out of tune. (The Oxford Book of English Verse [London: Oxford University Press, 1949], p. 626.)

Perhaps in our day and time it is more difficult to maintain moral strength and stand against the winds of evil that blow more fiercely than ever before. It is a sifting process. Today the modern counterparts of Babylon, Sodom, and Gomorrah are alluringly and explicitly displayed on television, the Internet, in movies, books, magazines, and places of entertainment. ("Search Me, O God, and Know My Heart," Ensign, May 1998, 18.)

IN OUR SOCIETY many sacred values have been eroded in the name of freedom of expression. The vulgar and the obscene are protected in the name of freedom of speech. The mainstream of society has become more tolerant, even accepting, of conduct that Jesus, Moses, the Prophet Joseph Smith, and other prophets have warned against since the beginning of human history.

We should not allow our personal values to erode, even if others think we are peculiar. We have always been regarded as a peculiar people. However, being spiritually correct is much better than being politically correct. Of course, as individuals and as a people we want to be liked and respected. But we cannot be in the mainstream of society if it means abandoning those righteous principles which thundered down from Sinai, later to be refined by the Savior, and subsequently taught by modern prophets. We should only fear offending God and His Son, Jesus Christ, who is the head of this Church. . . .

Paul spoke of those in his day who demonstrated that "the work of the law [was] written in their hearts, their conscience also bearing witness." (Rom. 2:15.) For members of this Church to enjoy the blessings of a covenant people, the law of the Lord must be written in their hearts. . . .

Joshua spoke unequivocally when he said: "But as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord. . . .

"And the people said unto Joshua, The Lord our God will we serve, and his voice will we obey." (Josh. 24:15, 24.) ("Search Me, O God, and Know My Heart," Ensign, May 1998, 18-19.)

THERE IS A widespread feeling that the honored values of this nation are eroding and must be re-enthroned. When someone in good conscience tries to say this, invariably someone else raises the voice, "Whose values?" My answer to that is, everybody's values: Time-honored values such as absolute honesty, complete integrity, decency and civility, marriage, independence, industry, thrift, self-reliance, respect for law and order, and hard work. These are human values. ("The Integrity of Obeying the Law," Freedom Festival Fireside, Provo, Utah, 2 July 1995.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
