James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

WELFARE

HUNDREDS OF MILLIONS of our Father's children face poverty and illiteracy and other problems—both temporal and spiritual—that are almost beyond our comprehension. Of such people President Kimball stated: "Give these people to us and we'll open their eyes to a vision of eternity and show them how to reach up to the stars" (Dec. 1974).

We recognize that the process of establishing the Lord's church encompasses much more than baptizing people. In the first chapter of Alma in the Book of Mormon we find an instructive sequence of events outlining the way by which the Lord's church is established. Beginning with verse 26 we read:

"The priests left their labor to impart the word of God unto the people. . . . And when the priest had imparted unto them the word of God they all returned again diligently unto their labors;. . . and thus they were all equal, and they did all labor, every man according to his strength.

"And they did impart of their substance, every man according to that which he had, to the poor, and the needy, and the sick, and the afflicted; and they did not wear costly apparel, yet they were neat and comely" (Alma 1:26-27).

Let us take note of this process:

First, the doctrines are taught (see v. 26).

Second, members esteem each other as themselves (see v. 26).

Third, they all labor; they work and earn that which they receive (see v. 26).

Fourth, they impart of their substance to the less fortunate; they serve one another (see v. 27).

Fifth, they discipline their own appetites while at the same time caring appropriately for their own needs (see v. 27).

Now listen to the declaration of the prophet:

"And thus they did establish the affairs of the church. . . .

"And now, because of the steadiness of the church they began to be exceeding rich, having abundance of all things whatsoever they stood in need" (Alma 1:28-29).

This mighty change happened, not because the people were given things, but rather because they were taught and began to help themselves and to care for those who were less fortunate. It was when they gave of themselves in the Lord's way that their circumstances began to improve. ("Establishing the Church," Ensign, Nov. 1979, 91.)

I HAVE BEEN wondering where the Lord's storehouse really is. The bishops' storehouse is certainly the Lord's storehouse, but I think the Lord's storehouse is much more. President Monson indicated to us what the Lord's storehouse includes, and I quote: "The Lord's storehouse includes the time, talents, skills, compassion, consecrated material and financial means of faithful Church members. These resources are available to the bishop in assisting those in need." Our new Leaders Guide to Welfare provides a beautiful definition of what the Lord's storehouse is: "In form and operation, the storehouse is as simple or sophisticated as circumstances require. It may be a list of available services, money in an account, food in a pantry, or commodities in a building. A storehouse is established the moment faithful members give to the bishop of their time, talents, skills, compassion, materials and financial means in caring for the poor and the building up of the Kingdom of God on earth."

But where is the Lord's storehouse? I believe that in a sense, ultimately and finally, the Lord's storehouse must be in our hearts. Our hearts must be full of compassion for our fellow men and women. In that spirit, all who administer and serve in this building will want to do so in a spirit of kindness and in the pure love of Christ. (Remarks at dedication of Welfare Center in Ogden, Utah, 21 Nov. 1991.)

PARTICIPATING IN THE activities of basic welfare gives members the opportunity to incorporate fundamental gospel principles into their lives.

For example, by living the law of the fast members learn of love and selflessness. As home teachers help a family mend a fence, or as Relief Society sisters prepare food for a neighbor who is ill, they experience the meaning of service. In seeking to be prepared individually and as a family, members practice self-reliance and work. ("Establishing the Church," Ensign, Nov. 1979, 92.)

I HOPE NONE of our people will be too proud to accept help when they are in need. I am grateful for an experience in my life which taught me this great principle. My father was a successful lawyer, but not many years after the Depression he had two sons on a mission at the same time, my older brother, Gus, and me. He fell ill and was hospitalized and financially things became difficult. Our good bishop went to him and said, "George, this month the ward is going to send the money to your two missionary sons while you get back on your feet." I did not learn of this until some years later, but I was grateful that my father, who gave generously to the Church all of his life, in a moment of need was not too proud to accept the help of the loving brothers and sisters in the ward. After all, that is the spirit of the gospel. In order to have the blessing of giving, one needs to receive. (Remarks at dedication of Welfare Center in Ogden, Utah, 21 Nov. 1991.)

RECENTLY IN THE small village of Ubon, Thailand, a member family by the name of Tan was beset with what seemed to be insurmountable problems. The father had lost his job, they had no money, the children were sick and malnourished. They were being forced to remove their humble home from the government land upon which it was built, and they had no place to go.

At this point a fine priesthood leader, who had been using welfare services missionaries as a resource, stepped in and averted what could otherwise have been a tragic situation. Under his guidance and with the assistance of all the branch members, a piece of land was obtained, and the Tan family home was dismantled, transported, and rebuilt. Brother Tan began farming the land and started a family produce business which is now flourishing. Some hard work, dedication, and love from local leaders and members, aided by the suggestions of welfare services missionaries, caused a miracle for one family and a great learning and growing experience for a whole branch. ("Establishing the Church," Ensign, Nov. 1979, 93.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
