James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

WOMEN

IT HAS BEEN my great blessing to know three perfect women. I speak of my wife, my mother, and my mother-in-law. I would like to tell you of my mother-in-law. . . . Her name was Elizabeth Hamilton Wright. She was a twin, born into a family of fourteen children. . . . She was taken out of school after the third grade and given the necessary task of tending the younger children. . . . But she was liberated and fully emancipated because she had graduated summa cum laude in spirituality. She knew things beyond the understanding of those of us who were merely college trained. She knew them by the Spirit of God. She was the humblest of the humble, the wisest of the wise, because she was simple enough to be able to accept a complete belief in God. She knew that the best religion is humanity and the best divine service is to love thy neighbor as thyself. ("Christianity—Repression or Liberation?" BYU Speeches, 10 June 1975, 143.)

HOW CAN ANY faithful sister in this Church feel that she is unimportant if she is to do the work which the Savior did? Inherent in this is the forgetting of self and the serving of others.

A. . . friend of ours who lives alone broke her shoulder and needed help. Word soon spread throughout her ward, and ward members brought dinners by the dozen so that she had to tell them to stop because her refrigerator was overflowing. One of them was a nearly blind sister who crossed a busy street with a hot dinner on a tray. Another sister volunteered to help clean her apartment. Seeing our friend's reluctance she countered, "How else can I show you that I love you?" Another sister who helped with grocery shopping saw the bright side of our friend's accident as she pointed out, "This opportunity has brought us close to each other again!" These sisters all had the vision of the work the Savior had in mind for them to do. ("The Grand Key-words for the Relief Society," Ensign, Nov. 1996, 95.)

SOME WOMEN, FOR reasons beyond their control, have to work and leave their young children in the care of others. At the press conference on March 13, 1995, when the new First Presidency was announced, reporters asked about working mothers. President Hinckley responded, "Do the best you can and remember that the greatest assets you have in this world are those children whom you have brought into the world and for whose nurture and care you are responsible" (Press Conference, March 13, 1995). (Address at Ricks College Commencement, 28 Apr. 1995.)

THE STRUGGLE TO improve the place of women in society has been a noble cause, and I sincerely hope the day will come when women with equal skills will be fully equal with men in the marketplace. However, this is an issue of equality, not sameness, and does not mean that women should be the same as men or try to do things the way men do them. Although some jobs that are traditionally masculine are now being done by women, it is possible for them to be done in a feminine way, and yet be done equally as well, or possibly even better.

Over a hundred years ago, in 1872, Eliza R. Snow said that some women "are so radical in their extreme theories that they would set for her an antagonism to man, [and] . . . make her adopt the more reprehensible phases of character which men present and which should be shunned or improved by them instead of being copied by women." Becoming like men is not the answer; being who you are and living up to your potential and commitment is. ("Message to Our Granddaughters," BYU Speeches, 12 Feb. 1985, 78.)

YOU SAY, "WHERE do I begin?" Rather than beginning with a wish list of all the things you want in life, the real question may be what you are not willing to do without. Select two or three of life's experiences you are absolutely sure you want to have. Do not leave important things to chance. Then think about what you can contribute to society by serving by serving your family, the Church, and the community. Also think of what life will demand from you. Everything has a price. Much is expected of us. Becoming like men is not the answer. Rather, the answer lies in being who you are and living up to your divine potential by fulfilling eternal commitments.

You cannot trust the many conflicting voices that clamor about what women should or should not do in today's society. Some of the loudest voices are echoes of those others who are out of harmony with themselves and out of tune with life in general rather than being unhappy with their role as women.

Do not be deceived in your quest to find happiness and an identity of your own. Entreating voices may tell you that what you have seen your mothers and grandmothers do is old-fashioned, unchallenging, boring, and drudgery. It may have been old-fashioned and perhaps routine; at times it was drudgery. But your mothers and grandmothers have sung a song that expressed the highest love and the noblest of womanly feelings. They have been our nurturers and our teachers. They have sanctified the work, transforming drudgery into the noblest enterprises. ("How Near to the Angels," Ensign, May 1998, 96.)

SURELY THE SECRET citadel of women's inner strength is their spirituality. In this they equal and even surpass men, as they do in faith, morality, and commitment when truly converted to the gospel. They have "more trust in the Lord [and] more hope in his word" ("More Holiness Give Me," Hymns [1985], no. 131). This inner spiritual sense seems to give them a certain resilience to cope with sorrow, trouble, and uncertainty. ("The Highest Place of Honor," Ensign, May 1988, 37.)

YOU ARE APPRECIATED and valued far more than you realize. We are mindful of your many challenges, which are often overwhelming and exhausting in this unsettled world. . . .

Despite all of this, greater blessings are coming to women than ever before. In my lifetime, the drudgery of caring for a home and family has been greatly reduced. I remember my grandmother's old washboard, which was used to scrub clothes by hand. She cooked hot meals winter and summer on a wood-burning stove. I remember the coming of electricity to our small town and all the marvelous advantages that it brought. Women now have never had greater opportunities for education and travel. But in the eternal scheme of things, your role is infinitely more vital, and it carries the promise of spiritual blessings greater than these temporal benefits. ("The Grand Key-words for the Relief Society," Ensign, Nov. 1996, 95-96.)

IT MAY NOT be possible for economic reasons, but if you have the choice, do not abandon too quickly the full-time career of marriage and mothering. Some may criticize you and say that you have no gumption, that you lack brains, that you have no ambition, or even that you are seeking to get your fulfillment from others. As you go forward with a professional career, remember that no one will love you more than those in your own home. In the business or scientific world, probably no one would consider you to be perfect. But your little ones, for a time, will think that you are perfect. If you are wise, they will adore you for eternity. No one will need more of your time and energy and attention on a twenty-four hour basis than your family. Their needs will not go away during the daytime working hours. There is the advantage that in working twenty-four hours a day on family relations, you are working on eternal relations. Thus you will also have more time for service in the administration of the Lord's church on earth where your service is valued and needed. You don't have to earn money to be important. You may choose not to sell your time. ("Message to Our Granddaughters," BYU Speeches, 12 Feb. 1985, 80-81.)

YOU WILL HAVE to answer to your natural womanly instincts which the Prophet Joseph said are according to your natures. You should respond generously to these instincts and promptings to do good. With your very being held still, you should listen to the whisperings of the Holy Spirit. You should follow the noble, intuitive feelings planted deep within your soul by Deity in the previous world. In this way you will be responding to the Holy Spirit of God, and will be sanctified by truth. By so doing, you will be eternally honored and loved. Much of your work is to enrich mankind. Care and mercy seem to be a dominant refrain of the song you have the opportunity to sing. I hope you will not leave any of the melody unsung. ("Message to Our Granddaughters," BYU Speeches, 12 Feb. 1985, 82.)

PART OF THE Problem is for us to live eternal principles faithfully every day. . . .

To meet the challenges of the eternal every day, every sister will be strengthened by daily communion with our Heavenly Father through prayer. Scripture study will be beneficial in bringing spiritual reassurances. Attending sacrament meeting, partaking of the sacred emblems, and the renewal of our covenants will be a weekly source of strength.

The sisters who try to cope with the myriad challenges of our complex times can benefit from the sisterhood of the Church more than ever before. The words of Sister Lucy Mack Smith in one of the first meetings of the Relief Society are as relevant today as when first spoken. She said, "We must cherish one another, watch over one another, comfort one another, and gain instruction, that we may all sit down in heaven together." (Relief Society Minutes of Nauvoo, 24 March 1842.) . . .

The bearing of testimony benefits both the one testifying as well as the one listening. Regular temple attendance will help us meet all our challenges. Accepting calls from priesthood leaders as well as visiting teaching assignments from the Relief Society president will be a great strengthening experience. In rendering compassionate service individually and as a group you lose sight of your own problems and do the work the Savior did. ("The Grand Key-words for the Relief Society," Ensign, Nov. 1996, 96.)

IF WE [WHO hold the priesthood] could recognize the true greatness of. . . women, we would not treat them as we sometimes do. The world often uses and abuses women. We holders of the priesthood should honor good women in and out of the Church as true sisters, not as objects and sources of service or pleasure. Our consideration for women should spring from esteem for the daughters of Zion and an awareness of their true identity more than from a concern with their functions and roles. ("The Highest Place of Honor," Ensign, May 1988, 36.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
