James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

WOMEN AND THE PRIESTHOOD

THERE ARE COEQUAL blessings and opportunities for both men and women in the Lord, neither having a superiority nor inferiority in eternal promises, commitments and faithfulness. They are different, however, in eternal assignments. In a far distant time perhaps God said to you beloved sisters, "You are best adapted to be a woman. You have special gifts, sensitivities of the spirit, faith and talents which particularly endow you for the exalting role of womanhood."

Your role is not an accident nor a mistake. No doubt all of you were pleased and happy with your being a woman—a very special and unique being. Motherhood is a very special calling, as is fatherhood for men. It is a great privilege for you with your husband to be involved together in the greatest of all works—that of rearing and teaching his children.

The priesthood leader, be he father, bishop or stake president, is not necessarily greater or better or smarter than his followers. Someone has to be appointed to be the focal point of responsibility and receive inspiration to give priesthood direction in the kingdom and "get on with the war" against Satan. It does not follow that because our sisters are not priesthood leaders that they are spiritually inferior or that their work in the kingdom is in any sense less important. The role of womankind as followers of the Savior is not limiting or confining, but liberating. God expects in his economy that his daughters will use all of the gifts and talents which he gave to them to be as fully flowered as his sons in their own spheres of influence and activity. (Remarks delivered at the dedication of the Eliza R. Snow Center for the Performing Arts, Ricks College, 9 Dec. 1980.)

FOR THE DAUGHTERS of God, doing the Savior's work does not, of course, include the use of priesthood keys, authority, or powers. But it does include building faith by testimony and example. It includes teaching the doctrines of salvation. It includes following the Savior's example of love for all mankind. It includes ministering to others for, as the Prophet Joseph said when the Relief Society was organized, "This is a charitable Society, and according to your natures; it is natural for females to have feelings of charity and benevolence." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith [1976], p. 226.) "Let the weight of your innocence, kindness and affection be felt. . . ; not war, not jangle, not contradiction, or dispute, but meekness, love, purity—these are the things that should magnify you in the eyes of all good men." (Ibid., p. 227.)

This charge to the women of the Church carries a promise. Said the Prophet Joseph: "If you live up to these principles, how great and glorious will be your reward in the celestial kingdom! If you live up to your privileges, the angels cannot be restrained from being your associates." (Ibid., pp. 226-27.) ("The Grand Key-words for the Relief Society," Ensign, Nov. 1996, 94.)

I BELIEVE THAT We, as. . . holders of the priesthood, will never achieve our potential without having in our lives the blessings of the unique qualities of our mothers, wives, sisters, daughters, and all of the good women of the Church.

Perhaps you have all heard the story, and it is just a story, of the insensitive man who held two season tickets to the basketball games at the local university. His wife died, and a day or two later he went to the game. The seat previously occupied by his wife was empty. Someone said, "Those seats of yours must be very expensive. Couldn't you find a member of the family to come and sit in your wife's seat?" The man answered, "No, they couldn't come. They've all gone to her funeral."

I fear that we brethren often get far too engrossed in the apparent importance of our own activities and relegate the less visible contributions of the sisters to a lesser role. They serve very quietly and effectively, often unnoticed, unrecognized, and unappreciated. ("The Highest Place of Honor," Ensign, May 1988, 36.)

BECAUSE YOU DESCENDED from great women, each of you has the potential to become a great woman.

Now you need to know that to me great does not necessarily mean your becoming a great doctor, lawyer, or business executive. You may, of course, become any of these if you so desire, and if you work hard enough, and I would be proud of such an achievement. However, to me greatness is much, much more. I hope that each of you girls will become an individual of significant worth and a person of virtue so that your contributions are maintained in both human and eternal terms. ("Message to Our Granddaughters," BYU Speeches, 12 Feb. 1985, 77-78.)

THE SISTERS HERE have something very special. It is their great femininity—part of the divinity of God which is in you. The men have masculinity, also part of divinity. Sister Faust, from this pulpit some years ago, reminded us that you women are very special because all life begins with you. And you have a direct pipeline with God because of your great capacity to love. Because of your great capacity to love; therefore, to bless. (Special Interest Fireside, Salt Lake City, Utah, 29 Jan. 1978.)

YOU SISTERS WHO sit in the ward and stake councils should feel free to share your special wisdom and experience in those councils. Then, when the bishop or stake president makes a decision, all will wish to support it. ("The Grand Key-words for the Relief Society," Ensign, Nov. 1996, 95.)

THE PRIESTHOOD PLACES upon the fathers the responsibility of being the head of the family and the home. What does being the head of the family mean? It is a priesthood power, and the Doctrine and Covenants, D&C 121, makes it clear that all priesthood responsibilities must be exercised "only by persuasion,. . . by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned" (D&C 121:41). Holding the priesthood does not mean that a man is a power-broker, or that he sits on a throne, dictating in macho terms, or that he is superior in any way. Rather, he is a leader by authority of example. Paul's counsel to the Ephesians included, "Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also loved the church, and gave himself for it" (Eph. 5:25). As Christ lifts us all, so must we, rather than put down women or anyone.

Nowhere does the doctrine of this Church declare that men are superior to women. Paul said to the Corinthians, "Nevertheless neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord" (1 Cor. 11:11). Each brings his or her own separate and unique strengths to the family and the Church. Women are not just cooks, stewards of our homes, or servants. They are much more. They are the enrichment of humanity. ("The Highest Place of Honor," Ensign, May 1988, 36.)

HOW SHOULD THE holders of the priesthood treat the women of the Church? The sisters of this church since the beginning have always made a great and marvelous contribution to the work of the Lord. They have added so very much of intelligence, work, culture, and refinement to the Church and our families. The contributions of the sisters as we move into the future are needed more than ever to help establish the values, the faith, and the future of our families and the well-being of our society. They need to know they are valued, honored, and appreciated. The sisters who serve as leaders need to be invited to participate and to be listened to and included in our stake and ward council meetings, particularly concerning matters involving sisters, youth, and children.

How should those who bear the priesthood treat their wives and the other women in their family? Our wives need to be cherished. They need to hear their husbands call them blessed, and the children need to hear their fathers generously praise their mothers (see Prov. 31:28). The Lord values his daughters just as much as he does his sons. In marriage, neither is superior; each has a different primary and divine responsibility. Chief among these different responsibilities for wives is the calling of motherhood. I firmly believe that our dear faithful sisters enjoy a special spiritual enrichment which is inherent in their natures. ("Keeping Covenants and Honoring the Priesthood," Ensign, Nov. 1993, 38-39.)

SOME WOMEN MAY feel it is subversive to their free agency to be directed by the power of the priesthood. This feeling comes from misunderstanding. There should be no compulsion, duress, or unrighteous dominion involved in priesthood authority. President Stephen L Richards stated: "Our accord comes from universal agreement with righteous principles and common response to the operation of the Spirit of our Father. It is actuated by no fear except one. That is the fear of offending God, the Author of our work" (Conference Report, Oct. 1938, p. 116). ("Message to Our Granddaughters," BYU Speeches, 12 Feb. 1985, 81.)

IT IS MOST important that you Aaronic Priesthood holders learn what strengths you have as men. Possibly you were foreordained to great priesthood callings. You need to learn that these masculine strengths are great, noble, and God-given; however, they also have some limitations. Because of these limitations, it is equally important to learn how the influence of good women in our lives can complement these strengths and overcome these limitations. As you walk on the way to eternity, it is important to gain some understanding and appreciation for the wonderful endowments and callings God has given uniquely to women. ("The Highest Place of Honor," Ensign, May 1988, 36.)

YOU YOUNG MEN who hold the Aaronic Priesthood need to know that you cannot achieve your potential without the influence of good women, particularly your mother and, in a few years, a good wife. But it is too soon for you deacons and teachers to think seriously about dating. Dating, along with temple marriage, will come at the appropriate season in your life. You have to be elders to go to the temple.

In preparation for that surpassing experience, it is important for you to learn now to appreciate the special gifts of the good sisters of the Church, whom God has so abundantly endowed with talents. Your eternal helpmate will gently hold you to your potential. She will give loving and thoughtful encouragement, as well as comfort and discipline. She will also lift you up when you are down and bring you back to earth when you are puffed up. She will bless your life in countless ways. As President Kimball said, "Brethren, we cannot be exalted without our wives. There can be no heaven without righteous women" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1979, p. 7; or Ensign, Nov. 1979, p. 5). ("The Highest Place of Honor," Ensign, May 1988, 37.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
