James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

YOUTH

YOU HAVE FEARS about being accepted. You worry about being popular in your age-group. It is natural to want to belong.

Recently I heard of a good man who, after being married in the temple and having four children, fell away from the Church. His physical appearance became shabby and his demeanor sad, as he became a drug addict, an alcoholic, and then a chain-smoker. He continued in this destructive lifestyle for many years. However, in time, with the help of a good wife, home teachers, a caring bishop, and our loving Heavenly Father, he eventually started on the long road back. One of the proudest days in his life came when he once again qualified for a temple recommend. Looking back on those bad years he later admitted, "All I ever wanted was to belong." Seeking acceptance from the wrong source brought untold misery and pain.

Please be assured, brethren, that we all belong. Nothing is more important or precious to any of us than belonging to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. We belong to the greatest cause on earth—that of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ. We have been endowed with the greatest power on earth—that of the holy priesthood. ("Pioneers of the Future—Be Not Afraid, Only Believe," Ensign, Nov. 1997, 43.)

RECENTLY I ASKED some special young people what I should know about your generation. One young man spoke for the group and said, "We live on the edge." Since that time I have thought a lot about what it means to live on the edge. Of course it can mean many things. I think my fine young friend was refering to hazardous motor cycling, cliff climbing, and other forms of recreation, which may involve taking unnecessary risks to produce a challenge or a thrill.

Some years ago Elder Marion D. Hanks told about a group of Boy Scouts who went cave exploring. The narrow trail was marked with white stones and lighted in sections as they went. After about an hour they came to a huge, high dome. Below it lay an area called the Bottomless Pit, so called because the floor of the cave had collapsed leaving a deep, gaping hole. It was hard not to jostle each other on that narrow path. Pretty soon, one of the bigger boys accidentally pushed a smaller boy into a muddy area away from the light. Terrified as he lost his footing, he screamed in the darkness. The ranger heard his cry of terror and came quickly. The boy let out another cry as the beam of the ranger's light showed he was right at the very edge of the pit.

In this story, the boy was rescued. But this does not always happen. So many times young people are enticed to go to the very edge or even beyond it. With only a precarious toehold, it is easy to be seriously injured or even die. Life is too precious to throw away in the name of excitement, or as Jacob said in the Book of Mormon, "looking beyond the mark." (Jacob 4:14.)

You young people may think that you are indestructible and that you are going to live forever. In a few years you will learn that this is not so. Living on the edge can also mean being perilously close to the Bottomless Pit. ("Acting for Ourselves and Not Being Acted Upon," Ensign, Nov. 1995, 45-46.)

THE MESSAGE I wish to speak today is one of hope. It concerns a conviction as well as a challenge that the youth, young adults, and young marrieds of this Church who believe in and follow its lofty purposes as a part of [a] new aristocracy will, by their influence and example, begin to reverse this spreading moral dry rot the world over.

In a letter to John Quincy Adams in 1813, Thomas Jefferson said: "There is a natural aristocracy among men. The grounds of this are virtue and talents. There is also an artificial aristocracy founded on wealth and birth, without either virtue or talents."

How is this new aristocracy distinguished?. . .

First, by their example of obedience to the commandments of God, thus enjoying the personal guidance of his Holy Spirit.

Second, by sharing their special knowledge as missionaries.

Third, by responding to the high level of expectancy of their parents and Church leaders.

Fourth, through the giving of themselves. A very special young friend of mine served as a missionary of this Church in Japan. His dedication to missionary work and the Japanese people was so complete and full that, rather than spend all of the money his parents sent to him, he unselfishly made a regular contribution of part of his money to help another local Japanese missionary. His parents sent him extra money so that he could buy some camera equipment available in Japan to record in pictures a few of the great experiences he was having. Rather than buy the camera equipment, which would have served him well for a lifetime, he chose rather to send the money back to his parents. In time, as with most missionaries, the clothes of my young friend became threadbare and thin. In order for him to be able to come home, it was necessary for him to buy a second-hand suit from one of the other elders. His regular denial of himself, in order to share his substance with the local Japanese missionary, was a very closely guarded secret. He is a good example of the young elect of God of this Church, as are hundreds of thousands of others. ("A New Aristocracy," Ensign, Nov. 1974, 59, 60.)

EXERCISE YOUR MORAL agency wisely. Omni tells us how we can make the proper channel selections. "There is nothing which is good save it comes from the Lord; and that which is evil cometh from the devil" (Omni 1:25). Every moment demands that we choose, over and over again, between that which comes from the Lord and that which comes from the devil. As tiny drops of water shape a landscape, so our minute-by-minute choices shape our character. Living the eternal gospel every day may be harder than dying for the Church and the Lord. ("The Voice of the Spirit," Young Adult Fireside Satellite Broadcast, 5 Sept. 1993.)

IF I WERE to ask you young people, "How is your testimony?" I suppose that many of you would say, "I don't know." But if I asked you some specific questions, the result would be different. For instance, if I asked you, "Do you believe that God lives and we are His children?" I think most of you would answer this question quickly and affirmatively.

And if I asked, "Do you believe and have faith in the Lord Jesus Christ as our Savior and Redeemer?" I think most of you would hasten to say yes.

And if I then asked, "Do you believe that Joseph Smith was the prophet of the Restoration?" I think most of you have a belief concerning this. Some of you would already be familiar with the 135th Section of the Doctrine and Covenants which states that "Joseph Smith, the Prophet and Seer of the Lord, has done more, save Jesus Christ only, for the salvation of men in this world, than any other man that ever lived in it" (D&C 135:3).

If I were to ask you, "Do you believe the Book of Mormon is the word of God?" I think many of you already have acquired a testimony concerning the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon.

Lastly, if I were to ask you, "Do you believe that President Benson and his counselors and the members of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles are the prophets, seers, and revelators of our day?" I think most of you have formed a respect for the leaders of this Church.

Having answered these five questions in the affirmative, you already have a foundation of a testimony. As you acquire knowledge of the plan of salvation and learn why you are here and where you are going, your testimony will be strengthened. In addition, as you walk by faith you will have confirmed in your young hearts spiritual experiences which will strengthen your faith and testimony. You of this generation are a chosen generation. ("The Voice of the Spirit," Young Adult Fireside Satellite Broadcast, 5 Sept. 1993.)

STAY MORALLY CLEAN. You must believe that it is worth it in the end to be true and faithful. Worldly pleasures do not match up to heavenly joy. It may not be "cool" to avoid certain things, or "rad" to do other things, but it is better to be alone and to be right than to be eternally wrong. We counsel you to associate with those who can help you maintain your standards rather than tear them down. You must learn to be your own person and to live by your own standards. Even though you may have become somewhat desensitized or made some mistakes, you must not let Satan reduce your self-esteem to the point that you become discouraged. We urge you to carry and frequently read your For the Strength of Youth booklet and to listen to your parents and your leaders. As a chosen generation there is not a problem that you cannot handle with the help of the Lord. We counsel you not to grow up too fast. Do not miss the joy of being a righteous young adult. Enjoy your dating years. Have many friends. Have confidence in yourselves and in your future. You must learn to labor and you must learn to wait. ("The Voice of the Spirit," Young Adult Fireside Satellite Broadcast, 5 Sept. 1993.)

I HAVE SUGGESTED a simple solution for selecting the channel to which you will attune yourselves: Listen to and follow the voice of the Spirit.

* This is an ancient solution, even eternal, and may not be popular in a society that is always looking for something new.

* This solution requires patience in a world that demands instant gratification.

* This solution is quiet, peaceful, and subtle in a world enamored by that which is loud, incessant, fast-paced, garish, and crude.

* This solution requires you to be contemplative while your peers seek physical titillation.

* This solution requires the prophets to "put you always in remembrance of these things, though ye know them, and be established in the present truth" (2 Pet. 1:12). This may seem foolish in a time when it is not worth remembering much of the trivial trip to which we are exposed.

* This solution is one unified, consistent, age-old message in a world that quickly becomes bored in the absence of intensity, variety, and novelty.

* This solution requires you to walk by faith in a world governed by sight (see 2 Cor. 4:18; 5:7). You must see with the eye of faith eternal, unseen, spiritual verities, while the masses of mankind depend solely on temporal things, which can be known only through the physical senses.

* In short, this solution may not be popular, it may not get you gain, or worldly power. But "our light affliction, which is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory" (2 Cor. 4:17).

* Learn to ponder the things of the Spirit and to respond to its promptings; filter out the static generated by Satan. As you become attuned to the Spirit, "thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This is the way, walk ye in it" (Isa. 30:21).

* Hearkening to the "voice of the living God" will give you—

"Peace in this world, and

"Eternal life in the world to come" (D&C 59:23).

These are the greatest of all the gifts of God (see D&C 14:7). ("The Voice of the Spirit," Young Adult Fireside Satellite Broadcast, 5 Sept. 1993.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
