James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

12

A CONSCIENTIOUS STEWARD

AS HARD AS HE HAS WORKED to fulfill his responsibilities as a General Authority, Elder Faust likewise has given his all to his family. His demanding schedule aside, he and Sister Faust have spent almost every evening they are in town with family members, and if there isn't a personal visit, there is inevitably a telephone call. His daughter Janna tells of how, over the years, people who know of her father's position would often ask if she ever saw her father. "I see him all the time," she explains, "and if I don't talk to him every day, I risk hurting his feelings. It seems to me that he and Mom need us to be their friends as much as they need us to be their family."

Upon learning that he and Sister Faust were going to be grandparents once again, Elder Faust recorded in his journal how happy that made him, and then declared, "Children are very welcome in our family." And his grandchildren attest to how welcome they feel—from Grandma buying "the right kinds of cereals" for when grandchildren would sleep over, to back and neck rubs, to always having something on hand to keep the grandkids happy as they would stay with Grandma and Grandpa Faust.

One grandson, Jason Coombs, remembers a hot summer Saturday when he and his friends, who were about ten at the time, didn't have anything to do and couldn't find a parent to take them swimming. "Grandpa was a member of the Twelve, but I didn't realize the busy life that he had," Jason recalls, "so I called and asked if he could come get us and take us swimming and maybe play some basketball with us. And he did! Then he took us around the tunnels underneath the Church office buildings and Temple Square complex, which my friends didn't even know were there. He spent all afternoon with us, even though, in looking back, I'm sure he had many other things he could have been doing."

On another occasion, when Jim's daughter, Brittney, stopped by with her boyfriend late one evening to visit her grandparents, Elder Faust reluctantly explained that he and Sister Faust were in their pajamas and about to get into bed. To make up for their inability to visit at the moment, however, he arranged for the two couples to go on a double date and eat barbecued ribs together. All of this was in keeping with a sentiment he expressed once, when he had to rearrange his schedule to attend a grandfather-granddaughter outing with two of his granddaughters: "I decided that if I am willing to give my life for each of these girls, I should be willing to alter a meeting schedule."

In a number of family settings, Elder Faust used an object lesson to demonstrate the need for his family members to be close to one another. He would pull out a small stick and ask a grandchild to try and break it, which they always were able to do. Then he would bring forth a bundle of sticks and ask the same grandchild to break it. They almost always failed, and he then would point out the strength that comes when family members remain close and pull together in facing the challenges of life.

At every opportunity, Elder Faust would encourage and organize family activities, including Sunday dinners, golf and ski outings, vacations, and the like.

One particularly memorable getaway among many was a hiking trip that Elder Faust took with his children, in-laws, and grandchildren to Escalante, Utah. John Faust, a grandson, recalls a long hike through the sandy terrain and then coming to a sheer cliff they needed to rappel down to reach the river below. "I remember Grandpa starting down that cliff and calling out, `Why can't we call a helicopter to take us down?' But he made it, with my uncles' help."

That evening, the family participated in a short devotional together, and as they looked into the starlit night, Elder Faust read to them from Moses, telling of the creation of worlds, which are unnumbered to man but numbered unto the Lord (see Moses 1:33, 35). During the rest of the trip, he would share with his family a lesson here and there, and John remembers, at one point, his grandfather telling him about the threefold mission of the Church as they walked along a trail together.

After spending two more days hiking, the time came for Elder Faust to climb up another cliff and out of the canyon, which he did, again, with the help of his sons and sons-in-law. Then he watched as the grandchildren "went up the cliff like monkeys."

In addition to taking time to get away with his family, Elder Faust also included them, as appropriate, in some of his Church assignments.

One such opportunity came on Christmas Eve, 1992, when he and Sister Faust invited their children and their families to join in presenting a devotional service for the missionaries serving at the Provo, Utah, Missionary Training Center. After eating dinner in the cafeteria with the missionaries, the Fausts went into the main assembly room and began the meeting. At the outset, Elder Faust recorded, Lisa and Scott's baby, Amanda, "stole the show. Then we introduced our family and told the missionaries that today we wanted them to be part of our family, that we didn't want any of them to be lonesome or homesick, and that tonight we would be their loving grandfather and grandmother. There were some tears in the group."

After scripture readings, musical numbers, and concluding talks by Elder and Sister Faust, "Ruth and I stood and shook hands with as many missionaries as came up. Some of the kids needed hugs."

One of the missionaries in the congregation that evening was the Fausts' grandson, Jamie Coombs, who was preparing to leave for Brazil on his mission. It wasn't until that evening that most of the missionaries in his district found out who his grandfather was; in fact, after he had offered the invocation and remained seated with the Faust family, some of the missionaries in his district (including his future wife, who was preparing to serve in Portugal) debated whether to pass a note to him, indicating that he probably ought to follow the usual practice of taking his seat with the rest of the congregation.

During all his years as a General Authority, Elder Faust has tried the best he could to provide as normal an existence as possible for his family, given the very public nature of his calling. Inevitably, when they went to a restaurant or other public place, people would come up to visit, which was something Elder Faust enjoyed but which, at the same time, drew undue attention to him and his family. "I can't be unresponsive and ignore people who come up," Elder Faust says, and his family adds that whenever he is out and about, he goes out of his way to greet people and get to know something about them.

He does, however, downplay the position he holds, and Marcus tells of himself and his wife, Susan, going with Elder and Sister Faust to attend a session at the Washington D.C. Temple. "Dad presented his recommend, which is a special one issued to the General Authorities and looks somewhat different. The gentleman who was checking recommends did not know what it was and told my father he wouldn't be able to enter the temple. Rather than embarrassing the man by telling him who he was, Dad politely excused himself and we all left."

Even his grandson, Jamie Coombs, says it was not until later in his life that he understood the importance of his grandfather's call. "He's always been Grandpa," Jamie says, "and he's always made it a very high priority to be close to us. Other than general conference, I really didn't have any experience with what he did when I was younger. In fact, sometimes I would be a little disgruntled when, as young kids, we had to dress a little nicer when we went with him to places like amusement parks."

Jamie's sister, Melissa Coombs Jones, adds, "I asked him once how he feels when we go places and people recognize him and come over to visit with him—whether it bothers him or embarrasses him. He patted my hand and said, `It's just the calling.'"

Elder Faust also has worked to ensure that the family receive no special preferences as a result of his calling. His children tell of how people will often ask questions of them, expecting that they will have "inside" information on various issues affecting the Church, but Marcus notes, "In terms of knowing what's going on in the Church, the least amount of information we get comes from him." Robert adds, "When he comes to our house, he comes to get away from the pressures of his Church calling. His focus is on what we and the kids are doing, rather than the Church being the agenda item for our get-togethers."

At the same time, Elder Faust has never attempted to downplay his responsibilities as the patriarch of his family and has sought to serve his children, in-laws, and grandchildren in every way that he can. His daughter, Janna, says, "He's the epitome of a patriarch in a family, which all men can be, with the priesthood enriching that role even more. He promotes certain traditions in the family, and whenever we're together, he tries to encourage some kind of cohesive conversation or teaching moment. Our visits, although certainly not formally structured in any way, also aren't just loose-ended. He likes to hear what people are thinking, and, if it's possible, he likes to have a family prayer."

Janna's husband, Doug, adds, "He's made the suggestion that we have personal priesthood interviews with our children, and he's set the example by having PPIs with each of his children and their spouses. I was probably a little intimidated by that at first, but what he does, really, is indicate his support for us. Everything he says is couched in terms of, `What can we do to help you?' Those are moments that just draw you to him all the more because you know that he really has one interest—and that is to help us."

The Fausts' daughter, Lisa Smith, tells of the support her parents have given to her family, particularly during the years her husband, Scott, served as bishop of their ward. "He gave Scott just a few words of advice when he was called: `Delegate or die.' Then he would keep track of concerns or issues and offer a word of encouragement when it was appropriate. I remember mentioning to him once that Scott had a funeral to conduct in the ward, and later he called and asked Scott how things had gone. That was one of those many times that I've thought how phenomenal it is that this man, who has so much going on, has time to remember little things about our family; that even as he is helping to run a worldwide church, he can remove himself from all of that and plug right into our everyday lives."

Scott points to the wisdom his father-in-law would always show in his role as patriarch and tells of dealing with a situation in his ward that resulted in a man's being deeply offended by something Scott had done and making a point of telling him so. "As Dad listened to the situation, he told me he felt I had handled it correctly. Then, after thinking for a moment, he said, `As for the man and your relationship with him, kill him with kindness.'"

The family also saw many situations where Elder Faust would sense that someone needed help and seek that person out. Melissa tells of how, when she was sixteen, she and her family were in San Diego, California, at the time of the San Diego Temple dedication. "I was caught up in my teenaged woes and my little crises, and one night Grandpa visited with me and asked if he could give me a blessing. I went to my mom and dad and asked if I had done something wrong, and they explained that he just felt I might need a little extra help in my life (he had asked my father first if it would be okay if he offered to give me a blessing). When he gave me the blessing, he said that I would know who I was and that I would be able to recognize my own character and make good, sound decisions. That had a big impact on me—both his words and the fact that he had the energy, during a very busy time, to think about me."

One grandson, who, like his grandfather, served a mission to Brazil, tells of how, during his high school years, he struggled some with his identity and with being as obedient as he knew he should be. "As Grandpa would come over on Sunday and have dinner with us," he says, "I was worried that he would judge me, but he would always give me a hug and show me the love he felt for me. I knew he could tell I wasn't doing all the right things, but he never said anything about it to make me feel like he didn't love me. Instead, he tried to teach me in a subtle way—by coming to my soccer games, by calling me and asking me how I was doing. At the time, I didn't attach much value to it, but the day came when my relationship with him became important to me once again—and when I knew I needed to make some changes in my life. I remember one day sitting down with him and saying, `Grandpa, I want to be your friend again and get to know you again.' We had a good talk and then he said, `What can I do to be a better grandfather and a better friend?' There was no lecturing, no telling me what I needed to do to straighten up; instead, in his humility, he wanted to know what he could do to strengthen our relationship."

In acknowledging that the members of his family are not immune from life's challenges, Elder Faust observes, "Children and grandchildren have to come to their own light and testimony, and they can't borrow it from me. Coming to the point where they get their own light is part of growing up, part of maturing, and challenges are just a part of that process. I remember my father telling me of a fellow who was eighty when he lost his sixty-year-old son. This old fellow's comment was, `I knew I'd never raise that boy.' In like manner, the work of family relationships is never done. You can never say, `I've got my children raised.' You can never say, `My grandkids are over Fool's Hill.' It's an ongoing process for all of us."

Elder Maxwell adds this observation: "Years ago, as we were driving home one night, I listened as my friend told me, through some tears, of one of those family challenges we all seem to face in one form or another. He's always been so grateful for all that has gone well in his family, but he's honest as a father and a grandfather that you should never assume that parenting is an unbroken chain of successes. Those experiences have given him added empathy in his ministry, and they are also evident in his very genuine inquiries about other people's families."

Always there to provide support, whether in his capacity as a father, grandfather, or leader in the Church, has been the woman Elder Faust refers to, with love, as "Ruthy." Of her mother's unique role in Elder Faust's life, Lisa says, "His greatness is because of her. I have no doubt about that." Of his grandmother, Jamie Coombs states, "My grandmother is a saint. She does not have any flaws." Then he adds, "My grandmother knows more about sports than any grandmother I know. She reads the sports section everyday. I asked her once why she does that, and she said that she wants to be able to relate to her grandchildren."

(Though modest about her own abilities, Sister Faust did acknowledge once in an interview, "The right to communicate heart-to-heart with each child and grandchild must be earned."fn)

A talk Elder Faust was assigned to deliver to a training session for General Authorities soon after his call to the Twelve is indicative of the depth of his appreciation for and devotion to the girl who, in 1943, took a chance on a young man she felt she hardly knew:

When Elder Packer gave me this assignment, he asked a very penetrating question, "What would you have been without Ruth?" I could have answered immediately, "Not much," but he already knew that. I took him seriously. I spent the next twenty-four hours thinking about what I would have been without the loving, sweet support and the discipline of Ruth Wright in my life. It shocked me a little to even think about what life would be and would have been without her. I would have to answer honestly that without my wife, I would have been pretty much a failure. I do not claim to be an expert in marriage. I have only been married once, but thanks to my good wife, it took. . .

I am not going to bother you with all of the experiences in marriage that have caused me to appreciate my wife so much because you have all had the same experiences. But I cannot help remembering during the twenty years that I was bishop and stake president, coming home tired and weary, and Ruth would say, `Have you called. . . so and so?' I would say, `No,' and I would be without strength to look up the telephone number and dial it. So she would silently take the phone, dial the number, and hand it to me. I remember leaving her in the hospital immediately after a serious operation to go to South America to find a home for the Area Supervisors. I also remember [leaving our home in Sao Paulo to deal with a very difficult situation] and she did not say, `Do you have to go?' Or, `When will you be back?' She did as she has done all these years, and sent me out with a kiss and her blessing, and with a silent encouragement to not come home until my work was done.

Then he added this encouragement, to himself as well as to the others assembled:

Perhaps in these times of great stress we can become what we ought to be in terms of our relationship with our wives, but perhaps the eternal everyday causes some of us to be more casual than we ought to be. . . I feel that Ruth deserves a better me. Under the direction of the First Presidency, we have the responsibility to be instruments to impart righteousness to the world. Unless we impart a full measure of righteousness to our wives and families, we will be blunted instruments to the rest of the world. . . I know that the Gospel is true, and I know that a substantial part of that Gospel is how I treat Ruth on an hour-by-hour, day-by-day, ongoing basis.fn

In addition to the countless public expressions of his love for Sister Faust is one of many more private moments recorded in his journals: "I walked over to the Temple with Elder Mark E. Petersen for our Thursday morning meeting, and bumped into my sweetheart, Ruth. My heart skipped to see her unexpectedly. What a delight she is in my life! What a magnificent blessing!"

From his years of association with the Fausts, Elder Holland observes:

This is an unusual relationship and romance—and I have to say "romance," because that's what it is. He is so considerate and gentle and attentive. If they are walking together, he will make sure he walks at her pace, as he takes her arm. If they are in a public setting, he is always looking around to see where she is and make sure she's okay.

She, on the other hand, is absolutely, flat-out adoring of this man. He is twenty-eight feet tall in her eyes. If you ask her how he did with a talk, she lights up like a Christmas tree. If his name is even mentioned, she looks like 220 volts just got plugged in.

I'm sure he's only been able to do what he has done because of the unqualified, uncompromised, unlimited adoration and support and love and loyalty of his wife; and she has had exactly the same kind of support from him. I can't imagine that this was just handed to them from on high; I think that kind of relationship and romance has to be worked at and earned.

Although as Elder and Sister Faust travel throughout the Church much of the attention is given to him, there are also those who recognize the unique spirit of Sister Faust—and the strength of the relationship these two share. After the two had attended a stake conference in Japan, a seventeen-year-old high school student wrote:

It was a moving experience for me to be able to shake the hand of a General Authority. . . Sister Faust was wonderful too. When I saw you and Sister Faust, I could see the love that existed between the two of you. When I met Sister Faust, my first impression proved to be true. She is truly a beautiful mother, easygoing in her ways, and full of grace and elegance. Indeed, I must say she is a wonderful example of motherhood and some day I'd like to be just like her, full of love and kindness.

The Fausts' children are likewise very much aware of the depth of Elder and Sister Faust's relationship, prompting Lisa, when asked in an interview, "What makes your father the happiest?" to respond simply, "My mother." When the interviewer asked if there was more she would like to add, she said, "No, just my mother, that's all I need to say."fn

A favorite moment in the family came during the Christmas season of 1994, as Elder and Sister Faust opened their presents from each other. At the urging of her children, Sister Faust had agreed to have a portrait taken, which they thought Elder Faust could keep on his desk. The Fausts' granddaughter Nicole recalls the moment he opened his present: "As he unwrapped the gift and saw what it was, he pumped his fist in the air as he let out a Portuguese expression meaning `Wonderful!' The family members became absolutely silent as he continued to look at the picture, and then he began to shake as tears rolled down his cheeks. He was so touched, he couldn't speak. After he composed himself, he went over and gave Grandma a hug and a kiss, and then he was unusually quiet the rest of the evening."

In addition to the time he spends with his wife and family, Elder Faust also makes certain he maintains his friendships, both with those he has known for years and those of more recent acquaintance. Of his father's many friendships, Elder Faust's son Jim says, "In all of his walks of life, he has met so many people with whom he has established a bond and a connection. In addition, he has an amazing memory for people and their lives, which my mother has as well, and they both have an ability to convey their love and concern in a way that is genuine. Now, most of us would think that you can only have so many special relationships in your life, but in Dad's case, that's not true. From Howard W. Hunter to his former missionary companions to the man who cares for the plants in his office, he will always find something they share in common, and he will use that connection as a means of giving them his attention. Interestingly, he is not flamboyant, but he has an amazing ability to connect with people."

In addition to trying, whenever possible, to attend gatherings of old friends and missionary companions, wedding receptions (often after having performed the sealing), and the like, Elder Faust has maintained many remarkably close associations with friends, both old and new.

Elder Albert Choules Jr., who first met Elder Faust while serving as a regional representative in Arizona (and who subsequently served as a member of the First and Second Quorums of Seventy), tells of getting to know Elder Faust as the two were assigned to divide a stake in the Phoenix area. "I was single at the time, my first wife having died about two years earlier, and for some reason Elder Faust chose to stay with me, rather than the stake president (where I'm sure he would have been fed better). He took an interest in my situation, and after we got the new stake presidency called, he suggested we go for a walk across the street through a cotton field. As we did, he asked me about a woman I was dating, how I was doing, what my feelings were, and so forth. His interest didn't end there, however, and when he returned home, he took the time to write Marilyn (whom I did eventually marry) and shared some thoughts with her that she was thrilled to receive."

On another occasion, while visiting with Sister Faust's brother, Owen Wright, and his wife in Idaho, Elder Faust went out for a walk one morning and struck up a conversation with a man who was laying sod in his front yard. The two talked for some time, and during the course of their conversation, Elder Faust learned that although the man was a member of the Church, he had not been active for many years. From the interest Elder Faust showed that morning, the man began the process of returning to full activity and eventually asked his newfound friend if he would perform the sealing for the man, his wife, and their children.

Elder Faust's secretary of many years, Margaret Bury, tells of his friendship, thoughtfulness, and wisdom over the years, particularly during a time of great loss in her life. "This person, though not a family member, was very near and dear to me," Sister Bury recalls. "When I learned of the person's death, I called Elder Faust to tell him of the news and to say that I would be late coming in. We talked for a minute, and then, as I found myself not wanting to be alone, I went next door to visit with a neighbor. About an hour later, I returned to my home to get ready for work, and as I walked in the telephone was ringing. It was Elder Faust, who said, `Thank goodness I've reached you. After we hung up, I realized who this person was to you and knew you shouldn't be alone. And I've been worried because I couldn't get through."

Later that day, she adds, "Something set me off and I started weeping. He came out and saw me, and through my tears I told him I was sorry to lose control. Then he draped himself over a huge printer we used to have and said, `Margaret, it's really tough to lose a parent. I haven't gotten over it yet.' He didn't use a cliche; rather, he thought the situation through in his sensitive mind and said what was appropriate from his heart."

Another associate tells of going through a rather public and misunderstood divorce—and of finding that Elder Faust was one person who did not rush to judgment and dismiss this man for what some might have perceived as his shortcomings. Instead, Elder Faust kept track of his friend and, after his second marriage, met with him and his new wife. "As we discussed certain challenges that were still ahead of us, he listened and then said to my wife, `Sister, I think a little patience here is all that's needed.' I'm not sure she would have accepted that advice from anyone else, but she knew he had listened and understood, and when I asked her later how she felt, she said, `Elder Faust told me to be patient, and I'm going to be patient.' And as time went on, we saw just how true his words had been."

Elder Faust also maintained an active involvement with the Church on a very local level, as he attended church in his home ward or with family, served as a home teacher, attended tithing settlement, and served in other ways that some might not expect of an apostle. He was often called upon to speak wherever he found himself attending church, and his family tells of his concern over not causing meetings to run long. Robert shares that at the conclusion of one meeting, which had already gone over when Elder Faust stood to give the closing remarks, his father simply said, "Remember who you are, and act accordingly"—and then sat down. (Elder Faust more than once quipped that church meetings—whether administrative or otherwise—"don't have to be endless to be eternal.")

His directness and humor were also often evident, as when he was asked to say a few words at the conclusion of a sacrament meeting during which a ward leader had been released and had borne a particularly tearful testimony to the ward. "Sister Jones," he observed, "you've been released today—and you're still alive. When I'm released, I'll be dead."

Although Elder Faust often wished that his presence at meetings did not attract as much attention as it did, he also counted it a great privilege and blessing to him to attend a regular block of meetings whenever he was in town. Once, after attending fast and testimony meeting in his own ward, he recorded, "It was very comforting to hear the humble saints bear powerful testimonies to the great absolutes of the Church, which we do not change nor alter, and of the mission of Jesus Christ as the Lord, Savior, and Redeemer, of the mission of Joseph Smith, the restoration of the gospel, the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon, the restoration of the priesthood, and so forth."

In addition to being able to attend his own ward on occasion, there were also times when, by being at home, he was able to have involvement in the very issues he dealt with as a General Authority. During the 1983 floods that turned several Salt Lake City streets into rivers, Elder Faust attended church one Sunday and there, with the rest of his ward, heard the call for all able-bodied members to help sandbag a section of the stake that was threatened by rising waters. He recorded, "Since I had been in on the planning as part of the Executive Committee of Welfare Services, I wanted to see how the process worked," and so he joined with his fellow ward members in the effort.

When the Relief Society and priesthood quorums in the Fausts' home ward were asked to make sandwiches for the Salvation Army soup kitchen, Elder Faust left the office early to go home and make the twenty he had signed up to help with, adding those to the twenty Sister Faust made. He then went with the ward to the soup kitchen and there helped to serve those who came for a meal and to clean up the tables and chairs after. His thought at the conclusion of the day was, "I was a little ashamed that I live in such comfort and pleasant circumstances."

Even with his favorable circumstances, Elder Faust has worked to follow the teachings he learned as a boy growing up during the Depression—namely, simplicity, frugality, and self-sufficiency. He and Sister Faust have always taken care of their own housekeeping, with Elder Faust helping out with vacuuming, replacing furnace filters, gardening, and shopping—"which I would usually foul up," he notes, with Sister Faust adding that he also attracts many who are willing to help as he navigates the grocery store aisles. He practices moderation in what he buys for himself, and once, when Sister Faust insisted that his overcoat had long since gone out of style and was showing signs of wear, he reluctantly agreed to buy a new one—but then had the old one "remodeled" so that he could continue to wear it as well. On another occasion, he rather reluctantly parted with a twenty-five-year-old television set when he found that it was finally beyond repair.

In an effort to simplify their lives further and cut back on Elder Faust's time commuting, the Fausts decided in 1986 to sell their condominium and move to a recently renovated apartment complex near the Church Administration Building. When the process followed a pattern typical of the frustrations that generally accompany the buying and selling of a home, Elder Faust concluded one challenging day with the observation, "So, we worry, and say our prayers." After weeks of delays and setbacks, the deal on both properties finally closed, only to then have one of the checks paid to him not clear the bank (a matter that was quickly resolved). Through it all, Elder Faust kept a philosophical outlook, no doubt knowing that neither his calling nor the demands of his office could spare him from the frustrations of life common to all.

Through all of his associations—with family, friends, his Brethren of the General Authorities, staff members, and sometimes even strangers—those close to Elder Faust during his years as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve have experienced much of his wisdom, kindness, counsel, humor, encouragement, and concern. Interestingly, many of those same people knew little of the significant contributions he made, both to the Church and beyond. Even within the close family circles, Elder Faust was never one to attach his name to any of the Church's advances, and his children generally had to learn from other sources all that their father had contributed to the work of the kingdom.

Such was certainly the case with the planning and construction of the BYU Jerusalem Center, for although his children knew of the frequent trips he took to Israel and of their father's association with the center, it was not until they went as a family to Jerusalem that they came close to fully realizing how integral he had been to this facility and to its purposes.

The idea for the trip came from Elder and Sister Faust, and Janna tells of the 1987 family dinner at which it was discussed. "The adults had gathered at my parents' home, and after dinner my father said, `Your mother and I have a proposal. We would like to spend your inheritance and take you and your spouses to Israel. This has always been a dream of your mother's, to have each of you with us in the Holy Land, and we would like to take you next Christmas.' Then, in keeping with his strong sense of organization and his belief in helping those who help themselves, he added, `We will pay for half of the trip, and if you will save $167 a month from now until next December, we will all be able to go.' Then he told us he knew we could each do it, and we all agreed we would find a way."

A year later, on December 26th, Elder and Sister Faust, accompanied by their five children and five "children-in-love," flew to Israel, and there the children let out a collective gasp as they rounded a corner and saw the magnificent structure their father had been involved with—and then learned something of the extent of that involvement.

Jim explains that much of that insight came one evening as the family had dinner with David Reznik, a Brazilian-born Jew who had served as the architect for the center. "David told us something of his history, and how he and his wife had emigrated to Israel in 1948. Jerusalem, at the time, was war-torn, as well as being old and in general disrepair, and the Jews were setting out to build up the State of Israel. During this time, David received a postcard from a friend showing the New York City skyline with its many skyscrapers, and on the back this friend had written, referring to all the work needing to be done in Israel, `Where are the architects to build up Israel?'

"David never forgot that, and he told us that several years later, after he had traveled through Europe and seen so many cathedrals and other architectural wonders, he sent this same friend a postcard from Europe asking, `Where are the Dukes?'—meaning that an architect is of no use unless he has a commission. Then David turned to my father and said, `I am the architect; he is the Duke!'"

Of course, the process of building the Jerusalem Center involved many, many people—some in Salt Lake City and others who lived in Jerusalem and dealt with the challenges on a day-to-day basis. But those involved with the center point to Elder Faust, together with his beloved friend, President Howard W. Hunter, as the men who had a vision of what the center could and should be, and who then worked to turn their vision into a reality.

In reflecting on his years in the Twelve, Elder Faust acknowledged, "One of the most meaningful experiences I had in the Twelve was working with President Hunter, Elder Jeffrey R. Holland (who, through much of the process, was president of BYU), and so many others in acquiring the land for and building the Jerusalem Center. That was a highlight of my service—not only because I had the association of these wonderful men, but also because the witness of the guidance of the hand of the Lord in bringing it all about was confirming to my testimony."

The hope that BYU and the Church might build a center for study-abroad students in Jerusalem predated Elder Faust's call to the Twelve. In fact, he was aware of the issue from his service as president of the International Mission. Soon after his call to the Twelve, Elder Faust received the assignment to work with Elder Hunter in beginning the process of establishing such a center.

Elder Holland recalls that in 1979, "Elder Hunter was asked by the First Presidency to take the assignment for this project because of his involvement with Elder LeGrand Richards in acquiring the funding for and overseeing the construction of the Orson Hyde Memorial Gardens in Jerusalem. Because the Brethren generally don't have solo assignments—given the benefit of two minds and two witnesses—early on, the First Presidency assigned Elder Faust to serve with Elder Hunter in fulfilling this assignment."

From the outset, writes David Galbraith,

the development of the Jerusalem Center was a First Presidency project that included Brigham Young University. The logic of the joint building effort was obvious: first, it satisfied the requirements of the BYU-sponsored educational programs operating in the Holy Land, which were becoming increasingly attractive to Latter-day Saint students and tourists alike; and, second, it met the ecclesiastical imperatives of the Church, which included a physical presence in the Holy Land after an absence of nearly two thousand years.fn

The first step in the process that Elders Hunter and Faust faced was acquiring an appropriate parcel of land upon which a center could be built. A number of possibilities had been explored over a several-year period, but after President Spencer W. Kimball returned in 1979 from dedicating the Orson Hyde Memorial Garden, which is located on the Mount of Olives and overlooks Jerusalem, it was evident to all concerned that the ideal site was a parcel of land located at the northern end of the Mount of Olives, in an area known as Mount Scopus.

Obtaining permission to lease that land—and at the same time working with David Reznik and his associates to develop plans for the building—was a five-year ordeal that saw Elders Hunter and Faust making numerous trips to Israel. As they traveled together, and especially as they walked the streets of Jerusalem and visited other sites where the Savior had ministered, the two men developed a closeness that went far beyond the friendship they had already enjoyed for many years. Often, after long days of meeting with government officials and attorneys (both Israeli and Palestinian, since the land was claimed by both sides), as well as with the faculty and students who had come to Jerusalem from BYU, the two apostles, together with then-President Holland, were able to go to the Garden Tomb where they would read from the scriptures, seek for the renewal of their souls, and ponder the import of their undertaking.

Finally, in early 1984, after some of the most arduous and delicate negotiations in the lives of these two former lawyers, Elder Faust was summoned to a meeting in President Hinckley's office, along with Elder Hunter, President Holland, and several others involved in the project. Elder Faust recalls that after much discussion relative to rezoning issues, building permits, construction costs, and architectural plans, "President Hinckley expressed his opinion that we ought to get the contracts signed as soon as possible and asked Brother Hunter to go over. Brother Hunter said he would appreciate some assistance, so President Hinckley said, `All right, Jim, you go with him.'"

Two days later, Elder Hunter, Elder Faust, and President Holland left Salt Lake City to complete the assignment given them by the First Presidency. On Saturday, the three men observed the Sabbath with BYU study abroad groups from Jerusalem, Vienna, and London as they held a sacrament meeting in the Orson Hyde Park.

On Sunday, as the three men prepared to sign the lease on the property, they received word that there was yet another hurdle that had been placed in their way, but after receiving the assistance of Mayor Teddy Kollek, whom Elder Faust describes as "one of the wisest, most durable politicians in the world," they were assured the signing would take place on Monday.

The next morning, the group was able to meet with the director of Lands Authority and sign the necessary agreements, but only after coming within three blocks of a terrorist attack on their way to the meeting. After the signing, the Jewish attorney retained by the Church and BYU observed, "Speaking for my family, who have been in Jerusalem for fifteen generations, you have a priceless piece of property." And at the end of the day, Elder Faust recorded, "It has been an historic day. A little hectic, but otherwise, quite wonderful."

Having overcome what at times seemed to be insurmountable obstacles during the planning stages of the Jerusalem Center, Elder Faust and his associates were entitled to the hope that with the commencement of construction, the worst of their challenges were behind them. Such was not to be the case, however, as the sight of cranes going up on the side of Mount Scopus increased the ire of certain extreme elements in Jerusalem who feared that, when the center was completed, Israel would be overrun by Mormon missionaries seeking to convert the Jews.

This was an issue that had been dealt with during the preliminary work, but with construction underway, the cries from small factions of the Orthodox Jewish community reached their crescendos. Elder Faust continued making frequent trips to Jerusalem, together with Elder Hunter and President Holland, as the three would meet with government officials and religious leaders to assure them that the center would be used to support the academic programs of BYU, function as a meeting place for LDS groups, and be open to all from the community who wished to come. No matter what the three men said, however, the opponents of the center continued to press their demand that the construction be halted and that the Mormons go back to Salt Lake City.

At one point, David Galbraith informed Elders Hunter and Faust that a group of Orthodox Jews had informed him that they had found a wealthy man who was willing to purchase the half-finished center from the Church. Elder Faust's response was, "They may have found a buyer, but they haven't found a seller." Brother Galbraith adds,

Those of us who were on the front lines in Jerusalem—who were having our phones tapped, our utilities shut off, our families threatened—needed someone who could lift us up and help us realize that this was the Lord's work and we would not fail. Elder Faust would explain to us that inasmuch as this was a First Presidency project, the adversary no doubt felt threatened and would do all he could to stop it. In the face of all this opposition, Elder Faust's was the voice that encouraged us to see our way through.

Beyond buoying up those whose lives were so intertwined with the construction of the center, Elder Faust also did much to orchestrate the university's and the Church's response to the opposition. He oversaw the efforts of an Israeli public relations firm that advised the Church on relevant issues, and he arranged for 154 United States Congressmen to write a letter of support to their counterparts in the Israeli Knesset. He also, more than once, joined with Elder Hunter and President Holland in meeting face-to-face with those who opposed the center in an attempt to reassure them that it would not be used as a means of proselytizing among the Jews.

A critical juncture occurred in July 1985, as opponents to the center called once again for the government to halt construction and staged demonstrations at the Wailing Wall in Jerusalem as a show of opposition. Once again, Elders Hunter and Faust and President Holland traveled to Jerusalem in yet another attempt to find a resolution to the conflict. During that trip, the three men met with the leading rabbis who opposed the center, during which Elder Faust was part of the following exchange:

Jerusalem Chief Rabbi, Mashash: You are honorable and intelligent people and so you will understand. The opposition does not stem from a single religious group—the Jews are united—we can't be silent, we will not. . .

We know about your missionary achievements and so we can say your efforts to obtain land for a missionary center was a misunderstanding. Because of that we feel we can ask you to stop construction! Otherwise we will have to fight. If we do not succeed in this meeting it will be a very serious fight. We pray that it will not come to that.

Elder Faust: We appreciate your statement and we know of your sincerity, but please examine your hearts and see if there is not a way we can exist together in this land.

You speak of a fight; we are not here to fight. We look upon you as a covenant people. We do not want a worldwide fight—it can only hurt each of us, including the State of Israel. . .

Rabbi Porush: Our relations with the Christian community since 1967 have been excellent, but there is a big difference between the Christian churches that have been built here and the huge Center you are building. We have no objection to a church, but your place will be a missionary center. If your youth are really devoted, and we know they are, then they must missionize; otherwise, they would not be Mormons.

You have chosen to build on such a sacred place—Mt. Scopus is the heart and soul of the Jewish people and we simply cannot tolerate your center on this sacred ground overlooking the Temple Mount. No law passed by the Knesset of Israel can obligate me if it contradicts the Torah.

If a people has no alternative, then their resolve becomes greater than an atomic bomb! Did you see? Our people were crying at the Western Wall. Place your Center in Egypt or Greece, anywhere, but not in Israel.

Elder Faust: It gives us sorrow to feel our presence is not welcome. We have good relations with Jews all over the world. In Salt Lake City we are very close to the Jewish community. Mormons elected a Jewish mayor and a Jewish governor. . .

We have lived together with the Jewish community for many, many years with mutual respect and tolerance for each other. We feel we have done nothing wrong in establishing our Center here, nor do we intend to do anything wrong in the future. We appreciate this opportunity to meet you and to discuss these matters directly.

In reflecting on that meeting and others, Brother Galbraith observes, "Elder Faust was truly a man of peace, always looking for ways to calm our often agitated Jewish friends who sought an end to our presence in Jerusalem, or to calm the troubled waters among the Latter-day Saints in Jerusalem who were sometimes offended by the opposition."

In time, the opposition did subside, and by the time the center was completed in 1988, fully eighty percent of the citizens of Israel held a favorable view toward the Jerusalem Center.

Through those years, those involved with the center saw much more than a building being built; they also witnessed the love and friendship that existed between President Hunter and Elder Faust—two men with like legal minds, unshakable faith, and the wisdom needed to work their way through ten years of one entanglement after another.

The full depth and meaning of that friendship is known only to the two, although those who were with them saw enough that they would conclude, in the words of Elder Holland, "that these two men forged a bond and friendship that is one of the sweet stories to come out of this entire effort." (Elder Faust acknowledges, with a chuckle, that when Elder Hunter married his second wife, Inis Bernice Egan, in 1990, he and Sister Faust accompanied the newlyweds on their honeymoon—to Jerusalem.)

Brother Galbraith adds, "One of the things that always impressed me about Elder Faust was how loyal he was to Elder Hunter. Elder Hunter, with his age and the demands of his office, sometimes showed the strains of these trips more so than his younger colleague, but Elder Faust was always there to help him. He protected Elder Hunter in many ways—spiritually, mentally, and physically—and he made sure we didn't place too many demands on him. While they were in Jerusalem, they could, at times, relax and enjoy each other's company in a way that I suspect was not possible in Salt Lake City. Theirs was more than a brotherly love; they enjoyed a beautiful relationship that would not be common among many men."

Elder Holland adds that each showed a great regard for the other's opinion as issues were discussed and decisions made, with Elder Faust always finding a way to defer to his senior companion. He also tells of one setting where that deference became rather difficult. "We arrived at the point of needing to choose the stone for the exterior of the center, and the contractors brought forth four or five slabs with various shades of red running through. Elder Faust, true to his nature, suggested that this was something Elder Hunter should decide, and Elder Hunter said, no, that Elder Faust had better judgment in such matters. They went back and forth for about twenty minutes in this courteous manner, and what neither one of them was willing to admit is that they were both color blind and could not see the distinctions in any of the stones placed before them."

When the project finally came to a completion in 1988, the two men, again with President Holland accompanying them, traveled with their wives back to Jerusalem to sign the final lease. Elder Faust noted in his journal, the day before the anticipated signing, "We are hoping to be able to sign the lease tomorrow, but being in Israel, we are not certain that it will come about. If things go as usual, we will have to push it." The next day, as the group was about to get in their cars to go to the signing, they received word that "it was all off." As Elder Faust worked to sort out what the complications were—and to solicit support from key allies—"All of a sudden, right out of the blue, here was another call from our attorney, Joe Kokia, saying, `Come on down and sign.'"

Even with that, Sister Faust recalls that the group got stuck in an elevator as they were leaving for the signing, and that a group of men had arrived with axes to open the doors just as they finally opened on their own. Through it all, even as Elder Faust wondered when the elevator doors would open, he maintained the attitude he had expressed at the height of the opposition, after a thorough discussion of the matter with the First Presidency and the Twelve: "We concluded that we should rely upon the Lord to lead us through, that it was through His service and providence that we are where we are, and that if it came to the worst case scenario that we had to leave the center, it would not be the end of the work, although tragic. In the past, we have walked away from temples, as well as homes and cities, and this could happen again."

After the lease was signed later that day, Elder Faust says, "President Hunter said to the Hollands and to Ruth and me, `Let's go to the Garden Tomb, for old times' sake.'"

That the Church and BYU were never forced to walk away from the project has been a blessing beyond what few could have imagined at the outset. Physically, the Jerusalem Center provides some two hundred students, faculty, and staff with living quarters, classrooms, a library, and two large auditoriums. It is carved almost unobtrusively into the side of Mount Scopus, even as it affords those who live and visit there panoramic views of Jerusalem. It provides a place for community events and concerts and hosts tens of thousands of visitors each year. The gardens that surround the center provide, through ancient grinding mills and grape and olive presses, a reminder of life in ancient Israel, as well as a place to meditate upon the significance of the sacred ground on which the center stands.

At another level, the Jerusalem Center has proven to be a bridge between cultures—Jews, Moslems, and Christians; Israelis, Palestinians, and Arabs. "Early on," Elder Faust recalls, "Mayor Kollek said to us, `This building can be a bridge to peace.' When it was completed, many years later, he visited us at the center and said that as the mayor of Jerusalem he had fought many battles, but that the most significant battle he had been part of was over the Jerusalem Center. He added, as he had told us many times over the years, that this really hadn't been a battle over the building, but it was a battle against prejudice and ignorance and bigotry. To him, the Jerusalem Center became a symbol of Jerusalem as an open city."

In 1993, Elder Faust returned to the Jerusalem Center yet again, this time with the Mormon Tabernacle Choir, which performed a series of concerts throughout the Middle East, culminating in performances at the center. At the conclusion of one of the group's final concerts there, Elder Faust recorded, "The news media has been very, very generous, and newspapers which opposed us before have been very loud in their praise. One of them called the group `a choir of angels.' As we visited with people after the concert, somebody in the group said, `The Mormon Tabernacle Choir has been able to do in thirty minutes what the community has not been able to do in twenty years in terms of uniting the community.'"

Even with such praise, the Church has been true to its word (and to the undertakings that President Ezra Taft Benson signed for the Church and President Holland signed for BYU) that it not allow proselytizing—until such time as it is permitted by the Israeli government. Students who attend the center are instructed that they are not to hand out tracts of any sort (including the Book of Mormon) or to engage in conversations with the citizens of Israel that could, in any way, be construed as an attempt to convert.

Yet Elder Faust would always note, as he visited the center after its completion, the effect living in the Holy Land had upon the students. To a group of BYU faculty and staff, he stated in 1994:

I have had a close relationship with only one of the functions of the University at the Jerusalem Center for Near Eastern Studies. You are well aware of the long struggle that it took to establish that presence in the holy city. You may not be aware of the miracles which took place to bring it into being. Yet the greatest miracles of the Jerusalem Center experience occur in the lives of the young men and women who are able to attend there. The monument there is not the magnificent building in the prime location of Jerusalem, nor in the world-class architecture, but in the lives of those who are able to go there.fn

Just over two weeks after Howard W. Hunter, Elder Faust's friend and companion, was ordained and set apart as president of the Church on June 5, 1994, President Hunter called Elder Jeffrey R. Holland to serve as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve. Not surprisingly, he also asked that Elder Holland join with Elder Faust in overseeing the center.

Then in early 1995, President Hunter assigned himself, along with Elders Faust and Holland, to return to the Jerusalem Center, as well as to conduct a regional conference in Birmingham, England. Before the three men could leave, however, President Hunter's health took a turn for the worse, and so Elder Faust and Elder Holland set out on the trip without their beloved friend.

The morning after their arrival in England, Elder Faust recorded, "I was awakened by Elder Holland, advising me that President Hunter had passed away. We were in shock because we had hoped and prayed that we could fill this last assignment that he had given to us. . . We were so saddened that we did nothing but count the great blessings we had had of associating so closely with such a great man."

Upon the advice of President Hinckley, Elder Faust and Elder Holland stayed to conduct the sessions of conference scheduled for Saturday and Sunday, although they had to move the Sunday morning session up one hour in order to catch their return flight to Salt Lake City. ("The great host of 11,000 Saints were notified by their home teachers," Elder Faust recorded, "and it was wonderful to see the Church work.")

As the two men then traveled the long distance home, Elder Faust says simply, "We did so with heavy hearts."

Elder Holland shared deeply in that same sentiment and later added, "As we sat side by side on those two flights, I had the distinct impression that I was flying home with the next counselor in the new First Presidency that was about to be formed. I kept that impression to myself but took great delight, even in the midst of overwhelming sorrow, in the anticipation of a First Presidency that would include President Gordon B. Hinckley, President Thomas S. Monson, and President James E. Faust."

NOTES

1999 Deseret Book Co.
