James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

13

A SPIRITUAL STATESMAN

UPON ARRIVING HOME LATE Sunday evening, "tired and sad," Elder Faust was faced not only with his own personal grief, but with a number of responsibilities relative to President Hunter's funeral on Wednesday, March 8, 1995, and what was scheduled to be the selection of a new president of the Church the next Sunday. Some of those responsibilities stemmed from his over-seeing the Church's public and media relations functions, and as the week progressed, he noted his appreciation for the "magnificent" work of the Public Affairs staff. A responsibility that weighed more heavily upon him was responding to the request that he speak at his beloved friend's funeral.

On Tuesday, March 7, 1995, a viewing was held in the Church Administration Building, where some 22,000 people filed by President Hunter's open casket. Elder Faust noted in his journal, "It was very touching to see the sweet faces of the humble Saints and the children who came. In the evening, when the viewing was to stop, there was still a long, long line. But the Brethren decided that they would let the people continue as long as anybody wished to come. What a great tribute to a great man."

The next day, Elder Faust paid his own public tribute to President Hunter. After reviewing the significant accomplishments of a relatively brief administration, Elder Faust suggested:

Perhaps the most remarkable occurrence during his short time as President of the Church has been that the members of the Church all over the world have become bonded to him in a special way as their prophet, seer, and revelator. They have seen in him the personification of the attributes of the Savior himself. They have responded in a remarkable way to his prophetic messages of making our lives more Christlike and of making our temples the center of our worship. He invited any who found themselves outside the circle of the Church to return and to have their tears dried in the process. He knew what it was like to be without a companion. He knew what it was like to have physical limitations. He was in so many ways the personification of the counsel of Alma:

"And now I would that ye should be humble, and be submissive and gentle; easy to be entreated; full of patience and long-suffering; being temperate in all things; being diligent in keeping the commandments of God at all times; asking for whatsoever things ye stand in need, both spiritual and temporal; always returning thanks unto God for whatsoever things ye do receive" (Alma 7:23).

No doubt the membership of the Church came to respect and love him so much because he possessed so abundantly these Christlike qualities. Surely his intense sorrow and suffering over a period of many years also contributed to their affinity for him.fn

Elder Faust told of President Hunter's love for the Holy Land, noting that "his desire to be where the Savior walked and talked seemed insatiable." He then provided a more personal perspective of an unassuming man whose callings had made him very public:

Although outgoing in so many ways, yet he was also a private man. He had no inner conflicts and tensions. He had no ego needs. With all his wisdom, he could sit among his brethren and say very little. He was at complete peace with himself. As Shakespeare said, "In peace there's nothing so becomes a man/As modest stillness and humility" (The Life of King Henry V, act 3, sc. 1, lines 3-4).

His delightful sense of humor was ever present. His beloved sister, Dorothy, also possessed this same charm. At one time we were together in Venice with a couple of hours to spare before going on to Jerusalem. I asked my wife, Ruth, "What have you always wanted to do in Venice?" And she replied, "I've always wanted to take a gondola ride and have you sing `O Solo Mio.'" President Hunter then responded, "If Jim's going to sing, I'm not going to go!" We went for the gondola ride, but I did not sing!. . .

President Hunter's spiritual depth was so profound as to be unfathomable. Having been under the guiding influence of the Lord Jesus Christ as his special witness for so many years, President Hunter's spirituality was honed in a remarkable way. It was the wellspring of his whole being. He was quiet about sacred things, humble about sacred things, careful when he spoke about sacred things.fn

Following the funeral, Elder and Sister Faust accompanied the cortege to President Hunter's burial site, a place the two men had gone to almost twelve years earlier when Elder Faust helped then-Elder Hunter select a burial site for his first wife, Clara Jeffs Hunter.

Thursday and Friday, Elder Faust noted, were likewise "busy days getting ready for the monumental events which will transpire this coming weekend and for the press conference on Monday."

Of the events that occurred on Sunday, he recorded:

This morning at nine o'clock the Quorum of the Twelve, including President Hinckley and President Monson, were to assemble. At 8:10 I received a call from President Gordon B. Hinckley telling me there was a cart going over and would I wish to go with him. I told him, "Of course." I met him about 8:15, and we arrived at five minutes to. I was embarrassed because my seat was the only empty one. I think everybody wondered if I was going to be the new second counselor in the Presidency, but President Hinckley hadn't said one word!. . .

[After the selection of Gordon B. Hinckley as the president of the Church,] he nominated Thomas S. Monson and James E. Faust to be his counselors. This announcement came as a surprise and a relief. It was a relief because I had been denying feelings and also because several of my brethren had expressed their feelings that I was going to go into the Presidency. . . It was, of course, one of the most overwhelming experiences of my life.

At the conclusion of the meeting, President Faust was presented with several legal documents he needed to sign as a member of the new First Presidency, and he added, "I was so rattled that I couldn't sign my name straight."

He then returned home to tell his wife what had just transpired. She would acknowledge later, "I had a feeling that he was going to be called, but when I would tell him I hoped he'd let me know if he had any inclinations, he'd just say, `No, no.'"

That evening, President and Sister Faust visited with two of their children and their families but said nothing of what had taken place earlier in the day. The next morning, at 9:00, President Faust followed President Hinckley and President Monson into the Joseph Smith Memorial Building, where a press conference was held to announce the reorganization of the First Presidency. As he helped field the questions that came from the media, President Faust also stated something of the feelings he held for the two men with whom he would serve. He reiterated those sentiments two weeks later in general conference, saying,

I have had the great privilege of associating in various Church assignments with President Gordon B. Hinckley for forty years. I know his heart. I know his soul. I know of his faith. I know of his dedication. I know of his great capacity. I know of his love of the Lord and God's holy work. I have a great personal affection and regard for him. I also know that he has been foreordained and marvelously prepared to be the President of this church in our day and time.

My association with President Thomas S. Monson has also been long and blessed. We have worked closely together for decades in several capacities. His mind and memory are unique; his faith simple and absolute. President Monson is a big man, but the biggest part of him is his great heart. He has tremendous talent. I feel very humbled to serve with President Hinckley and President Monson.fn

As the world heard the news, so did President Faust's children and grandchildren, who were not surprised by the announcement, but who were shocked nonetheless. One of the grandchildren living in Utah got an immediate taste of how this calling would affect the family as he was all but mobbed after the announcement and peppered with questions and well-meaning (but not always sensitive) counsel. A thoughtful school principal soon suggested he might want to go home for the remainder of the day, which he did. Lisa and Scott's five-year-old son, Jacob, began to cry as he watched the announcement with his mother and father. When Scott, concerned over Jacob's reaction, asked what the tears were for, the young boy said, "Because I'm going to be late for school!"

That evening, President and Sister Faust called their family together so that, in President Faust's words,

I could explain to them that my first responsibility was as a husband, father, and grandfather. I reviewed how all of us would have to conduct ourselves better and be more representative of what we ought to be. I also told them that I was not any better than any other elder in the Church, and that we as a family would only be better if we acted better, and that we should treat everyone with respect and courtesy and kindness. Much that we had to say to them was an expression of love, which Ruth did beautifully.

As the family visited, President Faust recorded, "Little Ashley (Jim's daughter) came over and hugged me. Then she cried and said, `You're the most wonderful grandfather in the world. I don't want to lose you as my grandfather.' I told her, `Ashley, I'm still going to be your grandfather.'"

Several days later, President and Sister Faust took his brothers and their wives to dinner, continuing their long-standing tradition of regular get-togethers. Afterwards, his brothers asked to see his new office, and while they were there visiting, he recorded, "I read the words of Gideon to my brothers: `My father is poor in Manasseh, and I am the least in my father's house' (Judg. 6:15). I told them that was the way I felt about the matter because I do not consider myself better in any way than they are. I also bore my testimony to them that any honor that is paid to me comes only because of the offices that I have held and do hold now."

If anyone in the family had any doubts about the extent to which their father and grandfather would have time for his family, those concerns were dispensed with almost immediately, as he and Sister Faust continued to call, visit, and welcome their ever-growing family into their home. President Faust's secretary, Margaret Bury, notes that upon leaving the office each day, his attention would visibly shift to "What can I do now for Ruth?" Then he and Ruth would turn their focus toward their family.

Whereas the family felt no sense of loss, President Faust's brethren of the Twelve did. At their first quorum meeting after Elder Faust's call to the First Presidency, President Boyd K. Packer, who had just been called again as acting president of the Twelve, said, in beginning the meeting, "Today we've lost two men. We've lost James, and we've lost Esdras."

Elder Joseph B. Wirthlin adds, "It was a definite loss to the Twelve because he was one who never hesitated in voicing his opinion. He was fearless of speaking up as to what he thought was right. For Brother Faust, right was right and wrong was wrong, regardless of who he was speaking to or what the situation was. We lost his forthrightness, his honesty, and his willingness to point something out that was certainly of no benefit to himself."

Elder Perry shares something of his feelings as he watched his friend move into the First Presidency in recalling, "When he was called, I sent him a letter and told him that at last I could feel comfortable—that I never felt comfortable about him being junior to me in the Twelve. I had always looked up to him and admired him so much. He got after me for sending him that letter, although I think he appreciated it."

Having had a close association with President Faust since their days together as regional representatives, Elder Maxwell observes, "It has been wonderful to see him grow. He started off so very able and distinguished, and yet his growth is so illustrative of what the gospel can do. As good as the James Esdras Faust was that I began to know in the 1960s—and he was good—he has grown to become so presidential and a spiritual statesman. He is `Exhibit A' in terms of what the gospel can do. And I'm not sure that, in his meekness, he realizes how much he has grown."

As Elder Holland watched Elder Faust deal with the many difficulties that arose during the construction of the Jerusalem Center (an experience he summarizes with the quip, "We may not have crossed the Plains, but we helped to build the Jerusalem Center"), he saw his friend's abilities tested in some of the hottest fires of adversity. In commenting on the contributions President Faust immediately made as a counselor to the President of the Church, Elder Holland says, "When things are calm, you might not have occasion to know he is in the room. But when the pressure comes, that is when President Faust is at his best. My experience with him over many years has shown me that the grimmer the situation is, the more difficult the challenge is, the better James E. Faust is going to be. In those situations, he is the one you want whispering in your ear what you need to hear; and in that sense, he was born to be a counselor."

In describing something of the work and responsibilities of the First Presidency, President Monson states:

This is a hierarchical church, and the presiding high priest is the president. With his two counselors, you have the Quorum of the First Presidency, which is the highest governing organization in the Church. The workload and detail involved in presiding over every aspect of a worldwide church is enormous. In addition, there are many, many issues that ultimately must be dealt with by the First Presidency, from questions of doctrine and exceptions to policy to the cancellation of sealings and restoration of blessings. I remember after President Kimball went into the First Presidency, he came back and met with the Twelve one day. During that meeting he said, "I was in the Twelve for many years, and I never dreamed of the detail the First Presidency has to deal with. It has been like night and day." And he was a detail man who could out-work anyone. When you come into the Presidency, you're required to take a broader view. It's a different type of calling.

From the perspective of one who had spent fourteen years as a counselor in the First Presidency, President Hinckley felt the man he called as his second counselor was particularly well suited to such work:

As a member of the Twelve, Brother Faust was a man of strong opinions and had the courage to state them. I never found a time when he wasn't right on track, and that's why I asked him to serve as my second counselor—because I appreciated that among his many other virtues. He has an excellent mind and is a very thoughtful man. He thinks before he speaks. He doesn't just shoot from the hip. He thinks things through, or he asks questions to get the facts so the facts don't get him. He's absolutely reliable in every respect. You don't have to worry about Brother Faust.

He is a man of balance. He doesn't ride hobby horses. He gets the big picture and sees the whole church. He has good experience and background. He comes through a line of ancestry in the Church who have been true blue through the years. He honors and respects his progenitors and lives up to what they might expect of him. He is a man of conviviality. He's nice to be around. He has a strong sense of humor that is never out of place. He is quiet and reserved for the most part, but very able. I don't find anything lacking that I could wish for in Brother Faust. He has been a wonderful counselor and one whom I very greatly appreciate.

After attending his first meeting of the First Presidency on Tuesday, March 14, President Faust recorded, "It's like putting on glasses and being able to see things I've never seen before, much of which I couldn't comprehend."

In addition to the broader perspective he had to adjust to, President Faust found that the day-to-day demands of the office were quite different from what he had known in the Quorum of the Twelve. For one thing, he spent considerably more time in meetings and noted during his first week, "I get challenges to be sure I'm in the right meeting." On one of those early days, he was sitting in his office attending to some work when his private line rang. As he answered, he heard the voice of President Hinckley, who said jovially, "Jim, were you going to join us for our meeting?"

As the three men began to work together in earnest, President Faust became all the more aware of the burden President Hinckley carried—and of the strength and stamina with which he had been blessed. He was just shy of eighty-five years old when he became president of the Church, yet he embarked on a never-ending series of national and international trips that brought him in contact with Saints who had not had personal contact with a prophet for the better part of twenty years. President Hinckley's desire to be out among the Saints meant that Presidents Monson and Faust often remained in Salt Lake "to hold down the fort." When the two were in town together, President Faust was more than happy to be able to defer decisions to President Monson, but he remembers well, a few months after he began serving in the First Presidency, when Presidents Hinckley and Monson were both out of town, which left him in charge.

"I was frightened," he acknowledges. "President Hinckley and President Monson were both on long flights, and I knew I couldn't get in touch with either of them. The concerns and the burdens were so great that I felt physically ill, and I thought to myself, `What am I going to do with this great responsibility and authority?' But the Lord came through and whispered in my ear, `Nothing, if you're smart.'" On another occasion, as Presidents Hinckley and Monson left together to preside at a temple dedication, President Faust asked President Hinckley what he should do while the two men were gone. "Do what you want," the prophet responded. Then he added, "But you're accountable!"

"For the first year and a half of his calling," President Faust's daughter Janna observes, "you could tell he didn't feel comfortable wearing that mantle. I think he has since become more peaceful about it, in part because he has realized that, even with the unrelenting weight, all he can do is the best he can do. He did not, however, wear his discomfort for the world—or even the family—to see because he knew that it would only distance himself from others. It is a fine art to wear the responsibility but not have it wear you, and that is something he learned to do over the years of his service in the Church."

When the pressures of the office would allow, President Faust would try to get a break, if only for a few hours. His son Robert tells of a day, early in his father's time in the First Presidency, when the two men drove out to the west desert of Utah. "Dad has an appreciation for the outdoors, and he especially loves the desert, with its sagebrush, sunsets, and simplicity of life. He was craving the crisp, clean views and the isolation you can find in the desert, so we got in the car and took off."

He also found infrequent occasions to play golf with family members, and after playing his first round while in the First Presidency—five months after his call—he noted, "playing nine holes of golf with Doug and Janna saved my life, and gave me a chance to breathe." His son-in-law Scott Smith points out that it wasn't always easy for President Faust to leave the pressures of his office behind, relating, "One day as we were walking onto the green to putt, I said, `Dad, are you going to putt with your seven iron?' He chuckled and said, `Oh, I was thinking about the budget appropriations committee meeting.'"

Such breaks were good for his soul, but as President Faust faced the challenges of helping to administer the affairs of the kingdom each day, he also knew well where the strength had to come from as he and his brethren worked their way through the myriad issues and challenges they faced each day.

During a particularly difficult time, which occurred in March 1998 when two missionaries were kidnapped in Russia, Elder Holland saw yet again the absolute faith that President Faust would carry into whatever situation he faced. "As we were battling through that situation for several very long days and nights, I was reporting to the First Presidency frequently," Elder Holland says. "As we would discuss the different approaches that could be taken to gain the missionaries' release, President Faust kept saying, with an unmistakable depth of feeling, `The help has to come from heaven. We'll use what we can from our government, we'll use what we can from the Russian government, but we have to pray down a blessing, as Enos did, praying the whole day and the whole night long if we have to.' Several times during our discussions, he was right up on the edge of the table about that point." (The missionaries were released, unharmed, after being held for three days.)

In a very different setting, President Faust's friend Newell Stevenson had the same lesson reiterated as he complimented President Faust on his April 1999 conference talk, which dealt with the making and keeping of covenants. "I was joking with him a bit after the conference," Brother Stevenson recalls, "and I said, `Where does all that wisdom come from? It certainly doesn't come out of the Jim Faust I knew in high school.' He just smiled and said, `It has to come from the Lord.'"

Such reliance upon and closeness to the Spirit is also the source of a unity within the First Presidency that, likewise, has made their work possible and for which President Faust has frequently expressed his gratitude. In an April 1999 training session for the General Authorities, he observed,

President J. Reuben Clark used to plead with us in General Priesthood Meeting: "Brethren, let us be united." I reaffirm that plea. It is a tribute to the genius and leadership of President Hinckley to say that he encourages his counselors to forthrightly speak their honest convictions and feelings on any subject. President Monson and I hope we are helpful to the President in fulfilling our responsibilities in the quorum to which we belong. However, after a full, frank, and open discussion, our individual opinions yield so that we become in full accord with the decisions of the President. I have learned much in this regard from President Monson. It is part of his greatness, after an open discussion and then receiving counsel from President Hinckley, to hear him say—and quite frequently—"Your desires are my desires and your feelings my feelings."

To those who know these three men, the love and unity they share is unmistakable, and Sister Faust summarizes something of the feelings that exist in the First Presidency when she says, "Jim will often come home and say, `I am working with a genius.' Then Marjorie Hinckley will tell me that her husband comes home and says, `I am working with a very wise man.'"

In addition to his daily associations with the Brethren of the General Authorities, President Faust works closely with his two secretaries, Margaret Bury and Sheila Kartchner, who have gained a unique perspective on the man they work with from day to day. (Sister Bury began working for him in 1983, and Sister Kartchner joined the office soon after he was called as a counselor to President Hinckley, although she had worked with him in various capacities since the late 1960s.)

Of that which lies at the core of his fundamental character, Sister Bury observes, "I see him as a very contented man. He is not grasping for something, like you see with so many men in the world. Rather, he is comfortable with himself, which enables him to be comfortable around others. Part of his contentment grows out of a deep well of spirituality, and another part, as I've observed him, stems from a very happy marriage. He and Sister Faust have a true partnership. As an example, he won't release a talk until, as he puts it, `The master editor has had a look at it.' He values her opinion and treats her with such respect and kindness."

In his working relationship with others, Sister Kartchner tells of a General Authority who had been called to chair a committee that reported to the First Presidency through President Faust. "As the two men met, this brother outlined some issues and the research he had done on them, and then asked President Faust what he thought. President Faust responded by asking this man what he thought, which may not have been the answer he was looking for, but is typical of President Faust wanting and allowing people to fully function in the calling they have. He may lead you along, but he is not inclined to dictate a position."

Sister Bury adds, "He can do that, in part, because of a complete lack of ego. If he has an ego, we've never seen it; instead, he would rather see other people develop. Interestingly, the strength with which he will voice certain views comes about because as he deals with an issue, he takes himself right out of it. Then, once he has taken himself out of the issue emotionally, he can speak to the issue itself."

In terms of how his office runs, both women point to a strong sense of organization, an efficient use of time, and the ability to delegate. They also add an intangible not taught in law school or business management courses—his desire to have a happy office. Sister Kartchner notes, "He's a cheerful person, and he is never moody. You know that when he walks in the door each morning, you're going to be dealing with the same person who left the night before. When we read in the scriptures about the qualities of love unfeigned, long-suffering, kindness, and tenderness, those are principles that he practices each and every day."

Sister Bury adds that it is very important to him how he treats other people, and that "he is 100 percent a gentleman at all times. The one time in our years of association that I have ever seen him come close to being upset was when someone had treated the prophet rudely and with contempt. And after he had dealt with the issues affecting this man, President Faust immediately extended a hand of love and support to this man's family, who he knew were suffering."

She also shares a view that is held by many: "I remember telling Sheila, when she first came to work in the office, `You're going to find that it won't take any time at all before President Faust has wound himself right into your heart.' And that's exactly what he does. It's not something that is calculated, or even conscious—it just happens."

NOTES

1999 Deseret Book Co.
