James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

14

CONTINUING WORLDWIDE SERVICE

BEYOND THE WORK THAT GOES ON inside the Church Administration Building, President Faust takes a very active and very public role in countless ways. From community functions to meetings with government and religious leaders to presiding at functions ranging from ground breakings to area conferences, he maintains an extremely active pace as a member of the First Presidency. Although he travels less than during his years in the Twelve, nonetheless, his service throughout the worldwide church continues to be significant.

Some trips have occurred with little public notice but with great significance to the Church, as was the case in April 1997 when President and Sister Faust traveled, in the company of Elder and Sister Russell M. Nelson, to China, Hong Kong, and Taiwan. Among their other meetings and responsibilities, the two Church leaders joined with Elder John H. Groberg in meeting with Mr. Tung Chee-Hwa, who became the chief executive of Hong Kong when it reverted to the control of mainland China in 1998. During their meeting, the Church leaders advised Mr. Tung of the Church's current activities in Hong Kong, including missionary work, the recent dedication of the Hong Kong Temple, and three chapels that were under construction. President Faust recorded, after their meeting, "He is very wealthy, and he is quite self-assured, gracious, charming, and a delightful personality. He gave us assurances that freedom of religion would obtain and continue under the one-country, two-policy program. We advised him that we had recently purchased a piece of ground with a building on it next to the temple and indicated that it was going to be something of a cultural center for people to learn English, take care of humanitarian work, and serve as an employment center. He seemed quite pleased with this. We asked him if he had any suggestions for us and he said, `Just keep on doing what you're doing.'"

One year later, President and Sister Faust traveled with Elder and Sister Joseph B. Wirthlin on a much more widely publicized trip to Brazil. During their ten-day tour of the country, President Faust presided at the ground-breaking ceremonies for temples in Campinas and Porto Alegre and held several regional conferences and meetings for the missionaries. In addition, he was honored at a red-carpet ceremony in Sao Paulo, where he received the "Paulistano Award," which made him an honorary citizen of Sao Paulo and which had been awarded to only two other men—Pope John Paul II and the Dalai Lama. In responding to the award, President Faust noted that he had always considered himself a "Paulista," but that to become a citizen of a city he loved so much was "very humbling." With all the publicity that accompanied the award, he continually downplayed his part as its recipient, noting on one occasion, "I'm not very smart, but I know full well that this honor and recognition came to the Church and to the office that I hold, rather than to me personally." His brethren in the First Presidency acknowledge that, given his humility, it took some arm-twisting to convince President Faust to accept the award, but that he was finally willing to do so on the basis that it might do something further to help bring the Church out of obscurity.

In order to do just that, President Faust, in accepting the award, asked his grandson, Joshua Smith (who was serving in the Sao Paulo Mission at the time), to stand up. He then talked about his ties to Brazil, about his time there as a missionary and his time as area supervisor. Then he noted that, given his service, his son Robert's mission, and, at that point, the missionary service of five grandsons who had served in Brazil, his family's involvement in that great country spanned three generations. As the formal ceremonies were being concluded, a reporter approached Elder Smith and mentioned that it was nice he had been able to travel the long distance to Brazil to see his grandfather receive this award. Elder Smith clarified the misperception by stating, "I'm happy for my grandfather, but I didn't come here for that reason. I came because I was called by a prophet of God to preach the gospel of Jesus Christ, and I'm here to fulfill that call."

Another grandson, Elder Jason Coombs, likewise had the opportunity to visit with his grandparents as they traveled to Curitiba, Brazil, for meetings with the missionaries and a fireside for the 7,500 members who attended. Elder Coombs was asked to conduct the missionary meeting, in his role as an assistant to the President, and President Faust noted in his journal that his grandson "did very well." But Elder Coombs also had the privilege of watching as his grandfather ministered to a recent convert to the Church, who was one of hundreds lining the walkway as President and Sister Faust made their way to the chapel for the meeting.

This man says of the moment he shared with President Faust:

As a recent convert my wife and I had little knowledge about the General Authorities of the Church. When we heard that we would have a special opportunity to listen to a member of the First Presidency, we did not understand exactly what that meant. Before the meeting began, I was chosen to work outside of the chapel to help with the crowds, and as President Faust and his group arrived, I was worried about keeping the people organized and, at the same time, trying to at least get a glance of the president. When he came down the walk, I found myself next to him and being introduced to him by Elder Coombs. As I shook his hand, he stopped and put his hand on my shoulder and began to tell me that adversity is necessary so that our knowledge can grow and we can become closer to the Lord. Then he said that if my wife and I would serve in our callings, follow in righteousness, and be firm in the gospel, we would be leaders in the Church of Jesus Christ.

As he said these words, he did not let go of my hand, and I had the feeling that his hand had embraced my whole being, providing me with enormous protection and peace. In addition to this feeling of peace, I felt the strength of the Holy Ghost, not only because of President Faust's presence but also because during those very days I was passing through some grand difficulties in various aspects of my life. I knew then that the Lord would not give us a burden without helping us be able to carry it.

In addition to the witness this new member received, as Elder Coombs listened to his grandfather speak with a man he knew nothing about, he likewise could see that this new convert had just been ministered to by a prophet of God.

As Elder Wirthlin watched the Fausts endure the rigors of a very demanding schedule on that trip, he noticed at least three things. The first was the love President Faust showed for Sister Faust. "He is a model for us all," Elder Wirthlin says, "with his gracious kindness and respect for Sister Faust. He honors her as few men honor their wives. He would always have her go ahead of him and never took a step ahead of her. He paid tribute to her in so many ways during the trip, and I witnessed that theirs is an absolute model of a beautiful marriage."

As the two men walked through areas where President Faust had served as a missionary, Elder Wirthlin also noticed that "he never said anything indicating that he endured any difficulties during his mission. He doesn't talk of hardships or challenging conditions; instead, everything he relates is on the positive side."

Finally, Elder Wirthlin says, "He is very easy to travel with, and he is appreciative of anything anyone does for him. If there were mistakes that others made on the trip, in arrangements or any other aspect, you would never have known it from him. He never appeared to be flustered, and he was never critical. It was a smooth, wonderful—almost heavenly—trip."

Closer to home, President Faust is constantly involved in hosting visiting dignitaries, speaking at civic functions, and presiding at Church conferences many of the weekends he is in town.

One of the many groups with which he met was the leadership of the Southern Baptist Convention, who were in Salt Lake City in June 1998 for their national convention and to encourage their members in a missionary effort among the Latter-day Saints living in Utah. Of that meeting President Faust recorded,

At the beginning, I felt it might be useful to have a word of prayer, so I asked the Baptists if they would be offended. They indicated they would not, and Elder Maxwell gave a very Christ-centered prayer. I then shared that we consider them to be Godfearing people and indicated my experience in the service with the Baptists, particularly that when I was treading water waiting to go to officers' school, the Baptist chaplain, Dr. Perego, invited me to be his assistant.

I then indicated we were going to agree on all matters, and that the first thing we were going to agree on was to disagree about doctrine. Having said that, we continued to talk about the social problems on which we agree such as pornography, drugs, teenage marriage, Sunday worship, the family, and so forth. We had a very cordial meeting, and when it was over they called upon one of their group to offer a prayer. There was a fine spirit.

Later that year, on October 20, President Faust was honored to be asked to address a luncheon of the International Association of Chiefs of Police during their annual conference, which was held in Salt Lake City. He paid tribute to the work of policemen throughout the world and then stated, in part:

Our nations will not be stronger than our families. This is because a strong family is the basic unit of our society. It is in the family and the churches of our society that the values of honesty, decency, morality, and respect for the law are taught. Your work will never become easier until violence decreases. These family values are not generally taught in the schools, and the only place where they will be taught effectively will be in the homes and in our churches. Over the centuries, the churches have been the conservators of moral values such as faith, goodness, sexual fidelity, and respect for others. With these values strongly in place among the citizenry, there would be less crime and violence.fn

At the conclusion of his remarks, those attending the luncheon gave President Faust a long, standing ovation, a point he failed to mention to his secretaries when they asked him how his speech had been received. When they later heard of the chiefs' response and mentioned his omission to him, President Faust, with a tinge of embarrassment, said, "Oh, they had been sitting for a very long time."

One of the assignments he enjoys the most is presiding and speaking at area and regional conferences, many of which he can attend without traveling far from Salt Lake City. Before attending one in Provo, Utah, he observed, "It's nice to be among the Saints in a less formal setting than we sometimes are—and to just relax and be ourselves."

In beginning the four-hour priesthood training session held Saturday afternoon in the Provo Tabernacle, President Faust's companion, Elder Neil L. Andersen of the First Quorum of Seventy, told of meeting with President Faust to review the status of the stakes involved and to make plans for the conference. Elder Andersen then said to those gathered, "He listened and then said, `Neil, we're going to have to work very hard at this conference.' I agreed, although I wasn't certain what he meant; and then after a pause he added, `We're going to have to work very hard to make sure we don't do any damage.'"

In his remarks to the priesthood leaders, President Faust alluded to the strong statistics of the stakes represented, but then noted, "Institutionally, you are doing a great work, but how are you doing personally? I would importune you to bless your families as their patriarch." He then stressed the importance of fathers being worthy and willing to give priesthood blessings to the members of their family and added, "I could ask for a blessing from President Hinckley any day of the week, and I'm sure he would give it to me. But the blessing I really desire is a blessing from the hands of my father, who has long been dead."

He offered some practical advice on living within one's means and not falling victim to speculative investing, nothing, "Some of you people think the stock market can only go up, that real estate can only go up. But they can come down." He then closed his formal remarks by admonishing the brethren, "We must watch our very thoughts, as well as our actions. We must keep the Church clean. If we do not keep the Church clean, it will not be the Church of Jesus Christ."

In opening up the session for questions and answers, he quipped, "Now, what are your questions? What are we doing wrong in the Church? Don't be shy. Everyone else tells us."

Many of the questions centered on current social issues. When asked about the possibility of widespread problems as computer clocks switched from 1999 to 2000, he said, making a point that went well beyond the question, "I don't believe there will be any great, catastrophic happenings. I think the greater danger is that our own moral compasses will go awry. I've lived most of my life without computers and have gotten along just fine."

When asked about the presidential impeachment hearings that were taking place in Washington, D.C., at the time, particularly what he thought the biblical significance of those hearings might be, he said, simply, "There is a phrase in the law, Res ipsa loquitur—'Let the matter speak for itself.'"

As he concluded the Saturday session of the regional conference, President Faust did so first, by bearing his testimony, which he always does, and second, by pronouncing an apostolic blessing upon those in attendance, a responsibility he feels is incumbent upon him by virtue of his calling.

In the Sunday morning session, which nearly filled the 23,000-seat Marriott Center on the BYU campus, President Faust made certain that those in attendance had an opportunity to hear from Sister Faust, who, with her gracious sense of humor, stated, "I wish he would testify more—and me less."

President Faust then centered his remarks on a story of President David O. McKay's horse that didn't like restraints and ended up dying after eating from a bag of poisoned oats. (He likewise told the story in the priesthood session of the April 1999 general conference.) After gaining the attention of both the youth and adults, he shared a wide range of thoughts on the fundamental principle of benefiting from the restraints the Lord has placed upon us and then concluded with the encouragement, "We want you to keep doing what you're doing—only do it a little bit better. You're not perfect yet, and that is the Savior's commandment to us."

The proceedings of the Provo regional conference are a sampling of the work he does as he counsels, teaches, and bears witness throughout the world in similar meetings.

President Faust's increased public presence has resulted in the unavoidable loss of what little anonymity he had enjoyed during his years as an Apostle. He quickly found, after moving into the First Presidency, that virtually everyone he met—LDS and non-LDS alike—seemed to know who he was. He was accepting of the change, though, and with his characteristic graciousness, he would make those he met as comfortable as he could and visit with people whenever it was feasible. One evening, as he and Sister Faust went with some of their family to a local restaurant, they ran into a neighbor who was hosting an out-of-town guest. As their friend began to search for the appropriate title to use in introducing his non-Mormon associate to a member of the First Presidency, President Faust quickly eased his friend's discomfort by extending his hand and saying simply, "Hi, I'm Jim Faust."

One Monday morning, as he came out of his office to greet his next appointment, he saw a grandmother, daughter, and granddaughter leaving the lobby area of the Church Administration Building. When he asked who they were and was told they had come in with the hope of being able to see President Hinckley's office (which wasn't possible), he hurried out of the building after them and visited with them on the front steps. Upon being told of the moment, his daughter-in-law Susan Faust observed, "In a situation like that, he would feel it was a privilege for him to meet them, not for them to meet him."

As he has traveled among the Saints, concerns over time, security, and the sheer crush of people wanting to greet him have made it impossible for him to shake hands with as many members as he did in the past. But when a young boy indicated to his father that he had felt slighted by President Faust—and word of the unintended offense got back to him—he had his secretaries track down the boy's name and address and then wrote a personal letter of apology.

He also has found that as a member of the First Presidency he comes under more scrutiny from all quarters, particularly as people wonder—and sometimes even speculate—about his age and physical well-being. One misperception he continues to deal with is the idea that he is afflicted with Parkinson's Disease; well-meaning individuals have often called his office to offer solace, advice, remedies, and the like. Although he knows well the seriousness of the illness, he laughs when asked about the notion so many hold, saying, "That's a rumor that's abroad in the land." Then, with his characteristic ability to extract a principle from virtually any point of discussion, he adds, "What I have are familial tremors, which come to me from a long line of faithful, wonderful relatives. They have no effect on my well-being, and the fact that I have them doesn't bother me a bit because of everything else I inherited as a consequence of my heritage. My grandmother had them, and my uncle had them, and if I could be as good as my grandmother, with all her tremors and shakes, I'd be very grateful."

Although he agrees with Sister Faust's observation that "growing old is not for sissies," President Faust appreciates the significant measure of good health with which he has been blessed. He was particularly pleased when, after having some concern over a pain in his knees, he was told by his doctor that he had not come close to wearing out his cartilage—and that, in fact, he had the knees of a twenty-year-old.

Even with demands from his calling that could consume every waking minute, President Faust has worked to ensure that at least some of his evenings each week are set aside for family. Sometimes children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren come to visit; other times, President and Sister Faust call on their family. But always they are concerned with their family's needs. Janna observes, "He tries so hard to be sensitive to what we're involved with, and he also reinforces those things that are important—the things we should be concerned about. He is always there, either by phone or in person, to do whatever he can to help us help ourselves."

The Fausts' grandson John Faust adds that his grandparents always want to know what they can do for the family—and that they are then there to actually do what they've offered to do. Over the years, that help has been in the form of everything from baby-sitting to counseling grandchildren who were about to go to the temple for the first time (and then going with them) to spending time with family members who were making life-changing decisions. One of many moments John shared with his grandfather occurred just before he began law school at BYU—the first of the Faust grandchildren to follow their grandfather and his three sons into the law. "We had dinner together," John says, "and he gave me some encouragement, saying, `There is no other education like the law. It's going to teach you to think.' He also talked with me about the need to keep my focus on helping clients—not on making money. He told me, `When I first started practicing law, I could have charged people a lot of money, but I didn't. I wanted to help them.'"

John's sister, Nicole Faust Hunt, tells of traveling two thousand miles from home to attend BYU as a freshman—and of the blessing of having her grandparents nearby. "They were my surrogate parents," she says, "and although I wouldn't bother them with all the details of my life, I asked them lots of questions about dating, boys, and so on. He would tell me, `Now, Nicole, all you need to worry about is finding a man who loves you and who loves the Lord.' His advice is really very simple—that if you focus on the things that really matter, the rest is going to work itself out."

As Nicole and her husband began their family, President and Sister Faust were as proud as two great-grandparents could be, and he also gave her some simple counsel to remember as her children began to grow. "He'd say, `If you don't discipline him, society will,'" Nicole says. "He is concerned that we teach our children self-discipline and self-control—and that we, as parents, be the schoolmasters."

She adds that his advice is always welcome, solicited or not, for two reasons: "The first is the manner in which he offers it. Some people would sit you down and be pushy about what they're telling you, but he isn't. It's a very relaxed, gentle form of counsel that doesn't feel like it's being pushed on you. The second reason is that he doesn't tell you specifically the things you should do; in fact, there are times when you'll go to him and ask for his advice, and you leave, thinking, `He didn't answer my question.' Many times he'll say things in such a way that there are many meanings and many levels of understanding, and if you were to take what he said at face value, you might feel there wasn't much to what he told you. But if you sit and listen and really think about what he says—and then let the Spirit talk to your heart—every answer you could ever need would be right there."

Jim Faust adds that as a father, he welcomes the active participation of his parents in his children's lives—and that Grandma and Grandpa Faust have done much to help the parents in their family inculcate correct ideals in their children. He also points out that his children will sometimes listen to their grandfather when they won't listen to their father. "Sometimes my kids will tell me they have an opportunity to do such and such, and it's something I'd prefer they not do. They'll say, `Oh, Dad, it won't hurt,' and I'll tell them, `Okay, you call Grandpa, and if he says yes, you can do it.' They've never called."

In addition to a number of trips the Fausts have taken as a family, President Faust arranged in 1997 for his two daughters to travel with him and Sister Faust while he fulfilled a series of assignments in England. (They, of course, did not travel at the Church's expense.) In addition to his official responsibilities, President Faust arranged for the four family members to visit the town where Sister Faust's great-grandfather, Joseph Wright, lived before coming to the United States and the town of Thursby, where George Finlinson and the Trimble family joined the Church.

During a day of sightseeing and shopping, as President Faust waited while Sister Faust and their daughters went through several ceramics shops, he had a little fun with a stake president who was accompanying the group. "I'm going to prove to you I'm a prophet," he said, rather uncharacteristically. When the stake president said he didn't need any proof, President Faust continued, "No, I'm going to prove it. When my wife and daughters come out of this shop [it being the third they had been to that day looking for a set of china], they'll tell us we need to return to the first shop." And, just as he predicted, such was the case.

The next summer, President Faust and his three sons spent six days in France (and two days in transit), using President Faust's father's journals to guide them to the various places he had fought in World War I. Those eight days were the first time in President Faust's years as a General Authority that he had taken that much time off—and it was the first trip he had taken overseas (or almost anywhere, for that matter) that did not involve a Church assignment.

The four men made their way through France, with the sons taking turns driving and navigating, and Jim tells of how fortunate they were to arrive at museums five minutes before an English tour was scheduled or pull up to a cathedral just as a car was pulling out of an overflowing parking lot. "It quickly turned into a joke that we really liked traveling with Dad," Jim says.

Even without any assignments, and in a country with a relatively small Latter-day Saint population, President Faust still came upon those who recognized him. One day at noon, as he and his sons were eating hot dogs they had purchased from a vendor in a park, a group of students from Bountiful, Utah, saw him and came over to visit. Embarrassed that he was eating and they weren't, President Faust bought hot dogs for the entire group.

Another day, President Faust says, as he and his sons walked along the beaches of Normandy, "An LDS woman, accompanied by a non-Mormon friend, came up and said, right out of the blue, `Hello, President Faust.' I didn't have on a suit or a white shirt, but she recognized me. Then she said to her friend, `This is one of our prophets,' and she began to cry. Meeting her that way made me feel very, very humble."

As the four men traveled, they also reflected on the life of their father and grandfather, and especially on the qualities of loyalty, devotion, and integrity that were so evident as he served his country and then throughout the rest of his life. President Faust valued the time together with his sons and says, "I had a perfect trip with our daughters in England, and I had a perfect trip with our sons in France. I had the chance to spend two nights in a room with each of my boys, and we had a chance to talk about them and their families. It was choice."

Marcus adds, "As my father gets older, I've noticed that more and more his heart is turning to his father and mother and grandparents and aunts and uncles. I think he has a greater perspective of the past and the future, and I think he is trying to pass some of those stories and our heritage on to us." Marcus also notes that the one difficulty in planning the trip was convincing his father to leave Sister Faust for such a long time. "I don't think he would have done that for any other reason," Marcus says, adding, "he hates to go even twenty-four hours without her."

Susan tells of how she and Marcus went to a department store to buy a lamp for Sister Faust and of calling to explain the choices to her in-laws. "I described two lamps, one of which was twice as expensive as the other, and, of course, Mother wanted to be conservative and get the less expensive of the two. But Dad said, `Now, Susan, we don't buy many lamps, and the price doesn't matter.' If we had been buying something for him, price certainly would have mattered; but because the lamp was for his Ruthy, it didn't."

President Faust's secretaries often see the tenderness and love he shows for Sister Faust, and Sister Bury tells of a day when the four of them had lunch together and Sister Faust was commenting on a new pair of glasses she had, which she didn't feel comfortable in. "President Faust listened and then said, `Oh, I like what's behind them.'"

In commenting on the priority President Faust places on his relationship with each member of his family, Janna says, "I think he has worked hard to implement in his family those things he has learned in his Church positions. Our family is a microcosm of the ten-million-member church that he helps to preside over. Even as he speaks in general conference, I have noticed that those talks are for his family every bit as much as they're for the Church as a whole."

In his October 1997 address to the priesthood session of general conference, President Faust indicated his own need to be reminded of and remain committed to the gospel principles he has taught throughout the world for some sixty years:

President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., a counselor in the First Presidency, used to say from this pulpit, "Brethren, I hope I can remain faithful to the end." At that time, President Clark was in his 80s.

As a young man, I could not understand how this wise, learned, experienced, righteous Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ could have any concern for his own spiritual well-being. As I approach his age, I now understand. I have the same concern for myself, for my family, and for all of my brethren of the priesthood. Over my lifetime, I have seen some of the most choice, capable, and righteous of men stumble and fall. They have been true and faithful for many years and then get caught in a web of stupidity and foolishness which has brought great shame to themselves and betrayed the trust of their innocent families, leaving their loved ones a legacy of sorrow and hurt.

My dear brethren, all of us, young and old, must constantly guard against the enticements of Satan.fn

Elder Neal A. Maxwell once observed, "President Faust has not pitched his tent on the hillside and said, `This is as far as I can make it.' Rather, he continues to climb each day in terms of his intellectual perceptivity and his spirituality. His teachings reflect that. His life reflects that."

What motivates him in that constant climb to serve more effectively was expressed in a moment he shared at the conclusion of his grandson Jason Coombs's missionary farewell in 1997. He began his brief remarks by quoting the words of the Apostle Peter, who said, "For we have not followed cunningly devised fables, when we made known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eyewitnesses of his majesty" (2 Pet. 1:16).

Then, alluding to the family he and Elder W. Grant Bangerter had tracted out in 1940 that subsequently joined the Church, he continued,

Jason has been called to serve in Curitiba, Parana. In 1940, there were no members of the Church in Curitiba, nor in the whole state of Parana, so far as we knew. There are now seven stakes in the vicinity of Curitiba.

The rest of that story is that Sister Faust and I were privileged to go back forty-seven years later to Curitiba, Parana. The Valeixo family, which we had found, came to the airport. These children, these grandchildren, had now grown old and had gray hair. As we walked out from the airplane, it seemed as if the whole family descended upon us, and in the loving style of the Latins, there were many abracos, or hugs. But one of the women, now a grayhaired grandmother, took my two hands. She wept in an expression of appreciation and gratitude, and the tears from her eyes dropped on the backs of my hands. She then took her other hand and rubbed the tears into the backs of my hands as if they were salve.

Now, I repeat, I was not the one who taught her. I was not the one who baptized her. But I was the humble messenger who, with my companion, brought the words of truth and salvation to this family. And I think that in all my life, I don't remember a greater expression of gratitude for anything I have done than that woman who wiped her tears from the backs of my hands. This is the work of God.

From his service as a missionary through every subsequent calling he has accepted, James Esdras Faust has served as an unassuming yet stalwart emissary of the Savior. In so doing, he, like Peter, has been an eyewitness of the Savior's majesty as he has watched the work grow throughout the world. He has traveled to every corner of the kingdom. He has ministered to the Saints in countless and varied ways. In the view of those who have seen him serve, he has made significant contributions to the growth of the Church. In his estimation, he has been the humblest, even the weakest, of those whom the Lord has called as His "especial witnesses" to the world, with his efforts having value only as he has served in the strength of the Lord.

NOTES

1999 Deseret Book Co.
