James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

PART 2

THE TEACHINGS OF JAMES E. FAUST

ABORTION

IN TIMES PAST we have looked upon a person who saves another human life as a great hero; yet now we have come to a time when the taking of an unborn human life for nonmedical reasons has become tolerated, made legal, and accepted in many countries of the world. But making it legal to destroy newly conceived life will never make it right. It is consummately wrong. ("The Sanctity of Life," Ensign, May 1975, 28.)

MOTHER TERESA DELIVERED a message that cut to the very heart and soul of the social ills afflicting America, which traditionally has given generously to the peoples of the earth, but now has become selfish. She stated that the greatest proof of that selfishness is abortion. . . . "If we accept that a mother can kill even her own child, how can we tell other people not to kill each other? . . . any country that accepts abortion is not teaching its people to love, but to use any violence to get what they want." ("Mother Teresa Has Anti-Abortion Answer," Salt Lake Tribune, 15 Feb. 1994.)

Then she alluded to the concern that has been shown for orphan children in India and elsewhere in the world, for which she expressed gratitude. But she continued, "These concerns are very good. But often these same people are not concerned with the millions who are being killed by the deliberate decision of their own mothers. And this is what is the greatest destroyer of peace today—abortion, which brings people to such blindness." (Ibid.). . .

In conclusion Mother Teresa pled for pregnant women who don't want their children to give them to her. She said, "I am willing to accept any child who would be aborted and to give that child to a married couple who will love the child, and be loved by the child." (Ibid.) What consummate spiritual courage this remarkable old woman demonstrated. How the devil must have been offended! Her remarkable declaration, however, was not generally picked up by the press or the editorial writers. Perhaps they felt more comfortable being politically or socially correct. After all, they can justify their stance by asserting that everyone does it, or it is legal. Fortunately the scriptures and the message of the prophets cannot be so revised. ("Trying to Serve the Lord without Offending the Devil," BYU Speeches, 15 Nov. 1994, 60-61.)

ONE OF THE most evil myths of our day is that a woman who has joined hands with God in creation can destroy that creation because she claims the right to control her own body. Since the life within her is not her own, how can she justify its termination and deflect that life from an earth which it may never inherit?

The great medical profession, for which I have such great respect [and] that for centuries has been committed to the preservation of life under the cardinal principles of treatment—"do no harm" and "protect life"—now finds itself destroying almost a million unborn children a year in the United States alone. Each of these, because of tiny chromosomal differences, would have been different from any other person born in the world. How many with special gifts like unto Moses, Leonardo da Vinci, and Abraham Lincoln might have been among them? ("The Sanctity of Life," Ensign, May 1975, 28-29.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
