James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

APOSTASY

AMONG THE ACTIVITIES considered apostate to the Church include when members" (1) repeatedly act in clear, open, and deliberate public opposition to the Church or its leaders; (2) persist in teaching as Church doctrine information that is not Church doctrine after being corrected by their bishops or higher authority; or (3) continue to follow the teachings of apostate cults (such as those that advocate plural marriage) after being corrected by their bishops or higher authority" (General Handbook of Instructions [1989], p. 10-3).

Those men and women who persist in publicly challenging basic doctrines, practices, and establishment of the Church sever themselves from the Spirit of the Lord and forfeit their right to place and influence in the Church. Members are encouraged to study the principles and the doctrines of the Church so that they understand them. Then, if questions arise and there are honest differences of opinion, members are encouraged to discuss these matters privately with priesthood leaders. ("Keeping Covenants and Honoring the Priesthood," Ensign, Nov. 1993, 38.)

THE DISPENSATION OF divine truth in which we now live, in distinction from previous dispensations, will not be destroyed by apostasy. This is in fulfillment of Daniel's prophecy that "the God of heaven [would] set up a kingdom which shall never be destroyed" nor "left to other people." (Dan. 2:44; D&C 138:44.) President John Taylor affirmed this also when he said, "There is one thing very certain . . . and that is, whatever men may think, and however they may plot and contrive, that this Kingdom will never be given into the hands of another people. It will grow and spread and increase, and no man living can stop its progress." (Journal of Discourses, 25:348; also 14:367.) ("The Prophetic Voice," Ensign, May 1996, 5.)

OVER THE YEARS many offshoots and splinter groups have not stayed with the Brethren. This is not a new phenomenon. After the Crucifixion of the Savior, Peter and the Apostles were preaching to a hostile audience. Gamaliel, a man learned in the law, defended their right to preach. After recalling the ill fate of two different groups that had risen up and drawn people away, he presented this sure test of truth. Said he: "If this counsel or this work be of men, it will come to nought:

"But if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it; lest haply ye be found even to fight against God." (Acts 5:38-39.)

In the great Sermon on the Mount, the Savior posed a poignant question: "Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles?" He goes on to say: "A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. . . . Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them." (Matt. 7:16-20.) The sweet fruits of this work are now known over much of the earth. ("The Prophetic Voice," Ensign, May 1996, 6.)

THOMAS B. MARSH was [a] favored associate of the Prophet Joseph. Over this pulpit in the April 1984 general conference, President Hinckley reminded us that Brother Marsh was serving as the President of the Quorum of the Twelve when he chose to disregard the decisions of the First Presidency and other Church leaders in a dispute between his wife and another woman over some milk strippings. (Gordon B. Hinckley, "Small Acts Lead to Great Consequences," Ensign 14 [May 1984]: 83.)

When, as did the prodigal son, he finally "came to himself" (Luke 15:17), he wrote to Heber C. Kimball, who had been his associate in the Quorum of the Twelve, stating:

"Having lost my wife three years since, I began to awake to a sense of my situation;. . . I know that I have sinned against Heaven and in thy sight and have rendered myself unworthy of your confidence; or of a place in the family of Heaven. . . . I deserve no place among you in the church even as the lowest member; but I cannot live long so without a reconciliation with the 12 and the Church whom I have injured." He then recited they typical lesson his years of rebellion had taught him: "The Lord could get along very well without me and He has lost nothing by my falling out of the ranks; But O what have I lost?! Riches, greater riches than all this world or many planets like this could afford." He pleaded with his brethren for comfort and peace and their smiles upon him. (Thomas B. Marsh to Heber C. Kimball, 5 May 1857, Brigham Young Collection, Church Historical Department.)

After being rebaptized, Thomas came to Salt Lake City, where he asked Brigham Young, the President of the Church, for forgiveness. He was invited by President Young to speak at a Sunday service where Thomas offered this advice to his listeners: "If there are any among this people who should ever apostatize and do as I have done, prepare your backs for a good whipping, if you are such as the Lord loves. But if you will take my advice, you will stand by the authorities." (Journal of Discourses 5:207.) ("The Prophetic Voice," Ensign, May 1996, 7.)

I BELIEVE THOSE who find fault would be surprised at how often the leadership of the Church prays for them. . . .

We do not wish any who have questions [about the Church] to prove that they are sincere in their feelings by leaving the Church. That is not what we want. We hope that their sincerity would be manifested rather by building upon those feelings that have kept them in the Church. Their faith can be strengthened by following their intuitive judgment and the purest and noblest feelings of their own souls. By looking to a source higher than themselves, they can receive answers to their questions from the divine source. If there have been some mistakes, there is a way back. The doors are wide open; welcoming arms are outstretched. There is a place for all; there is a contribution for each to make.

In the spirit of Wilford Woodruff's letter to Lyman Wight, an Apostle who became separated from the leadership of the Church, we say to all: "Come home to Zion, mingle in our midst, confess and forsake your sins, and do right, as . . . all men have to do, in order to enjoy the favor of God, and the gift of the Holy Ghost, and have fellowship with the Saints. . . . We all feel interested in your welfare; you have no enemies here; the longer you stay away from us, the more alienated your feelings become" (quoted in Ronald G. Watt, "A Dialogue between Wilford Woodruff and Lyman Wight," Brigham Young University Studies, Autumn 1976, p. 113).

The leadership of the Church will continue to pray for its critics, its enemies, and those who seek to do it harm. ("The Abundant Life," Ensign, Nov. 1985, 7, 9.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
