James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

BIRTH CONTROL

I [WISH TO] speak. . . of the present-day challenge to the words of the Lord recorded in Genesis: "Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth." (Gen. 1:28.) All my life I have heard the argument that the earth is overpopulated. Much controversy surrounded a recently concluded United Nations International Conference on Population and Development held in Cairo, Egypt. No doubt the conference accomplished much that was worthwhile. But at the very center of the debate was the socially acceptable phrase "sustainable growth." This concept is becoming increasingly popular. How cleverly Satan masked his evil designs with that phrase.

Few voices in the developed nations cry out in the wilderness against this coined phrase "sustainable growth." In Forbes Magazine of September of this year, a thoughtful editorial asserts that people are an asset not a liability. It forthrightly declares as preposterous the broadly accepted premise that curbing population growth is essential for economic development. The editorial then states convincingly that "free people don't exhaust resources, they create them." (Forbes Magazine, September 12, 1994, p. 25.)

An article in the U.S. News and World Report entitled "Ten Billion for Dinner, Please," states that the earth is capable of producing food for a population of at least eighty billion, eight times the ten billion expected to inhabit the earth by the year 2050. One study estimates that with improved scientific methods the earth could feed as many as one thousand billion people. ("Ten Billion for Dinner, Please," U.S. News and World Report, September 12, 1994, pp. 57-60.) Those who argue for sustainable growth lack vision and faith. The Lord said, "For the earth is full, and there is enough and to spare." (D&C 104:17.) That settles the issue for me. It should settle the issue for all of us. The Lord has spoken. ("Trying to Serve the Lord without Offending the Devil," BYU Speeches, 1994-1995, 61-62.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
