James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

BOOK OF MORMON

SOME TIME AGO I held in my mother's copy of her favorite book. It was a timeworn copy of the Book of Mormon. Almost every page was marked; in spite of tender handling, some of the leaves were dogeared, and the cover was worn thin. No one had to tell her that one can get closer to God by reading the Book of Mormon than by any other book. She was already there. She had read it, studied it, prayed over it, and taught from it. As a young man I held her book in my hands and tried to see, through her eyes, the great truths of the Book of Mormon to which she so readily testified and which she so greatly loved.

As a young boy in the Cottonwood Ward, I was greatly impressed when I listened to James H. Moyle tell in sacrament meeting of his having heard both Martin Harris and David Whitmer, two of the witnesses of the Book of Mormon, affirm their testimony concerning that book. They, along with Oliver Cowdery, had testified in connection with the original publication of the Book of Mormon "that an angel of God came down from heaven, and he brought and laid before our eyes, that we beheld and saw the plates, and the engravings thereon; and we. . . bear record that these things are true" ("The Testimony of Three Witnesses," Book of Mormon). . . .

However, the Book of Mormon did not yield its profound message to me as an unearned legacy. I question whether one can acquire an understanding of this great book except through singleness of mind and strong purpose of heart. We must ask not only if it is true, but also do it in the name of Jesus Christ. Said Moroni, "Ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost" (Moro. 10:4). ("The Keystone of Our Religion," Ensign, Nov. 1983, 9.)

THE IMPORTANCE OF the Book of Mormon in our history and theology cannot be overestimated. The Book of Mormon is the text for this dispensation. Nothing took priority over getting the Book of Mormon translated and published. Everything was held until that was accomplished. There were no apostles until it came into being. Ten days after its publication the Church was organized. It preceded missionary work because Samuel Smith needed to have it in hand before he could go forward as the first missionary of the Church. Both D&C 17 and 20 of the Doctrine and Covenants indicate that the Brethren could not pretend to know the divinity of the latter-day work until the Book of Mormon was translated.

Furthermore, the translation process was the education of Joseph Smith. Like so many of the young missionaries in the field, when the Lord called Joseph Smith, he was a young man, uneducated, unrefined, unremarkable in the eyes of the world. . . .

The doctrines he learned, the truths revealed during translation, and the principles taught in the process of laboring over the book all contributed to his education. Even as the Book of Mormon operates as a "keystone of our religion," so the process of translation was the keystone of the prophet's education.

The Book of Mormon was central to Joseph Smith's coming to an understanding of the doctrines of the restoration and of his role in this mission and of his responsibility to it. Surely the First Vision alerted young Joseph to the fact that he had special responsibilities, but he was not given the fullness of this except through dealing with the Book of Mormon and its translation. The nature of his prophetic responsibilities became clear in the four years before he was allowed even to obtain the plates; the confirmation of his responsibility to translate the record perhaps came only after he had the plates in his possession and was commanded to make it available to this generation. ("Joseph Smith and the Book of Mormon," Mission Presidents Seminar, Provo, Utah, 26 June 1987.)

MOST OBJECTIVE, ANALYTICAL scholars have come to recognize that it would have been impossible for an uneducated boy such as Joseph Smith, reared on the frontiers of America, to write the Book of Mormon. It contains so many exalted concepts, has such different writing styles, and is compiled in such a way that no one person could be its author. The honest inquirer can be led by faith to believe that Joseph Smith did translate the Book of Mormon from ancient plates of gold which were written with engraved characters in the reformed Egyptian language. No other explanations which have seriously challenged Joseph Smith's own account of the Book of Mormon have been able to survive as being factually correct. The evidences of a century and a half continue, and these increasingly affirm that Joseph Smith spoke the truth, completely, honestly, and humbly. ("The Expanding Inheritance from Joseph Smith," Ensign, Nov. 1981, 76.)

A KEYSTONE KEEPS an arch in place; without a keystone the whole arch will collapse. Why is the Book of Mormon the keystone of our religion? Because it is central to our history and theology. It is the text for this dispensation. ("Joseph Smith and the Book of Mormon," Ensign, Jan. 1996, 7.)

ONE OF THE MOST significant contributions of Joseph Smith is his work in translating and publishing the Book of Mormon, a sacred volume of scripture brought forth from ancient records. When it was first published in 1830, there was little scientific or historical evidence to substantiate the claims of Joseph Smith that the record came from metallic plates and told of ancient civilizations on the North and South American continents. Today such outward evidences have been discovered and help confirm that Joseph Smith was telling the truth about the Book of Mormon. ("The Expanding Inheritance from Joseph Smith," Ensign, Nov. 1981, 76.)

TO ME IT IS inconceivable that Joseph Smith, without divine help, could have written this complex and profound book. There is no way that Joseph Smith, an unlearned young frontiersman, could have fabricated the great truths it contains, generated its great spiritual power, or falsified the testimony of Christ that it contains. The book itself testifies that it is the holy word of God. ("The Keystone of Our Religion," Ensign, Nov. 1983, 10.)

REFERENCES TO TEACHINGS also taught in the Old Testament and the New Testament are so numerous and overwhelming throughout the Book of Mormon that one can come to a definitive conclusion by logic that a human intellect could not have conceived of them all. But more important than logic is the confirmation by the Holy Spirit that the story of the Book of Mormon is true. ("The Keystone of Our Religion, Ensign, Nov. 1983, 10.)

THE TEST FOR understanding [the Book of Mormon] is preeminently spiritual. An obsession with secular knowledge rather than spiritual understanding will make its pages difficult to unlock. ("The Keystone of Our Religion, Ensign, Nov. 1983, 10.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
