James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

CHASTITY

AS MEMBERS OF the Church and particularly as holders of the priesthood, we believe in being chaste. There is no different or double standard for moral cleanliness for men and women in the Church. In fact, I believe holders of the priesthood have a greater responsibility to maintain standards of chastity before marriage and fidelity after marriage. The Lord has said, "Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord." (D&C 38:42.) This means being pure in thought as well as in deed. The Prophet Joseph Smith stated, "If we would come before God, we must keep ourselves pure, as He is pure." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 226.) If husband and wife will remain pure and chaste, completely devoted to each other during the storms and sunshine of life, their love for one another will deepen into something of supernal fulfillment. An early LDS Apostle, Parley P. Pratt, said, "From this union of affection, springs all the other relationships, social joys and affections diffused through every branch of human existence." (Encyclopedia of Mormonism, vol. 3, "Procreation," pp. 52-54.) ("We Seek After These Things," Ensign, May 1998, 44-45.)

SINCE BECOMING A parent is such a transcending blessing, and since each child is so precious and brings so much happiness, a cardinal purpose of marriage and of life itself is to bring forth new life within this partnership with God. Obligations inherent in the creation of precious human life are a sacred trust, which if faithfully kept, will keep us from degenerating into moral bankrupts and from becoming mere addicts of lust.

The responsibilities involved in the divine life-giving process, and the functions of our body, are so sacrosanct that they are to be exercised only within the marriage relationship. Those who do not accept and meet those responsibilities, for any reason, as well as those who do, should never depart from the law of chastity if they wish to be truly happy. All members of this Church seeking eternal joy and peace are expected to and will wish to come to the marriage altar free from sexual transgressions—chaste and pure. Any who fail to do so may find that they have cheated themselves of their own self-respect, dignity, and much of the great joy they seek in marriage. Because of the special inner peace, strength, and happiness it brings, chastity, as the law of God, is and always has been really "in," and unchastity is and always has been really "out." ("The Sanctity of Life," Ensign, May 1975, 27-28.)

CHASTITY BEFORE MARRIAGE and faithfulness after marriage are cardinal ingredients for the full flowering of sacred love between husband and wife. Chastity nurtures and builds feelings of self-worth and indemnifies against the destruction of self-image. ("The Dignity of Self," Ensign, May 1981, 9.)

BY THE WORD of the Lord, all men and women are to practice chastity before marriage and fidelity after marriage. "Thou shalt not commit adultery," said the Lord (Ex. 20:14), "nor do anything like unto it" (D&C 59:6). The Apostle Paul was more explicit in his epistle to the Corinthians (see 1 Cor. 6:9), as was Alma in the Book of Mormon (see Alma 39:1-13).

Alternatives to the legal and loving marriage between a man and a woman are helping to unravel the fabric of human society. That fabric, of course, is the family. These so-called alternative lifestyles cannot be accepted as right because they frustrate God's commandment for a life-giving union of male and female within a legal marriage (see Gen. 1:28). If practiced by all adults, these lifestyles would mean the end of family.

The scriptures clearly and consistently condemn all sex relations outside of legal marriage as morally wrong. Why is this so? It is so because God said so. It is so because we are made in the image of God, male and female (see Gen. 1:27). We are his spirit children (see D&C 76:24). We were with him in the beginning (see D&C 93:23). Bringing to pass our exaltation is his work and glory (see Moses 1:39). We are directed to be the children of light (see D&C 106:5). We are heirs to eternal life. The Spirit gives light to every man and woman who comes into the world (see D&C 84:46). ("Will I Be Happy?" Ensign, May 1987, 81.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
