James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

CHRISTMAS

CHRISTMAS AND THE holiday season is a wonderful time to help us to forgive and forget. We become our better selves and rise above the shackles that seem to bind us as we meet the concerns of the eternal every day. The holiday season is a wonderful time to find peace. It is a time to make new resolves and to hope for better days. The holiday season is a special time because we make time for family, loved ones, and friends. We seem to turn outward rather than inward. We think more of others, including strangers. We have the spirit of giving. The heavenly hosts who proclaimed the birth of Jesus declared, "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, goodwill toward men" (Luke 2:14). The good tidings of Christmas "shall be to all people" (Luke 2:10). ("Peace There Shall Be No End," Remarks delivered at the Washington, D.C., Temple Visitors Center, 1 Dec. 1993.)

CHRISTMAS IS A time when more Christians take part in religious ceremonies and celebrate the season of peace on earth, goodwill toward men. So much of the celebration of Christmas centers on the wonderful account of the Savior's birth in a manger. The custom of exchanging gifts may have come from the memory of the gifts brought by the Wise Men to give to the baby Jesus. (Matt. 2:11.). . .

Bringing happiness to others without their knowing the identity of the giver is, as Portia says in The Merchant of Venice, "twice blest;/It blesseth him that gives and him that takes." (Shakespeare, The Merchant of Venice, iv.i. 186-87.) [But] we celebrate Christmas principally to commemorate the birth of our Lord, Redeemer, and Savior, who is the King of Kings and Lord of Lords. In doing so we also open our hearts and souls to show our love for our families, friends, strangers, and all creatures of God. In this way we honor Him in the most important way we can—by keeping his commandment to "love one another" (John 15:1.2 for He has said, "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me." (Matt. 25:40.) (First Presidency Christmas Fireside, Salt Lake City, Utah, 8 Dec. 1996.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
