James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST

THE SAVING PRINCIPLES and doctrines of the Church are established, fixed, and unchangeable. Obedience to these absolutes is necessary to enjoy "peace in this world, and eternal life in the world to come." (D&C 59:23.) However, the manner in which the Church administers complex and varied worldwide challenges changes from time to time. Under guidance from living prophets, new guidelines and procedures are put in place. I welcome these inspired changes. They are a proof of the truthfulness of the restored gospel.

I have some fear, however, that some members consider guidelines and procedures to be as important as the timeless, immutable laws of the gospel. ("The Weightier Matters of the Law: Judgment, Mercy and Faith," Ensign, Nov. 1997, 53.)

WE SHOULD NOT be preoccupied with the lacquered image of the Church nor worry excessively about what people are going to think. Let us go ahead and do our work. Mostly, let us do what's right—for the right reason.

While serving many years ago as a guide on Temple Square, I found that visitors were unimpressed when I spoke of the holdings of the Church. All of a sudden, it got through to me. Here I have a responsibility to tell them about the beauties and wonders of eternity, and I am spending time talking about bricks and mortar, companies and things.

I think we can properly . . . focus on what we believe, what we try to teach, what we are and what we are trying to be and ought to be. We have the responsibility of saying it right and putting the best face on the Lord's business. But it has to be genuine and it has to be honest.

The Lord said, "By their fruits ye shall know them." We take the apples and we polish them. We wipe off the pears. We wash the grapes. And we put the fruit in the basket so that its natural beauty—its God-given beauty—is obvious and shines. (Address to Public Affairs Directors, 7 May 1991.)

SOME TIME AGO I was walking in the center of Salt Lake City, on my way to City Creek Canyon, where I usually walk every day. A car with an out-of-state license plate was driving by. It pulled over and stopped. The driver asked, "Where is the church of the Mormons?" I assumed they were thinking of some place or building. I took time to point out the Church Office Building, and the Church Administration Building, and the magnificent temple, and the historic tabernacle, most of which were visible from our vantage point. They thanked me and went on their way. . . .

How should I have answered? It has bothered me ever since. If I had pointed to my chest and said that the Church should be first and foremost in my heart, the inquiring travelers surely would have gone away somewhat bewildered. But I would have been more accurate than I was by directing him to our beloved, magnificent, sky-piercing spires; the great majestic dome; and the other world-famous monuments and edifices—wonderful and unique and great as they are. . . .

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is in our hearts, and when it is in our hearts as individuals, it will also be in our great buildings of worship, in our great educational institutions, in our magnificent temples, and in our homes and families. ("Where Is the Church?" BYU Speeches, 24 Sept. 1989, 31, 36.)

THERE IS ONLY one head of this church, and he is the Lord Jesus Christ. (Conference Report, Oct. 1994, 95.)

THE WORLDWIDE MISSION of the Church can be simply stated; it is to perfect the Saints, proclaim the gospel, and redeem the dead in order to bring God's children to Christ. ("An Untroubled Faith," Ensign, Mar. 1988, 70.)

A MAJOR REASON this church has grown from its humble beginnings to its current strength is the faithfulness and devotion of millions of humble and devoted people who have only five loaves and two small fishes to offer in the service of the Master. (Conference Report, Apr. 1994, 5.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
