James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

CITIZENSHIP

THE DESIRABILITY OF this country will persist so long as its citizenry are a God-fearing people with the integrity to obey the law of the land. This includes the laws we do not like as well as the laws we do like. ("The Integrity of Obeying the Law," Freedom Festival Fireside, Provo, Utah, 2 July 1995.)

AS DEMOCRACIES TEETER around the world, drug cartels take over countries in South America, and the dread disease AIDS destroys the infrastructure of countries in Central Africa, we feel quite smug and secure in the success of our democracy. We say, "It can't fail here." Yet a fair question to ask is whether our citizens are willing to pay the higher price required to preserve a popular sovereignty. Many are disinclined to make the effort to vote, or to serve in the armed forces in an unpopular war. Others are not willing to serve on juries, nor to render public service. Also of concern is the obsession with materialism, the measure of success seeming to be what we have rather than what we are. . . .

Private virtue embodies a nobility of soul based upon the Judeo-Christian values of faith, hope, and charity. Vetterli and Bryner contend that classical public virtues, to which the ancients encouraged even the magistrates to adhere, were "justice," "fortitude," "temperance," and "wisdom." . . . (Richard Vetterli and Gary Bryner, In Search of the Republic [Rowman and Littlefield], 1987, p. 20). The founders held these values to be absolutes in the body politic.

The cardinal virtues must be found in the hearts of the citizens, and the public virtue must subordinate individual desires for the greater good of society. ("In Preservation of the Republic," Remarks at the United States Courthouse, Salt Lake City, Utah, 20 Oct. 1988.)

I WONDER HOW this nation will preserve its enduring values. In my view, there is substantial governmental interest within the limits of the religious clauses of the Constitution in public prayer and expressions of all faiths which acknowledge the existence of deity. I believe this because in so doing, the transcendent principles of morality can be reached. Such prayer and expressions accommodate the abiding values shared by a great majority of our citizenry. It gives meaning to a transcendent spiritual reality and idealism which, in the past at least, was quite firmly held by the people of our society. The very essence of our concern for human welfare and alleviation of human suffering lies in our spiritual feelings and expressions.

So, how do we preserve the essence of our humanity? How can we hope to avoid future wars? Perhaps this may not be possible, but try we must; and we must begin in our homes. Our children and our grandchildren must be taught moral responsibility. The moral teachings of all of our churches of every denomination must find an honored place in our society. The general decline in the moral fabric of the citizenry places a greater responsibility on homes and churches to teach values—marriage, morality, decency, family responsibility, respect for others, patriotism and honoring and sustaining the law.

With all other citizens, we also have the right to vote for men and women who reflect our own sense of values. We can also express our views as all other citizens have a right to do in the legislative process of the state and the nation. With all others we can claim our rights of free expression. We can petition for the redress of grievances.

We can help educate the coming generation about their rights but, more importantly, about their duties. ("The Impact of World War II on Utah," World War II Commemoration, Ogden, Utah, 13 Aug. 1995.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
