James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

DEBT

MANY YEARS AGO when I was practicing law, I organized a company for one of the new car dealers in this area. I served as his legal counsel and a corporate officer for many years, and one of my sons has taken over my responsibilities as legal counsel. Recently we were both at his place of business. I noticed the rows and rows of beautiful, shiny, gleaming, expensive new cars. Out of concern I mentioned to the proprietor that if he did not get those cars sold, the finance charges would be exorbitant and eat up the profits. My son said, "Dad, don't look at it that way. Look at all the profit those cars will bring."

While I think he was more right than I, it suddenly occurred to me that my son had never been through a depression. We looked at the problem through different eyes because I am a child of the Great Depression. I cannot forget what a merciless taskmaster debt is. ("The Blessings of Adversity," BYU Speeches, 21 Feb. 1978, 27-28.)

WE MUST BE careful of the misuse of credit. The use of credit cards in many places has increased consumer debt to staggering proportions. I am reminded of the story of "an elderly farmer [who] wrote to a mail order house as follows: `Please send me one of the gasoline engines you show on page 787, and if it's any good, I'll send you a check.' In time he received the following reply: `Please send check. If it's any good, we'll send the engine.'" (Braude's Treasury of Wit and Humor, Jacob M. Braude, p. 45.)

Contemporary society rushes headlong to accumulate the material goods of this world. This leads many to think they can alter the law of the harvest, reaping rewards without paying the price of honest toil and effort. Wishing to prosper immediately, they speculate in high-risk financial schemes that promote instant wealth. This all too frequently results in economic reverses, sometimes even financial ruin. In Proverbs we read, "A faithful man shall abound with blessings: but he that maketh haste to be rich shall not be innocent." (Prov. 28:20.) ("We Seek After These Things," Ensign, May 1998, 44.)

LIVING OUR LIVES in the Lord's way means that we live providently. It means we live within our means and save a little for a rainy day. It means that we avoid debt as much as possible. When we borrow we not only have to repay the loan but the interest on the money borrowed. As President J. Reuben Clark, Jr. put it:

"Interest never sleeps nor sickens nor dies; it never goes to the hospital; it works on Sundays and holidays. . . . Once in debt, interest is your companion every minute of the day and night; you cannot shun it or slip away from it; you cannot dismiss it;. . . and whenever you. . . fail to meet its demands, it crushes you." (Conference Report, April 1938, p. 103.)

If we can say that we have managed our stewardship in the Lord's way, both temporally and spiritually, we will be surprised beyond our fondest dreams and expectations by the Lord's generosity as we account to Him for our stewardship. ("In the Lord's Way," Address at Ricks College Commencement, Apr. 28, 1995.)

THERE ARE SOME investment counselors who urge speculative credit practices described as "leverage," "credit wealth," and "borrow yourself rich." Such practices may work successfully for some, but at best they succeed only for a time. An economic reversal always seems to come, and many who have followed such practices find themselves in financial ruin and their lives in shambles.

Elder Ezra Taft Benson stated: "A large proportion of families with personal debt have no liquid assets whatsoever to fall back upon. What troubles they invite if their income should be suddenly cut off or seriously reduced! We all know of families who have obligated themselves for more than they could pay" ("Pay Thy Debt, and Live," BYU Speeches [Provo, 28 Feb. 1963], p. 10). ("Responsibility for Welfare Rests with Me and My Family," Ensign, May 1986, 20.)

OWNING A HOME free of debt is an important goal of provident living, although it may not be a realistic possibility for some. A mortgage on a home leaves a family unprotected against severe financial storms. Homes that are free and clear of mortgages and liens cannot be foreclosed on. When there are good financial times, it is the most opportune time to retire our debts and pay installments in advance. It is a truth that "the borrower is servant to the lender" (Prov. 22:7).

Many young people have become so hypnotized by the rhythm of monthly payments they scarcely think of the total cost of what they buy. They immediately want things it took their parents years to acquire. It is not the pathway to happiness to assume debts for a big home, an expensive car, or the most stylish clothes just so we can "keep up with the Joneses." Payment of obligations is a sacred trust. Most of us will never be rich, but we can feel greatly unburdened when we are debt-free.

The Lord said that it is important for the Church to "stand independent above all other creatures beneath the celestial world" (D&C 78:14). Members of the Church are also counseled to be independent. Independence means many things. It means being free of drugs that addict, habits that bind, and diseases that curse. It also means being free of personal debt and of the interest and carrying charges required by debt the world over. ("Responsibility for Welfare Rests with Me and My Family," Ensign, May 1986, 21.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
