James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

DISCIPLESHIP

IF WE PARTAKE of the sacrament regularly and are faithful to these covenants, the law will be in our inward parts and written in our hearts. Let me illustrate this with a story from the Church News:

"A group of religion instructors [were] taking a summer course on the life of the Savior and focusing particularly on the parables.

"When the final exam time came. . . the students arrived at the classroom to find a note that the exam would be given in another building across campus. Moreover, the note said, it must be finished within the two-hour time period that was starting almost at that moment.

"The students hurried across campus. On the way they passed a little girl crying over a flat tire on her new bike. An old man hobbled painfully toward the library with a cane in one hand, spilling books from a stack he was trying to manage with the other. On a bench by the union building sat a shabbily dressed, bearded man [in obvious distress].

"Rushing into the other classroom, the students were met by the professor, who announced they had all flunked the final exam.

"The only true test of whether they understood the Savior's life and teaching, he said, was how they treated people in need.

"Their weeks of study at the feet of a capable professor had taught them a great deal of what Christ had said and done." (Church News, "Viewpoint," 1 October 1988, p. 16.)

In their haste to finish the technicalities of the course, however, they failed to recognize the application represented by the three scenes that had been deliberately staged. They learned the letter but not the spirit. Their neglect of the little girl and the two men showed that the profound message of the course had not entered into their inward parts.

We must at times search our own souls and discover what we really are. Our real character, much as we would wish, cannot be hidden. It shines from within us transparently. Attempts to deceive others only deceive ourselves. We are often like the emperor in the fairy tale who thought he was arrayed in beautiful garments when he was in fact unclothed. ("Search Me, O God, and Know My Heart," Ensign, May 1998, 18.)

TRUE DISCIPLES ARE those who go beyond simply believing. They act out their belief. Said the Savior, "If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself" (John 7:17). Disciples follow the Divine Master. Their actions speak in symphonic harmony with their beliefs. They know who they are. They know what God expects of them. They mirror inner peace and certainty concerning the mission and resurrection of Christ. They hunger and thirst after righteousness. They know they are here on this earth for a purpose. They understand life after death. They believe that the transcendent event in the ministry of the Christ was the Atonement, culminating in the Resurrection.

The prophet Ether says that a disciple may with "surety hope for a better world,. . . which hope cometh of faith, maketh an anchor to the souls of men, which would make them sure and steadfast, always abounding in good works" (Ether 12:4). ("The Resurrection," Ensign, May 1985, 30.)

RECENTLY IN SOUTH America, a seasoned group of outstanding missionaries was asked, "What is the greatest need in the world?" One wisely responded: "Is not the greatest need in all of the world for every person to have a personal, ongoing, daily, continuing relationship with the Savior?" Having such a relationship can unchain the divinity within us, and nothing can make a greater difference in our lives as we come to know and understand our divine relationship with God.

We should earnestly seek not just to know about the Master, but to strive, as He invited, to be one with Him (see John 17:21), to "be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man" (Eph. 3:16). ("A Personal Relationship with the Savior," Ensign, Nov. 1976, 58.)

THE REPLENISHING OF our inner selves occurs as we come to know the Savior through keeping his commandments and serving him. ("He Restoreth My Soul," Ensign, Oct. 1997, 2.)

CHRISTLIKE CONDUCT FLOWS from the deepest well-springs of the human heart and soul. ("Search Me, O God, and Know My Heart," Ensign, May 1998, 20.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
