James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

DIVORCE

SOME YEARS AGO, I was consulted by a woman who desired a divorce from her husband on grounds which, in my opinion, were justified. After the divorce was concluded, I did not see her again for many years. A chance meeting with her on the street was very surprising. The years of loneliness and discouragement were evident in her once beautiful face.

After passing a few pleasantries, she was quick to say that life had not been rich and rewarding for her and that she was tired of facing the struggle alone. Then came a most startling disclosure, which, with her permission, I share. She said, "Bad as it was, if I had to do it over again, knowing what I do now, I would not have sought the divorce. This is worse.". . .

Divorce can be justified only in the most rare of circumstances, because it often tears people's lives apart and shears family happiness. Frequently in a divorce the parties lose much more than they gain. ("The Enriching of Marriage," Ensign, Nov. 1977, 9.)

THERE ARE NO simple, easy answers to the challenging and complex questions of happiness in marriage. There are also many supposed reasons for divorce. Among them are the serious problems of selfishness, immaturity, lack of commitment, inadequate communication, unfaithfulness; and all of the rest, which are obvious and well known.

In my experience there is another reason which seems not so obvious but which precedes and laces through all of the others. It is the lack of a constant enrichment in marriage, it is an absence of that something extra which makes it precious, special, and wonderful, when it is also drudgery, difficult, and dull. ("The Enriching of Marriage," Ensign, Nov. 1977, 10.)

I SUGGEST THAT the devil takes some delight every time a home is broken up, even where there is no parent to blame. This is especially so where there are children involved. The physical and spiritual neglect of children is one of the spawning grounds for so many of the social ills of the world. ("Trying to Serve the Lord without Offending the Devil," BYU Speeches, 15 Nov. 1994, 62.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
