James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

EDUCATION

THE LORD HAS said that "every man [and woman] may give an account unto me of the stewardship which is appointed unto him [or her]" (D&C 104:12). For what will we be required to give a stewardship accounting? "As a steward over earthly blessings, which I have made and prepared" (D&C 104:13). The Lord further explains that as we handle our stewardships "it must needs be done in mine own way" (D&C 104:16). While that scripture is most frequently quoted to refer to temporal things, it also means to me that all knowledge should be acquired and applied, both temporally and spiritually, in the Lord's way.

While [in college], you have spent most of your time on secular learning, and that is appropriate. But that does not mean that your application of that knowledge should be primarily secular rather than spiritual. At your age, one is justified in asking, What is more important in the learning process, the secular or the spiritual? I don't know that the two can be clearly separated, but I suggest that you will learn faster and better and more surely through the spiritual. Through the gift of the Holy Ghost we can "learn all things," and if that is not enough, we are also told that we can learn the truth of all things by that same power (see John 16:13). ("In the Lord's Way," Address at Ricks College Commencement, 28 Apr. 1995.)

LEARNING AND EDUCATION have always been the hallmark of our people. Every president of the Church, beginning with President Joseph Smith, has zealously fostered, encouraged, and supported the cause of education. The reason for this emphasis is that education equates with our eternal well-being. In a First Presidency message dated March 26, 1907, the Brethren said: "To the Latter-day Saints, salvation itself, under the atonement of Christ, is a process of education. That knowledge is a means of eternal progress, was taught by Joseph Smith:—It is impossible for a man to be saved in ignorance.—A man is saved no faster than he gets knowledge."—"The glory of God is intelligence." (Teachings of Latter-day Prophets, Messages of the First Presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 4 [1901-1915]: 146-47.) ("Learning for Eternity," BYU Speeches, 18 Nov. 1997, 76-77.)

IN THE LAW school I attended not far from here, our dean told us we were studying the law so that we could learn to think straight. He said the law would change, but if we could learn to think critically by separating the wheat from the chaff, we would be better qualified to become effective advocates. Brigham Young stated it better: "Education is the power to think clearly, the power to act well in the world's work, and the power to appreciate life." (Brigham Young, quoted by George H. Brimhall in "The Brigham Young University," Improvement Era, vol. 23, no. 9 [July 1920], p. 831.)

Thinking clearly does not mean we can think "by infection, and catch an opinion like a cold." (John Ruskin, Humorous Quotations, p. 191.) Thinking clearly is the ability to discern things that matter most and separate them from things of less importance. We can think more clearly when we:

Questions—in the sense of searching, not doubting—seem to be essential for learning. They are a primary means of expressing curiosity, the self-motivation to search for knowledge. Indeed, many of the Prophet Joseph Smith's revelations "came in response to enquiry, in response to prayer. `Ask and ye shall receive'; `Seek and ye shall find,' seems to have been the principle on which the Lord has acted with reference to giving revelations." Such inquiries "may be considered as a condition precedent to his receiving revelations." (B. H. Roberts, History of the Church, 2:210, ft; 5:34.) ("Learning for Eternity," BYU Speeches, 18 Nov. 1997, 76-77.)

DEALING WITH LOFTY issues should not generate pride, which is an enemy to learning spiritual things. The training of the heart comes by and through the Holy Spirit. reaching for eternity requires an understanding heart. We can all learn from the great Solomon who, when he was made the king of Israel, said, "I am but a little child: I know not how to go out or come in . . .

"Give therefore thy servant an understanding heart to judge thy people, that I may discern between good and bad: for who is able to judge this thy so great a people?" (1 Kgs. 3:7, 9.)

This so pleased the Lord that he said, "I have given thee a wise and an understanding heart; so that there was none like thee before thee, neither after thee shall any arise like unto thee." (1 Kgs. 3:12.) ("Learning for Eternity," BYU Speeches, 18 Nov. 1997, 77.)

ALL OF US know examples of gospel scholars who have been preoccupied with every jot and tittle of historical fact and gospel scholarship. We wonder if their supposed erudition could in part be an ego trip. Are they looking for motes in another gospel scholar's eyes, while they have great beams in their own? In my experience, a few are often short on the weightier matters of the law: justice, tolerance, mercy, kindness, and forgiveness. ("A Legacy of the New Testament," 12th Annual CES Religious Educators' Symposium, 12 Aug. 1988.)

FOR 25 YEARS I have been privileged to walk with and sit at the feet of the prophets almost daily. Some have excelled academically, or in the business world. Others achieved distinction in medicine, science, or in law. Yet they are all men of great humility and wisdom. They bear witness, as expressed by our late President Howard W. Hunter, that "Belief must be realized in personal achievement. Real Christians must understand that the gospel of Jesus Christ is not just a gospel of belief; it is a plan of action. His gospel is a gospel of imperatives, and the very nature of its substance is a call to action." (Conference Report, Apr. 1967, 118.) Do not become puffed up with pride as you progress in secular learning. ("Learning for Eternity," BYU Speeches, 18 Nov. 1997, 78-79.)

MAY I GIVE you four suggestions which might be used to find answers to doctrinal or historical conflicts or doubts?

First, rescue that which is deep down in your soul. Follow that which is intuitive, the purest and most noble feelings of your being.

Second, use the Holy Spirit as a sieve. Employ a spiritual light to read by and interpret everything. Where there is a lapse and gaps and some seeming contradictions, pray diligently and study for answers.

Third, learn to be patient. Not everything can be answered now. In a way, a person must earn the right to enjoy the companionship of the Spirit. Alma reminds us that we must repent, exercise faith, bring forth good works, and pray continually. (Alma 26:22.)

Fourth, it is easy to doubt. It is much more mature and responsible to question and diligently and prayerfully search for the truth. Often, doubters have not paid their dues in terms of work, study, and prayer. ("The Voice of the Spirit," Latter-day Saint Student Association, Salt Lake City, Utah, 27 Oct. 1985.)

FOR MANY STUDENTS in higher education, going to a university is a game, a self-defeating game. To them it is a process of cramming like the seagulls in pioneer times when the crops were threatened by crickets. The gulls came and devoured, then they would fly off to disgorge and return to devour again. Learning is more than cramming for tests. Education is more than bulimia at exam time.

I learned that in my own discipline of the law. Reading the cases and briefing them for possible recitation in the classroom is difficult, arduous, challenging work. You cannot learn the rules of law just by having a good heart. Some found that they could buy canned briefs as a shortcut to the laborious work of reading and briefing the cases. However, in an hour of need in the courtroom, they were apt to find themselves doing a disservice to their clients and embarrassing themselves. There is no simple substitute for the hard work of learning well the rules of law. And so it is with us. In the courtroom of life we need to have well-honed skills.

President Lorenzo Snow taught that "The whole idea of Mormonism is improvement—mentally, physically, morally, and spiritually. No half-way education suffices for the Latter-day Saint." ("Learning for Eternity," BYU Speeches, 18 Nov. 1997, 79.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
