James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

ENDURANCE

I WOULD LIKE to say a word to you brethren who are a little older. President J. Reuben Clark, a counselor in the First Presidency, used to say from this pulpit, "Brethren, I hope I can remain faithful to the end. "At that time, President Clark was in his eighties. As a young man, I could not understand how this wise, learned, experienced, righteous Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ could have any concern for his own spiritual well-being. As I approach his age, I now understand. I have the same concern for myself, for my family, and for all of my brethren of the priesthood. Over my lifetime, I have seen some of the most choice, capable, and righteous of men stumble and fall. They have been true and faithful for many years and then get caught in a web of stupidity and foolishness which has brought great shame to themselves, and betrayed the trust of their innocent families, leaving their loved ones a legacy of sorrow and hurt.

My dear brethren, all of us, young and old, must constantly guard against the enticements of Satan. These evil influences come to us like tidal waves. We must choose wisely the books and magazines we read, the movies we see, and how we use modern technology, such as the Internet. ("Pioneers of the Future—Be Not Afraid, Only Believe," Ensign, Nov. 1997, 45.)

LIVING THE ETERNAL gospel every day may be harder than dying for the Church and the Lord. ("The Voice of the Spirit," Ensign, Apr. 1994, 8.)

IN THE HISTORY of this Church, we have "endured many things." As we look forward to the future, we "hope to be able to endure all things." I am confident that we will do so, even though no one knows fully what may lie ahead. How will we endure all things? The answer is amazingly simple: We shall do so by faith, by unity, and by following the prophets of God. It has been so in the past; it will be so in the future. ("We Seek After These Things," Ensign, May 1998, 46.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
