James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

EVIL, AVOIDANCE OF

I EMPHASIZE THAT fasting and prayer is a great way to receive the moral strength and spiritual strength to resist the temptations of Satan. But you may say this is hard and unpleasant. I commend to you the example of the Savior. He went into the desert, where he fasted and prayed to prepare himself spiritually for his ministry. His temptation by the devil was great, but through the purification of his spirit he was able to triumph over all evil.

Work is another deterrent to evil. The symbol of this state is the beehive. Our forefathers fostered industry and work. Elder John Longden quoted Herndon as saying: "Satan selects his disciples when they are idle; Jesus selected his when they were busy at their work either mending their nets or casting them into the sea." (John Longden, Conference Report, April 1966, 39.) ("Trying to Serve the Lord without Offending the Devil," BYU Speeches, Nov. 15, 1994, 64.)

BELIEVING INVOLVES FAITH and good works. We cannot be passive; we must actively avoid evil. This means that we do not trifle with sacred things. Families in this day and time should not only avoid evil but avoid the very appearance of evil. To combat these influences families must have family prayer, family home evening, and family scripture study.

How corrosive is the daily diet of pornography, immorality, dishonesty, disrespect, abuse, and violence that comes from so many sources. If we are not careful it will shake our spiritual moorings. Once we internalize these evils, it is very difficult to purge ourselves of them. . . .

In some ways we are the most challenged generation in the history of the world. We seem to be living in a time foreseen by King Benjamin. Said he, "And finally, I cannot tell you all the things whereby ye may commit sin; for there are divers ways and means, even so many that I cannot number them." Now comes this powerful warning: "But this much I can tell you, that if ye do not watch yourselves, and your thoughts, and your words, and your deeds, and observe the commandments of God, and continue in the faith of what ye have heard concerning the coming of our Lord, even unto the end of your lives, ye must perish." (Mosiah 4:29-30.) ("Pioneers of the Future—Be Not Afraid, Only Believe," Ensign, Nov. 1997, 45.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
