James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

FAITH

I AM PERSUADED that the miraculous and spectacular does not necessarily convert people to the gospel. Miracles are more to confirm a faith already held. After the ten lepers were healed by the Savior, only one even bothered to thank him, and I have found no convincing proof that even that one became a disciple. A quiet witness that Jesus is the Christ is more the product of a committed faith coming from dedication and sacrifice, an effort to keep God's commandments, and following the constituted priesthood authority of the Church. ("A Legacy of the New Testament," 12th Annual CES Religious Educators' Symposium, 12 Aug. 1988.)

IT IS IMPORTANT for us to nurture. . . a simple, untroubled faith. I urge complete acceptance of the absolutes of our own faith. At the same time, I urge you not to be unduly concerned about the intricacies, the complexities, and any seeming contradictions that seem to trouble many of us. Sometimes we spend time satisfying our intellectual egos and trying to find all the answers before we accept any.

We are all in pursuit of truth and knowledge. The nurturing of a simple untroubled faith does not limit us in the pursuit of growth and accomplishment. On the contrary, it may intensify and hasten our progress. This is so because our natural gifts and powers of achievement are increasingly enhanced by the endless growth of knowledge. In our belief, it is possible to be even a helper of the Father and of the Son and to be under their personal tutelage. ("An Untroubled Faith," BYU Speeches, 28 Sept. 1986, 46.)

TO HAVE A simple, untroubled faith, you must keep your spiritual innocence. That requires avoiding cynicism and criticism. This is the day of the cynics, the critics, and the pickle-suckers. Said President Hinckley: "Criticism is the forerunner of divorce, the cultivator of rebellion, sometimes a catalyst that leads to failure. In the Church, it sows the seed of inactivity and finally apostasy." (Church News, 3 July 1983, p. 10.) ("An Untroubled Faith," BYU Speeches, 28 Sept. 1986, 49.)

I HAVE A dear friend with whom I grew up. Although bright and able, he was not a scholarly type. The press of family needs and concerns limited his educational opportunities. He did not graduate from high school. He acquired an old, beat-up truck and began hauling sand and gravel for a few contractors. The work was seasonal and not at all productive. The old truck would frequently break down and need repairs.

In his teenage years he drifted some, but married a good woman and settled down. Their circumstances were economically straitened, but somehow they managed to get a house built on part of the family property. I was the bishop and called him to be the Aaronic Priesthood adviser. He took his calling seriously. He literally wore out the handbook, studying it. He had a notebook filled with dates when all the young men in the ward would reach the age to be advanced in the Aaronic Priesthood. He kept good track of the young men and kept the bishopric informed of their activities.

Some years after I was released, he became a member of our bishopric. He needed a little nudging to become a full tithepayer, but responded faithfully, as he had done before. Subsequently, he became our bishop. He served wonderfully and well. In the meantime, he and an associate had learned how to lay bricks and had formed a brick-contracting partnership. The difference between their work and the work of others was in the quality. They did beautiful work. They were in demand. He prospered and became well respected in the community. He also became the president of the local water company. After many successful years as a bishop, he was called to the high council and served well and faithfully. He is now a man of high affairs, respected and honored, although his formal education ended before high school graduation. With the advantage of a college education he no doubt would have achieved even more.

What caused him to succeed? Industry? Thrift? Self-reliance? Yes, but there was more. Conscientiously and untiringly, he sought to know and do the mind and the will of the Lord. He had a simple, untroubled faith. ("An Untroubled Faith," BYU Speeches, 28 Sept. 1986, 46-47.)

TO HAVE A simple, untroubled faith, we must accept some absolutes. . . . They are to believe:

. . . This untroubled faith can come by prayer, study, and a submissive willingness to keep as many commandments as we can. Let us be more specific.

As to the first absolute, the acceptance of Jesus as the Christ, we have two thousand years of teaching and tradition, which help the inquirer accept him as our Savior and Redeemer. So this absolute, initially, at least, may be the easiest to accept after study, prayer, and trying to follow his teachings.

The second absolute, the calling of Joseph Smith as the Prophet of the Restoration, may be more difficult for the honest seeker to accept. . . . To me, the only logical explanation for the majesty and success of his work is that he saw what he said he saw, and he was what he said he was. What he restored is so complete, so all-encompassing in concept, so majestic and awesome in potential, that only God himself could have been the author and motivating force behind it. The fruits of Joseph Smith's work, so plain for all to see, are also a testimony of the divinity of his work.

The third absolute, namely a testimony of the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon, in my opinion comes exactly as Moroni stated, by the power of the Holy Ghost, by asking God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if the book is true [see Moro. 10;4].

The fourth absolute is essential to enjoying an untroubled faith. It is the proposition that President Ezra Taft Benson is the inheritor of the restored keys, as was each of his predecessors since Joseph Smith. Some accept the Savior, the divine mission of Joseph Smith, and the Book of Mormon, but then think that after Joseph's time somehow the Brethren went astray. Many who have thought this have taken others with them, and their efforts have not prospered. ("An Untroubled Faith," BYU Speeches, 28 Sept. 1986, 50.)

I TAKE AS my text the simple but profound message of the Savior to the ruler of the synagogue. You will recall that the ruler was told that his daughter was dead and that he should not trouble the Master about it. . . .

The Savior's words to the leader of the synagogue capture the essence of this story: "Be not afraid, only believe." (Mark 5:36.) These five words comprise my message to you.

We must believe in God, the Eternal Father, and in His Son, Jesus Christ, and in the Holy Ghost. (See Mosiah 4:9.) We must believe in the Atonement and the Resurrection of the Savior. We must believe in the words of the prophets, both ancient and modern. We should also believe in ourselves.

Believing requires action. If you prepare to walk down the path of life, you can be rewarded beyond your dreams and expectations. But to achieve this, you must work very hard, save, be wise, and be alert. You must learn to deny yourselves of worldly gratification. You must be faithful in paying tithes; you must keep the Word of Wisdom; you must be free from other addictions. You must be chaste and morally clean in every respect. You should accept and be faithful in all of the calls that come to you. Steadiness and toil will serve you better than brilliance. ("Pioneers of the Future—Be Not Afraid, Only Believe," Ensign, Nov. 1997, 42-43.)

IF YOU TAKE each challenge one step at a time, with faith in every footstep, your strength and understanding will increase. You cannot foresee all of the turns and twists ahead. My counsel to you is to follow the direction of the Savior of the world: "Be not afraid, only believe." (Mark 5:36.) ("Pioneers of the Future—Be Not Afraid, Only Believe," Ensign, Nov. 1997, 43.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
