James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

FREEDOM OF RELIGION

EVERY AMERICAN HAS been taught that "freedom of religion" is the "first freedom" guaranteed by the Bill of Rights. The First Amendment to the Constitution recognizes the "free exercise of religion" as the pre-eminent position among Constitutional rights as intended by the Founding Fathers. Most Americans, however, have seen these principles being eroded.

The twin religious clauses of the Bill of Rights—"Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion nor prohibit the free exercise thereof"—are the golden threads which in the past have permitted those who believe in God to publicly affirm that there is a higher power that "rules in the affairs of men." . . .

In my opinion, the establishment and free exercise clauses should be read together to harmonize the importance of religious liberty with freedom from government regulation. Rather, today in our nation the establishment clause is being used to restrict religious institutions from playing a role in civic issues, and the recent interpolations of the free exercise clause in my opinion denies to some individuals their religious liberty. . . .

The basic concept of Anglo-Saxon-American jurisprudence has held, as affirmed by the Constitution, that God is the source of all of our basic rights, and that the principal function of government is only to secure those rights. May I quote from the Declaration of Independence: "We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights. . . . That to secure these rights governments are instituted among Man."

In contrast, the new secular religion of which I speak finds its source of right by invoking the power of the state. It seems to have little purpose, few common values for morality except self-interest. ("The Impact of World War II on Utah," World War II Commemoration, Ogden, Utah, 13 Aug. 1995.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
