James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

GOVERNMENT

ON THIS [4TH of July] holiday, we celebrate, as we have for 219 years, the establishment of a government in a country unlike any other in the history of the world. It has had at its very heart the concept of a government "instituted of God for the benefit of man" (D&C 134:1). The deepest taproots of our nation and state have lain in the very essence of our humanity, our faith in God. This nation as a democracy has as its basic foundation a government of laws and equality of all before the law. Under the Constitution it has the right and the duty to institute laws to protect its citizenry in their inalienable rights, recognizing that, as the Doctrine and Covenants says, "sedition and rebellion are unbecoming every citizen thus protected, and should be punished accordingly" (D&C 134:5). The government has the right and duty to enact laws within the institutions set up by the Constitution which are best calculated to secure the public interest while at the same time preserving the individual rights of its citizenry. ("The Integrity of Obeying the Law," Freedom Festival Fireside, Provo, Utah, 2 July 1995.)

I HAVE LIVED under military dictatorships for some years of my life. I have a great love for those countries and their people. But in those countries, the principal authority is the man who has the rubber stamp which grants authority and rights. The law is, in large measure, what the man in authority decides it is. The system of law in those countries evolved from the Roman system under which the emperor was above the law, and the state was the source of all individual rights. In some of those countries, inadequate respect was shown for stop signs or traffic lights or even civil authority. These countries were controlled in large measure by bureaucracy. From this experience I have learned that obedience to law must come from one's heart and conscience, reinforced by a patriotic feeling of duty and citizenship. "No man is above the law and no man below it," as Theodore Roosevelt put it. "Nor do we ask any man's permission when we require him to obey it" (The Story of Theodore Roosevelt and His Influence on Our Times, Noel F. Busch, Reynal & Company Inc., New York, 1963, p. 305). ("The Integrity of Obeying the Law," Freedom Festival Fireside, Provo, Utah, 2 July 1995.)

IN MY LIFETIME I have seen a decay in the respect for the legal system under which we live, and a disrespect and mistrust of civil authority. In my childhood all police officers were respected and looked up to as friends and protectors, as were judges and congressmen. In the recent bombing explosion in Oklahoma City, some of the heroes who risked their lives were the firemen and policemen who worked round the clock trying to save lives. Yet these same heroes are often defamed and slandered in other circumstances.

Cynicism and distrust of government are abroad in the land. A growing group of our citizenry, including businessmen and professional people, choose not to obey laws they do not like or think are wrong. Like Mr. Bumble in Dickens' Oliver Twist, they challenge what they don't like as he did when he said, "If the law supposes that, the law is a ass—a idiot" (Oliver Twist, chapter 51). I am quick to admit that some laws seem irrational, but they are the law, and should be changed by orderly process. I again draw from Theodore Roosevelt: "The best way to get rid of a bad law is to see that it is uniformly enforced" (The Story of Theodore Roosevelt and His Influence on Our Times, Noel F. Busch, Reynal & Company Inc., New York, 1963, p. 305). ("The Integrity of Obeying the Law," Freedom Festival Fireside, Provo, Utah, 2 July 1995.)

I BELIEVE THAT most governmental problems can usually be handled best at a level closest to the people. The principal suggestion I have . . . to cure some of the ills and irritations of government is to get personally involved. In a democracy, if we are not involved in our duty as citizens we have the kind of government we deserve. ("The Integrity of Obeying the Law," Freedom Festival Fireside, Provo, Utah, 2 July 1995.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
