James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

HONESTY

IT IS FREQUENTLY astounding to see the dereliction of people in keeping the standards of ordinary fairness and justice. This delinquency manifests itself in so many ways. It is sometimes evident in commercial transactions, as well as in private contacts. Injustice to others is manifest even in the way automobiles are sometimes driven. This unfairness and injustice results principally from one person seeking an advantage or an edge over another. Those who follow such a practice demean themselves greatly. How can those of us who do not practice ordinary fairness and justice have serious claim on the blessings of a just and a fair God?

Do some of us seek to justify our taking of shortcuts and advantage of others by indulging in the twin sophistries, "There isn't any justice" and "Everybody does it"? There are many others who seemingly prosper by violating the rules of God and the standards of decency and fair play. They appear to escape the imminent law of the harvest, which states, "Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap" (Gal. 6:7). Worrying about the punishment we think ought to come to others is self-defeating to us. ("Unwanted Messages," Ensign, Nov. 1986, 10.)

HONESTY IS A very important part of character. We have all seen men who think they are not accountable to the laws of men or of God. They seem to feel that the rules of human conduct do not apply to them. A popular philosophy is, "What can I get away with?" As someone once said, "The difference between a moral man and a man of honor is that the latter regrets a discreditable act even when it has worked." (H. L. Mencken, Dictionary of Humorous Quotations, edited by Evan Esar, New York, 1949, p. 126.)

Honesty begins when we are young. When I was eleven years old, I looked forward eagerly to my magical 12th birthday when I could become a deacon and a Scout. My mother helped me to learn the Articles of Faith, the Scout Law and Motto, and other requirements so that I would have a good start when that special birthday arrived.

. . . One day Mother left me to wash the dishes and clean the kitchen while she attended to a sick neighbor. I agreed to do these duties but put off doing the dishes. Time ran out and they didn't get done. In fact, they didn't even get started. When Mother came home and saw the kitchen, she put on her apron and went to the sink. She spoke only three words, which stung worse than the sting of a dozen hornets. They were the first three words of the Scout Law: "On my honor." That day I resolved that I would never give my mother cause to repeat those words to me again. ("We Seek After These Things," Ensign, May 1998, 44.)

WE ALL NEED to know what it means to be honest. Honesty is more than not lying. It is truth telling, truth speaking, truth living, and truth loving. John, a nine-year-old Swiss pioneer child who was in one of the handcart companies, is an example of honesty. His father put a chunk of buffalo meat in the handcart and said it was to be saved for Sunday dinner. John said, "I was so very hungry and the meat smelled so good to me while pushing at the handcart that I could not resist. I had a little pocket knife. . . . Although I expected a severe whipping when father found it out, I cut off little pieces each day. I would chew them so long that they got white and perfectly tasteless. When father came to get the meat he asked me if I had been cutting off some of it. I said, `Yes. I was so hungry I could not let it alone.' Instead of giving me a scolding or a whipping, father turned away and wiped tears from his eyes.'" (LeRoy R. And Ann W. Hafen, Handcarts to Zion, p. 190.). . .

Honesty is a principle, and we have our moral agency to determine how we will apply this principle. We have the agency to make choices; but ultimately, we will be accountable for each choice we make. We may deceive others, but there is One we will never deceive. From the Book of Mormon we learn, "The keeper of the gate is the Holy One of Israel; and he employeth no servant there; and there is none other way save it be by the gate; for he cannot be deceived, for the Lord God is his name." (2 Ne. 9:41.) ("Honesty—A Moral Compass," Ensign, Nov. 1996, 41-42.)

STEALING IS ALL too common throughout the world. For many their reasoning seems to be, "What can I get away with?" or "It's OK to do it as long as I don't get caught!" Stealing takes many forms, including shoplifting; taking cars, stereos, CD players, video games, and other items that belong to someone else; stealing time, money, and merchandise from employers; stealing from the government by the misuse of taxpayers' money or making false claims on our income tax returns; and borrowing without any intention of repayment. No one has ever gained anything of value by theft. . . . The stealing of anything is unworthy of a priesthood holder. ("Honesty—A Moral Compass," Ensign, Nov. 1996, 43.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
