James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

HUMILITY

NO STONE WALL separates the members of the Church from all of the seductions of the world. Members of the Church, like everyone else, are being surfeited with deceptions, challenges, and temptations. However, to those of enduring faith, judgment, and discernment, there is an invisible wall which they choose never to breach. Those on the safe side of this invisible wall are filled with humility, not servitude. They willingly accept the supremacy of God and rely upon the scriptures and counsel of His servants, the leaders of the Church. These leaders of the Church are men with human frailties, and are imperfect in their wisdom and judgment. Perfection in men is not found on the earth. But almost without exception these leaders sincerely, humbly, and prayerfully render great and dedicated Christian service to the best of their ability. More important, they hold a divine warrant and commission through which great and eternal blessings come to those who sustain and follow them. They are God's servants. ("The Abundant Life," Ensign, Nov. 1985, 8.)

THE LORD HAS a great work for each of us to do. You may wonder how this can be. You may feel that there is nothing special or superior about you or your ability. Perhaps you feel, or have been told, that you are stupid. Many of us have felt that and been told that. Gideon felt this when the Lord asked him to save Israel from the Midianites. Gideon said, "My family is poor in Manasseh, and I am the least in my father's house." (Judg. 6:15.) He had only three hundred men, but with the help of the Lord, Gideon defeated the armies of the Midianites. (See Judges.)

The Lord can do remarkable miracles with a person of ordinary ability who is humble, faithful, and diligent in serving the Lord and who seeks to improve himself. This is because God is the ultimate source of power. By the gift of the Holy Ghost we can not only "know all things" but even "the truth of all things." (Moro. 10:5.) ("Acting for Ourselves and Not Being Acted Upon," Ensign, Nov. 1995, 47.)

IN SPEAKING OF humility I do not refer to the "breast beating," "sackcloth and ashes" kind of humility. I refer to the humility that comes with inner strength and peace. It is the humility that can accept and live with one's own warts without cosmetics to hide them. It is important to learn to live with our incorrectable physical and mental defects without comment and without explanation. ("Self-Esteem: A Great Human Need," Brigham Young University Education Week address, 23 Aug. 1983.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
