James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

HUMOR, SENSE OF

AN IMPORTANT PART of the gospel message is that we not be too rigid, that we open up our minds, that we develop some tolerance and not be too quick to render judgment. I learned when I was making my living in the arena of the law that we do not always have all of the facts. There always seemed to be at least two sides to a question. Everything is not just black and white. The counsel of the Savior as he instructed his Twelve was, "Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves" (Matt. 10:16).

It is not always easy to achieve an appropriate balance. In addition to what we read in the newspapers, we can have brought right into our homes in color most of the problems of an entire world. We also have our own personal ups and downs and challenges. The stresses of life are real and rather constant. There is, however, a defense against much of this. A thoughtful man said, "There is no defense against adverse fortune which is, on the whole, so effectual as an habitual sense of humor" (Thomas Wentworth Storrow Higginson, Dictionary of Thoughts, J. G. Ferguson Publishing Co., 1969, p. 372). Humor is a defense against adversity.

For many years as I have blessed newborn children, including my own, I have blessed them with a sense of humor. I do this with the hope that it will help guard them against being too rigid, in the hope that they will have balance in their lives, in the hope that situations and problems and difficulties will not be overdrawn. ("The Study and Practice of the Laws of Men in Light of the Laws of God," Address to Brigham Young University law students, 22 Nov. 1987.)

CULTIVATING GOOD humor may be helpful in finding our own identity. Each of you young people are trying to find out who you really are. You can feel your surging powers and strengths, and yet with the many challenges that confront you now and lie ahead of you, you may have some inner concerns as to your ability to meet and cope with them. I wish to assure you that you will ride over the bumps and come quicker to your own identity if you cultivate the good humor which comes naturally. A thoughtful man said: "Humor is an affirmation of dignity, a declaration of man's superiority to all that befalls him." (Romain Gary, in Dictionary of Thoughts, J. G. Ferguson Publishing Co., 1969, p. 372). It is important to learn to laugh at yourself and poke fun at yourself. ("The Study and Practice of the Laws of Men in Light of the Laws of God," Address to Brigham Young University law students, 22 Nov. 1997.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
