James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

INTEGRITY

THE STANDARD OF the common thief, "What can we get away with?" has become the standard for many in the world rather than what our own integrity ought to demand that we do. What has happened to self-respect and personal integrity, which would not permit even entertaining the idea of doing cheap or small things? An example might be our relationship with the financial credit by which the world's commerce is carried on. Often we forget that those who extend credit to us are also extending trust and confidence in us. Our own integrity is involved. I recall my father speaking with profound respect of a man whom father as a lawyer had taken through bankruptcy. Given time, this man paid in full all of his creditors who had trusted him and extended confidence in him, even though he was legally relieved of paying the debts. Our own integrity is a substantial part of our individual worth. ("The Dignity of Self," Ensign, May 1981, 8.)

INTEGRITY IS THE value we set on ourselves. It is a fulfillment of the duty we owe ourselves. An honorable man or woman will personally commit to live up to certain self-imposed expectations. They need no outside check or control. They are honorable in their inner core.

Where does the soul play its part best? Is it in outward show? Or is it within, where no mortal eyes can penetrate and where we have an inner defense against the tragedies of life?

Integrity is the light that shines from a disciplined conscience. It is the strength of duty within us. Moses gave the following counsel: "If a man vow a vow unto the Lord, or swear an oath to bind his soul with a bond; he shall not break his word, he shall do according to all that proceedeth out of his mouth." (Num. 30:2.) ("Integrity, the Mother of Many Virtues," Ensign, May 1982, 47.)

BEING TRUE TO oneself at times requires extraordinary strength and courage. For instance, in the early days of the Church it was very unpopular, even dangerous, to uphold Joseph Smith as a prophet of God. Lyman Wight was one of those imprisoned by the leaders of a mob in 1839.

General Wilson advised Brother Wight, "We do not wish to hurt you nor kill you," and then following an oath said, "but we have one thing against you, and that is, you are too friendly to Joe Smith, . . . Wight, you know all about his character."

Brother Wight said, "I do, sir."

"Will you swear all you know concerning him?" said Wilson.

Brother Wight then told Wilson he "believed . . . Joseph Smith to be the most philanthropic man he ever saw, and possessed of the most pure . . . principles—a friend to mankind, a maker of peace."

Wilson then observed, "Wight, I fear your life is in danger, for there is no end to the prejudice against Joe Smith."

"Kill and be damned, sir," was Brother Wight's answer.

Returning later that night, Wilson told Lyman Wight: "I regret to tell you your die is cast; your doom is fixed; you are sentenced to be shot tomorrow morning on the public square in Far West, at eight o'clock."

Brother Wight answered, "Shoot, and be damned."

The decree of execution of the prisoners was revoked the next morning. (See History of the Church, 3:446-47.) ("Integrity, the Mother of Many Virtues," Ensign, May 1982, 47.)

HOLDERS OF THE priesthood of God should be men of impeccable character. I have always admired the integrity of Father Abraham when he returned from Egypt to Palestine. He came with his nephew, Lot. Soon, there was strife between the herdmen of Abraham's cattle and the herdmen of Lot's cattle. "And Abram said unto Lot, Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between me and thee, and between my herdmen and thy herdmen; for we be brethren." (Gen. 13:8.) Abraham offered Lot his choice of property, either on his left hand or on his right. Lot chose the more productive land to the east, and so Abraham took the land to the west. In course of time, Lot and all his household were captured in battle and taken to Dan, over a hundred miles to the north. When Abraham heard of his fate, he armed 318 of his servants and went in pursuit. He not only rescued Lot and his family but also restored them to their property in Sodom. The King of Sodom returned from exile and, in gratitude, offered Abraham the spoils of victory. But these Abraham declined, saying, "I will not take from a thread even to a shoelatchet . . . I will not take any thing that is thine, lest thou shouldest say, I have made Abram rich." (Gen. 14:23.) In these episodes, Abraham demonstrated his fairness, integrity, and faith. And the Lord rewarded him with both spiritual and earthly blessings so that ultimately he prospered far more than Lot. ("We Seek After These Things," Ensign, May 1998, 44.)

NATURAL, INHERENT INTEGRITY is manifested almost every hour of every day of our lives. Those who unjustly profit at the expense of others may gain a fortune, but they forfeit something more important, which is their own integrity. Taking advantage of others is a counterfeit form of true success and honor. ("Integrity, the Mother of Many Virtues," Ensign, May 1982, 48.)

COMPLETE AND CONSTANT integrity is a great law of human conduct. There need to be some absolutes in life. There are some things that should not ever be done, some lines that should never be crossed, vows that should never be broken, words that should never be spoken, and thoughts that should never be entertained.

Yet there is a place for mercy, for equity, and for forgiveness. Even the stalwart Peter, the chief Apostle, was forgiven for a moment of weakness (see Luke 22:54-62). . . . I believe this incident strengthened Peter's commitment. He was never to be weak again. The resolve borne of that disappointment in his own temporary weakness tempered his metal into the hardest steel. He proved his devotion every day of his life thereafter, and in his death. So it can be with all of us. When we have been less than we ought to be and have fallen below our own standards, we can have newfound resolve and strength by forsaking our weakness. ("Integrity, the Mother of Many Virtues," Ensign, May 1982, 48-49.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
