James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

JESUS CHRIST

HOW DO WE accept Jesus of Nazareth?

We joyfully accept him without reservation as the greatest personage who ever lived on the face of the earth.

We believe him to be the Messiah, the Redeemer.

We glory in his mission and his doctrine.

We delight in him as the firstfruits of them that slept.

We worship him as the second member of the Godhead of three.

We humbly come to the Father through him, believing his words. "I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me" (John 14:6).

A hallmark of a disciple is described in the words of the Master: "By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another" (John 13:35).

We can ask, with Job, the age-old question, "If a man die, shall he live again?" (Job 14:14). And the answering testimony is that Jesus Christ made the resurrection possible:

"For I know that my redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth:

"And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God" (Job 19:25-26).

We testify with Isaiah that "his name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace" (Isa. 9:6). Of the Resurrection we can declare with Paul: "O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?" (1 Cor. 15:55.) ("The Resurrection," Ensign, May 1985, 32.)

THE MESSAGE OF Christ is eternal truth. There is no truth that it is not encompassed within it. But learning the will of the Father and doing it are two different things. ("A Legacy of the New Testament," 12th Annual CES Religious Educators' Symposium, 12 Aug. 1988.)

FOR THOSE WHO have honest doubts, let us hear what eyewitnesses had to say about Jesus of Nazareth. The ancient apostles were there. They saw it all. They participated. No one is more worthy of belief than they. Said Peter: "For we have not followed cunningly devised fables, when we made known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eyewitnesses of his majesty." (2 Pet. 1:16.) Said John: "For we have heard him ourselves, and know that this is indeed the Christ, the Saviour of the world." (John 4:42.) Modern-day witnesses, Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon, declared: "For we saw him, even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father." (D&C 76:23.)

Peter counsels us to be "partakers of the divine nature." (2 Pet. 1:4.) The influence and teaching of the Messiah should have a transcendence over all other interests and concerns in our lives. We must constantly be reaching upward for the riches of eternity, for the kingdom of God is within us. (See Luke 17:21.) ("A Personal Relationship with the Savior," Ensign, Nov. 1976, 59.)

AS A CARPENTER, Jesus would have been familiar with slivers and thorny woods. As a child he would have learned that one rarely gets a sliver when working the wood in the right direction. He would also have known more than any how slivers—small and painful—divert attention from important matters. The scourging of Jesus took place partly with thorns:

"Then the soldiers of the governor took Jesus into the common hall, and gathered unto him the whole band of soldiers.

"And they stripped him, and put on him a scarlet robe.

"And when they had platted a crown of thorns, they put it upon his head, and a reed in his right hand: and they bowed the knee before him, and mocked him, saying, Hail, King of the Jews!

"And they spit upon him, and took the reed, and smote him on the head" (Matt. 27:27-30).

Perhaps this cruel act was a perverse attempt to mimic the placing of an emperor's laurel upon his head. Thus, there was pressed down upon him a crown of thorns. He accepted the pain as part of the great gift he had promised to make. How poignant this was, considering that thorns signified God's displeasure as he cursed the ground for Adam's sake that henceforth it would bring forth thorns. But by wearing the crown, Jesus transformed thorns into a symbol of his glory. ("A Crown of Thorns, a Crown of Glory," Ensign, May 1991, 69.)

IT IS NOT necessary for anyone to depend continually upon the testimony of another regarding the mediation, atonement, and resurrection of Christ as our Redeemer and Savior. Each can savor the sweetness of the truths of the gospel by obedience to the principles, ordinances, and covenants.

One can still go to the Garden of Gethsemane, but the Lord Jesus cannot be found there, nor is He in the Garden Tomb. He is not on the road to Emmaus, nor in Galilee, nor at Nazareth or Bethlehem. He must be found in one's heart. But He left us the great Comforter forever (see John 14:16) and the everlasting power of the priesthood. Of this power, Jacob, the son of Lehi, testified, "We truly can command in the name of Jesus and the very trees obey us, or the mountains, or the waves of the sea" (Jacob 4:6). ("The Supernal Gift of the Atonement," Ensign, Nov. 1988, 14.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
