James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

JOSEPH SMITH

[UPON THE DEATH of Joseph Smith,] some of [his] enemies exulted in their infamous deeds; and many proclaimed that the Church, which he had restored and for which he had given his life, would die with him.

But, to the surprise of its enemies, the Church did not die nor did the work of Joseph Smith cease with his mortal death. What has transpired in a century and a half bears eloquent testimony to the eternal nature of the work of this singularly remarkable man, Joseph Smith. The Church which he restored has had dramatic growth in many parts of the earth. It has produced an unequaled missionary system and an unmatched welfare program. Its governing system gives priesthood power and authority from God to all worthy male members, at the same time recognizing the exalted status of women as being equal to men. The Church has an inspired law of health and temporal well-being far ahead of its time. By revelation from God, the Church also possesses those keys, saving principles, and ordinances which will bring eternal exaltation to mankind, living and dead.

Because of these and other reasons, millions of people have become members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. But to each true believer there must ultimately and finally come a conviction that Joseph Smith was a revealer of truth, a prophet of God. Each must be convinced that God the Father and his Son Jesus Christ did appear to Joseph Smith and did commission him to reestablish the church of Christ upon the face of the earth. ("The Expanding Inheritance from Joseph Smith," Ensign, Nov. 1981, 75-76.)

THE EARLY HISTORY of this Church is quite complete, and it has been combed over many times. A search of the history brings little that is new, but the impression that looms largest is the stature of Joseph Smith. Joseph Smith will be discussed, debated, and challenged, but no one can argue about the success of the work which he introduced. There are many distinguishing aspects of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints with its lay priesthood, its unequaled missionary effort, the great welfare program, the women's organization, and all the rest, but that which makes it live is the individual testimony of the members of the Church, which testimony relates back to Joseph Smith as a true prophet. ("Joseph Smith, The Beloved Leader," Logan, Utah, Institute of Religion Fireside, 25 Jan. 1981.)

MANY YEARS AGO, I visited for the first time a wooded area of extraordinary natural beauty near Palmyra, New York. This area is known to members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints as the Sacred Grove. On the day of our visit, the bees were kissing the wildflowers, and the soft zephyrs gently rustled the leaves of the great trees. It is a place of perfect peace and serenity. It was easy to believe that the heavens were opened and that the magnificent vision took place there.

I refer to the awesome experience of Joseph Smith when he beheld God the Father and his Son, Jesus Christ, in the spring of 1820. There has been no event more glorious, more controversial, nor more important in the story of Joseph Smith than this vision. It is possibly the most singular event to occur on the earth since the Resurrection. Those who do not believe it happened find it difficult to explain away. Too much has happened since its occurrence to summarily deny that it ever took place. Some years later, still suffering under the impact of that happening, Joseph said, "If I had not experienced what I have, I should not have known it myself" (Millennial Star, Nov. 1844, p. 93). . . .

Since no one was with Joseph when this great vision took place in the wooded grove near Palmyra, a testimony concerning its reality can come only by believing the truthfulness of Joseph Smith's own account or by the witness of the Holy Ghost, or both. I have such a conviction. It is a sure conviction that lies deep in my soul. As a special witness of the same Christ who appeared with the Father and instructed the boy Joseph Smith, I bear witness of the truthfulness of the magnificent First Vision near Palmyra. ("The Magnificent Vision Near Palmyra," Ensign, May 1984, 67, 69.)

NO DOUBT MANY of your investigators will already have heard something of Joseph Smith before they came in contact with the missionaries. We need not claim perfection for Joseph Smith, the way we do for the Savior. His humanity was part of his strength and part of his credibility. He never claimed to be perfect, so we should not try to claim something he did not claim for himself. He claimed only to be a mortal man with human feelings and imperfections, trying honestly to fulfil the divine mission given to him. He so describes himself in recorded counsel given to some of the members of the Church who had just arrived in Nauvoo on October 29, 1842. Said the Prophet: "I told them I was but a man, and they must not expect me to be perfect; if they expected perfection from me, I should expect it from them; but if they would bear with my infirmities and the infirmities of the brethren, I would likewise bear with their infirmities." (History of the Church, 5:181.) ("Joseph Smith and the Book of Mormon," Mission Presidents Seminar, Provo, Utah, 26 June 1987.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
