James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

JOY AND HAPPINESS

THE ODYSSEY TO happiness seems to depend almost entirely upon the degree of righteousness to which we attain in terms of the degree of selflessness we acquire, the amount of service we render, and the inner peace which we enjoy. It also hangs to some degree on those loved ones and friends on whose smile and welfare our happiness so much depends. ("The Odyssey to Happiness," BYU Speeches, 6 Jan. 1974, 326.)

THE JOY WE seek is not a temporary emotional high but a habitual inner joy learned from long experience and trust in God. ("The Voice of the Spirit," Ensign, Apr. 1994, 7.)

JOY COMES THROUGH listening to the Spirit. ("The Voice of the Spirit," BYU Speeches, 5 Sept. 1993, 2.)

THE KEY TO happiness does not lie alone in gender or marital status or parenthood or being free of physical challenges. Happiness comes from living the teachings of the Savior and having the vision to see what He would have us become. Remember what He said: "He that findeth his life shall lose it: and he that loseth his life for my sake shall find it" (Matt. 10:39). ("A Vision of What We Can Be," Ensign, Mar. 1996, 12.)

WORLDLY PLEASURES DO not match up to heavenly joy. ("The Voice of the Spirit," Ensign, Apr. 1994, 10.)

MANY YEARS OF listening to the tribulations of man have persuaded me that the satisfaction of all desires is completely counterproductive to happiness. Instant and unrestrained gratification is the shortest and most direct route to unhappiness. ("The Odyssey to Happiness," BYU Speeches, 6 Jan. 1974, 319.)

SOME PEOPLE ARE seeking to find the abundant life. Paul made it clear that it is "the spirit [that] giveth life" (2 Cor. 3:6). Indeed, the Savior said, "The words that I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are life" (John 6:63).

You may ask, then, "What are the fruits of the Spirit?" Paul answered this by saying they are "love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance" (Gal. 5:22-23). The joy we seek is not a temporary emotional high, but a habitual inner joy learned from long experience and trust in God. . . .

Lehi's teaching to his firstborn son Jacob declares: "Men are, that they might have joy" (2 Ne. 2:25). To achieve this great objective, we must "Give ear to the voice of the living God" (D&C 50:1).

I wish to testify as a living witness that joy does come through listening to the Spirit, for I have experienced it. Those who live the gospel learn to live "after the manner of happiness," as did the Nephites (see 2 Ne. 5:27). All over the world, in the many countries where the Church is established, members could add their testimonies to mine. Abundant evidence verifies the promise of peace, hope, love, and joy as gifts of the Spirit. Our voices join in a united petition for all of God's children to partake of these gifts also. ("The Voice of the Spirit," Young Adult Fireside Satellite Broadcast, 5 Sept. 1993.)

MAY I SUGGEST a few things which might be done to prepare us for a time when we are less affluent and possibly happier.

DURING THE PAST two years, and indeed for about five years of my life, I have lived in countries where most of the people are far below the poverty level of the United States. During this last period of time,. . . we made our home in Sao Paulo, Brazil. During most of that time our neighbor to the north was constructing a new home. The carpenters, the tile setters, the plumbers, and the cabinet workers on that house received far below what we know as the minimum wage. In fact, some lived in a shack on the site. There was cold running water available from the end of a hose, but no warm or hot water. Their work day was from 6:00 A.M. till about 5:30 P.M. This meant that at about 5:00 in the morning they would begin to prepare their meals and get ready for work.

My college-age daughter, Lisa, could not help complaining that she was awakened almost every morning by their clarionvoiced singing. They sang, they laughed, they chattered—only occasionally unpleasantly—the whole day through. When I explained to Lisa how little money they made and how little they had she made an interesting observation, "But Dad, they seem so happy." And happy they were. Not one owned an automobile, nor even a bicycle—just the clothes on their backs—but they found life pleasant and fulfilling. We were reminded again how little it takes to make some people happy. ("The Blessings of Adversity," BYU Speeches, 21 Feb. 1978, 27.)

[FACING THOSE TIMES that challenge our quality of life,] may mean that to be happy we are not going to be able to rely upon physical comforts and to satisfy our whims, but must learn to draw upon inner strengths and inner resources. It will likely mean that we will find our entertainment and pleasure in simpler things that do not cost money and are closer to home. Hopefully, it will mean the development of untapped inner strengths and resources that will bring an inner peace and a self-understanding so articulately explained by Anwar Sadat in a recent essay which no doubt many of you read in Time magazine. He related his experience of being confined in a British jail. Like Sadat, hopefully we will find ourselves and like ourselves better, be more at peace with our surroundings, and appreciate more our fellowmen. We will become less sated with the material and the mechanical and learn to cultivate a taste for bread and milk. ("The Blessings of Adversity," BYU Speeches, 21 Feb. 1978, 28-29.)

THE ODYSSEY TO happiness lies in the dimension of the heart. Such a journey is made on stepping-stones of selflessness, wisdom, contentment, and faith. The enemies of progress and fulfillment are self-doubt, a poor self-image, self-pity, bitterness, and despair. By substituting simple faith and humility for these enemies we can move rapidly in our journey to true felicity. ("The Odyssey to Happiness," BYU Speeches, 6 Jan. 1974, 323.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
