James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

KNOWLEDGE

THE ABUNDANT LIFE involves an endless search for knowledge, light, and truth. ("The Abundant Life," Ensign, Nov. 1985, 7.)

QUESTIONS—IN THE sense of searching, not doubting—seem to be essential for learning. They are a primary means of expressing curiosity, the self-motivation to search for knowledge. ("Learning for Eternity," BYU Speeches, 18 Nov. 1997, 3.)

WE ARE ALL in pursuit of truth and knowledge. The nurturing of a simple, untroubled faith does not limit us in the pursuit of growth and accomplishment. On the contrary, it may intensify and hasten our progress. This is so because our natural gifts and powers of achievement are increasingly enhanced by the endless growth of knowledge. ("An Untroubled Faith," Ensign, Mar. 1988, 69.)

THINKING CLEARLY DOES not mean we can think "by infection, catching an opinion like a cold" (John Ruskin, in Dictionary of Humorous Quotations, ed. Evan Esar [New York: Paperback Library, Inc., 1949], p. 154). Thinking clearly is the ability to discern things that matter most and separate them from things of less importance. ("Learning for Eternity," BYU Speeches, 18 Nov. 1997, 3.)

IN THE INFINITE process of accepting and rejecting information in the search for light, truth, and knowledge, almost everyone may have at one time or another some private questions. That is part of the learning process. Many are like the biblical father of the child with the "dumb spirit" who pleaded with the Savior: "Lord, I believe; help thou mine unbelief." (Mark 9:24.) ("The Abundant Life," Ensign, Nov. 1985, 8.)

SOME PEOPLE IN their searching. . . are not seeking for truth but are given to contention. They do not sincerely seek to learn; rather they desire to dispute, to show their supposed learning and thus cause strife. ("The Truth Shall Make You Free," Ensign, Sept. 1998, 5.)

I URGE YOU not to be unduly concerned about the intricacies, the complexities, and any seeming contradictions that seem to trouble many of us. Sometimes we spend time satisfying our intellectual egos and trying to find all the answers before we accept any. ("An Untroubled Faith," Ensign, Mar. 1988, 69.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
