James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

MISSIONARY WORK

WE ARE ANNOUNCING no new missionary programs. . . . We do not have any new organization to announce. The manuals, the guidelines, and the instructions are unchanged. Certainly, there is nothing new in the doctrine, nor in the covenants.

. . . What we seek to do is to join with you in calling forth the Spirit of God upon our work. The priesthood quorums, the auxiliary organizations, the stake missions, the member-missionary class are available. Everything is in place. It is felt at this time that no new changes in programs or organizations are needed. Perhaps the only change that is really needed is to change ourselves. Missionary work begins with each of us at home. It ought to be motivated more by fresh faith and conviction rather than obligation. It involves quiet living. If we do this, missionary work in the stakes and the wards will be fruitful.

How can I change? I can certainly change my attitude. I can change my commitment. I can change my approach. Hopefully, with diligent study of the scriptures and obedience to saving principles, I can expand my soul. Missionary work is a natural manifestation of the pure love of Christ. We need to learn and teach the gospel doctrines—the requirements, principles and promises. Hopefully, like the sons of Mosiah, we will become "instruments in the hands of God in bringing many to a knowledge of truth" and "to the knowledge of their Redeemer" (Mosiah 27:36.) (Address to Regional Representatives and Mission Presidents, Salt Lake City, Utah, 5 Apr. 1985.)

THE FIRST PRESIDENCY have the opportunity to meet with many ambassadors, prime ministers, rulers, and prominent public and political figures from all over the world. Frequently they say, "We have met your missionaries. We have seen them in many places." Sometimes these prominent people visit the Missionary Training Center in Provo and see the thousands of missionaries there. These officials always seem to be greatly impressed. The missionaries appear well groomed and dignified. Sometimes they say, "We would like our children to be associated with your young people at one of your schools."

Being a missionary is a continuing responsibility. Returned missionaries need to be exemplary in living the principles which they taught to others in the mission field. President Spencer W. Kimball said, "Please, you returned missionaries. . . , please do not abandon in appearance or principle or habit the great experiences of the mission field when you were like Alma and the sons of Mosiah, as the very angels of God to the people you met and taught and baptized. We do not expect you to wear a tie, white shirt, and a dark blue suit every day now that you are back in school. But surely it is not too much to ask that your good grooming be maintained, that your personal habits reflect cleanliness and dignity and pride in the principles of the gospel you taught. We ask you for the good of the kingdom and all those who have done and yet do take pride in you." (The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, edited by Edward L. Kimball, p. 593.) ("We Seek After These Things," Ensign, May 1998, 45.)

WHEN I WAS a boy, I remember attending the homecoming of Ames Bagley who came home from a mission in a distant land across the sea. His mother, Sister Amanda Bagley, had been a wise Stake Relief Society President. Sister Bagley was invited to speak at her son's homecoming sacrament meeting. In her response, she wondered why we send our missionaries so far, spend so much time, effort, and money to support missionaries so far away, when our next-door neighbors and friends at home have souls just as important and precious as those in distant lands. We may have a tendency to think if we are sending missionaries that we are taking care of our responsibilities for this important work. If we feel we are relieved of our duty to our nonmember neighbors because full-time missionaries happen to be working in our neighborhoods, it is most unfortunate. All of us have neighbors, all of us have friends, and many of us have kinsmen who are not members. (Address to Regional Representatives and Mission Presidents, Salt Lake City, Utah, 5 Apr. 1985.)

I DO NOT believe that we need to be bombastic, loud, pushy, or insensitive in our approach [to missionary work]. Our personal missionary work should not be so threatening as to destroy our personal friendships and good will. There should be nothing approaching even a hint of a threat or ultimatum of any kind. Alma said we should "use boldness, but not overbearance." (Alma 38:12) The light of the gospel should show in our countenances as well as our actions. I do, however, believe that we need to be courageous, resourceful, and sensitive. The Lord counsels us, "And let your preaching be the warning voice, every man to his neighbor in mildness and in meekness." (D&C 38:41.) (Address to Regional Representatives and Mission Presidents, Salt Lake City, Utah, 5 Apr. 1985.)

DESPITE THE SUCCESS we are enjoying [in our missionary efforts], no doubt we can improve. We hope for steady growth and activity in all phases of missionary work, including among the members. Hopefully this increase will be based upon our increasing knowledge of God and his holy word on the earth. We would rather not have a great spurt or surge which dies out after a time. We don't need a quick fix. We need fathers and families. Steady, sustained efforts will bring great results. (Address to Regional Representatives and Mission Presidents, Salt Lake City, Utah, 5 Apr. 1985.)

WE HAVE NOTED in this conference that the Spirit of the Lord must be present if investigators are to be converted to the gospel. The same is true if members are to be converted to their missionary responsibilities. Quorum leaders have the responsibility to prepare members to feel the Spirit of the Lord so that their missionary actions will be prompted by inner conviction rather than a mere sense of obligation or duty. (Address to Regional Representatives and Mission Presidents, Salt Lake City, Utah, 5 Apr. 1985.)

AS THE HUMBLE servants of God—the General Authorities, the missionaries, and others—travel throughout the world, we are compelled to ask: What can we do for the peoples of the earth? What can we give that no one else can? What can justify the great expenditure of effort, time, and means to "go. . . into all of the world" (Mark 16:15), as the Savior commanded. We cannot change the economy of countries. We do not seek to change governments. The answer is simple. We can offer the hope promised by the Savior: "Peace in this world and eternal life in the world to come." (D&C 59:23.) Lives are changed as the servants of God teach God's children everywhere to accept and keep the commandments of God. Anyone, regardless of culture or economic circumstance, can go to the depths of his spiritual wells and drink of that water. He that partakes of this water, as the Savior said, "shall never thirst; but. . . shall be in him a well of water springing up unto everlasting life." (John 14:40.) The basic needs of mankind identified by Dr. Wirthlin—self-esteem, peace of mind, and personal contentment—can be fully satisfied by faithful obedience to the commandments of God. This is true of any person in any country or culture.

Though many lack the necessities of life, I take comfort in the words of Nephi. "But they were. . . one, the children of Christ, and the heirs to the kingdom of God." (4 Ne. 1:17.) ("Heirs to the Kingdom of God," Ensign, May 1995, 62.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
