James E. Faust, James P. Bell, In the Strength of the Lord: The Life and Teachings of James E. Faust (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

PRIESTHOOD

THE OBJECT OF God's work is "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39). God has given the priesthood to man at various times since Adam's day to bring about the great plan of salvation for all mankind. Through our faithfulness, the transcendent blessings of eternal life flow from this priesthood authority.

For these priesthood blessings to flower, there is a constant need for unity within the priesthood. We must be loyal to the leadership who have been called to preside over us and hold the keys of the priesthood. The words of President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., still ring loudly in our ears: "Brethren, let us be united." He explained:

"An essential part of unity is loyalty. . . . Loyalty is a pretty difficult quality to possess. It requires the ability to put away selfishness, greed, ambition and all of the baser qualities of the human mind. You cannot be loyal unless you are willing to surrender. . . . [A person's] own preferences and desires must be put away, and he must see only the great purpose which lies out ahead" (Immortality and Eternal Life [Melchizedek Priesthood Course of Study, 1968-69], p. 163). . . .

In some legislative assembles of the world, there are some groups termed the "loyal opposition." I find no such principle in the gospel of Jesus Christ. The Savior gave us this solemn warning: "Be one; and if ye are not one ye are not mine" (D&C 38:27). The Lord made it clear that in the presiding quorums every decision "must be by the unanimous voice of the same; that is, every member in each quorum must be agreed to its decisions" (D&C 107:27). This means that after frank and open discussion, decisions are reached in council under the direction of the presiding officer, who has the ultimate authority to decide. That decision is then sustained, because our unity comes from full agreement with righteous principles and general response to the operation of the Spirit of God. ("Keeping Covenants and Honoring the Priesthood," Ensign, Nov. 1993, 36-38.)

POWER IS HIGHLY attractive. It can be both good and bad. In your formative years, you young men are attracted to power figures of one kind or another. These often include sports idols, entertainers, people of wealth, and those who have political power. Unfortunately, some young men, particularly those who fall short scholastically, who don't make the team, or who are not chosen to sing in a specially selected choir may feel rejected and be lured into groups that they think will compensate for their inadequacies. This hunger for acceptance or power draws them like a moth to a flame to street gangs and other associations that can be violent and encourage habits which are dangerous to the body and to the soul.

You young holders of the priesthood have access to the greatest power source in the world. It is the priesthood of God. In complete contrast to other power sources, the holy priesthood, through its proper exercise, continues to build spiritual and physical strength which endures through the eternities. It is "inseparably connected with the powers of heaven" and can be "handled only upon the principles of righteousness." (D&C 121:36.) Regarding the priesthood, the Prophet Joseph Smith[stated:"[It] is the channel through which all knowledge, doctrine, the plan of salvation and every important matter is revealed from heaven. . . . It is the channel through which the Almighty. . . has continued to reveal Himself to the children of men to the present time, and through which He will make known His purposes to the end of time." (History of the Church, 4:39.) ("By What Power Have Ye Done This?" Ensign, Nov. 1998, 45.)

[PRIESTHOOD] POWER COMES in proportion to our faithfulness in fulfilling our duties. As the Prophet Joseph observed, "The Lord gave us power in proportion to the work to be done, and strength according to the race set before us, and grace and help as our needs required." (History of the Church, 1:175.) As an example, the prophet Elijah, using his priesthood, was able to call forth fire from heaven to demonstrate the power of God.

Before President Hugh B. Brown was a General Authority, he served in England as an officer in the Canadian army and had great power. Men stood at attention before him and called him "sir." One day Brother Brown received a message that he was wanted in the hospital. When he got there, someone directed him to a little room where a sick young man lay. Brother Brown remembered that he had once been that young man's Sunday School teacher. "Brother Brown," said the young man, "would you use your authority in my behalf? The doctors say I cannot live. Will you give me a blessing?" All the pride Brother Brown felt in wearing the uniform of the king disappeared as he laid his hands upon the boy's head and gave him a blessing. The help that the boy needed was not from any authority of an officer in the king's army but from the authority of the priesthood. (Adapted from Hugh B. Brown, "Be What You Will to Be," Brigham Young University Speeches of the Year [14 Feb. 1967], 8-9.) ("By What Power Have Ye Done This?" Ensign, Nov. 1998, 45-46.)

MANY PEOPLE DO not understand our belief that God has wisely established a guiding authority for the most important institutions in the world. This guiding authority is called the priesthood. The priesthood is held in trust to be used to bless all of God's children. Priesthood is not gender; it is blessings from God for all at the hands of the servants He has designated. Within the Church this authority of the priesthood can bless all members through the ministration of home teachers, quorum presidents, bishops, fathers, and all other righteous brethren who are charged with the administration of the affairs of the kingdom of God. Priesthood is the righteous power and influence by which boys are taught in their youth and throughout their lives to honor chastity, to be honest and industrious, and to develop respect for, and stand in the defense of, womanhood. Priesthood is a restraining influence. Girls are taught that through its influence and power to bless, they can fulfill many of their desires.

Holding the Priesthood means following the example of Christ and seeking to emulate his example of fatherhood. It means constant concern and caring for one's own flesh and blood. The man who holds the priesthood is to honor it by eternally cherishing, with absolute fidelity, his wife and the mother of his children. He is to extend lifelong care and concern for his children, and their children. ("Father, Come Home," Ensign, May 1993, 36.)

YOU YOUNG MEN of the Aaronic Priesthood have only glimpsed the satisfaction that comes through the righteous exercise of your priesthood. This priesthood holds "the key of the ministering of angels." (D&C 84:26.) Priests may be permitted to perform the sacred ordinance of baptism in order to have our sins removed. The Aaronic Priesthood administers and passes the sacred emblems of the sacrament. Both ordinances relate directly to the Savior's Atonement. In addition, as home teaching companions you are to help watch over the Church, urging members "to pray . . . and attend to all family duties." (D&C 20:51.)

Another duty particularly pertains to you wonderful young men. That is the duty to follow the counsel of those in authority over you. Listen to your parents. Be obedient to them whether you agree with them or not. They love you more than anyone else and have your best interests at heart. Listen to your quorum president, your bishop, your stake president, the apostles, seers, and revelators, and especially President Hinckley, as well as the other General Authorities of the Church. They will lead you into the ways of righteousness. ("By What Power Have Ye Done This?" Ensign, Nov. 1998, 47.)

ISN'T IT REMARKABLE that we do not have to understand all of the intricate laws of physics, chemistry, and medicine to experience the power of the priesthood? To control the great physical laws by the power of the priesthood, we need to understand and invoke the greater spiritual laws of faith, righteousness, and obedience. Often the humblest and meekest among us have great spiritual gifts and powers. ("The Priesthood of God," Priesthood Fireside, 6 May 1990.)

IT IS IMPORTANT to remember that in this Church, the husbands and fathers, and members of the family through them, enjoy a power and influence in their lives, far beyond the natural gifts of intellect and character of the father. I refer to the priesthood of God, which every worthy man and boy over 12 years of age enjoys.

A prominent Church and business leader in this community was born without life. His father, exercising his priesthood, made a promise that if his firstborn could live, that he, the father, would do all in his power to provide the proper example and teachings for his son. After a few minutes his infant son began to breathe and is well and vigorous to this day. ("Happiness Is Having a Father Who Cares," Ensign, Jan. 1974, 23.)

THE PRIESTHOOD OF God is a shield. It is a shield against the evils of the world. That shield needs to be kept clean; otherwise, our vision of our purpose and the dangers around us will be limited. The cleansing agent is personal righteousness, but not all will pay the price to keep their shields clean. The Lord said, "For many are called, but few are chosen" (Matt. 22:14). We are called when hands are laid upon our heads and we are given the priesthood, but we are not chosen until we demonstrate to God our righteousness, our faithfulness, and our commitment. ("The Priesthood of God," Priesthood Fireside, 6 May 1990.)

JUST A FEW weeks ago, in a stake conference, one gracious mother joyously recounted a marvelous experience of being in one of the temples with her husband and with all of her children but one and being sealed together as husband and wife and family for time and all eternity. Her husband, newly involved in the priesthood, sat in the conference audience a few rows back. For a moment she seemed to forget all of the rest of us and spoke only to him. Over the pulpit, and through the loudspeaker, with over 1,000 people in tears watching and listening, she said, "John, the children and I don't know how to tell you what you mean to us. Until you honored the priesthood, the greatest blessings of eternity would not open up for us. Now they have. We all love you very much and we thank you with all our hearts for what you have made possible for us." ("Happiness Is Having a Father Who Cares," Ensign, Jan. 1974, 23-24.)

THE CHURCH CANNOT cloak a man in medieval robes and give him a parchment saying that he is fully ready and worthy to use all of the powers of the priesthood. The authority of the priesthood is not manifest in such outward symbols. But as a worthy man grows in strength and spiritual righteousness, he can receive a warm, spiritual cloak. ("The Priesthood of God," Priesthood Fireside, 6 May 1990.)

BRETHREN, WE ARE the authorized servants of the risen Christ. With this authority comes the duty to move this holy work forward across the world. We are part of the greatest brotherhood in all the world. We will be held accountable for what we do with the keys, power, and authority granted to us. We must be true to this great trust in every way.

As we look to the future, we will continue to have obstacles, difficulties, challenges, and opposition. Satan has more tools at his disposal than ever before to deceive, distract, and corrupt our people. We will continue to be winnowed. One day in the future, we will have to account through President Gordon B. Hinckley to the Prophet Joseph for what we have done with this great power which the Lord has invested in us.

We are grateful that the work of God moves forward as powerfully as it does under the leadership of President Gordon B. Hinckley. After the death of the Savior, his apostles did great and marvelous things in His name. Peter and John were asked by Caiaphas and the high priests, "By what power . . . have ye done this?" (Acts 4:7.) Like Peter, we declare to the world that all this happens by and through the power of the holy priesthood and in the "name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth." (Acts 4:10.) ("By What Power Have Ye Done This?" Ensign, Nov. 1998, 47.)

MORE THAN FIFTY years ago a patriarch indicated that I would be called to preside among the people. The blessing does not say preside "over," it says preside "among." I have always thought this was significant. . . .

One does not have to hold an administrative calling in the Church, such as bishop or stake president or General Authority, to receive all of the blessings of the priesthood. The promise of the oath and covenant of the priesthood to His worthy holders is that through their faithfulness they may be sanctified by the Spirit and may become the elect of God (see D&C 84:33-34). The further promise is that "all that my Father hath shall be given unto him" (D&C 84:38). If therefore the worthy holders of the priesthood receive all that the Father hath, by giving "diligent heed to the words of eternal life" (D&C 84:43), then there is nothing more to receive. ("The Priesthood of God," Priesthood Fireside, 6 May 1990.)

1999 Deseret Book Co.
