Charles D. Tate, Susan Easton Black, Joseph Smith: The Prophet, The Man ( 1993)

Preface

Susan Easton Black and Charles D. Tate, Jr.

It has been a pleasure to edit a book honoring the life and mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith. This book includes the proceedings of the dedicatory ceremony of the new Joseph Smith Memorial Building and selected papers from the Joseph Smith Symposium, the first symposium held in that building. It is intended as a written memorial to the Prophet of the Restoration.

As this book serves as a written remembrance of the Prophet Joseph Smith, two buildings on the Brigham Young University campus have also served as memorials of his life and mission. The first Joseph Smith Memorial Building dates from 1937 when the General Church Board of Education approved a new building for BYU that would serve as a chapel, an assembly hall, and social center for the students. Construction began under the direction of architect Fred L. Markham in the fall of 1939 on a site east of the Brimhall and Grant buildings. In November 1940, Elder Stephen L Richards, then a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, proposed that the new building be named in honor of the Prophet Joseph Smith. The Church Board of Education enthusiastically agreed.

The first Joseph Smith Memorial Building was dedicated on 16 October 1941, with President David O. McKay, Second Counselor in the First Presidency, giving the keynote address and dedicatory prayer. In that prayer he petitioned the Lord to "let thy Spirit be in every room of this institution, and be in the heart of every instructor." He designated the building "as a religious and social center, a place of instruction in the revealed work of God, a place of divine communion."

The Joseph Smith Building served its purpose for over 40 years, and thousands of students learned gospel truths from faculty members like Sidney B. Sperry, Hugh Nibley, Robert J. Matthews, and Daniel H. Ludlow. Many made lasting friendships and attended social and ecclesiastical functions in the building. Some even met their eternal companions there. However, by the late 1980s it was apparent that the building needed extensive reconstruction to meet the expanding needs of the University and to comply with strict new building codes. Fond memories conflicted with concern over outmoded heating and cooling systems, overloaded electrical wiring, and other structural needs.

On 31 January 1989 University officials announced a new Joseph Smith Memorial Building to be built directly west of the older edifice. Construction began in August 1990 under the direction of John and Dixon Markham, sons of the architect of the original building. Characteristic features of the old building such as the tower and the auditorium were included in the new structure, and the new building was built with the same square footage as the old. It also included a modern technological support system, a baptismal font, a student commons area, an atrium featuring a small biblical garden, and near the main entrance a bronze relief depicting Joseph Smith teaching.

The sight of the new Memorial arising side-by-side the old caused many to stop and reminisce. As demolition of the old building began, pieces of the parquet floor, bricks, and mail-boxes became favorite keepsakes. The last high walls of the original Joseph Smith Memorial were razed on 16 October 1991-50 years to the day it was dedicated by President McKay.

The new Joseph Smith Memorial Building was dedicated on 10 December 1991. BYU President Rex E. Lee conducted the session and noted, "Today we not only dedicate a building, we also honor a man—and not any ordinary man. Joseph Smith's life and work are as central to the Restoration, and to the welfare of human-kind, as the learning that will occur in this building is central to the mission of our university."

President Gordon B. Hinckley, First Counselor in the First Presidency, expressed appreciation for "this beautiful and impressive structure that will become a place of learning for uncounted generations of eager and able students." In the dedicatory prayer he asked, "May the name of Joseph Smith ever be held in gratitude, respect, and love by all whose lives will be blessed by this facility. May he be kept in remembrance as the great prophet of this dispensation."

Faculty members in Religious Education and across campus desired to participate in the commemoration of Joseph Smith by sharing their research and testimony about his life and mission. Professor Susan Easton Black, director of the Church History and Doctrine area of the Religious Studies Center at BYU, proposed a symposium be held to honor the Prophet Joseph Smith. She selected Milton V. Backman, Jr., Donald Q. Cannon, Leon R. Hartshorn, Richard L. Jensen, Robert J. Matthews, and Larry C. Porter as committee members. As they planned a Joseph Smith Symposium, the committee members envisioned a day set aside for scholars to share their knowledge and understanding of the life and mission of Joseph Smith. They saw a day where once again the significant contributions of the Prophet might be highlighted with expressions of gratitude.

On 22 February 1992 the Joseph Smith auditorium was filled to capacity an hour before the opening session, and all 17 classrooms in the building were opened to accommodate the crowd. Dr. Larry C. Porter, Area Coordinator of Church History and Doctrine, gave the invocation, which was followed by a vocal solo by Dr. Clayne W. Robison, professor of music. President Gordon B. Hinckley gave the keynote address and commended "those who have come with a desire to learn more concerning the Prophet Joseph Smith. I have looked over the program and note that by the time you finish this evening, you will have explored almost every facet of his life and works." He then spoke of his love and gratitude for the Prophet Joseph Smith, "I thank him, I honor him, I love him for the faith, simple and trusting, that impelled him to go into the grove to ask of God, 'nothing doubting.' From that experience came knowledge of Deity beyond any comprehended by the learned of the world through centuries of time."

President Hinckley reminisced about having walked the places that Joseph had walked—from Sharon, Vermont, to Carthage Jail, and concluded his remarks by stating, "I am now growing old, and I know that in the natural course of events before many years, I will step across the threshold to stand before my Maker and my Lord and give an accounting of my life. And I hope that I shall have the opportunity of embracing the Prophet Joseph Smith and of thanking him and of speaking of my love for him."

Following the opening session, the Symposium featured concurrent presentations by Church scholars who had gathered to Brigham Young University from New York, South Carolina, California, Oregon, and communities throughout Utah. The second part of this volume contains papers selected from those presentations.

This publication represents the efforts not only of the authors but also of colleagues, secretaries, and friends. We appreciate the many colleagues who graciously refereed the papers and made suggestions for improvement. We are grateful for the invaluable service of the Religious Education staff with special mention given to Patty Smith, Secretary of the Religious Studies Center; David Boone, Supervisor of Faculty Support; Charlotte Pollard, computer specialist; and Angela Wentz and Lynn Applegate, research assistants.

As editors of the written memorial to Joseph Smith, we are very grateful for the life, mission, and contributions of the Prophet. We honor and revere him as the Prophet through whom the truths of the gospel were restored. We appreciate the opportunity we had to teach, to study, to learn, and to write in the former Joseph Smith Memorial Building on the Brigham Young University campus and are pleased to continue those pursuits in the beautiful new Memorial building that honors the Prophet.
