Charles D. Tate, Susan Easton Black, Joseph Smith: The Prophet, The Man ( 1993)

13

Joseph Smith: Gifted Learner, Master Teacher, Prophetic Seer

Brian L. Smith

Italt has become traditional to emphasize the fact that Joseph Smith did not have much formal education. While it is essentially true that none of the Smiths had much formal education because they all had to work just to stay alive, we should not forget that even though he did not spend much time in classrooms, Joseph Smith did become a very educated person. He was a gifted learner who was often taught by divine tutors. He was also able to transfer what he learned into masterful teachings in delivering a prophetic message to the world in this last dispensation.

A Gifted Learner

Although Joseph had limited formal educational opportunities, he took advantage of what was available and went beyond them. Many of his resources were of the heavenly kind. For example, when he couldn't find an answer to a question or problem through ample study, Joseph would go to the Lord and ask for help. He was not afraid to ask the Lord questions. Elder John A. Widtsoe tells us, "It is to be an eternal law that a question must preceed a revelation" (258). Joseph indicates that often when he struggled with a problem and could not find the answer either in his thinking or that of his contemporaries, he went to the Lord in prayer. And when he prayed in faith, the answer "came into my mind, with such clarity and such sequence of thoughts that I knew it was of God and I dictated the answer to my scribe" (Berrett). On another occasion the Prophet said: "The best way to obtain truth and wisdom is not to ask it from books, but to go to God in prayer, and obtain divine teaching" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith 191; hereafter TPJS).

Joseph also learned as he translated the Book of Mormon. One day when Emma was acting as scribe, he dictated from the Book of Mormon the phrase "the walls of Jerusalem." The prophet paused and then said, "Emma, did Jerusalem have walls surrounding it?" (Briggs 396). Later while translating a passage referring to baptism, both Joseph and Oliver Cowdery decided to ask the Lord about baptism. As they were calling upon the Lord, John the Baptist appeared to them and instructed them. This was a pattern Joseph Smith followed throughout his life. When he came across something he didn't understand, he was not afraid to ask the Lord for clarification.

Later when he organized the School of the Prophets in Kirtland for the instruction of the brethren, he impressed upon these future leaders of the Church the necessity and importance of knowledge. In his journal Joseph wrote, "At home. Continued my studies. Oh, may God give me learning, even language; and imbue me with qualifications to magnify his name while I live" (History of the Church 2:344; hereafter HC). For several years, Joseph studied grammar in an attempt to improve his capacity to express himself. His later writings reveal that both his spelling and style improved considerably (Backman 11). He was also interested in learning foreign languages. On one occasion he said, "I am determined to pursue the study of languages, until I shall become master of them, if I am permitted to live long enough" (HC 2:396). When the brethren had decided to study Greek and Hebrew, Joseph was an able and thirsty student. When asked how the prophet had progressed in his study of grammar, one of his teachers replied, "Joseph was the calf that sucked three cows. He acquired knowledge very rapidly" (West 61).

But how did others see him academically? Orson Pratt, a contemporary of Joseph, stated that, "He could read without much difficulty and write a very imperfect hand; and had a very limited understanding of the elementary rules of arithmetic. These were his highest and only attainments; while the rest of those branches so universally taught in the common schools throughout the United States were entirely unknown to him" (Pratt, Remarkable Visions 1). On another occasion Elder Pratt said,

Now, it does not seem likely to me, that a young man whose beard had scarcely grown, a youth untutored, untaught in the sectarian notions of the day, brought up to labor hard on his father's farm, should be able to make these great distinctions, to come out in opposition to all modern systems of religion, and establish the very fundamental principles that are necessary to the very existence of Christianity in the last days. But God was with that young man. He was not his own teacher; he was not left to his own judgment in regard to what Christianity should be and what it should not be. (Journal of Discourses 21:172; hereafter JD)

Moroni: Ancient Prophet Teaching Latter-day Prophet

From Joseph's very first visit to Cumorah, Moroni impressed upon him the consequences of obedience and disobedience. This was done so vividly that Joseph said he was ever afterwards willing to keep the commandments of God. The very purpose in not giving Joseph the plates immediately was to wait until Joseph had learned to keep the commandments, not only until he was willing to, as his mother said, but until he was able to keep them (Smith, Lucy 83).

Oliver Cowdery tells us the following:

Two invisible powers were operating upon the mind of our brother while going to Cumorah. In this, then, I discover wisdom in the dealings of the Lord: it was impossible for any man to translate the Book of Mormon by the gift of God, endure the inflictions, and temptations, and devices of Satan, without being overthrown, unless he had been previously benefited with a certain round of experience: and had our brother obtained the record the first time, not knowing how to detect the works of darkness, he might have been deprived of the blessing of sending forth the word of truth to this generation. (Kirkham 1:101)

Few of us will experience the meticulous training or chastisement given to the Prophet Joseph Smith; yet, ultimately, all of us must learn exactness and honor in obeying the commandments and upholding the covenants we enter into. No wonder Moroni waited four years before giving him the plates. Joseph had to be at his spiritual best, obedient to every commandment. Oliver Cowdery noted that on one of Joseph's visits Moroni told him, "Forget not to pray, that thy mind may become strong and when he shall manifest unto thee, thou mayest have power to escape the evil and obtain those precious things" (Cowdery, "Letter VIII" 199). Although Joseph left Cumorah empty-handed those early years, he left much wiser than when he came. And even though the plates were to be given "to him that is not learned" (Isa 29:12), Joseph had exercised much faith and had developed a willingness to learn.

One aspect of Joseph's tutoring involved an interesting approach. Oliver Cowdery reports that not only did Moroni deliver important messages to Joseph, but on occasions a vision would be opened simultaneously to Joseph so that he could see by the Spirit that which he needed to learn. Oliver wrote,

You will understand, then, by this, that while those glorious things were being rehearsed, the vision was also opened so that our brother was permitted to see and understand much more fully and perfectly than I am able to communicate in writing. I know much may be conveyed to the understanding in writing and many marvelous truths set forth by the pen, but after all, it is but a shadow compared to an open vision of seeing, hearing, and realizing eternal things. (Cowdery, "Letter VI" 112)

Nephi, too, was taught in a similar way when he was caught up to the top of a mountain. He was told to "look" and "behold" and asked to respond to what he saw in that great panoramic vision (1 Nephi 11-14). This was the way Joseph Smith was taught on occasion. A panoramic vision would open up to Joseph and he would ask questions and interact with his tutor. The vision now recorded as Doctrine and Covenants section 76 is a partial example of this visionary learning. No wonder Joseph is quoted as saying that if you "could . . . look into heaven for five minutes you would know more than all that has been written on the subject (HC 6:50). Joseph often referred to his tutorial sessions with Moroni as "interviews" (JS-H 1:47, 54). Professor H. Donl Peterson has documented at least twenty-two times that Moroni appeared to Joseph (see Appendix A for a list of Moroni's appearances).

It must have required a great deal of concentration to develop the translating skills he needed. Joseph Smith learned and developed his gift of seership. However, it was his task to learn how to use this power for righteousness—particularly coming from one so young—training, patience, and experience were necessary. Orson Pratt once reported that the experience Joseph had acquired while translating the Book of Mormon by the use of the Urim and Thummin had rendered him so well acquainted with the spirit of revelation and prophecy that in translating the New Testament he did not need the aid that was necessary in the first instance (Minutes of the School of the Prophets).

Other Heavenly Tutors

Many other heavenly messengers were sent to tutor Joseph Smith, but it is difficult to determine how many because he didn't make a list of them. An impressive number can be documented, however (see Appendix B). President John Taylor once said after explaining that Joseph was set apart in the pre-earth council,

The principles which he had, placed him in communication with the Lord, and not only with the Lord, but with the ancient apostles and prophets; such men, for instance, as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Noah, Adam, Seth, Enoch, and Jesus and the Father, and the apostles that lived on this continent as well those who lived on the Asiatic continent. He seemed to be as familiar with these people as we are with one another. (JD 21:94)

On another occasion, President Taylor said,

And when Joseph was raised up as a prophet of God, Mormon, Moroni, Nephi and others of the ancient apostles who formerly lived on this continent, and Peter and John who lived on the Asiatic continent came to him and communicated to him certain principles pertaining to the gospel of the Son of God. Why? Because they held the keys of the various dispensations, and conferred them upon him, and he upon us. (JD 17:374)

Orson Pratt stated, "The prophet often received visits from Nephi, Moroni, Peter, James, John the Beloved, John the Baptist, Elijah, Moses, the three Nephites, etc., etc." (Letter).

There were many angels sent to bestow keys upon Joseph. Others were sent to unfold the majesty and glory of the events that should transpire, while others were sent to warn and admonish the maturing prophet. From them all Joseph learned what he needed to do to carry out his foreordained responsibilities.

This young prophet had been trusted with the greatest block of knowledge given to man. He experienced first hand the restitution of all things. Joseph knew the doctrine imparted by the Lord to these ancient prophets. He knew the writings of Abraham, Moses, John, and others; and he knew the prophets—personally. The ancient prophets likewise knew of and prophesied of Joseph Smith and would later tutor him personally as glorified, resurrected beings in the last dispensation. Prophets tutoring prophets. In this way it would appear that prophets throughout the history of the world have kept in touch with each other.

Opening the Heavens Through the Scriptures

Joseph learned much of what he learned while translating the Book of Mormon, the Bible, and the book of Abraham. President John Taylor tells us,

God chose this young man. He was ignorant of letters as the world has it, but the most profoundly learned and intelligent man that I ever met in my life, and I have traveled hundreds of thousands of miles, been on different continents and mingled among all classes and creeds of people, yet I have never met a man so intelligent as he was. And where did he get his intelligence from? Not from books, not from the logic or science or philosophy of the day, but he obtained it through the revelation of God made known to him through the medium of the everlasting gospel. (JD 21:163)

Wilford Woodruff also commented on Joseph's abilities:

This man to whom the angel appeared obeyed the gospel, received it in meekness and humility and bowed down before the Lord and worshipped him, and did the best he could in his illiterate state; he was as it were but a mere plowboy. He laid hold of it with all his heart, though he saw he would have to wage war with sin, and wickedness, and abominations, and the opposition of the people. (JD 2:197)

Joseph F. Smith tells us,

When he [Joseph Smith] had finished translating the Book of Mormon he was still only a boy, yet in producing this book he developed historical facts, prophecies, revelations, predictions, testimonies and doctrines, precepts and principles that are beyond the power and wisdom of the learned world to duplicate or refute. Joseph Smith was an unlearned youth, so far as the learning of the world is concerned. He was taught by the angel Moroni. He received his education from above, from God Almighty, and not from man-made institutions; but to charge him with being ignorant would be both unjust and false; no man or combination of men possessed greater intelligence than he, nor could the combined wisdom and cunning of the age produce an equivalent for what he did. He was not ignorant, for he was taught by Him from whom all intelligence flows. (483)

George Q. Cannon tells us,

When Joseph began translating the Book of Mormon he could not spell so well as an ordinary schoolboy of these days. His ignorance was not because he was dull or lazy. His energies were spent in the field and forest, and he did not live among people who wrote much or had much knowledge of books. Just as soon, though, as he began spending his time in the Lord's service, his learning grew very fast. In translating the Book of Mormon Joseph was in the best school a man could attend. The Holy Ghost, which is the spirit of intelligence, inspired his mind as he read and understood a strange language entirely different from his own. When he finished this work he probably had more knowledge of Egyptian writing than any other man living. The work on the Book of Mormon gave him also a better grasp and understanding of English, and caused within him a thirst for learning that was never quenched. His work in rewriting the Bible helped him very much and when he translated the books and writings of Abraham and Moses from the Egyptian found on the papyrus with the mummies he was a well educated man. (Cannon 104-05)

As briefly mentioned earlier, one important aspect of the Prophet's learning came as he translated the Bible. This experience of translating was a fundamental part of his tutoring. He continued to translate for about three years. The process put the Prophet in an inquiring frame of mind and led him to receive many revelations. One of the reasons for having Joseph translate the Bible was not just to point out any errors in the Bible. It was not to discredit the King James translation although Joseph did know that certain errors and omissions were there. It was to restore truths. As he translated, he was prompted to ask for clarification. He would get all that the Bible had to offer then he would clarify and restore what was missing (Matthews). There are at least 3,400 verses in the Joseph Smith Translation (JST) that contain alterations made by the Prophet Joseph. It is important to consider how this work contributed to Joseph's and our understanding of the gospel.

Joseph as a Master Teacher

How was Joseph as a teacher? Joseph was the great restorer and teacher of the true knowledge of God. The First Vision was just the beginning of many great truths that set the foundation for the restoration of all things. In many ways the Prophet parted the veil for all of us to see God and reveal our real potential. Certainly if one is called a prophet he must also be called a teacher. Elder John Widtsoe defines a prophet as a teacher, one who expounds and teaches truth as revealed by the Lord to man. Elder Widtsoe further explains:

To an astonishing degree, Joseph Smith was a teacher, revelator, and a predictor. He stands among the foremost in the company of historical prophets. He was a superb teacher. He had a frank and a kind manner. His followers flocked to hear him and hung upon his every word. His mind swept the horizons of eternity as he explained the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. Strangers were caught by his simple oratory and were left to ponder if he were not indeed dealing with eternal truths. (288-89)

All of us have been blessed by the works, writings, and teachings of Joseph Smith. We are still being taught by him. On one occasion he shared his feelings about his calling to teach, "I realize in some measure my responsibility, and the need I have of support from above, and the wisdom from on high, that I may be able to teach this people" (HC 4:230).

With sincere love he urged people to incorporate correct principles into their lives. He was sensitive to the Saints' need to learn principles of the gospel line upon line. One time he said, "I could explain a hundred-fold more than I ever have of the glories of the kingdoms manifested in the vision, were I permitted, and were the people prepared to receive them" (HC 5:402). On another occasion he said "It is my meditation all the day and more than my meat and drink, to know how I shall make the saints of God comprehend the visions that roll like an overflowing surge before my mind" (5:362).

Joseph Smith had the ability to motivate people and draw them around him. Men like Orson Spencer, who was a man of letters, refined in culture, and Orrin Porter Rockwell, who was apparently the opposite in many ways, devoted their lives to the Prophet. Orson Pratt was a child of poverty before meeting the Prophet. Baptized on his nineteenth birthday, he later crossed the ocean 16 times and fulfilled 21 missions, all because of the teachings of the Prophet.

On one occasion, Joseph was speaking so powerfully to a group of brethren in Nauvoo on the importance of missionary work that 380 elders volunteered to immediately embark on missions. When one of those men, John E. Page, remarked that he did not have a coat, Joseph Smith gave him his coat, and Elder Page went to Canada. In two years he walked 5,000 miles and baptized 600 souls because he trusted in the words of Joseph Smith (Monson).

Brigham Young declared, "What a delight it was to hear Brother Joseph talk upon the great principles of eternity: he would bring them down to the capacity of a child, and he would unite heaven with earth" (459; also in JD 4:54). On another occasion Brigham said, "In my experience I never did let an opportunity pass of getting with the Prophet Joseph and of hearing him speak in public or in private, so that I might draw understanding from the fountain from which he spoke, that I might have it and bring it forth when it was needed" (JD 12:269).

Parley P. Pratt stated of Joseph,

His language abounding in original eloquence peculiar to himself—not polished—not studied—not smooth and softened by education and refined by art: but flowing forth in its own native simplicity, and profusely abounding in a variety of subject and manner. He interested and edified while, at the same time, he amused and entertained his audience: and none listened to him that were ever weary with his discourse. I have known him to retain a congregation of willing and anxious listeners for many hours together, in the midst of cold or sunshine, rain or wind, while they were laughing at one moment and weeping the next. Even his most bitter enemies were generally overcome if he could once get their ears. (45-46)

Joseph, the Prophet and Seer

On one occasion Josiah Quincy as a curious non-Mormon visited Joseph and spent enough time with him to gain some feelings about him. He said, "General, it seems to me that you have too much power to be safely trusted to one man." Joseph said, "In your hands or in the hands of any other person, so much power would no doubt be dangerous. I am the only man in the world in whom it would be safe to trust with it. Remember I am a prophet" (Quincy 397). Joseph taught with great power and authority recognized from on high. The honest in heart responded to his teachings; the wicked rejected them.

Elder Neal A. Maxwell has shared this thought:

From Joseph Smith, one unlearned and untrained in theology, more printed pages of scripture have come down to us than from any mortal, including Moses, Paul, Luke, and Mormon combined. But it is not only a matter of impressive quantity; it is also a qualitative matter. . . . What came through Joseph Smith was beyond Joseph Smith, and it did stretch him! In fact, the doctrines that came through that 'choice seer' (2 Nephi 3:6-7), by translation or revelation, are often so light intensive that, like radio-active materials, they must be handled with care! (6)

Conclusion

As we look back through the vista of over 150 years, we can see that this boy prophet stood in the midst of a religious tempest. He declared that God had spoken to him and that the authorized church of Christ was not upon the earth at that time. He did not depend upon the learning or wisdom of man but was called to give the world something superior to what had been produced by the philosophies of men. As Brigham Young said, Joseph could pull heaven down to earth (Young 459).

The towering mountain of truth built from the translations and revelations of the Prophet Joseph Smith speaks for itself. His views soar above the foothills of philosophy. And this is all the more amazing when we consider how inadequate he was in and of himself to do what he did. But since he has given to the world something which stands today in brilliancy, we can only conclude that indeed he was a chosen prophet and latter-day seer. His brother Hyrum left an interesting statement about Joseph's calling among the prophets: "There are prophets before, but Joseph has the spirit and power of all the prophets" (HC 6:346).

We have been taught well by this true and gifted prophet. The Book of Mormon tells us that God himself will witness to us that Joseph is a prophet. In a special 1835 blessing given him by his father, the Patriarch Joseph Smith, Sr., we read, "Thy testimony shall yet convince thousands and tens of thousands; it shall shine like the sun, and though the wicked seek to overthrow it, it shall be in vain, for the Lord God shall bear it off victorious" ("'Man Who Knew'" 6). Now is that time and the testimonies of millions proclaim that Joseph truly was a gifted, choice prophetic seer.

NOTES

Brian L. Smith is director of the Portland Institute of Religion adjacent to Portland State University in Portland, Oregon.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Backman, Milton V. "Joseph Smith's Recitals of the First Vision." Ensign (Jan 1985) 15:8-17.

Berrett, William E. "Joseph Smith: Five Qualities of Leadership." BYU Address, 5 Mar 1986.

Briggs, J. C. "Brother Joseph Smith." Saints' Herald (21 Jun 1884).

Cannon, George Q. Young People's History of Joseph Smith. Salt Lake City: George Q. Cannon & Sons, 1912.

Cowdery, Oliver. "Letter VI" Messenger and Advocate (Apr 1835) 1:108-112.

———. "Letter VIII." Messenger and Advocate (Oct 1835) 2:195-202.

History of the Church. 7 vols. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1980.

Journal of Discourses. 26 vols. 1854-86.

Kirkham, Francis W. A New Witness For Christ in America. 2 vols. Salt Lake City: Utah Printing Co., 1967.

"'Man Who Knew:' Firm Gospel Witness." Church News (9 Sep 1984) 6.

Matthews, Robert J. Joseph Smith Memorial Sermons. Logan, UT, Institute, 25 Jan 1987.

Maxwell, Neal A. "'A Choice Seer.'" Ensign (Aug 1986) 16:6-15.

Minutes of the School of the Prophets, Salt Lake City. 14 Jan 1871.

Monson, Thomas S. Joseph Smith Memorial Sermons. Logan, UT: Institute, 11 Dec 1963.

Peterson, H. Donl. "Moroni, Joseph Smith's Tutor." Ensign (Jan 1992) 22:22-29.

Pratt, Parley P. Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1938.

Pratt, Orson. Remarkable Visions. New York, 1841.

———. Letter to John Christensen, 11 Mar 1876. LDS Church Archives.

Quincy, Josiah. Figures of the Past. Boston: Little, Brown, 1926.

Smith, Joseph F. Gospel Doctrine. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1966.

Smith, Lucy Mack. History of Joseph Smith: By His Mother, Lucy Mack Smith. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1958.

Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Comp. Joseph Fielding Smith. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1976.

West, Ray B., Jr. Kingdom of the Saints. New York: Viking Press, 1957.

Widtstoe, John A. Joseph Smith: Seeker After Truth, Prophet of God. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1991.

Young, Brigham. Discourses of Brigham Young. Sel. and arr. John A. Widtsoe. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1966.

APPENDIX A

Moroni's Known Appearances to Joseph Smith 1823-1829

Compiled by H. Donl Peterson (Used by Permission)

DATE CIRCUMSTANCES/REFERENCES/NO. OF APPEARANCES

Sept 21-22, 1823 Joseph's bedroom—Message repeated three times

(Manchester, NY) JS-H 1:30-47

Sept 22, 1823 Field outside Joseph's home—Initial message

repeated (Manchester, NY) JS-H 1:48-49

Sept 22, 1823 At the Hill Cumorah—Plates, Urim and Thummin

and breastplate shown in addition to an open

vision (Hill Cumorah, NY) JS-H 1:51-53 and

Messenger & Advocate July and

Oct 1835

Sept 22, 1824, Yearly at Cumorah. Instructions given to aid

1825, and 1826 Joseph in preparation for the restoration (Hill

Cumorah, NY) JS-H 1:53-54. Winter 1827

Moroni met Joseph by the Hill Cumorah and said

that the time had come for the record to be

brought forth. He told Joseph to be up and doing

the things that he had been commanded (Hill

Cumorah, NY) Biographical Sketches, p. 99

Sept 22, 1827 Joseph receives the plates (Hill Cumorah, NY)

JS-H 1:59

June-July 1828 Urim and Thummin taken by Moroni over the

Martin Harris incident (Harmony, PA) HC

1:21-22

July 1828 Urim and Thummin returned (Harmony, PA)

HC 1:21-22 and Biographical

Sketches, p. 126

July 1828 Plates and Urim and Thummin taken (Harmony, PA)

HC 1:23

July-Aug 1828 Plates and Urim and Thummin returned (Harmony,

PA) HC 1:23 and Biographical

Sketches, p. 126, (1/14)

June 1829 Angel obtained the plates at Harmony, PA, to

transport them to Fayette township, NY, because

Joseph was apprehensive about their safety

enroute (Harmony, PA) Biographical

Sketches, p. 126

June 1829 Joseph, Emma, Oliver & David Whitmer saw

Moroni carrying the plates enroute to Cumorah—

Moroni appeared and disappeared instantly (on the

road between Harmony, PA, and the Hill Cumorah),

Joseph F. Smith Journal Msd 4319 CHO, The Three

Witnesses, Andrew Jensen, The Historical Record,

5, Jan 1886), p. 209

June 1829 Joseph had the plates once again in his

possession in Fayette township. Moroni met Joseph

in the garden and gave the plates to him

(Fayette township, NY) Biographical

Sketches, p. 137

June 1829 Joseph finished the translation and Moroni took

the record (Fayette township, NY) HC 1:60

June 1829 Oliver, David Whitmer and Joseph Smith (B of M

witnesses) saw Moroni and he showed them the

plates (Fayette township, NY) HC 1:60

June 1829 Martin Harris and Joseph Smith (B of M witnesses)

saw Moroni and the plates (Fayette township, NY)

HC 1:55

June 1829 Moroni gave the plates to Joseph and he showed

them to the eight witnesses. Moroni then called

for them and kept them (Manchester township,

NY) Biographical Sketches, pp. 140-41

APPENDIX B

Personages Who Appeared to the Prophet Joseph Smith or Who Were Seen by Him in Vision

List Compiled by H. Donl Peterson (Used by Permission)

# Personage References

D&C 76:20

1:5-6; D&C 76:20-24;

D&C 110:2-10

17:374

JD 23:48

1:39-40

6-8. Peter, James, John D&C 27:12; D&C

128:20; HC

1:40-42; JD 18:326

128:21; HC 2:380;

JD 18:326

21:94

21:65

JD 23:48

21:94

21:94

21:94

19-27. Twelve Jewish Apostles JD 21:94

(Peter, James, and John already counted above.) Names are in Matt 10:1-4 & Luke 6:13-16)

28-39. Twelve Nephite Apostles JD 21:94

(Including Three Nephites; names are recorded in 3 Nephi 19:4)

Pratt Letter Box

3/11/1876 (CHO)

HC 3:388; D&C

107:53-57

HC 3:388; D&C

107:53-57

HC 3:388; D&C

107:53-57

HC 3:388; D&C

107:53-57

107:53-57

HC 3:388

107:53-57

deceased brother

Diary, Part 2, 214, BYU

Library

in Sacrament) HC

1:106

dedication of Temple.

Life of Heber C.

Kimball, 106;

Temples of the

Most High, 159

three different times

and commanded him to

practice polygamy—

Eliza R. Snow,

Biography and Family

Records of Lorenzo

Snow 69-70

of the First Vision.

Joseph Smith's First

Vision, 159

Light (and his associates) 3:229-30
