THE PLAN OF SALVATION

TRUTHS OF SALVATION EASILY UNDERSTOOD. Salvation should be a subject uppermost in the mind's of all men. It is, without question, the most important subject that could possibly be considered, and yet there are so few among the many who pay any attention whatever to this great and important theme, as it may be applied in their lives. 1.1

All truth connected with the plan of salvation is reasonable and comprehensible, At least it may be comprehended by those who trust in the Lord and put themselves in an attitude to receive the revelation he may give them. The Lord does not leave man to discover truth without any guidance. Never has he performed any important work for the salvation of the people without first sending among them his specially appointed witnesses who are empowered to speak with authority and with knowledge of the things of which they testify.1.2

LABORS TOWARD SALVATION IN PRE-EXISTENCE. We had an existence before we came to this world. We lived in the spirit, and were in the presence of our Father in heaven, who is the Father of the spirits of all men; and there we walked by sight, for we were in his presence.

It was necessary, in order that we might receive a fulness of blessings and opportunities and become like unto our Father, for us to pass through this mortal probation. Hence, this earth was prepared; and we were sent down here to receive bodies of flesh and bones and to be quickened by blood; and to partake of all the vicissitudes of life as we find them here on this
 earth, that we might, through obedience to the principles of the gospel, know good from evil.

It was necessary that we have the privilege of suffering temptation and experiencing pain and tribulation as well as pleasure; and, if faithful, pass on to our exaltation and become the sons and daughters of God, having gained knowledge, wisdom, and understanding in this mortal life that could not be obtained in any other way, That is why we came here.

We took these mortal bodies; they were granted to us because of our obedience in the world before this, when we dwelt in the spirit and in the presence of God; and we now are suffering the sorrows as well as receiving the pleasures of the flesh. 2.3

FREE AGENCY ESSENTIAL TO SALVATION. We are subject to temptation; but the Lord never intended that we should yield to it and thus become subject unto sin, and fall and lose the reward that otherwise would be ours. He knew that on no other terms, only through our free agency and the opportunities which would come to us in this life by knowing good from evil when we no longer walk by sight but by faith, would we be able to come back into his presence and be worthy of exaltation. Without free agency we would amount to very little, and the Lord granted unto us our agency, that we might act for ourselves -- to choose the good, or to choose the evil if we desire -- with the understanding that we would reap the reward of our labors in this life. Those who do good shall come forth in the resurrection of the just and receive a place of exaltation in his kingdom, while those who do evil shall come forth in the resurrection also, but the resurrection of damnation. 2.4

LAWS OF SALVATION REVEALED FROM BEGINNING. We are not ignorant of the things of God, for they have been made known to us from the days of Adam until now and are recorded in the holy scriptures. Messengers from the presence of God have been sent to the earth from the beginning to establish in the hearts of men, and to reveal to them, all that is essential for man's salvation. If any among us is ignorant of these things, it is due to wilful rebellion.

The Son of God came to earth himself to show us by example the way to eternal life, and was himself free from all sin. We cannot excuse ourselves for the violation of the laws of God on the ground of ignorance. With all of these commandments before us, we are moral agents responsible to the Most High and under obligation to be obedient. 3.5

TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF PLAN OF SALVATION. The primary and fundamental principles of this plan of salvation are:

1 -- Faith in God the Father, in his Son Jesus Christ, and in the Holy Ghost. We must accept them as the presiding authority in the heavens, who govern and control all things, who are omnipotent, just, and true.

2 -- We must accept the infinite atonement of Christ, believing that he is the Redeemer of the
 world, both from Adam's transgression and from our individual sins on condition of our repentance.

3 -- We must repent of all our sins, giving our hearts to God with the full intent of serving him.

4 -- We must be baptized in water for the remission of our sins, by one who is called of God and clothed with divine authority to administer in the ordinances of the gospel.

5 -- We must have the hands of those holding authority placed upon our heads, and through their ministrations receive the baptism of the Holy Ghost -- the Spirit of truth and prophecy that guides us in all truth.

6 -- We must be willing to serve the Lord with all our heart, mind, and strength, keeping his commandments even unto the end.

Upon these laws salvation is based, and the promised blessings are unto all men. These conditions are not severe, or grievous, and are within the power of the weakest of the weak, if they will only place their trust in their Redeemer.

All who repent and obey these laws, will be redeemed and saved from the sins of the world; but they who refuse and repent not will have to suffer for their own sins. 4.6

INGRATITUDE FOR PLAN OF SALVATION. Ingratitude is, I think, the most prevalent of all sins, and one of the greatest, because every soul who refuses to abide in the truth, who will not walk in the light and understanding of the commandments which Jesus Christ has given, is ungrateful. He came and gave his life to redeem us from transgression. He was nailed to a cross and his blood was shed. What for? That we might live, that we might receive the remission of our sins, that we might, through obedience to the principles of the gospel, come back again into the presence of God the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ.4.7

IMMORTALITY AND ETERNAL LIFE

IMMORTALITY AND ETERNAL LIFE COMPARED. Immortality and eternal life are two separate things, one distinct from the other. Every man shall receive immortality, whether he be good, bad, or indifferent, for the resurrection from the dead shall come to all.

Eternal life is something in addition. None shall receive eternal life save it be those who keep the commandments of the Lord and are entitled thus to enter into his presence. When the Lord says, "Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it,"5.8 he means that there will be very few of the children of men who will prove themselves worthy in this life, to go back and dwell in his presence. That is eternal life, to dwell in the presence of the Father and receive exaltation from him. He did not mean
 that those who passed through the gate which is strait, and the way which is narrow, were those who should be raised from the dead.

Very gladly would the Lord give to everyone eternal life, but since that blessing can come only on merit -- through the faithful performance of duty -- only those who are worthy shall receive it.

HIGHER KINGDOMS MINISTER TO LOWER. Yet, through his abundant mercy, the Lord will do for all the best that can be done, and therefore he will give to all a place somewhere -- if not within the gates of the Holy City, then it must be on the outside -- 5.9 where those who are not entitled to the fulness of blessings may be ministered to by those who have greater glory. For we read also here in this vision, where the glories are spoken of, that those who dwell in the celestial kingdom shall minister unto those of the terrestrial kingdom; those in the terrestrial kingdom shall minister to those of the telestial kingdom.

The Son may go to the terrestrial, but they who enter into that kingdom shall not receive the fulness of the Father; they will not see the greatness of his glory. He withholds that from them. They never come back again into the fulness of his presence. Those who enter into the telestial kingdom will not receive the fulness of the Father or of the Son. They will not visit there but will send messengers to visit the inhabitants of that glory and instruct them.

Those in the terrestrial kingdom shall visit those in the telestial kingdom, and those of the celestial shall visit those in the terrestrial kingdom. Where the Father is these cannot come, for the Lord has said: "Where God and Christ dwell they cannot come, worlds without end." 6.10 Yet in this very same section it is written that notwithstanding this fact, so great shall be the blessings that come to those who enter there that it is beyond our comprehension.6.11 Such is the great mercy of the Lord. He will endeavor to save all his children and exalt as many as he possibly can.

COMPLETE OBEDIENCE BRINGS ETERNAL LIFE. But to be exalted one must keep the whole law. This is the great love he shows forth for his children: notwithstanding they sin and close their eyes against the truth, yet his arm is stretched out still, and he will feel after them and bring them back if they will keep his commandments; and if not, he will do for them just the best he can. He is going to bless them with all it is possible to give, and all shall be saved; all others will receive a place somewhere and it will be glorious unto them, but to receive the exaltation of the righteous, in other words eternal life, the commandments of the Lord must be kept in all things.

ETERNAL LIFE AND ETERNAL DAMNATION COMPARED. There is another passage of scripture I want to read in connection with this. I want to read from section 29. The Lord here speaks of Adam and his punishment after he was cast out of the Lord's presence. "But, behold, I say unto you that I, the Lord God, gave unto Adam and unto his seed, that they should not die as to the temporal death" -- they had already died the first death, the spiritual
 death, and the Lord said he gave them power that they should not die the temporal death -- "until I, the Lord God, should send forth angels to declare unto them repentance and redemption, through faith on the name of mine Only Begotten Son. And thus did I, the Lord God, appoint unto man the days of his probation," -- now mark this -- "that by his natural death he might be raised in immortality unto eternal life."

So you see the significance of it? Every man is raised in immortality, no more death, even unto eternal life, if he keeps the commandments of the Lord -- not otherwise. Now I think that is a very significant reading here, "raised in immortality unto eternal life, even as many as would believe." Now mark this: "And they that believe not unto eternal damnation; for they cannot be redeemed from their spiritual fall, because they repent not."7.12

The spiritual fall means banishment from the presence of the Lord, and they cannot be redeemed from that because they do not repent. Now when they eventually do repent, if their deeds have been evil and they are not entitled to walk in the strait and narrow way and through the gate, they will have to take their place somewhere in some kingdom outside of his presence where they shall be taught, they shall be instructed by those who have gone beyond to exaltation.

ETERNAL LIFE IS GOD'S LIFE. One more thought. I want to read you a verse or two from the 17th chapter of John: "These words spake Jesus, and lifted up his eyes to heaven, and said, Father, the hour is come; glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee: As thou hast given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou hast given him. And this is life eternal," now here you get it, "this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent."7.13

No man who does not receive the privilege of entering the celestial kingdom and coming face to face with the Father will be able to know what eternal life is, for he cannot know the Father unless he sees him and dwells with him, and partakes of the same life which the Father possesses for that is eternal life.

ETERNAL LIFE AND ETERNAL PUNISHMENT COMPARED. Now, again, my mind is called to another thought I do not want to lose before I close. In the 19th section of the Doctrine and Covenants we read of endless punishment. You know the idea of eternal punishment, endless punishment, had troubled the world; and because the scriptures speak of endless punishment and eternal punishment, men have stood before congregations of the people and said unto them, "If you don't repent, if you don't believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, you shall be damned eternally; you shall go into a lake of fire and brimstone where you will be ever burning but never consumed"; and thus they tortured the minds of the people by teaching unto them such doctrine as that. The Lord has revealed unto us what is meant by eternal punishment, for he says: "For, behold, the mystery of godliness, how great is it! For, behold, I am endless, and the punishment which is given from my hand is endless punishment, for Endless is my name. Wherefore --

"Eternal punishment is God's punishment.

"Endless punishment is God's punishment."8.14

That is why it is called endless. Therefore, I say to you, eternal life is God's life; it is the life which he has, that which he possesses. Therefore, if he gives unto you that life which he has, you have eternal life, and you will not get it if you do not prove yourself worthy to enter into his presence. Now, that is the gospel of Jesus Christ, that is the great plan of salvation. 8.15

ETERNAL LIFE IS EXALTATION. Now there is a difference between immortality and eternal life. Immortality is the gift to live forever. It comes to every creature. Eternal life is to have the kind of life that God has. All those who become servants will have immortality, but they who become sons and daughters of God will have the additional gift of eternal life, which is the greatest gift of God.8.16

Eternal life is life in the presence of the Father and the Son. Those who receive it become members of the "Church of the Firstborn" and are heirs as sons and daughters of God. They receive the fulness of blessings. They become like the Father and the Son and are joint-heirs with Jesus Christ.9.17

What is eternal life? It is to have a continuation of the seeds forever and ever." 9.18 No one receives eternal life except those who receive the exaltation. Eternal life is the greatest gift of God; immortality is not. The Lord says: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that heareth my word, and believeth on him that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation; but is passed from death unto life." Everlasting life in this passage is the same as eternal life. 9.19

KINDS OF SALVATION

SALVATION: CONDITIONAL AND UNCONDITIONAL. Christ's sacrifice and death did two things for us: it brought unto us unconditional salvation and conditional salvation. Sometimes we refer to these as general salvation and individual salvation. I am going to read what Orson Pratt said in relation to this. It is one of the clearest statements I know about. It is very concise and well thought out.

"The universal redemption of the posterity of Adam from the fall will be fully accomplished after the earth has been filled with its measure of inhabitants, and all men have been redeemed from the grave to immortality, and the earth itself has been changed and made entirely new."

Christ's mission is not finished until that time comes.

"But universal redemption from the effects of original sin, has nothing to do with redemption from our personal sins; for the original sin of Adam and the personal sins of his children, are two different things. The first was committed by man in his immortal state; the second was committed by man in a mortal state; the former was committed in a state of ignorance of good and evil; the latter was committed by man, having a knowledge of both good and evil. . . .

"The children of Adam had no agency in the transgression of their first parents, and therefore, they are not required to exercise any agency in their redemption from its penalty. They are redeemed from it without faith, repentance, baptism, or any other act, either of the mind or body."

REDEMPTION: CONDITIONAL AND UNCONDITIONAL. "Conditional redemption is also universal in its nature; it is offered to all but not received by all; it is a universal gift, though not universally accepted; its benefits can be obtained only through faith, repentance, baptism, the laying on of hands, and obedience to all other requirements of the gospel.

"Unconditional redemption is a gift forced upon mankind which they cannot reject, though they were disposed. Not so with conditional redemption; it can be received or rejected according to the will of the creature.

"Redemption from the original sin is without faith or works; redemption from our own sins is given through faith and works. Both are the gifts of free grace; but while one is a gift forced upon us unconditionally, the other is a gift merely offered to us conditionally. The redemption of the one is compulsory; the reception of the other is voluntary. Man cannot, by any possible act, prevent his redemption from the fall; but he can utterly refuse and prevent his redemption from the penalty of his own sins."10.20

CHRIST REDEEMS ALL FORMS OF LIFE. We need a little more explanation as to just what we mean by unconditional redemption. That means to restore us from this mortal state to the immortal state; in other words, to give unto us the resurrection. That comes to every creature, not only to men but also to the fish, the fowls of the air, and the beasts of the field, as the Lord tells us in section 29, of the Doctrine and Covenants.11.21 All of them had spiritual existence before they were placed upon the earth; therefore they are to be redeemed.

Christ's blood not only redeems man but it also redeems every creature throughout this earth and the very earth itself. That comes as a free gift from Christ, without any asking on our part. We cannot prevent it. We have nothing to do with it, only to receive it, because we were not responsible for death. Therefore, as Paul says, "For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive."11.22

But the conditional redemption is the redemption which will place us as sons and daughters of God in the kingdom of God.11.23

REDEMPTION AND SALVATION MEAN EXALTATION. I want to discuss a little these three terms, redemption, salvation, and exaltation, used synonymously in the scriptures. Many places where you see the word redemption or where you see the word salvation it means exaltation, or in other word's salvation in the kingdom of God; and yet sometimes there is a difference in meaning. While these three terms are used frequently in the scriptures synonymously, 11.24 in fact most of the time, yet they also do have different meanings describing three separate stages in the eternal progress of man. 11.25

SPECIAL MEANINGS OF REDEMPTION AND SALVATION. Redemption is the act of purchasing back, recovering from captivity, or restoring. So Christ becomes our Redeemer in bringing life back again where it was taken away through the transgression. There will be some individuals who will be redeemed from death -- I am speaking now of the physical death -- and that is all. They will go out as sons of perdition to dwell with the devil and his angels, as set forth in section 76 and other scriptures. They are not redeemed from the spiritual death, which is banishment from the presence of God.12.26

Salvation is preservation from impending evil; deliverance from sin and its penalty realized in a future state; also, the means of deliverance from evil and ruin. That is salvation. (I am giving you the dictionary definition of these terms.)

Salvation will come to the great body of humanity. The redemption of the soul is the resurrection. Salvation is to find a place somewhere in that redeemed state, freed from the realms "where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched" 12.27 in its fulness, or in other words redemption from that spiritual death which shall be pronounced upon the wicked when the Lord says unto them, "Depart," and they go into the realms of Satan. 12.28

Salvation will come to all who enter the terrestrial kingdom. They will receive a higher grade of salvation than will those in the telestial kingdom. Salvation will come also to those who enter the celestial kingdom. That will be a still higher grade of salvation.

SPECIAL MEANINGS OF REDEMPTION AND SALVATION COMPARED. Exaltation is the act of being raised or elevated, as in position or rank; it is to be magnified or glorified. So in the celestial kingdom those who pass by the gods who are set to guard the way to a fulness, receive exaltation. The telestial kingdom is not a kingdom of exaltation; the terrestrial kingdom is not a kingdom of exaltation, although it is higher than the telestial kingdom; and there will be many who will enter the celestial kingdom in their saved condition without an exaltation in it, for there are different degrees even in the celestial kingdom.

Redemption, according to the gospel, is the gift of God to every creature born into the world, that he shall live again, being entitled to the resurrection. Christ is frequently spoken of in the scriptures as our Redeemer, and so refers to himself.

Salvation is the gift of God, according to the scriptures, to all men who do not sin against the light and become sons of perdition. Salvation is of varying stages or degrees. Every man is to be judged according to his works, and for this reason various degrees or kingdoms have been established.

Exaltation is to dwell in the presence of God and to be like him. 13.29

WORKING OUT OUR SALVATION

GATE TO SALVATION IS STRAIT. "Enter ye in at the strait gate; for wide is the gate, and broad is the way, which leadeth to destruction, and many there be who go in thereat; Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it." 13.30

Strange as it may appear, there are few people, very few in the world, who believe, if we are to judge them by their acts, in these words of our Redeemer. Mark you, this word strait is spelled s-t-r- a-i-t and not s-t-r-a-i-g-h-t. While no doubt, that path which leads into the presence of God is straight, it is also strait, which means that those who enter into it will find it restricted; it is narrow; they cannot take with them that which does not apply, or which does not belong to the kingdom of God. All such things must be left behind when we enter into this narrow way which leads into the presence of God, where we can receive life eternal. "Few there be that find it." 13.31

I have never been able in my teachings to make the gospel plan appear easy: that is, to hold out hopes to those who are indifferent, to those who are wayward, to those who wilfully break the commandments of the Lord and will not hearken unto these truths when every opportunity is given them to obey the truth.14.32

CHURCH MEMBERSHIP ALONE WILL NOT SAVE. We are not going to be saved in the kingdom of God just because our names are on the records of the Church. It will require more than that. We will have to have our names written in the Lamb's Book of Life; that is the evidence we have kept the commandments. Every soul who will not keep the commandments shall have his name blotted out of that book."14.33 . . .

Oh, I wish we had the power, we who hold the priesthood, to reach every soul who is not faithful, who is not humbled in his heart -- members of this Church -- that we might bring them back to a full understanding of the gospel. Is it true that some among us have an idea that it matters not that we sin so long as it is not a grievous sin, a deadly sin, that we will yet be saved in the kingdom of God? Nephi saw our day. He said that people would be saying that. But I say unto you, we cannot turn away from the path of truth and righteousness and retain the guidance of the Spirit of the Lord.14.34

It is not possible, as some of us have supposed, for us to slip along easily through this life, keeping the commandments of the Lord indifferently -- accepting some of the doctrines and not others, and indulging our appetites or desires, and, because we consider them little things, failing to understand and comprehend our duty to them -- and then expect to receive a fulness of glory in the kingdom of God.14.35

NOT HALF THE LATTER-DAY SAINTS TO BE SAVED. Those who receive the fulness will be privileged to view the face of our Father. There will not be such an overwhelming number of the Latter-day Saints who will get there. President Francis M. Lyman many times has declared, and he had reason to declare, I believe, that if we save one-half of the Latter-day Saints, that is, with an exaltation in the celestial kingdom of God, we will be doing well. Not that the Lord is partial, not that he will draw the line as some will say, to keep people out. He would have every one of us go in if we would; but there are laws and ordinances that we must keep; if we do not observe the law we cannot enter.

Many come into the Church, like fish that are gathered into the net, that have to be sorted and thrown out again or put into piles where they belong. And so it will be with us. 15.36

The Savior compared the kingdom, in other words the Church, to ten virgins, five of whom were wise and five of whom were foolish;15.37 and so we must not get the understanding that because we are members of the Church it is all well with us, and our salvation is secure, that is, our exaltation is secure. It is not so.

We must continue to the end; we must obey the commandments. We must keep the ordinances. We must receive covenants, sealings, the sealing power, and privileges which are obtained in the temple of the Lord, and then live in accordance with them. That we must do. 15.38

NOT SAVED BY FAITH OF OUR FATHERS. We must not lose sight of the fact that no man can lay claim to salvation, or to the priesthood of God, simply because he had a faithful father. . . .

If they are not faithful, then they will not receive the fulfilment of the promise. The posterity of Joseph Smith, like the posterity of any other elder of Israel, will stand or fall on their own foundation which they have builded. And if the sons of Joseph Smith refuse to keep the commandments, the blessings wilt pass them by; but God's work will continue until the consummation of all things.15.39

SALVATION AND A CUP OF TEA. You cannot neglect little things. "Oh, a cup of tea is such a little thing. It is so little; surely it doesn't amount to much; surely the Lord will forgive me if I drink a cup of tea."

Yes, he will forgive you, because he is going to forgive every man who repents; but, my
 brethren, if you drink coffee or tea, or take tobacco, are you letting a cup of tea or a little tobacco stand in the road and bar you from the celestial kingdom of God, where you might otherwise have received a fulness of glory?

"Oh, it is such a little thing, and the Lord will forgive us." Well, there is not anything that is little in the way of sinning. There is not anything that is little in this world in the aggregate. One cup of tea, then it is another cup of tea and another cup of tea, and when you get them all together, they are not so little. As we learned in the Primary:

"Little drops of water, little grains of sand Make the mighty ocean and the pleasant land."

What is a grain of sand? And yet the earth is composed of just such things as that.

Not long ago I was riding in an automobile. Something went wrong with it, and it refused to go. The man was an expert who was driving, but I did not have much time. I left matters till I hardly had time to get to the train, which was 30 miles away. We went all over his machine; every wire was in contact; everything was just so; he could not find a thing in it that was wrong; and yet he could not make it go.

"Well" I said to him, "here, you have done everything you know but one. There is just one thing now that I want you to do: open up your carburetor, and let out a little gas, I believe it has water in it." He let it run off and closed the valve again, and the auto began to run immediately.

LITTLE SINS WILL KEEP US FROM SALVATION. But a little water in the carburetor was such a little thing, just a few drops, but they were in the road and they stopped the progress and nearly cost me reaching that train. Suppose we call that train salvation, could you afford to let a little thing like that stand between you and your salvation? . . .

God is not going to save every man and woman in the celestial kingdom. If you want to get there, and you have failings; if you are committing sins; if you are breaking the commandments of the Lord, and you know it; it is a good time right now to repent and reform, and not get the idea that it is such a little thing that the Lord will forgive you; just a few stripes, just a little punishment and we will be forgiven; for you may find yourselves cast out, if you insist and persist in such a course. 17.40

CHURCH MEMBERS MUST ENDURE TO END. Unless it is a grievous sin we do not excommunicate people from the Church. We try to teach them their duty. We try to bring them to repentance. We try to make them understand the truth. But after they are in the Church, if they will not do these things and will not hearken to our counsels, you may be assured that they are going to be judged according to their works.

The fact that they are members of the Church will not save them. Every man and every
 woman will have to answer for the deeds done in the body. An ancient prophet said: "Wo unto him that has the law given, yea, that has all the commandments of God, like unto us, and that transgresseth them, and that wasteth the days of his probation, for awful is his state!" 17.41 . . .

"How shall we, that are dead to sin, live any longer therein?" 18.42

Every baptized person who has fully repented, who comes into the Church with a broken heart and a contrite spirit, has made a covenant to continue with that broken heart, with that contrite spirit, which means a repentant spirit. He makes a covenant that he will do that." 18.43

He is to endure to the end, It is essential that we endure to the end. In the revelation. that was given at the time the Church was organized, the Lord said this:

"And we know that all men must repent and believe on the name of Jesus Christ, and worship the Father in his name, and endure in faith on his name to the end, or they cannot be saved in the kingdom of God."18.44

PROGRESS TOWARD SALVATION BEYOND THE GRAVE. Salvation does not come all at once; we are commanded to be perfect even as our Father in heaven is perfect. It will take us ages to accomplish this end, for there will be greater progress beyond the grave, and it will be there that the faithful will overcome all things, and receive all things, even the fulness of the Father's glory. 18.45

I believe the Lord meant just what he said: that we should be perfect, as our Father in heaven is perfect, That will not come all at once, but line upon line, and precept upon precept, example upon example, and even then not as long as we live in this mortal life, for we will have to go even beyond the grave before we reach that perfection and shall be like God.

But here we lay the foundation. Here is where we are taught these simple truths of the gospel of Jesus Christ, in this probationary state, to prepare us for that perfection. It is our duty to be better today than we were yesterday, and better tomorrow than we are today. Why? Because we are on that road, if we are keeping the commandments of the Lord, we are on that road to perfection, and that can only come through obedience and the desire in our hearts to overcome the world.19.46

THE UNCLEAN CANNOT BE SAVED. It is the duty of every man to try to be like his Eternal Father. This requires cleanliness of thought and action. We are instructed that no unclean thing can inherit the kingdom of God.19.47 . . .

It is reasonable to think that every soul who desires to be a true follower of Jesus Christ would wish to be as nearly like him in all respects as it is possible. 19.48

HOW SAINTS ARE MADE. Saints are not made by popes or any other creature. It is not within the jurisdiction of mortals to make saints, either when they are living or after they are dead. Sainthood comes through obedience to the commandments of the Lord. 19.49
