JOINT-HEIRS WITH JESUS CHRIST

EXALTATION: TO BECOME LIKE GOD. Those who receive exaltation in the celestial kingdom are promised the fulness thereof. "All things are theirs, whether life or death, or things present, or things to come."35.1 Our Father in heaven is infinite; he is perfect; he possesses all knowledge and wisdom. However, he is not jealous of his wisdom and perfection, but glories in the fact that it is possible for his children who obey him in all things and endure to the end to become like him.

Man has within him the power, which the Father has bestowed upon him, so to develop in truth, faith, wisdom, and all the virtues, that eventually he shall become like the Father and the Son; this virtue, wisdom, and knowledge on the part of the faithful does not rob the Father and the Son, but adds to their glory and dominion. Thus it is destined that those who are worthy to become his sons and joint-heirs with our Redeemer, would be heirs of the Father's kingdom, possessing the same attributes in their perfection, as the Father and the Son now possess. 35.2

ALL THAT THE FATHER HATH. Those who are faithful in obtaining the priesthood and magnifying their calling become members of the Church of the Firstborn, receiving all that the Father hath; and this is according to an oath and covenant that cannot be broken. Now, how are they to receive all that the Father hath, if something is withheld? And if something is not withheld, how can they receive all that he hath and not become as he is, that is, be gods themselves? . . .

How can the saints receive of his fulness and be equal with the Lord and not be as he is, that is, gods?36.3

The Father has promised through the Son that all that he has shall be given to those who are
 obedient to his commandments. They shall increase in knowledge, wisdom, and power, going from grace to grace, until the fulness of the perfect day shall burst upon them. They shall, through the glory and blessing of the Almighty, become creators. All power, and dominion, and might shall be given to them, and they shall be the only ones upon whom this great blessing shall be bestowed.

All others, no matter how much learning, wisdom, and power, they may obtain, shall nevertheless be restricted in their several spheres, for they cannot attain to the fulness which is held in reserve for those who are permitted to pass by the angels and the gods who are set to guard the way to this great exaltation.

GAINING A FULNESS OF LIGHT AND TRUTH. "If ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed; And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free." 36.4 These are the words of our Master, and it is obedience to him and his word that unlocks the glories and mysteries of the kingdom of heaven. They cannot be unlocked in any other way.

All light, all truth come from God. That which is not from him does not edify but brings darkness. If we will continue in God; that is, keep his commandments, worship him and love his truth; then the time will come when we shall be bathed in the fulness of truth, which shall grow brighter and brighter until the perfect day. Here then, we find power wisdom, advancement, the knowledge which is perfect and which can only be obtained through continuing in God by obedience unto him."36.5

FULL OBEDIENCE LEADS TO JOINT-HEIRSHIP. Now if we want to become heirs, joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, possessing the blessings of the kingdom, there is only one thing required of you and of me, and that is that we keep the whole law, not a part of it only. Do you think it would be fair, just, proper, for the Lord to say to us: "I will give unto you commandments; you may keep them if you will; you may be indifferent about the matter if you will; keep some, reject others; or, partially keep some; and I will punish you, but then I will make it up to you, and all will be well."37.6

SONS OF GOD

FAITHFUL BECOME SONS AND DAUGHTERS OF GOD. The destiny of the faithful man in this Church and the faithful woman is to become a son and daughter of God. That is the great gift that the Lord holds out to the members of the Church. 37.7

John writes as follows: "Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is."37.8

Why? Because as sons of God we have lived to be like him; and John did not mean that we would see him in the form of a man. Every man is in that form, whether he repents of his sins
 or whether he does not. Every man was created in the image of God, in his likeness; but when Christ comes, those who have kept the commandments and stand before him, will see themselves like they see him, a Son of God! They will be entitled to the blessings of sons, heirs. The Lord has promised to them the fulness of his kingdom so they can go on through the eternities. 37.9

PRIESTHOOD ESSENTIAL TO SONSHIP. John was speaking to the men who held the priesthood. He calls them the sons of God. We are the sons of God. That same divine authority has been bestowed upon us. We, too, in this day should be just as grateful and just as willing to serve, and to keep the commandments of the Lord, and to magnify the callings which have been given unto us, as were these men in former days who were the sons of God.

I wonder if we realize the greatness of our callings -- yes, all the elders in this Church -- do they realize that they hold the Melchizedek Priesthood? Do they know that through their faithfulness and their obedience, according to the revelations of the Lord, they are entitled to receive all that the Father has -- to become the sons of God, joint-heirs with our Elder Brother, Jesus Christ, entitled to the exaltations in the celestial kingdom? Do we realize that? We, too, if we do realize it, should be like those of former days, and every man that hath this hope in him, will purify himself even as Christ is pure.38.10

SONS OF GOD BECOME JOINT-HEIRS WITH CHRIST. I many times think of that passage of scripture, pertaining to those who keep the commandments of the Lord and are faithful and true to the end, that all that the Father hath shall be given unto them. 38.11 It is consoling and glorious to me. While we cannot comprehend the greatness of this blessing, yet a ray of light we do receive; an impression is made upon our minds to this effect, that if we will do the things the Lord requires of us, we shall become sons and daughters unto God. That is the meaning of this scripture.

As sons and daughters then, we are heirs of his kingdom and shall receive by right the fulness of the glory and be entitled to the great blessings and privileges which the Lord in his mercy has revealed to us in the dispensation of the fulness of times. "For as many as are led by the Spirit of God," Paul has written, "they are the sons of God. . . . The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God: And if children, then heirs; heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ; if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together." 39.12

SONS OF GOD BECOME GODS. If the faithful, who keep the commandments of the Father, are his sons, then they are heirs of the kingdom and shall receive of the fulness of the Father's glory, even until they become like the Father. And how can they be perfect as their Father in heaven is perfect if they are not like him? . . .

Now, if they overcome all things, then there are not some things which they do not overcome. If these are to receive "of his fulness and of his glory," and if into their "hands the

Father has given all things," then the Father has not withheld some of the fulness of his glory, or some things. And if they receive his fulness and his glory, and if "all things are theirs, whether life or death, or things present, or things to come, all are theirs," how can they receive these blessings and not become gods? They cannot.39.13

FULL OBEDIENCE LEADS TO SONSHIP. Now how are we going to become the sons of God and, of course, daughters as well? How is it done? Can we become the sons and heirs of our Eternal Father simply by being baptized for the remission of our sins after we have repented and have had faith, and have had hands laid upon us for the gift of the Holy Ghost, and have come into the Church? No, it takes more than that.

Why, of course they are the children of our Father in heaven, those who do that, as are the people who are outside of the Church; but to become the sons and daughters of God, children, "heirs, heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ," we must suffer with him, that we may be glorified with him.39.14 In other words, we must receive in our hearts, accept in our hearts, every principle of the gospel which has been revealed; and insofar as it is in our power to do so, we must live in accordance with these principles and keep the commandments of God in full.40.15

ENDOWMENT AND SEALING PRECEDE SONSHIP. The Lord has given unto us privileges, and blessings, and the opportunity of entering into covenants, of accepting ordinances that pertain to our salvation beyond what is preached in the world; beyond the principles of faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, repentance from sin, and baptism for the remission of sins, and the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost; and these principles and covenants are received nowhere else but in the temple of God.

If you would become a son or a daughter of God and an heir of the kingdom, then you must go to the house of the Lord and receive blessings which there can be obtained and which cannot be obtained elsewhere; and you must keep those commandments and those covenants to the end. . . .

The ordinances of the temple, the endowment and sealings, pertain to exaltation in the celestial kingdom, where the sons and daughters are. The sons and daughters are not outside in some other kingdom. The sons and daughters go into the house, belong to the household, have access to the home. "In my Father's house are many mansions." 40.16 Sons and daughters have access to the home where he dwells, and you cannot receive that access until you go to the temple. Why? Because you must receive certain key words as well as make covenants by which you are able to enter. If you try to get into the house, and the door is locked, how are you going to enter, if you haven't your key? You get your key in the temple. which will admit you.

I picked up a key on the street one day, and took it home, and it opened every door in my house. You cannot find a key on the street, for that key is never lost that will open the door
 that enters into our Father's mansions. You have got to go where the key is given. And each can obtain the key, if you will; but after receiving it, you may lose it, by having it taken away from you again, unless you abide by the agreement which you entered into when you went to the house of the Lord. 41.17

ALL MEN TO BE EITHER SERVANTS OR SONS. You know what it says about servants in the scriptures. Those who become servants are those who are not willing to receive these blessings in the house of the Lord and abide in them. They are not sons; they are not daughters. They are children of God, it is true, for all men are his children. But they do not inherit, and therefore they remain servants throughout eternity, because they were not willing to receive that which they might have received, and the gift which was bestowed upon them or offered to them. They not only rejected the gift, but also the Giver of the gift. There will be a great many servants, but there will not be many heirs, "Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it."41.18

THE CHURCH OF THE FIRSTBORN

EXALTED BEINGS BELONG TO CHURCH OF FIRSTBORN. Those who gain exaltation in the celestial kingdom are those who are members of the Church of the Firstborn; in other words, those who keep all the commandments of the Lord. 41.19 There will be many who are members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints who shall never become members of the Church of the Firstborn.

The higher ordinances in the temple of God pertain to exaltation in the celestial kingdom. . . . In order to receive this blessing, one must keep the full law, must abide the law by which that kingdom is governed; for, "He who is not able to abide the law of a celestial kingdom cannot abide a celestial glory."42.20

So being ordained an elder, or a high priest, or an apostle, or even President of the Church, is not the thing that brings the exaltation, but obedience to the laws and the ordinances and the covenants required of those who desire to become members of the Church of the Firstborn, as these are administered in the house of the Lord. To become a member of the Church of the Firstborn, as I understand it, is to become one of the inner circle. We are all members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints by being baptized and confirmed, and there are many who seem to be content to remain such without obtaining the privileges of exaltation.

HOW TO JOIN CHURCH OF THE FIRSTBORN. The Lord has made it possible for us to become members of the Church of the Firstborn, by receiving the blessings of the house of the Lord and overcoming all things. Thus we become heirs, "priests and kings, who have received of his fulness, and of his glory," who shall "dwell in the presence of God and his Christ forever and ever," with full exaltation.42.21 Are such blessings worth having?

I have said that only one man at a time on the earth holds the keys of this sealing power of
 the priesthood, but he may, and does, delegate power to others, and they officiate under his direction in the temples of the Lord. No man can officiate in these sealing ordinances until he receives the authority to do so by being set apart by the one who holds the keys, notwithstanding he may hold the priesthood. All the authority exercised in the temples is then. after all, the authority centered in one man. He has the power and calls upon others to officiate, and they seal upon us the keys and powers which, through our obedience, entitle us to become sons and daughters and members of the Church of the Firstborn, receiving all things in the kingdom. This is what we can get in the temple, so that we become members of the family, sons and daughters of God, not servants. 43.22

THE PATH TO EXALTATION

EXALTATION OFFERED TO ALL. The Lord does not desire that the people should suffer. He is pained when a man does wrong and needs to be punished and fails to receive the crown or reward that is offered to those who are faithful and true. The Lord would have every man receive a crown, every man become exalted, every man become a son, and every woman become a daughter unto him. But this cannot be done, except on principles of righteousness and free agency.

Therefore, every soul has the right to choose for himself that which he will do. This is the gospel of merit. Every man shall receive that which he is entitled to receive. Every soul shall be blessed according to the diligence, willingness, and integrity put forth in the service of the Lord. The man who will not keep his commandments, the Lord will not exalt. The woman who rejects the light and refuses to abide by the doctrines of our Redeemer shall not be exalted. Those who will be exalted shall be crowned with glory, immortality, and eternal life in the presence of our Father. 43.23

In order to obtain the exaltation we must accept the gospel and all its covenants; and take upon us the obligations which the Lord has offered; and walk in the light and the understanding of the truth; and "live by every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of God." 43.24

CELESTIAL MARRIAGE ESSENTIAL TO EXALTATION. Another thing that we must not forget in this great plan of redemption and exaltation, is that a man must have a wife, and a woman a husband, to receive the fulness of exaltation. They must be sealed for time and for all eternity in a temple; then their union will last forever, and they cannot be separated because God has joined them together, as he taught the Pharisees. 44.25

Parents will have eternal claim upon their posterity and will have the gift of eternal increase, if they obtain the exaltation. This is the crowning glory in the kingdom of God, and they will have no end. When the Lord says they will have no end, he means that all who attain to this glory will have the blessing of the continuation of the "seeds" forever. Those who fail to obtain this blessing come to the "deaths," which means that they will have no increase,
 forever. All who obtain this exaltation will have the privilege of completing the full measure of their existence, and they will have a posterity that will be as innumerable as the stars of heaven. 44.26

If you want salvation in the fullest, that is exaltation in the kingdom of God, so that you may become his sons and his daughters, you have got to go into the temple of the Lord and receive these holy ordinances which belong to that house, which cannot be had elsewhere. No man shall receive the fulness of eternity, of exaltation, alone; no woman shall receive that blessing alone; but man and wife, when they receive the sealing power in the temple of the Lord, if they thereafter keep all the commandments, shall pass on to exaltation, and shall continue and become like the Lord. And that is the destiny of men; that is what the Lord desires for his children. 44.27

ONLY EXALTED BEINGS GAIN FULNESS OF FATHER. No man can obtain that exaltation without receiving the covenants that belong to the priesthood. No woman can obtain this great honor and glory without receiving the blessings of faith, repentance and baptism, confirmation, and obedience to the covenants that are promised her and her husband in the temple of the Lord. Otherwise. there would be no progress, that is, to the fulness.

No man who is not willing to continue, even though he be a member of the Church, in receiving these covenants, and taking upon him these blessings and powers which the Lord has offered unto him by covenant, will ever reach the fulness. All such will be barred. There will come a certain place which they cannot pass. The fulness of knowledge, and understanding, and wisdom, by which men may become perfect even as God is perfect, can only be gained by a strict adherence to those eternal laws upon which this great blessing is based.

We fall short through lack of faithfulness if we refuse to receive covenants and take upon ourselves obligations that pertain to the exaltation. There will be a bar that will prevent us from continuing to that fulness.45.28

ENDOWMENTS AND SEALINGS PERTAIN TO EXALTATION. Baptism is the door into the celestial kingdom. All the ordinances of the gospel pertain to the celestial kingdom, and any person who is faithful to the covenant of baptism will be entitled to enter there, but no person can receive an exaltation in the celestial kingdom without the ordinances of the temple. The endowments are for advancement in that kingdom, and the sealings for our perfection, provided we keep our covenants and obligations.45.29

People baptized, and who are not endowed in the temple of the Lord, may enter the celestial kingdom, But that does not mean that a baptized person is going to get the exaltation in that kingdom, He is not going to pass on to the fulness just by being baptized. He will not pass on to the fulness even after he has been baptized and received an endowment in the temple.

He has also to receive the other ordinances so that he can become through his faithfulness and obedience a son of God. . . .

The first principles of the gospel are principles that save. By obedience to them we enter the celestial kingdom of God. Then, when we get into that kingdom, if we have received the other covenants, have been true and faithful to other obligations, we will advance until we shall become like God -- his sons, his daughters, receiving a fulness of his kingdom. That is the promise. 46.30

MAKING OUR CALLING AND ELECTION SURE. Those who press forward in righteousness, living by every word of revealed truth, have power to make their calling and election sure. They receive the more sure word of prophecy and know by revelation and the authority of the priesthood that they are sealed up unto eternal life. They are sealed up against all manner of sin and blasphemy except the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost and the shedding of innocent blood. But the mere fact of being married for time and eternity in the temple, standing alone, does not give them this guarantee. Blessings pronounced upon couples in connection with celestial marriage are conditioned upon the subsequent faithfulness of the participating parties.

Peter tells how the saints may make their calling and election sure in these words: Grace and peace be multiplied unto you through the knowledge of God, and of Jesus our Lord, According as his divine power hath given unto us all things that pertain unto life and godliness, through the knowledge of him that hath called us to glory and virtue: Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises: that by these ye might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust.

"And beside this, giving all diligence, add to your faith virtue; and to virtue knowledge; And to knowledge temperance; and to temperance patience; and to patience godliness; And to godliness brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness charity.

"For if these things be in you, and abound, they make you that ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. But he that lacketh these things is blind, and cannot see afar off, and hath forgotten that he was purged from his old sins.

"Wherefore the rather, brethren, give diligence to make your calling and election sure: for if ye do these things, ye shall never fall: For so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. . . .

"We have also a more sure word of prophecy: whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts." 47.31

EXALTATION AND THE CREATION OF WORLDS. Now, according to the teachings of
 the Prophet Joseph Smith, we worship our Heavenly Father who governs in our universe, and we do all that we do in the name of the Son. We are informed that there are many earths or worlds which have been created, and were created by the Son for the Father, This was, of course, before he was born a Babe in Bethlehem.47.32

Evidently his Father passed through a period of mortality even as he passed through mortality, and as we all are doing. Our Father in heaven, according to the Prophet, had a Father, and since there has been a condition of this kind through all eternity, each Father had a Father, until we come to a stop where we cannot go further, because of our limited capacity to understand. 47.33

We are sons and daughters of God in the spirit. Through the atonement of Jesus Christ, we receive the resurrection, the spirit and the body being united inseparably, never to be divided, so that we will never die again. We thus become immortal, and if we keep the commandments which are given us, we will inherit celestial glory. When we receive this great blessing, we will be sons of God, joint-heirs with Jesus Christ.

The Father has promised us that through our faithfulness we shall be blessed with the fulness of his kingdom. In other words we will have the privilege of becoming like him. To become like him we must have all the powers of godhood; thus a man and his wife when glorified will have spirit children who eventually will go on an earth like this one we are on and pass through the same kind of experiences, being subject to mortal conditions, and if faithful, then they also will receive the fulness of exaltation and partake of the same blessings. There is no end to this development; it will go on forever. We will become gods and have jurisdiction over worlds, and these worlds will be peopled by our own offspring. We will have an endless eternity for this. 48.34

EXALTATION IS WORTH REPENTANCE AND OBEDIENCE. What we need in the Church, as well as out of it, is repentance. We need more faith and more determination to serve the Lord. . . . If the people of the world walk in darkness and sin, and contrary to the will of the Lord, there is the place for us to draw the line. Why should we not uphold the standards of our faith? Why should we not walk in strict accord with the regulations of the Church notwithstanding what the world may think?

The Lord has revealed the fulness of his gospel. We have been fully informed regarding all of its principles pertaining to salvation. Is it worth while for us to maintain our integrity and prove faithful to every trust? Is the pearl of great price -- the fulness of the glory, honor, and eternal life in the presence of the Father and the Son -- worth the sacrifice we may be called upon to make? Are we, as the man spoken of in former times, willing to sell all that we have in order that we may buy this field which will bring to us everlasting joy and exaltation as sons and daughters of God?49.35

SALVATION OF CHILDREN

FALSE DOCTRINE OF GUILT FOR ORIGINAL SIN. There are millions of people, professing to believe in Christ, who believe that little children are under condemnation and tainted with original sin -- which is as damnable a doctrine as was ever taught among the children of men, for little children are not tainted with sin. They are not subject to sin until they reach the years of accountability, until they begin to know and to understand right from wrong, and become accountable before God according to the age which he himself has appointed, which is eight years. "Baptism availeth nothing," in the case of infants, because they cannot repent, and baptism is for the remission of sins.49.36

Christ paid the debt for Adam's transgression. "We believe that men will be punished for their own sins, and not for Adam's transgression,"49.37 and the Lord has not placed any taint upon little children who come into this world. Through the blood of Christ they are redeemed from all that could be laid to their charge as descendants of Adam. Christ took that upon himself.

"The glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth, Light and truth forsake that evil one. Every spirit of man was innocent in the beginning." 49.38

CHILDREN INNOCENT IN BEGINNING. That means that in the beginning -- before the foundation of the world was laid, and before Satan rebelled -- when we were born, if you please, in that spirit world, we were innocent. There came a rebellion, and one-third of the hosts of heaven, we are told, rebelled against God, under the direction of Lucifer, and were cast out.

The two-thirds remaining were privileged to come to this earth and receive tabernacles of flesh and bones. Now the Lord says, in regard to men, at the time they come into this world: "And God having redeemed man from the fall, men became again, in their infant state, innocent before God."50.39

Now, that is good, sound sense. To believe that the Lord damns little children because parents, in a thoughtless mood, fail to have them sprinkled or otherwise baptized, and therefore, should they die, they are forever damned, I repeat, is a doctrine of the devil. There is no truth in it. Baptism is for the remission of sins, and no man can repent of a sin until he is accountable before God. 50.40

BELIEF IN ORIGINAL SIN DENIES POWER OF ATONEMENT. Any man who believes that little children are born in sin and are tainted by original sin, or the sin of somebody else, has failed to comprehend the nature of the atonement of Jesus Christ. . . .

It is one doctrine, among all the doctrines that have been corrupted, that seems to me to stand out as the most damnable, denying the mercies of God to little children who come into this world as innocent as they can be, and then to put taint upon them. There may be a taint upon
 the father, there may be a taint upon the mother, but that little child is not responsible in any sense of the word for either Adam's transgression, or your transgression, or mine, or any other man's. I say again, the man who believes that children are tainted by original sin cannot understand and fails to comprehend the mission of Jesus Christ.

What was his mission? One part was to bring redemption to every soul from Adam's transgression; and Christ paid the price. That is unconditional; it depends neither upon repentance nor faith nor any other principle. Every soul that comes into this world is cleansed -- if there is to be any cleansing -- at least redeemed from the consequences of Adam's transgression, because we were not in any sense responsible for it.

Why, of course we die; of course we suffer; of course we are subject to the vicissitudes of mortal life, We came here for that very purpose. Of course we inherit these from Adam; but to lay a sin on a child, because it was born into this world of mortal parents, I repeat, is a damnable doctrine. . . .

ALL CHILDREN ARE ALIVE IN CHRIST. "Little children are redeemed from the foundation of the world."51.41 What does the Lord mean by that? He means that before the foundation of this earth was laid, this plan of redemption, the plan of salvation which we are supposed to follow in this mortal life, was all prepared; and God, knowing the end from the beginning, made provisions for the redemption of little children through the atonement of Jesus Christ. . . .

We teach that we are the offspring of God, we are his sons and daughters -- that is a good Bible doctrine -- and in the beginning of that spirit life every man was innocent, Likewise in the beginning of this mortal life -- no matter how faithful, or how valiant, or otherwise, we were in that spirit world -- when we come into this world, we come into it innocent as far as this world is concerned, just as we were innocent in the other world in the beginning. Every child -- I don't care where it is born; I don't care what its color -- that is born into this world comes into it innocent in its infant state.

Why, when you look into the face of a little babe and he looks up and smiles at you, can you believe that that little child is tainted with any kind of sin that will deprive it of the presence of God should it die? I have been reading to you about this Catholic doctrine of the "beatific vision," and these little children who are not sprinkled -- or baptized if you want to call it that -- in their infancy, being deprived of that glorious vision, and the Lord softening their punishment or loss by dulling their comprehension so they do not understand and do not realize what they have lost. Can you think of anything that is more damnable than that?

FALSE TEACHING THAT UNBAPTIZED CHILDREN ARE LOST. I remember when I was in the mission field in England, there was an American family there. . . . One evening as we sat in their home, the man's wife turned to me and said: "Elder Smith, I want to ask you a question." Before she could ask her question, she began to cry. I did not know what the
 matter was. She sobbed, and when she had composed herself enough to ask the question, she told me this story:

When they went over to England, they had the misfortune of losing a little baby. They were attending the Church of England. They went to the minister and wanted to have that baby laid away with a Christian burial, as they had been attending the church. The minister said to her: "We can't give your child a Christian burial because it was not christened. Your baby is lost." That was a rather blunt way to put it, but that is the way she told the story; and that woman's heart had been aching and aching for two or three years. So she asked the question of me: "Is my baby lost? Will I never see it again?" I turned and read to her from the Book of Mormon the words of Mormon to his son Moroni.52.42 I said: "Your baby is not lost. No baby is lost. Every baby is saved in the kingdom of God when it dies." . . .

ALL CHILDREN SAVED IN CELESTIAL KINGDOM. "And I also beheld that all children who die before they arrive at the years of accountability, are saved in the celestial kingdom of heaven."52.43 That is what the Lord said to the Prophet Joseph Smith by revelation in a vision that he had in the Kirtland Temple. Does not that sound good? Is it not just? Is it not right?

It does not make any difference whether it is a Catholic baby, a Protestant baby, or a Mohammedan baby: no matter whose baby it is, it is not responsible for original sin; it is not responsible for any sin; and the mercy of God claims it; and it is redeemed.

But how is it with you and me? Here we are, capable of understanding, and the Lord says: "Whoso having knowledge, have I not commanded to repent?" 53.44 We are commanded to repent; we are commanded to be baptized; we are commanded to have our sins washed away in the waters of baptism, because we are capable of understanding, and we have all sinned. But I have not been baptized and you have not been baptized for anything that Adam did.

LITTLE CHILDREN NEED NO BAPTISM. I have been baptized that I might be cleansed from that which I have done myself (and so with you) and that I might come into the kingdom of God. Baptism is for two purposes. It is the door into the celestial kingdom of God; and so the Lord taught Nicodemus: "Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God."53.45

That is true of men; it is true of women; but the Lord has made provisions for those who are without law, and little children are not subject to the law of repentance. How could you teach a little child to repent? It has not anything to repent of.

The Lord has placed -- and that in his own judgment -- the age of accountability at eight years, After we get to be eight years of age, we are supposed to have understanding sufficient that we should be baptized. The Lord takes care of those who are under that age. Now he has himself arbitrarily declared that. I did not set the age. I accept it because the

Lord set the age, and that is the law.53.46

EXALTATION OF CHILDREN. Little children who die before they reach the years of accountability will automatically inherit the celestial kingdom, but not the exaltation in that kingdom until they have complied with all the requirements of exaltation, For instance:

The crowning glory is marriage and this ordinance would have to be performed in their behalf before they could inherit the fulness of that kingdom. The Lord is just with all his children, and little children who die will not be penalized as the Catholic Church penalizes them, simply because they happen to die. The Lord will grant unto these children the privilege of all the sealing blessings which pertain to the exaltation.

We were all mature spirits before we were born, and the bodies of little children will grow after the resurrection to the full stature of the spirit, and all the blessings will be theirs through their obedience, the same as if they had lived to maturity and received them on the earth.

NO BLESSING TO BE DENIED TO CHILDREN. The Lord is just and will not deprive any person of a blessing, simply because he dies before that blessing can be received. It would be manifestly unfair to deprive a little child of the privilege of receiving all the blessings of exaltation in the world to come simply because it died in infancy. The same thing is true of the young men who were deprived of these blessings and laid down their lives during the war. The Lord judges every soul by the intent of the heart.

All that we need do for children is to have them sealed to their parents. They need no baptism and never will, for our Lord has performed all the work necessary for them.

Children who die in childhood will not be deprived of any blessing. When they grow, after the resurrection, to the full maturity of the spirit, they will be entitled to all the blessings which they would have been entitled to had they been privileged to tarry here and receive them.

The Lord has arranged for that, so that justice will be given to every soul.

Boys and girls who die after baptism may have the endowment work done for them in the temple. Children who die in infancy do not have to be endowed. So far as the ordinance of sealing, is concerned, this may wait until the millennium.

CHILDREN OF ALL RACES HEIRS OF SALVATION. The revelations of the Lord to the Prophet Joseph Smith declare that all little children who die are heirs of the celestial kingdom. This would mean the children of every race. All the spirits that come to this world come from the presence of God and, therefore, must have been in his kingdom.

Little children are redeemed by the Lord's decree from the foundation of the world through the ministry of Jesus Christ;55.47 every spirit of man was innocent in the beginning;55.48 and all who rebelled were cast out; therefore. all who remained are entitled to the blessings of the gospel.

The only souls coming to this world who are under restriction are the Negroes, and they cannot hold the priesthood; but Negroes may be baptized, and we have many Negroes in the Church. Therefore, by what right or reason are we going to deprive innocent children whether they are black, brown, or yellow who die in their infancy -- innocent and without sin -- from entering the celestial kingdom? If a Negro can receive the celestial kingdom by baptism, and the Chinese, Japanese and all other races, where would there be consistency in saying that any children, because they are born under adverse circumstances, should be deprived of entrance into that kingdom? It seems definitely clear that the Lord means exactly what he said to the Prophet Joseph Smith.

SALVATION OF MENTALLY DEFICIENT PERSONS. Mentally deficient persons, those who are incompetent of understanding, are classed among those who are redeemed as little children through the atonement of our Redeemer. They need no baptism. 56.49

Mentally deficient children who are incompetent of proper understanding, and hence are not to be baptized themselves, should not be used for the ordinance of baptism for the dead. Any person acting vicariously must be competent.

It would be proper, of course, for a mentally deficient person to be sealed to its parents. Babies are sealed to their parents when they are too young to comprehend, but no one is to be baptized until he or she reaches the age of accountability. We do not expect mentally deficient children to remain so after the resurrection; the condition under which they suffer now is one that pertains to the mortal condition, with all its defects and restrictions.

CHILDREN IN THE RESURRECTION. When a baby dies, it goes back into the spirit world, and the spirit assumes its natural form as an adult, for we were all adults before we were born.

When a child is raised in the resurrection, the spirit will enter the body and the body will be the same size as it was when the child died. It will then grow after the resurrection to full maturity to conform to the size of the spirit.

If parents are righteous, they will have their children after the resurrection. Little children who die, whose parents are not worthy of an exaltation, will be adopted into the families of those who are worthy.

CHILDREN NEVER TO BE TEMPTED. Satan will be loosed to gather his forces after the millennium. The people who will be tempted, will be people living on this earth, and they
 will have every opportunity to accept the gospel or reject it. Satan will have nothing to do whatever with little children, or grown people who have received their resurrection and entered into the celestial kingdom.

Satan cannot tempt little children in this life, nor in the spirit world, nor after their resurrection. Little children who die before reaching the years of accountability will not be tempted; those born during the millennium, when Satan is bound and cannot tempt them, "shall grow up without sin unto salvation."57.50
