NO SECOND CHANCE FOR SALVATION

NOW IS DAY OF OUR SALVATION. Our scriptures are very explicit in their declaration in relation to the requirements made of sons and daughters of God. They who overcome all things are to be crowned as sons and daughters of God and be members of the Church of the Firstborn. 181.1

We are taught in the Book of Mormon: "For behold, now is the time and the day of your salvation; . . . this life is the time for men to prepare to meet God; yea, behold the day of this life is the day for men to perform their labors."181.2 These people to whom Amulek was speaking had heard the truth and were not altogether ignorant of the plan of salvation, because they had gone out of the Church by apostasy. So he declared unto them that this is the day for them to repent and turn unto God or they would be lost.181.3

The Lord, in his mercy, grants to every soul the privilege of repentance and the blessings of the gospel. If men do not receive this privilege here, they will receive it in the spirit world, for it must come to all. If they reject it here, they may not receive the fulness in eternity. 181.4

THOSE WHO HAVE A FUTURE DAY OF SALVATION. On January 21, 1836, Joseph Smith received the following revelation: "All who have died without a knowledge of the gospel, who would have received it if they had been permitted to tarry, shall be heirs of the celestial kingdom of God; also all that shall die henceforth without a knowledge of it, who would have received it with all their hearts, shall be heirs of that kingdom, for I, the Lord, will judge all men according to their works, according to the desire of their hearts." 182.5

What a wonderful ray of light is here thrown on the question of man's redemption! If Joseph Smith had made no other contribution to the world than to restore this divine truth, it would have stamped him as one of the greatest benefactors of the race.

One very significant thing in this revelation, which should be remembered, is the fact that the Lord did not say that all who are dead are entitled to these blessings in the celestial kingdom, if they hear the gospel in the spirit world, but all who would have received the gospel had they been given the opportunity in this mortal life. The privilege of exaltation is not held out to those who have had the opportunity to receive Christ and obey his truth and who have refused to do so.

OFFER OF SALVATION MADE EITHER NOW OR IN SPIRIT WORLD. The justice of the Lord is manifest in the right he grants to all men to hear the plan of salvation and receive it. Some have that privilege in this life; if they obey the gospel, well and good; if they reject it, then in the spirit world the same opportunities with the same fulness do not come to them.

If they die without that opportunity in this life, it will reach them in the world of spirits. The gospel will there be declared to them, and if they are willing to accept, it is counted unto them just the same as if they had embraced it in mortality. In this way justice is meted out to every man; all are placed on an equality before the bar of God.182.6

Those who have the opportunity here, those unto whom the message of salvation is declared, who are taught and who have this truth presented to them in this life -- yet who deny it and refuse to receive it -- shall not have a place in the kingdom of God. They will not be with those who died without that knowledge and who yet accepted it in the spirit world.

SOME NOT ELIGIBLE FOR VICARIOUS SALVATION. There are too many people in this world, who have heard the message of the gospel, who think they can continue on to the end of this mortal life, living as they please, and then accept the gospel after death and friends will perform the ordinances that they neglect to perform for themselves, and eventually they will receive blessings in the kingdom of God. This is an error.

It is the duty of men in this life to repent. Every man who hears the gospel message is under obligation to receive it. If he fails, then in the spirit world he will be called upon to receive it, but he will be denied the fulness that will come to those who in their faithfulness have been just and true, whether it be in this life or in the spirit world. 183.7

SECOND CHANCE LEADS TO TERRESTRIAL KINGDOM, Moreover, we learn that those who rejected the gospel when it was offered them in ancient times, but afterwards accepted the "testimony of Jesus" in the spirit world when it was declared to them, and who were honorable men of the earth, are assigned to the terrestrial glory, not the celestial. 183.8

Then again, we are informed that the wicked of the earth who do not repent in this life and who do not receive the gospel, shall be assigned to the telestial kingdom. In that kingdom they will become "servants of the Most High; but where God and Christ dwell they cannot come, worlds without end."183.9

All of these, however, will be called upon to repent. They will have to suffer the torments of the damned until they do, and through that suffering they will be brought to repentance and to acknowledge Jesus Christ as their Redeemer and the Son of God. Every knee must bow and every tongue confess, no matter which kingdom the inhabitants of the earth enter. 184.10

FALSE NOTIONS ABOUT SALVATION FOR DEAD. Salvation for the dead is grossly misunderstood by many of the Latter-day Saints. It is due to the justice of our Eternal Father that a chance for salvation and exaltation is given to every soul. Some of the spirits rejected their privilege and rebelled in the former existence and had to be punished. All the others were granted bodies and the privilege of abiding in covenants here that would give them
 salvation, with the provision that any of the number coming to earth who, for causes over which they had no control, were denied the privileges of obedience to gospel covenants in the mortal life should have that privilege in the spirit world after death. But the Lord did not offer to those who had every opportunity while in this mortal existence the privilege of another chance in the world of spirits.

The endowment and sealing work for the dead is for those who died without having had the opportunity to hear and receive the gospel; also, for those who were faithful members of the Church who lived in foreign lands or where, during their life time, they did not have the privilege to go to a temple, yet they were converted and were true members of the Church. The work for the dead is not intended for those who had every opportunity to receive it, who had it taught to them, and who then refused to receive it, or had not interest enough to attend to these ordinances when they were living.

So many of the members of the Church have the thought that if they do not do the work for dead friends, they are sure to be neglected and the opportunity will never come to them. We should remember that in his justice the Lord will never permit one soul to be lost who is worthy of salvation. Every person who is entitled to the blessings will receive them. 185.11

TEMPLE WORK NOT FOR REBELLIOUS

CANNOT FORCE TEMPLE BLESSINGS ON DEAD. This idea that some of us have that we can go into the temple and perform the ordinances for the people who have been bitter against the truth, have known the truth and had every opportunity to receive the gospel and have refused to receive it, this idea that when they die we can go to the temple and do the work for them, is not in keeping in any sense with the revelations the Lord has given us. 185.12

We may be sure that the Lord is just, and no man will be denied any blessing to which he is entitled. Neither will any man receive that to which he is not entitled, even though we should endeavor to give it to him by the ordinances of the house of the Lord. It is far better for us to leave some matters in the hands of the Lord, especially in the case of those who turn away from the Church and die unrepentant.185.13

We are not going to save and exalt in the celestial kingdom all the children of our Heavenly Father through our vicarious labors. Only those will enter into celestial glory who are worthy of it, and if we perform labor in the temples for those who are unworthy, they shall not be entitled to those blessings simply because we have worked for them.

JUDGMENT OF DEAD IS ACCORDING TO THEIR WORKS. It is our duty to perform the ordinance work for the dead, and then the Lord will do the adjusting. I believe that every accountable man, if he is to gain salvation, must receive a remission of sins by baptism, either in this life, or by proxy if he is dead. It behooves us to perform baptisms and all other
 ordinances for those who are dead.

Not all who are baptized for will be entitled to the blessings of the endowment. Not all will be entitled to the sealing ordinances, but that is in the hands of the Lord, and he will judge whether a man is worthy or not. We will perform the work, and the Lord will determine the final result.

There is an expression given by John in the Book of Revelation as follows: "And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; and the books were opened: and another book was opened, which is the book of life: and the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to their works."186.14

From this we learn that the dead are to be judged according to their works. out of the things that are written in the books, and the judgment will be just. If the life of an individual has been such that he is unworthy of celestial glory, all that we can do for him by our vicarious labors will not place him there. Salvation will be based on merit.

REBELLIOUS DEAD DENIED SALVATION. It was revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith in a vision in the Kirtland Temple, January 21, 1836, that "all who have died without a knowledge of this gospel, who would have received it if they had been permitted to tarry, shall be heirs of the celestial kingdom of God; also all that shall die henceforth without a knowledge of it, who would have received it with all their hearts"; also, that little children "who die before they arrive at years of accountability, are saved in the celestial kingdom of heaven." 186.15

He did not see, however, the rebellious, the ungodly, the corrupt and filthy, and those who love and make a lie, as heirs of that kingdom. There is another place provided for them. 187.16 Men cannot be thrust into the kingdom of God, irrespective of their worthiness or unworthiness, just because their relatives or friends perform labor for them after they are dead.

VICARIOUS ORDINANCES NOT FOR REBELLIOUS. I have known of cases where individuals have died who were bitterly opposed to the Church, and had denied the faith and left the Church, and hardly had they died when relatives have appealed to the First Presidency for the privilege of having their work done for them in the temple. Such appeals have been made at times so that relatives of the person, who passed away under such unfavorable circumstances, might be able to give the deceased a burial according to the rites and customs of the Latter-day Saints. Now, all this is wrong.

What good is it going to do for us to perform in the temples ordinances for those who die with an unrepentant attitude of this kind? If they had the opportunity and would not receive the truth while living, can we force it upon them when they are dead? Is it within our power, because we labor in the vicarious work as proxies for them, to make them heirs of the
 celestial kingdom? No, it is not!

But, one will say: "Perhaps they will not receive these blessings now, but later they may do so, and therefore our labors will not be in vain." Let me ask you these questions: Where in the scriptures, or where in the revelations from the Lord, is it found written, that the man who dies in rebellious opposition to the gospel, who has once had the light and through transgression turned from it, or who rejected it after it was presented to him and who has been familiar with it all his life, shall become an heir of the celestial kingdom even though he repents in the world of spirits? Has the Lord promised that the rebellious, the wicked, these who reject this truth shall eventually, after repentance, become heirs of the celestial kingdom? I do not gather any such conclusion from my reading of the scriptures.188.17

APOSTATES EXCLUDED FROM SALVATION FOR DEAD.

Oh, I wish we could destroy the idea that is in the minds of some that we can live in unrighteousness and actually turn against the truth, and then our children will come along after we are dead and have the work done for us, and all will be lovely, and we will receive the blessings. The Lord is the judge of all men, and if such a person is entitled to receive any blessings, he will get them. But read section 76 of the Doctrine and Covenants in regard to those who enter into the terrestrial kingdom and see what it says.188.18

Why, if the honorable men of the earth who receive not the gospel in this life when they have the chance, are consigned to that kingdom, are we going to have it within our power to act for the apostate -- the man who is bitter in his soul, who has known the truth but has turned away from the light and rejected the gospel -- and go into the house of the Lord and pull him into the celestial kingdom? That doctrine actually prevails in the minds of some. . . .

APOSTATE CHURCH AND SALVATION FOR DEAD. They have in the Catholic Church the doctrine of indulgences, and you will remember you have read in history how, during the Middle Ages particularly, a man by paying the price could receive the privilege, so far as the church could give it -- there was no power in it! -- to go out and sin. Even before the sin was committed, he could have promise of forgiveness.

They sold these indulgences. That is one of the main things that took Martin Luther out of the Catholic Church. He began to realize that the practice was wrong; it was not possible, not just or right for a person to sell forgiveness of sins for a price, either before or after the sin; and they used to do that. If a man wanted to go out and sin, they had a schedule of prices, so Motley tells in his Rise of the Dutch Republic.189.19 In the Catholic Church they offer prayers for the dead to get them out of purgatory. And people pay the priests to pray for the dead. Now that is a corruption of the doctrine of salvation for the dead.

TREND TOWARD APOSTATE CONCEPTS OF SALVATION FOR DEAD. I can see confronting us a danger, and a very serious danger, because some of our people are of the
 opinion that the work can be done for them or their relatives after they are dead. so it is not so necessary for them to be righteous here. They think when they die, they shall receive that work in its fulness and the necessary ordinances will be performed for them in the temple, which will entitle them to the full reward of the faithful. This false belief causes men and women to live lives of unrighteousness, with indifference to the gospel, with the idea in their minds that when they are gone their children will do the work, and they shall receive the blessing. This is pernicious doctrine!

I heard a man say, "I am not good enough to go into the temple of the Lord, I have my faults, I have my appetites that I acquired before I ever heard of the gospel. I am not good enough to go into the temple, but when I am dead, then my children can go in and do the work."

Now I have read to you the scripture.189.20 I believe it is the word of God "with the bark on it," where the prophet of the Lord declared unto apostates and those who have heard the gospel that if they did not repent and come into the Church now, in this day of repentance, but continued to procrastinate their repentance unto the end, that the night would come when no work could be done for them, and their souls would be lost. I think that is pretty good scripture. I do not know how the Lord could do otherwise in justice.

Now, mark you, I am not saying that there are not people who have come into the Church and gone out of it again. who did not understand the truth, and for whom the Lord will make allowances. He, of course, is going to judge every case! I cannot judge. I am speaking now generally; I have no individual case in mind. But the fact is, nevertheless, the Lord has declared what we must do to receive the fulness of the gospel and become sons and daughters. He has told us which class of people will enter into his kingdom, He has told us which people will enter into the third kingdom, and we have the privilege of choosing which kingdom it will be. 190.21

SALVATION FOR WORTHY DEAD ONLY

GOSPEL ORDINANCES FOR CELESTIAL KINGDOM ONLY. I want to correct an idea that prevails very largely in the minds of many members of the Church. I know that this is discussed in our Gospel Doctrine classes, in our Mutuals, and in other places, because the question is brought to me frequently and they contend on it -- the question whether or not the temple work will have to be performed for everybody upon the earth. I want to say to you no, absolutely no.

Now let us get this plainly in our minds. I think it is a self-evident truth that ought to impress us without any argument whatever. All of the ordinances of the gospel -- baptism, laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, the work in the temples for the salvation of the living and the dead -- these ordinances, everything else, all of the ordinances of the gospel pertain to the celestial kingdom of God.190.22

We are not preaching the gospel with the idea of trying to save people in the terrestrial world. Ours is the salvation of exaltation. What we are trying to do with the gospel of Jesus Christ is to bring people back again, through the power of the priesthood and the ordinances of the Church, as sons and daughters of God, receiving a fulness of the Father's kingdom. That is our endeavor.

VICARIOUS ORDINANCES NOT FOR ALL. We are not going to do the temple work for everybody because it does not pertain to them. We are going to do the temple work for those who are entitled, through their faith and their repentance, to enter into the celestial kingdom. But somebody says, "How do we know? We search our records for hundreds of years and do the work for all of them." Of course we do, because we cannot judge. I do not know whether one man is worthy and another is not.

The Lord has given us the privilege of doing the work for all of our kindred, with the hope, of course, on our part that all of them will receive the truth. Since we are of the house of Israel, our parents, generation by generation as they go back, also would be of the house of Israel, and hence they would be more likely to receive the gospel than would those who are pure gentiles.

Now if there are any in our lines we do work for in the temple who are unworthy or unwilling to receive the ordinances of the house of the Lord, then the Lord will be the judge. He will set that ordinance aside and it Bill not be accounted as done. That is in his hands. Our duty is to do the work the Lord has required at our hands for the salvation of our dead. 191.23

SALVATION FOR RIGHTEOUS DEAD ONLY. The Lord has given us the opportunity to perform in the temples the necessary labor for the righteous and repentant dead. The Lord is not going to save all the world in the celestial kingdom. But all who would have received the gospel had it been declared to them in the flesh, shall receive it in the spirit world, and they become heirs of the celestial kingdom. So the Prophet Joseph Smith has taught us. Millions will enter into the other kingdoms. The Lord said the telestial kingdom will be filled with people as innumerable as the sands upon the shore, or the stars of heaven. 192.24

MURDERERS DENIED VICARIOUS ORDINANCES. We are called upon to assist in saving our own families. This is the great duty the Lord has given to us, It is our privilege to go back and trace our ancestors as far as we can and then go to the temple and do the work for all of them. The Lord will judge whether they are worthy or not to receive what we have done. Remember, though, we do not have the privilege of performing the ordinances for murderers who shed innocent blood, nor for those who take their own lives. These are left in the hands of the Lord. If we find in our record one of this kind, we should pass him by and not attempt to do work for him. . . .

I cannot imagine a murderer like Nero, for example, having the work done for him and being
 entitled to the blessings of the celestial kingdom along with Isaiah who laid down his life for the truth. Men are to be graded, and every man will receive all that he is entitled to receive according to the laws of justice and mercy. It is for this purpose the Lord has prepared several glories, or kingdoms, and as Paul saw it, there will be glories as diversified as the magnitude of the stars. No one who is entitled to salvation or exaltation will be neglected. 192.25

TEMPLE WORK AND ENDURING TO END

FOLLOW AVAILABLE LIGHT TO BE SAVED. Those who die without law will be redeemed, because they will be judged without law. But all who have received law and who have known the truth in a degree will be judged according to the truth that they have known, and if they have not lived up to that which they have known, or which they have been taught or had the privilege of receiving, then they cannot enter into the celestial kingdom. 192.26 It is, however, our duty to save the world, the dead as well as the living. We are saving the living who will repent by preaching the gospel among the nations and gathering out the children of Israel, the honest in heart. We are saving the dead by going into the house of the Lord and performing these ceremonies -- baptism, the laying on of hands, confirmation, and such other things as the Lord requires at our hands -- in their behalf.193.27

TEMPLE BLESSINGS LOST THROUGH INDIFFERENCE. If you are slipping, if you are careless and indifferent and you violate the covenants you made when you went through the temple and you continue to do that, remember the Lord has said repeatedly that it is he who endures to the end who shall be saved. And if that is what you have been doing, that leaves you out. You will not gain salvation.

I will read you these words of our Savior himself as he stood before his disciples on this continent. He answered their questions, gave them instructions, and told them he came into the world to die, that he might draw all men unto him, but not in the celestial kingdom: "And my Father sent me that I might be lifted up upon the cross; and after that I had been lifted up upon the cross, that I might draw all men unto me, that as I have been lifted up by men even so should men be lifted up by the Father, to stand before me, to be judged of their works, whether they be good or whether they be evil -- And for this cause have I been lifted up; therefore, according to the power of the Father I will draw all men unto me. that they may be judged according to their works."

UNFAITHFUL NEVER TO GAIN SALVATION. "And it shall come to pass, that whoso repenteth and is baptized in my name shall be filled; and if he endureth to the end, behold, him will I hold guiltless before my Father at that day when I shall stand to judge the world. And he that endureth not unto the end, the same is he that is also hewn down and cast into the fire, from whence they can no more return, because of the justice of the Father. And this is the word which he hath given unto the children of men. And for this cause he fulfilleth the words which he hath given, and he lieth not, but fulfilleth all his words."

"Oh," someone says, "the Lord is just and merciful. He is a merciful God and when man repents, God will give him these privileges. The Lord will reinstate him after he is dead when he repents." Every man has to repent eventually and every knee has to bow, even those going into the telestial kingdom.

Now, it says here that this is the word which he had given unto men and that he lieth not but fulfilleth his word. I quote further: "And no unclean thing can enter into his kingdom; therefore nothing entereth into his rest save it be those who have washed their garments in my blood, because of their faith, and the repentance of all their sins, and their faithfulness unto the end." 194.28

Now, every knee must bow, the Lord has said, and every tongue confess that Jesus is the Christ; but that does not mean the bowing or bending of the knee and confessing Jesus as the Son of God is going to put people in the celestial kingdom. The devils recognized him when he was on the earth, and they cried out and called him the Holy One. Think of it; they knew why he had come. They recognized him as the Son of God.194.29 But they did not repent. They cannot repent.

WILFULLY REBELLIOUS DENIED REPENTANCE AND SALVATION. It is possible for people to get so far in the dark through rebellion and wickedness that the spirit of repentance leaves them. It is a gift of God, and they get beyond the power of repentance. How well Mormon speaks of that, in reference to the people who turned away with their eyes open, who turned against the truth some 200 years following the coming of Christ. The people rebelled; Mormon speaks about them and their condition beyond the power of redemption because of their wickedness and the hardness of their hearts, which the Spirit of the Lord could not penetrate.

They sinned wilfully, and therefore salvation cannot come to them. It was offered to them, and they would not have it. They rejected it. They fought it and preferred to take the course of rebellion; and the Lord on one occasion said to Mormon, You shall not preach to these people; they have turned against me and you shall not preach to them." He had a right to say that. Now why did he say that? Because they had every opportunity and would not receive the truth. They mocked at it, and so the Lord said, "You don't have to talk to them; there is no need to cry repentance to them any longer." And after a while Mormon still pleaded with the Lord to let him try again. It was useless. 195.30

President Brigham Young said, "People who fight the truth don't stop fighting it after their death." Do not get the idea that everybody is going to repent and be saved. The Lord is going to do for every soul just the best that he can. But justice demands that each be placed where he fits himself, according to his works, and mercy cannot rob justice. 195.31

AWFUL DESTINY OF REBELLIOUS. There can be no salvation without repentance. A
 man cannot enter into the kingdom of God in his sins. It would be a very inconsistent thing for a man to come into the presence of the Father and to dwell in God's presence in his sins. . . .

I think there are a great many people upon the earth, many of them perhaps in the Church -- at least some in the Church -- who have an idea they can go through this life doing as they please, violating the commandments of the Lord and yet eventually they are going to come into his presence. They think they are going to repent, perhaps in the spirit world.

They ought to read these words of Moroni: "Do ye suppose that ye shall dwell with him [Christ] under a consciousness of your guilt? Do ye suppose that ye could be happy to dwell with that holy Being, when your souls are racked with a consciousness of guilt that ye have ever abused his laws?

"Behold, I say unto you that ye would be more miserable to dwell with a holy and just God, under a consciousness of your filthiness before him, than ye would to dwell with the damned souls in hell. For behold, when ye shall be brought to see your nakedness before God, and also the glory of God, and the holiness of Jesus Christ, it will kindle a flame of unquenchable fire upon you." 196.32

Do you think that a man whose life has been filled with corruption, who has been rebellious against God, who has not had the spirit of repentance, would be happy or comfortable should he be permitted to come into the presence of God?196.33
