BLESSINGS RECEIVED THROUGH RESURRECTION

RESURRECTION SAVES MAN FROM DEVIL. Immortality of the soul is the gift of God through the death and resurrection of his Son Jesus Christ. If the Savior had not died for the world, man would have remained in his sins. There could have been no resurrection from the dead and the physical body would have gone down into the grave without redemption, while the spirit would have become subject to the devil and his angels eternally. 283.1

FULNESS OF JOY COMES THROUGH RESURRECTION. The spirit and the body in this mortal life are not inseparably connected. Hence man cannot in the mortal life receive a fulness of joy. It is only through the resurrection and the spirit and the body being united inseparably that immortality and eternal life can come.283.2

No man can receive the inseparable connection of the spirit and body until he dies. Therefore, death is just as important, so far as life is concerned, as birth. The reason is that in this life the spirit and the body are not inseparably connected. When mortal sickness comes, or old age, then dissolution comes, the spirit leaves the body, and the body goes into the grave to await the resurrection. When the spirit and the body unite again in the resurrection from the dead, they are joined together in such a way that they cannot be separated, and there shall be no more death.

Then man may receive a fulness of joy. While he is in this temporal state of spirit and body, he cannot receive a fulness of joy. No man in mortal life can receive the fulness of joy which the Lord has in store for him. Only after the resurrection from the dead, only when the spirit
 and the body are inseparably connected -- when through the resurrection the spirit and the body are welded together inseparably -- can that fulness come. That is the beauty of the resurrection, that is the objective of the resurrection from the dead.

MORTALITY GIVEN TO PREPARE MEN FOR RESURRECTION. And so it is necessary that every man must die. It is necessary to bring to pass the greater blessing which cannot come unless we die. No man wants to be cursed with mortal life and live forever. No, that would be a calamity.284.3 Mortal life is all right for the little space of time that we spend here in this world. It is necessary. It is a mighty important part of our existence, because it is here that we prove ourselves. It is here that we prepare ourselves for that which is to come. That is how important mortality is, and yet we treat it lightly, many of us. We look upon it as meaning little. "We are here today; we will be gone tomorrow. Tomorrow can take care of itself. We will have a good time here." That is the way many of us look on life. Now is the time, this is the day, Alma says, for repentance. Do not procrastinate the day of your repentance. The time may come when it is too late. 284.4

NATURE OF RESURRECTED BODIES

SPIRITUAL BODIES IN THE RESURRECTION. In the resurrection from the dead, the bodies which were laid down natural bodies shall come forth spiritual bodies. That is to say, in mortality the life of the body is in the blood,284.5 but the body when raised to immortality shall be quickened by the spirit and not the blood. Hence, it becomes spiritual, but it will be composed of flesh and bones, just as the body of Jesus was, who is the prototype.285.6

TANGIBLE NATURE OF SPIRITUAL BODIES. These modern blind teachers of the blind who deny the literal resurrection have a very false understanding of what is meant by a spiritual body. They have based their conclusion on the statement that Paul makes that the body is raised a spiritual body and that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God. 285.7 They cannot conceive in their minds of a body raised from the dead, being composed of flesh and bones, quickened by spirit and not by blood.

When Paul spoke of the spiritual body, he had no reference at all to the spirit body, and there they have made their mistake. They have confused the spiritual body, or, in other words, the body quickened by the spirit, with the body of the spirit alone. They think that those who believe in the resurrection of the literal body believe that it shall be raised again, quickened by blood, which is not the case. . . .

After the resurrection from the dead our bodies will be spiritual bodies, but they will be bodies that are tangible, bodies that have been purified, but they will nevertheless be bodies of flesh and bones. They will not be blood bodies, They will no longer be quickened by blood but quickened by the spirit which is eternal, and they shall become immortal and shall never die. 285.8

BLOOD BODIES AND SPIRITUAL BODIES COMPARED. Now if our good friends understood this, they would not fall into this error of thinking that Paul's doctrine was in conflict with that of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, when Paul declared that the body that would be raised would be a spiritual body. You read in the Book of Genesis, where the Lord said to Noah after the flood, that the blood was the life of the body; the blood is the life thereof, he says. Therefore, "Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed," because blood is the life of the mortal body.286.9

But with the body brought forth in the resurrection, which is the immortal body, that is not the case. In it blood does not exist, but the spirit is the life giving power. Hence, they are no longer bodies quickened by blood but bodies quickened by spirit, and hence they are spiritual bodies, but tangible bodies of flesh and bones, just as was the body of the Son of God. Now this is the doctrine of the Lord and Savior of the world.286.10

RESURRECTION IN INCORRUPTION. Now let us understand the meaning of that term corruption. Perhaps, because of the way that word is usually used, what you may have in mind is not exactly the meaning given by Paul in this passage of scripture. 286.11 Corruption here means mortality, It means to be in this world of change.

Our bodies are changing daily, They are throwing off the waste, taking on the new, They are so constituted that the food we eat, the water we drink, the air we breathe, build up and replace those parts which have decayed or have filled their mission of usefulness and have been discarded. So this is, as Paul put it, a corruptible body that we have now, and this prophet is speaking of the mortal body when he says corruption. This mortal body shall eventually, through the resurrection, become an incorruptible body, not subject to these changes, not subject to disease and decay. 286.12

KINDS OF RESURRECTED BODIES. In the resurrection there will be different kinds of bodies; they will not all be alike. The body a man receives will determine his place hereafter. There will be celestial bodies, terrestrial bodies, and telestial bodies, and these bodies will differ as distinctly as do bodies here, for example, the white European, the Negro, the Philippino, the Indian. 286.13

Bodies will be quickened according to the kingdom which they are judged worthy to enter. Elder Orson Pratt many years ago in writing of the resurrection and the kind of bodies which would be raised in these kingdoms said:

"In every species of animals and plants, there are many resemblances in the general outlines and many specific differences characterizing the individuals of each species. So in the resurrection. There will be several classes of resurrected bodies; some celestial, some terrestrial, some telestial, and some sons of perdition. Each of these classes will differ from the others by prominent and marked distinctions; yet, in each, considered by itself, there will be found many resemblances as well as distinctions. There will be some physical peculiarity
 by which each individual in every class can be identified."

PROCREATION LIMITED TO CELESTIAL BODIES. Some will gain celestial bodies with all the powers of exaltation and eternal increase. These bodies will shine like the sun as our Savior's does, as described by John.287.14 Those who enter the terrestrial kingdom will have terrestrial bodies, and they will not shine like the sun, but they will be more glorious than the bodies of those who receive the telestial glory.

In both of these kingdoms there will be changes in the bodies and limitations. They will not have the power of increase, neither the power or nature to live as husbands and wives, for this will be denied them and they cannot increase.

Those who receive the exaltation in the celestial kingdom will have the "continuation of the seeds forever."287.15 They will live in the family relationship. In the terrestrial and in the telestial kingdoms there will be no marriage. Those who enter there will remain "separately and singly" forever. 287.16

Some of the functions in the celestial body will not appear in the terrestrial body, neither in the telestial body, and the power of procreation will be removed. I take it that men and women will, in these kingdoms, be just what the so-called Christian world expects us all to be -- neither man nor woman, merely immortal beings having received the resurrection.

RESURRECTED BODIES PASS THROUGH SOLID OBJECTS. Resurrected bodies have control over the elements, How do you think the bodies will get out of the graves at the resurrection? When the Angel Moroni appeared to the Prophet Joseph Smith, the Prophet saw him apparently come down and ascend through the solid walls or ceiling of the building. 288.17 If the Prophet's account had been a fraud, he never would have stated such a story (as we may be sure he never would have thought of such a thing), but would have had the angel come in through the door. Why should it appear any more impossible for a resurrected being to pass through solid objects than for a spirit, for a spirit is also matter?288.18

It was just as easy for the Angel Moroni to come to the Prophet Joseph Smith down through the building as it was for our Savior to appear to his disciples after his resurrection in the room where they were assembled when the door was closed. "The same day at evening, being the first day of the week, when the doors were shut where the disciples were assembled for fear of the Jews, came Jesus and stood in the midst, and saith unto them, Peace be unto you." 288.19

Here, you see that the door was shut, "for fear of the Jews," but this did not prevent Jesus from appearing to them in the room. How could he do it? He had power over the elements. This has been explained by some scientists by the statement that we are limited to three dimensions, but superior beings may have many dimensions of which we know nothing. One learned man, who does not believe in the resurrection, stated that a mortal being, if his body
 could vibrate in the proper manner, could' pass through solid objects. Just how resurrected beings do it, we do not know, but that it has been done we do know, for the Savior and others have done it. 289.20

PHYSICAL PERFECTION IN RESURRECTION

NO DEFORMITIES OR IMPERFECTIONS IN RESURRECTION. A little sound thinking will reveal to us that it would be inconsistent for our bodies to be raised with all kinds of imperfections. Some men have been burned at the stake for the sake of truth. Some have been beheaded, and others have had their bodies torn asunder; for example, John the Baptist was beheaded and received his resurrection at the time of the resurrection of our Redeemer. It is impossible for us to think of him coming forth from the dead holding his head in his hands; our reason says he was physically complete in the resurrection, He appeared to the Prophet Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery with a perfect resurrected body.

When we come forth from the dead, our spirits and bodies will be reunited inseparably, never again to be divided, and they will then be assigned to the kingdom to which they belong. All deformities and imperfections will be removed, and the body will conform to the likeness of the spirit, for the Lord revealed, "that which is spiritual being in the likeness of that which is temporal; and that which is temporal in the likeness of that which is spiritual; the spirit of man in the likeness of his person, as also the spirit of the beast, and every other creature which God has created." 289.21

PERFECT AND PROPER FRAME IN RESURRECTION. The Prophet Amulek has stated the case very clearly in these words: "Now, there is a death which is called a temporal death; and the death of Christ shall loose the bands of this temporal death. . . . The spirit and the body shall be reunited again in its perfect form; both limb and joint shall be restored to its proper frame, even as we now are at this time; and we shall be brought to stand before God, knowing even as we know now, and have a bright recollection of all our guilt.

"Now, this restoration shall come to all, both old and young, both bond and free, both male and female, both the wicked and the righteous; and even there shall not so much as a hair of their heads be lost; but every thing shall be restored to its perfect frame, as it is now, or in the body, and shall be brought and be arraigned before the bar of Christ the Son, and God the Father, and the Holy Spirit, which is one Eternal God, to be judged according to their works, whether they be good or whether they be evil.

"Now, behold, I have spoken unto you concerning the death of the mortal body, and also concerning the resurrection of the mortal body. I say unto you that this mortal body is raised to an immortal body, that is from death, even from the first death unto life, that they can die no more; their spirits uniting with their bodies, never to be divided; thus the whole becoming spiritual and immortal, that they can no more see corruption."290.22

Alma testifies to this same thing. Speaking of the resurrection of our Lord which will give him power to call forth all of the dead, he says: "Yea, this bringeth about the restoration of those things of which has been spoken by the mouths of the prophets. The soul shall be restored to the body, and the body to the soul; yea, and every limb and joint shall be restored to its body; yea, even a hair of the head shall not be lost; but all things shall be restored to their proper and perfect frame." 290.23

WHY CHRIST RETAINED MARKS OF WOUNDS IN HIS BODY. We must not judge the resurrection of others by the resurrection of Jesus Christ. It is true that he appeared to his disciples and invited them to examine the prints of the nails in his hands and in his feet, and the spear wound in his side, but this was a special manifestation to them.

We should know that the disciples had failed to understand that he was to rise again, and this manifestation was for their benefit. Thomas was absent, and it was with some difficulty that the other disciples could convince him that the Lord had risen. Thomas was not worse than any other one of the apostles. Perhaps they would have done just what he did had they been absent. The Lord said to them and later to him: "Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have." 291.24

CHRIST'S WOUNDS A WITNESS AT SECOND COMING. When the Savior comes to the Jews in the hour of their distress, as recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants, 45:51-53, he will show them the wounds in his hands and in his feet.

"And then shall the Jews look upon me and say: What are these wounds in thine hands and in thy feet? Then shall they know that I am the Lord; for I will say unto them: These wounds are the wounds with which I was wounded in the house of my friends. I am he who was lifted up. I am Jesus that was crucified. I am the Son of God. And then shall they weep because of their iniquities; then shall they lament because they persecuted their king."

The Prophet Zechariah has also prophesied of the Savior's Second Coming and his appearance to the Jews, when they will flee from their enemies and the Mount of Olives shall cleave in twain making a valley in which they shall seek refuge. At that particular time he will appear and they shall say: "What are these wounds in thine hands? Then he shall answer, Those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends."291.25 Then will they mourn, each family apart, because they had rejected their Lord.

It is true that he also showed these wounds to the Nephites when he visited with them with the same purpose in view, to convince them of his identity, and give to them a witness of his suffering. 292.26 It can hardly be accepted as a fact that these wounds have remained in his hands, side, and feet all through the centuries from the time of his crucifixion and will remain until his Second Coming, But they will appear to the Jews as a witness against their fathers and their stubbornness in following the teachings of their fathers. After their weeping and mourning they shall be cleansed. 292.27

NATURE OF HEALING POWER OP RESURRECTION. When a person rises in the resurrection, his body will be perfect but that does not mean that he will be perfect in faith. 292.28 There will be different kinds of bodies in the resurrection -- celestial, terrestrial, and telestial -- and they will not be alike any more than whites, browns, and blacks are alike in this life. Every man will receive according to his works.

Bodies will come up, of course, as they were laid down, but will be restored to their proper, perfect frame immediately. Old people will not look old when they come forth from the grave. Scars will be removed. No one will be bent or wrinkled. How foolish it would be for a man to come forth in the resurrection who had lost a leg and have to wait for it to grow again. Each body will come forth with its perfect frame. If there has been some deformity or physical impairment in this life, it will be removed.

The Lord is not impotent to heal and restore the dead to their perfect frame in the resurrection. If the Savior could restore withered hands, eyes that had never had sight, crooked bodies, in this mortal life, surely the Father will not permit bodies that are not physically perfect to come forth in the resurrection.

NO DISEASE IN RESURRECTION. If a man has gone through life with a club foot, or other deformity, will he be raised in the resurrection and have the club foot or deformity, and have to wait until the "restoration of all things," before this imperfection is corrected?

The answer to this is. No! Let us carry this a little farther. If a person through disease passes through the greater part of his life with some deformity -- such as diabetes, tumors, consumption -- will he have to be subject to such disease until the day of "restitution of all things?" Certainly not, and it is just as inconsistent to claim that the club foot would have to remain as to say that any of these other deformities or diseases would have to remain.

CHILDREN RESURRECTED AS CHILDREN. Of course, children who die do not grow in the grave. They will come forth with their bodies as they were laid down, and then they will grow to the full stature of manhood or womanhood after the resurrection, but all will have their bodies fully restored.293.29

RESTORATION TO PERFECTION THROUGH RESURRECTION. In speaking about the resurrection at the funeral of Sister Rachel Grant, President Joseph F. Smith said that the same person, in the same form and likeness, will come forth "even to the wounds in the flesh. Not that a person will always be marred by scars, wounds, deformities, defects or infirmities, for these will be removed in their course, in their proper time, according to the merciful providence of God." 293.30

President Smith was in full accord with Amulek and Alma. He taught that the body will be restored as stated in Alma 11:42-45 and 40:22-23. While he expresses the thought that the
 body will come forth as it was laid down, he also expresses the thought that it will take time to adjust the body from the condition of imperfections, This, of course, is reasonable, but at the same time the length of time to make these adjustments will not cover any appreciable extent of time.

President Smith never intended to convey the thought that it would require weeks or months of time in order for the defects to be removed. These changes will come naturally, of course, but almost instantly, We cannot look upon it in any other way. For instance, a man who has lost a leg in childhood will have his leg restored. It does not grow in the grave, but will be restored naturally, but with the power of the Almighty it will not take extended time for this to be accomplished.

RESTORATION TO PERFECTION ALMOST INSTANTANEOUS. When President Smith declares that "the body will come forth as it is laid to rest, for there is no growth in the grave," 294.31 he has in mind this: Infants and children do not grow in the grave, but when they come forth, they will come forth with the same body and in the same size in which the body was when it was laid away. After the resurrection the body will grow until it has reached the full stature of manhood or womanhood. He did not intend to teach that the adult who loses a leg will come forth without that leg until it can be grafted on after the resurrection. Rather, his body will come forth complete in every part. Deformities and the like will be corrected, if not immediately at the time of the uniting of the spirit and body, so soon thereafter that it will make no difference. We may be sure that every man will receive his body in its perfect frame in the resurrection.294.32

FIRST AND SECOND RESURRECTIONS

A RESURRECTION OF LIFE AND OF DAMNATION. The Lord meant literally just what he said when he declared that the dead should hear his voice and should come forth, they that had done good unto the resurrection of life and they that had done evil unto the resurrection of damnation.295.33

The resurrection shall come to all men, for they are not responsible for death. The Lord will not punish them for Adam's transgression.295.34 Therefore, he took upon him the sins of all mankind and redeemed every creature from death and granted unto each one of us a resurrection, but not eternal life, not salvation, not an existence in the presence of his Father in the celestial kingdom. That comes through faithfulness, through diligence, through perseverance on our part and through our belief and acceptance and our keeping of the commandments of the Lord.295.35

FIRST RESURRECTION AT SECOND COMING. While there was a general resurrection of the righteous at the time Christ arose from the dead, it is customary for us to speak of the resurrection of the righteous at the Second Coming of Christ as the first resurrection. It is the first to us, for we have little thought or concern over that which is past. The Lord has
 promised that at the time of his Second Advent the graves will be opened, and the just shall come forth to reign with him on the earth for a thousand years.

John in the Book of Revelation writes of these: "And I saw thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given unto them: and I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the word of God, and which had not worshipped the beast, neither his image, neither had received his mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands; and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years.

"But the rest of the dead lived not again until the thousand years were finished. This is the first resurrection. Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection: on such the second death hath no power, but they shall be priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years."296.36

RESURRECTION OF CELESTIAL BODIES. In modern revelation given to the Church, the Lord has made known more in relation to this glorious event. There shall be at least two classes which shall have the privilege of the resurrection at this time: First, those who "shall dwell in the presence of God and his Christ forever and ever"; 296.37 and second, honorable men, those who belong to the terrestrial kingdom as well as those of the celestial kingdom.

At the time of the coming of Christ, "They who have slept in their graves shall come forth, for their graves shall be opened; and they also shall be caught up to meet him in the midst of the pillar of heaven -- They are Christ's, the first fruits, they who shall descend with him first, and they who are on the earth and in their graves, who are first caught up to meet him; and all this by the voice of the sounding of the trump of the angel of God." 296.38 These are the just, "whose names are written in heaven, where God and Christ are the judge of all. These are they who are just men made perfect through Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, who wrought out this perfect atonement through the shedding of his own blood."296.39

RESURRECTION OF TERRESTRIAL BODIES. Following this great event, and after the Lord and the righteous who are caught up to meet him have descended upon the earth, there will come to pass another resurrection. This may be considered as a part of the first, although it comes later. In this resurrection will come forth those of the terrestrial order, who were not worthy to be caught up to meet him, but who are worthy to come forth to enjoy the millennial reign.

It is written that the second angel shall sound, which is the second trump, "and then cometh the redemption of those who are Christ's at his coming; who have received their part in the prison which is prepared for them, that they might receive the gospel, and be judged according to men in the flesh."297.40

This other class, which will also have right to the first resurrection, are those who are not
 members of the Church of the Firstborn, but who have led honorable lives, although they refused to accept the fulness of the gospel.

Also in this class will be numbered those who died without law and hence are not under condemnation for a violation of the commandments of the Lord. The promise is made to them of redemption from death in the following words: "And then shall the heathen nations be redeemed, and they that knew no law shall have part in the first resurrection; and it shall be tolerable for them." 297.41 These, too, shall partake of the mercies of the Lord and shall receive the reuniting of spirit and body inseparably, thus becoming immortal, but not with the fulness of the glory of God.

RESURRECTION OF TELESTIAL BODIES. All liars, and sorcerers, and adulterers and all who love and make a lie, shall not receive the resurrection at this time, but for a thousand years shall be thrust down into hell where they shall suffer the wrath of God until they pay the price of their sinning, if it is possible, by the things which they shall suffer. 297.42

These are the "spirits of men who are to be judged, and are found under condemnation; And these are the rest of the dead; and they live not again until the thousand years are ended, neither again, until the end of the earth."297.43

These are the hosts of the telestial world who are condemned to "suffer the wrath of God on earth"; and who are "cast down to hell and suffer the wrath of Almighty God, until the fulness of times, when Christ shall have subdued all enemies under his feet, and shall have perfected his work."298.44

SUFFERINGS OF UNGODLY BEFORE RESURRECTION. These do not live during the millennial reign, but during that time are spending their time in torment, or anguish of soul, because of their transgressions. Christ has said that he suffered for all who will repent, but his wrath is kindled against all who will not repent, and they must suffer, "how exquisite you know not, yea, how hard to bear you know not. For behold, I, God, have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent; But if they would not repent they must suffer even as I; Which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit." 298.45

This suffering will be a means of cleansing, or purifying, and through it the wicked shall be brought to a condition whereby they may, through the redemption of Jesus Christ, obtain immortality. Their spirits and bodies shall be again united, and they shall dwell in the telestial kingdom. But this resurrection will not come until the end of the world.

CHRIST DESTROYS DEATH THROUGH RESURRECTION. Paul says: "Then cometh the end when he [Christ] shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father; when he shall have put down all rule and all authority and power. For he must reign, till he hath put
 all enemies under his feet. The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death." 298.46

The victory of Jesus Christ will not be complete until death is destroyed, and death will not be destroyed until every creature affected by the fall has been redeemed from death through the resurrection. This does not insure, however, a place in the kingdom of God for those who have lived lives of wickedness. While they pay the price of their sinning and obtain the resurrection, yet they shall go to "their own place, to enjoy that which they are willing to receive, because they were not willing to enjoy that which they might have received." 299.47

They do not partake of eternal life, or salvation in the presence of God, but forever are shut out of his presence. Nevertheless, in his infinite goodness, our Eternal Father, will bless them as far as they may be blessed in accordance with the laws of justice and mercy.

This doctrine the Lord revealed to Joseph Smith. It is peculiar to the Latter-day Saints for even today the false idea persists that if a man is not saved in the kingdom of God, he is damned in the eternal torments of hell, without hope of relief from his sufferings. 299.48

IS RESURRECTION GOING ON NOW? It is the opinion of some that the resurrection is going on all the time now, but this is purely speculation without warrant in the scriptures. It is true that the Lord has power to call forth any person or persons from the dead, as he may desire, especially if they have a mission to perform which would require their resurrection. For example, we have the cases of Peter, James, and Moroni.

We are given to understand that the first resurrection yet future, which means the coming forth of the righteous, will take place at one particular time, which is when our Savior shall appear in the clouds of heaven, when he shall return to reign. For us to speculate whether or not the Prophet Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith, Brigham Young, and others have been called forth, without any revelation from the Lord, is merely supposition. When the Lord wants any of these men, he has the power to call them, but the first resurrection, with which we have any future concern, will commence when Christ comes.300.49

ALMA'S "OPINION" ON RESURRECTION CLARIFIED. Christ was the first fruits of the resurrection. He holds the keys of the resurrection. The first resurrection took place immediately following his resurrection. A misunderstanding has arisen in the minds of some because of the words of Alma to his son Corianton.300.50 They think that Alma said all the dead, both good and bad, who lived before the coming of our Lord, would receive the resurrection before any who should die after his coming. A careful reading of Alma's words will show, however, that he did not wish to convey any such thought. Abinadi has made this matter very plain. 300.51

Alma does not intend to say, although verse 19 of chapter 40 implies it, that the wicked who lived before Christ will be raised before the righteous who lived after the coming of Christ; that may be implied by what he says in verse 19, but in verse 20, he modifies this and says it
 shall be the souls and bodies of the righteous who come forth at the time of that resurrection.

We find Abinadi teaching that the wicked have no part in the first resurrection, and the first resurrection to Abinadi who lived before the days of Christ was the time of our Savior's resurrection; so we conclude that the wicked, no matter when they lived, will have to wait until the final resurrection.300.52

TRANSLATED BEINGS STILL MORTAL. Translated beings are still mortal and will have to pass through the experience of death, or the separation of the spirit and the body, although this will be instantaneous. The people of the City of Enoch, Elijah, and others who received this great blessing of translation in ancient times, before the coming of our Lord, could not have received the resurrection, or the change from mortality to immortality at that time, because our Lord had not paid the debt which frees us from mortality and grants to us the resurrection and immortal life.

Christ is the "resurrection and the life"301.53 and the first fruits of them that slept. 301.54 Therefore, none could pass from mortality to immortality until our Savior completed his work for the redemption of man and had gained the keys of the resurrection, being the first to rise, having "life in himself" and the power to lay down his life and take it up again, thus freeing all men from the bondage which the fall had placed upon them.301.55
