The Washing of the Feet

Matt. 26

waste?

Mark 14

me.

Luke 7

15

John 11

John 12

16

Jesus, and wiped his feet with her hair: and the house was filled with odour of the ointment.

*7. I.V.: ". . .for she hath preserved this ointment until now, that she might anoint me in token of my burial."

17

THE ORDINANCE OF SECOND ANOINTINGS

The Washing of The Feet

Apriel the first day 1844 I Heber C Kimball received the washing of my feet, and was annointed by my wife Vilate fore my burial, that is my feet head Stomach. Even as Mary did Jesus, that She mite have a claim on him in the Reserrection

in the City of Nauvoo [next page]

In 1845 I received the washing of my feet by [left black in the original; Heber C. Kimball's handwriting stops here and Vilate Kimball's begins:]

I Vilate Kimball do hereby certify that on the first day of April 1844 I attended to washing and anointing the head Stomach and feet of my dear companion Heber C Kimball, that I may have claim upon him in the morning of the first resurrection.

/s/ Vilate Kimball

I called my family together & blessed them. Phoebe washed my feet that I might be clean every whit.

... in the Evening received the washing of my feet by Sarah Wfhitney]

On December 15, 1845 we [David Fullmer and her] received our endowments and on the 19th of January, 1846, in the Temple of the Lord at Nauvoo we received our second anointings and ordination and the next day, the 20th of January we attended to the last anointings, that of the feet.

18

Williard Richards born Jan 24 1804 Hopkinton Middlesex Mass-- & Jenntte Richards, (was born Aug 21--1817. Walkerford Chaidgley Lancashire England deceased) were sealed Husband & wife for time & all Eternity Amelia Elizabeth Peirson acting proxy for & in behalf of the (deceased) who died at Nauvoo; July 9th 1845 Done in presence of Heber Chase Kimble Orson Hyde & J.D. Lee Pres. B. Young officiating at the Alter done at 5 minutes to 9. evening —

Jennette Richards was Sealed to Williard as his wife for time and all Eternity-& with him attended to all the ordinances pertaining to the House of the Lord-to & including the washing of feet in the days of Pres. Joseph Smith Jr the first Prophet of the Church of the Last days-

F. D. Richards

[Note: This entry was in the handwriting of the recorder John D. Lee, though F. D. Richards was the clerk on the occasion of the performance of the ordinances.]

January 22d 1846. Visited the Temple with Wealthy she was sealed to me by the Prophet B. Young and then we repaired to the High Priests room where we were Anointed King and Queen. Priest and Priestess to the Most high God for Time and through out all Eternity by P.P. Pratt as mouth...

February 1st I labored in the Temple the last 8 working days Annointing in the High Priests Room, learnt the ordnance of the washing & anointing of feet for burial.

Morning pleasant. Pres. B. Young's health is improving. At 10 Alanson Allen, my grandson, arrived in camp for the settlements in Mo. Brought in a load of meal. Said that Caroline [Wife No.4] and his mother's family were all well. Today at 1 p.m. the aged men of Israel, called the Silver Grays, met and celebrated the praise of Zion's kings at the hall. Pres. B. Young, Kimble and others of the 21 participated in the worship. About 9 I was washed in salaratus and water from head to foot, afterward in spirits, then anointed in like manner by Louisa [Wife No. 3] and Rachel [Wife No. 6] (as I told them) preparatory to my burial. They both were very kind and attentive to me. In the eve. I felt some better. Weather warm.

19

written shortly after 20 July 1851. [While writing a eulogy in honor of his wife who died following the birth of a son, Lewis Dunbar Wilson speaks of his Nancy's faith in the Gospel and her obedience to its ordinances, particularly by referring to events that occurred on or shortly after 20 January 1846:]

So, she. Nancy Wilson, departed this life at the age of 41 years having been the mother of eleven living children, nine of them on my hands. . .[she] died having been in the church 15 years, having become a member at the age of 26 years during which time she has attended every ordinance of the Gospel that has been offered in her day. and in fact all that I know anything about. She was baptized for the remission of her sins and had hands laid upon her for the reception of the Holy Ghost, and confirmed in the Church and has received blessings from time to time.

At the temple at Nauvoo she received her washings and anointings even to become a queen and a priestess, after which time she attended to one other ordinance which was to wash the feet of her husband and anoint him to be her king and priest and Savior, that she might have claim on him at the resurrection... Nancy Wilson, who knew and died in triumph of faith in the gospel of the Son of God, after having lived and obeyed all the laws and ordinances of the Church. . . died full in the faith of a glorious resurrection with the just and was buried on the Missouri Bluff just above Kanesville [20 July 1851], 9. Mary Ellen A. Kimball Journal, Church Archives; February 18, 1857; W/O sic.

[Heber C. Kimball] came to our room [and] said he did not feel well, spoke of an ordinance which he had previously taught and said that only one of his wives had attended to it. he then spoke of our Savior and his wives but more particularly of Mary [and her] faithfulness to her Lord Said Mary felt to say that she intended to devote her time to him for he had told her that his time was short and he must soon leave them Now she says I design to attend to his words and teaching Let Martha and the rest say what they would. The Savior then told Martha to let Mary alone for she had chosen the better part which should never be taken from her Now said He follow me and you shall see my father This she did even to the tomb and was the first to see him resurrected from the grave.

Monday 22 September 1879 the evening of the fifty second Anniversary of the Angel delivering of the Plates of the Book of Mormon to Joseph Smith the Prophet of the Lord, I dedicated the house and room also blest the Oil after which my Ruth Anointed my feet and wiped them with the hair of her head, then kissed them after the pattern as written in the Testament of the Lord Jesus Christ.

20

Salt Lake City Feb 24th

President Woodruff Dear Brother

Will you please answer a few questions. I wish to ask. you I am the widow of Thomas. C Jones of your Circle he died soon after we came from Logan Temple working for our Dead and having our 2d Ontingins where we told to attend to the Washing of Feet at home the baby was sick after we came home so I asked Bro Jones when we should attend to it and he said we had better wait till the baby is better but he was taken sick and Died before it was attended to can that be done by Proxy or not as I feel sorry about it for he was a good man and I gave him 2 living Wives and 3 Dead ones and worked hard to help him to keep them.

[Letter from Pres. Woodruff to Eliza I. Jones; Church Archives under date:]

Feb. 24th, 1888.

Mr. Eliza I. Jones

10th Ward, Salt Lake City

Dear Sister:

The ordinance of which you speak, and which you say you failed to attend to before the death of your husband, is one that should not be written about, and it cannot be attended to by proxy. Your husband is dead and, so far as the ordinances is concerned, it is all right.

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 7th, 1893 ... At 6 o'clock I went to the [Salt Lake] Temple where I met my folks, we having received permission from Pres. Woodruff to receive our second anointings. Father [George Q. Cannon of the First Presidency] was there to perform the ceremony. Bro. [Francis M.] Lyman was also there to be with his wife Susan D. Ca Mister Lyman as she received this blessing. Father anointed and spoke the words. John D. T. McAllister held the horn [containing the consecrated oil], and Lorenzo Snow and John R. Winder were the witnesses. Sister Lyman was the first anointed in the presence of us all, she thus being the first to receive this blessing in this building. I then received mine, and my wives followed in the order of their

21

marriages. I felt very much pleased to be thus favored. The ordinance of the washing of feet was explained by Bro. McAllister, after the anointings had been given.

30 May 1901 [Thursday]: . . . This afternoon my wife and I took train for Salt Lake City to get our second anointings and attend 100th anniversary of Brigham Young's birth.

31 May 1901 [Friday]: Went to Temple this morning presenting recommend which Pres. Snow gave me about 3 months ago. We had not come before for our second anointing as the baby was young, and because we desired to become settled in our new home.

I was called to speak during the services of the temple. Dwelt principally upon the necessity of keeping awake during temple services and keeping awake in our duties. I consider this a very great honor to be called to speak in the House of the Lord. Bp John R Winder annointed us and Elder Madsen instructed us. These are the greatest blessings that are bestowed upon man in the flesh. We were both melted in tears and I felt the patriarchal spirit of pure affection more than I have done before. The witnesses to the annointing were John R. Winder annointed. Adolph Madsen assisted John Nicholson Recorder.

21 June 1901 [Friday; at their home; he was the Wasatch Stake President in Heber Utah at this time]: This evening from about 9-30 to 12 O.C. my wife and I attended to the second part of the ordinance of second anointings. We besides the ordinance itself sang "We thank thee 0 God for a prophet," conversed concerning our duties to each other and children, read from John XII: 1- 8 verses, read the Rev. on the Eternity of the Marriage Covenant. Section 132. We dedicated [the] room for the purpose of this meeting. Closed by singing: "Oh My father thou that dwellest." Anna was mouth in preliminary prayer, I gave the dedicatory prayer and the benediction. The spirit of the Lord was with us and we felt nearer together than usual: were much encouraged in pressing onward in an endeavor to succeed in life. We fasted during the day and broke our fast together a little after 12 O.C.

22

A COMPILATION OF QUOTATIONS

ON

SECOND ANOINTINGS

CHURCH OF THE FIRSTBORN

KINGS & PRIESTS/QUEENS & PRIESTESSES

FULNESS OF THE PRIESTHOOD

In the 22nd chapter of Luke's account of the Messiah, we find the kingdom of heaven likened unto a king who made a marriage for his son. That this son was the Messiah will not be disputed, since it was the kingdom of heaven that was represented in the parable; and that the Saints, or those who are found faithful to the Lord, are the individuals who will be found worthy to inherit a seat at the marriage supper, is evident from the sayings of John in the Revelation where he represents the sound which he heard in heaven to be like a great multitude, or like the voice of mighty thunderings, saying, the Lord God Omnipotent reigneth. Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to Him; for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and His wife hath made herself ready. And to her was granted that she should be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white: For the fine linen is the righteousness of the Saints (Rev. 19).

That those who keep the commandments of the Lord and walk in His statutes to the end, are the only individuals permitted to sit at this glorious feast, is evident from the following items in Paul's last letter to Timothy, which was written just previous to his death,--he says: "I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith: henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give me at that day: and not to me only, but unto all them also that love His appearing." * * * Reflect for a moment, brethren, and enquire, whether you would consider yourselves worthy a seat at the marriage feast with Paul and others like him, if you had been unfaithful? Had you not fought the good fight, and kept the faith, could you expect to receive? Have you a promise of receiving a crown of righteousness from the hand of the Lord, with the Church of the Firstborn? Here then, we understand, that Paul rested his hope in Christ, because he had kept the faith, and loved His appearing and from His hand he had a promise of receiving a crown of righteousness.

If the Saints are not to reign, for what purpose are they crowned? * * * John represents the sound which he heard from heaven, as giving thanks and glory to God, saying that the Lamb was worthy to take the book and to open its seals; because he was slain, and had made them kings and priests unto God; and they should reign on the earth (see Rev. v). * * *

Most assuredly it is, however, that the ancients, though persecuted and afflicted by men, obtained from God promises of such weight and glory, that our hearts are often filled with gratitude that we are even permitted to look upon them while we contemplate that there is no respect of persons in His sight, and that in every nation, he that feareth God and worketh righteousness, is acceptable with Him. But from the few items previously quoted we can draw the conclusion that there is to be a day when all will be judged of their works, and rewarded

23

according to the same; that those who have kept the faith will be crowned with a crown of righteousness; be clothed in white raiment; be admitted to the marriage feast; be free from every affliction, and reign with Christ on the earth. . . .

And though we cannot claim these promises which were made to the ancients for they are not our property, merely because they were made to the ancient Saints, yet if we are the children of the Most High, and are called with the same calling with which they were called, and embrace the same covenant that they embraced, and are faithful to the testimony of our Lord as they were, we can approach the Father in the name of Christ as they approached Him, and for ourselves obtain the same promises. ***... and when these promises are obtained, they will be promises directly to us, or they will do us no good. They will be communicated for our benefit, being our own property (through the gift of God), earned by our own diligence in keeping His commandments and walking uprightly before Him. If not, to what end serves the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, and why was it ever communicated to us?

While attending college at Oberlin, Ohio, in the spring of 1836 I had occasion to visit Kirtland, some sixty miles distant, where two of my sisters were residing. * * * I became acquainted with Joseph Smith, his counselors, and a number of prominent leaders. * * *

Being at that time a young man, full of worldly aspirations, with bright prospects, and means to gratify my ambition in acquiring a liberal collegiate education; also having a host of wealthy, proud, aristocratic friends and relatives watching eagerly for my achieving high honors in life, of course, you can easily understand that it was a great trial, and required the strongest effort to form a resolution to abandon those prospects, disappoint expectations, join the poor, ignorant, despised Mormons, and follow Old Joe Smith, the money digger, as he and they were regarded.

Had I then understood, as I now know, the ultimate results of obedience to the gospel, a life of purity, and after its close an exaltation to the fulness of the Godhead, I should then have been ashamed to have called it a sacrifice. But in my ignorance, at that time, of its blessings and glories, it was the fiercest struggle of heart and will I ever experienced before or since. But through the help of the Lord, for I feel certain that He must have helped me, I laid my pride, worldly ambition and aspirations upon the altar, and as humble as a child went to the waters of baptism, received the ordinance administered by an Apostle, and afterwards the laying on of hands.

2a. History of the Church, Vol. 4:570; Wednesday, March 30, 1842; Remarks by Joseph Smith to the Female Relief Society.

All must act in concert, or nothing can be done, and should move according to the ancient Priesthood; hence the Saints should be a select people, separate from all the evils of the world — choice, virtuous, and holy. The Lord was going to make of the Church of Jesus Christ a kingdom of

Priests, a holy people, a chosen generation, as in Enoch's day, having all the gifts as illustrated to the Church in Paul's epistles and teachings to the churches in his day. . . .

June 1842 I was initiated into the ancient order, was washed and anointed and sealed and ordained [to become] a priest and so forth, in company with many others. That is, Joseph Smith, Hiram Smith, Wm. Law, Wm. Marks, Judge Adams, Brigham Young, Willard Richards, George Miller, Newel K. Whitney.

My feelings at the present time are that inasmuch as the Lord Almighty has preserved me until today. He will continue to preserve me, by the united faith and prayers of the Saints, until I have fully accomplished my mission in this life, and so firmly established the dispensation of the fullness of the priesthood in the last days, that all the power of earth and hell can never prevail against it.

While in conversation at Judge Adams during the evening, I said, Christ and the resurrected Saints will reign [as kings & priests] over the earth during the thousand years. They will not probably dwell upon the earth, but will visit it when they please, or when it is necessary to govern it. There will be wicked men [those who have not been baptized] on the earth during the thousand years. The heathen nations who will not come up to worship will be visited with the judgments of God, and must eventually be destroyed from the earth.

For these overcome, by their faith and their works.

Being tried in their life-time, as purified gold.

And seal'd by the spirit of promise to life.

By men called of God, as was Aaron of old.

They are they, of the church of the first-born of God,

And unto whose hands he committeth all things;

For they hold the keys of the kingdom of heav'n.

And reign with the Saviour, as priests and as kings.

25

They're priests of the order of Melchisedec,

Like Jesus (from whom is this highest reward),

and light;

As written-they're God's, even sons of the Lord.

Receiving a fulness of glory

June 11 Joseph said the reason why the Jews were scattered and their House left unto them desolate was because they refused to be gathered that the fulness of the Priesthood might be revealed among them which never can be done but by the gathering of the People also [next page] the Order & Ordinances of the Kingdom were instituted by the Priesthood in the council of Heaven before the world was.

If a man gets a fullness of the priesthood of God, he has to get it in the same way that Jesus Christ obtained it, and that was by keeping all the commandments and obeying all the ordinances of the house of the Lord. * * *

All men who become heirs of God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ wilT have to receive the fulness of the ordinances of his kingdom; and those who will not receive all the ordinances will come short of the fullness of that glory, if they do not lose the whole.

Meeting of the Twelve Apostles in Philadelphia. * * *

President Brigham Young addressed the congregation at considerable length. * * * He also remarked that if any in the Church had the fullness of the Melchizedek Priesthood, he did not know it. For any person to have the fullness of that priesthood, he must be a king and priest. A person may have a portion of that priesthood, the same as governors or judges of England have power from the king to transact business; but that does not make them kings of England. A per- son may be anointed king and priest long before he receives his kingdom.

The sound saluted by ears — "Ye are come unto Mount Zion, and unto the city of the living

26

God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of angels, to the general assembly and church of the firstborn, which are written in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the new covenant" (Hebrew xii:22,23,24). What would it profit us to come unto the spirits of the just men, but to learn and come up to the standard of their knowledge? * * *

Four destroying angels holding power over the four quarters of the earth until the servants of God are sealed in their foreheads, which signifies sealing the blessing upon their heads, meaning the everlasting covenant, thereby making their calling and election sure. When a seal is put upon the father and mother, it secures their posterity, so that they cannot be lost, but will be saved by virtue of the covenant of their father and mother.

The speaker continued to teach the doctrine of election and the sealing powers and principles, and spoke of the doctrine of election with the seed of Abraham, and the sealing of blessings upon his posterity, and the sealing of the fathers and children, according to the declarations of the prophets. He then spoke of Judge Higbee in the world of spirits, and the blessings which he would obtain, and of the kind spirit and disposition of Judge Higbee while living; none of which was reported. * * *

The world is reserved unto burning in the last days. He shall send Elijah the prophet, and he shall reveal the covenants of the fathers in relation to the children, and the covenants of the children in relation to the fathers.

Doctrine of election — sealing of the servants of our God on the top of their heads — 'tis not the cross, as the catholics would have it. Doctrine of election to Abraham was in the relation to the seed. A man wishes to be embraced in the covenants of Abraham.

Judge Higby in the world of spirits is sealed unto the throne, and doctrine of election sealing the fathers and children together.

4 destroying angels holding power over the 4 quarters of the earth until the servents of God are sealed in their foreheads what is that seal, shall I tell you? No. Doctrine of Election sealing (of the servent forged) on the top of their heads, tis not the cross as the catholics would have it.

What was the power of Melchizedek? 'Twas not the Priesthood of Aaron which administers in outward ordinances, and the offering of sacrifices. Those holding the fullness of the Melchizedek Priesthood are kings and priests of the Most High God, holding the keys of

27

power and blessings. In fact, that priesthood is a perfect law of theocracy, and stands as God to give laws to the people, administering endless lives to the sons and daughters of Adam. * * *

How shall God come to the rescue of this generation? He will send Elijah the prophet. The law revealed to Moses in Horeb never was revealed to the children of Israel as a nation.

Elijah shall reveal the covenants to seal the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers.

The anointing and sealing is to be called, elected and made sure. * * * Men have to suffer [to wean us away from this world] that they may come upon Mount Zion and be exalted above the heavens.

There are 3 grand principles or orders of Priesthood portrayed in this chapter [Heb 7],

1st Levitical which was never able to administer a Blessing but only to bind heavy burdens which neither they nor their father [were] able to bear.

2 Abrahams Patriarchal power [endowment thru temple marriage] which is the greatest yet experienced in this church [the second anointing ordinance which makes a man a king & priest was introduced a month later],

3d That of Melchisedec who had still greater power even power of an endless life of which was our Lord Jesus Christ which also Abraham obtained by the offering of his son Isaac which was not the power of a Prophet nor apostle nor Patriarch only but of King & Priest to God to open the windows of Heaven and pour out the peace & law of endless Life to man & no man can attain to the Joint heirship with Jesus Christ without being administered to by one having the same power & Authority of Melchisedec.

What was the power of Melchisedeck twas not P. of Aaron &c. a king & a priest to the most high God. a perfect law of Theocracy holding keys of power & blessings, stood as God to give laws to the people, administering endless lives to the sons and daughters of Adam kingly powers of anointing.

Abraham's priesthood was of greater power than Levi's and Melchizedeck's was of greater power than that of Abraham. * * * I ask was there any sealing power attending this priesthood [Aaronic] that would admit a man into the presence of God. Oh no, but Abraham's was a more exalted power or priesthood he could talk and walk with God [thru the endowment & temple marriage] and yet consider how great this man was when even this patriarch Abraham gave a

28

tenth part of all his spoils and then received a blessing under the hands of Melchesideck even the last law or a fulness of the law or priesthood which constituted him a king and preist after the order of Melchesideck or an endless life. * * * It is understood by many by reading this chapter [Heb 7] that Melchesedeck was king of some country or nation on the earth, but it was not so. In the original it reads king of Shaloam which signifies king of peace or righteousness and not of any country or nation. * * *

Men will set up stakes and say thus far will we go and no farther, did Abraham when called upon to offer his son, did the Saviour, no, view him fulfilling all righteousness again on the banks of Jordan, also on the Mount transfigured before Peter and John there receiving the fulness of priesthood or the law of God, setting up no stake but coming right up to the mark in all things here him after he returned from the Mount, did ever language of such magnitude fall from the lips of any man, hearken him. All power is given unto me both in heaven and the earth.

Thursday Sept 28 1843 / 10 A.M. in the street going toward / printing office. 11 1/2 A.M. in Council over / the Store. Hyrum, Newell, Geo. M., Wa.d & A/ J.S., J.T., A.L., L.W., J.M.B..--and at 7 eve / met at the Mansion upper room prest. with / W.L., W.M. Baurak Ale was by common / consent, & unanimous voice chosen president / of the quorum. & anointed & ordn to the highest / and holiest order of the priesthood (& companion do.-) / Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith, Geo Miller, N.K. Whitney / Willard Richards, John Smith, John Taylor, / Amasa Lyman, Lucien Woodworth, J.M. Bernhisel / -Wm Law, Wm Marks, - President led in / prayers, that his days might be prolonged have dominion / over his enemies., all their households be blessed / and all the church & world.

Feb 26 1867. While reading Dr Richards Journal we found the account of the Second Anointing of Presdent Joseph Smith, & by the Council of G. A. Smith Histo I record the Account in this Journal

Thursday Sept 28, 1843 The Council met over the Store Also at 7 o clok in the Evening met in an upper room in the mansion. Ther were present Joseph Smith, Hyram Smith, George Miller N. K. Whitney, Willard Richard John Smith John Taylor Amasa Lyman, Locian Woodworth, J M Bernhisel Wm Law., Wm Marks. Joseph Smith led in prayer he prayed that his days might be lengthened & had dominion over his Enemies, and all there Households be blessed & all the world Then by common conssnt Joseph Smith the Prophet Received his second Anointing of the Highest & Holiest order.

29

eve - Council met same as Thursday previous / except & S. Law, - Marks. Durphy..-&- Hirums wife.- Joseph / &c re - anointed. Law &c, anointed counselors.-- prayer & singing adjourned to Wednesday eve.

[Joseph Smith given second anointing again.] 20. "Historian's Office Private Journal, 1858", p. 24, kept by Wilford Woodruff, Church Archives; October 8, 1843.

Sunday Oct 8 1843 Prayer Meeting at Josephs Hyrum Smith & Wife received his

second Anointig

I assure the Saints that truth, in reference to these matters, can and may be known through the revelations of God in the way of His ordinances, and in answer to prayer. The Hebrew Church "came unto the spirits of just men made perfect, and unto an innumerable company of angels, unto God the Father of all, and to Jesus Christ the Mediator of the new covenant." What did they learn by coming to the spirits of just men made perfect? Is it written? No. What they learned has not been and could not have been written. What object was gained by this communication with the spirits of the just? It was the established order of the kingdom of God: the keys of power and knowledge were with them to communicate to the saints. Hence the importance of understanding the distinction between the spirits of the just and angels. * * *

The spirits of just men are made ministering servants to those who are sealed unto life eternal, and it is through them that the sealing power comes down.

Prayer Meeting in the eve at old home. B Young [and wife anointed].

— 27—1 attended prayer-meeting in the evening at President Joseph Smith's. Bishop N. K. Whitney and wife were [second] anointed.

30

--14 (Sunday) --Preached in the city. In the evening attended prayer meeting at the Assembly Room. My wife Mary Ann and I received our second anointing. [See 22 Nov 1843 for the first instance of this ordinance.]

But how are they to become saviors on Mount Zion? By building their temples, erecting their baptismal fonts, and going forth and receiving all the ordinances, baptisms, confirmations, washings, anointings, ordinations [as king and priest] and sealing powers upon their heads, in behalf of all their progenitors who are dead, and redeem them that they may come forth in the first resurrection and be exalted to thrones of glory with them; and herein is the chain that binds the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, which fulfills the mission of Elijah.

--20-Met with the Quorum; Heber C. Kimball and his wife Vilate received their second anointing.

--21 (Sunday)--I met in the Assembly Room with the Quorum, [p. 159] and administered to Parley P. Pratt his second anointing.

I met with the quorum in the evening had an interestin time many good exhortation were given by the brethren concerning the things of God P.P.P. received his 2d Anointing Joseph said concerning Parley P. Pratt that he had no wife sealed to him for Eternity as He would want a wife in the resurrection or els his glory would be cliped many arguments He used upon this subject which were rational & consistent. Br. Joseph said now what will we do with Elder P. P. Pratt He has no wife sealed to him for Eternity He had one living wife but she had a former Husband did not wish to be sealed to Parly, for Eternity now is it not right for Parley to have another wife that can [end of the entry], . .

31

On January 21st, Elder Woodruff records the fact that Apostle Parley P. Pratt had just received second anointings and that he had been instructed by the Prophet that it was his duty to have his wife sealed to him for eternity in order that his glory might be full.

--25--The Quorum met at my house: Orson Hyde received his second anointing.

--26--The Twelve met at my house: Orson Pratt received his second anointing.

— 27-We met at the Assembly Room: Willard Richards and his wife Jenetta were sealed and received their second anointing.

--28--The Quorum met in the Assembly Room. Wilford Woodruff and his wife Phebe W. were sealed and received their second anointing.

--30--The Quorum met at my house. John and Leonora Taylor were sealed and anointed.

["J Taylor & Leonora Taylor received their 2d Anointing & sealing." — taken from the Journal of Wilford Woodruff under date.]

—31—1 met with the Quorum at my house. George A. and Bathsheba W. Smith were anointed, having been sealed on the 20th inst.

["Geo A. Smith & wife Bathsheba / W. Bigler received their Second / Anointing, which was administered by Brigham Young / Prest of the Twelve "--taken from the Joseph Smith "Diary",

32

under date.]

["Jan 31, 1844 Geo A Smith & Bathsheba W Smith Recvd our 2 anointing at B Young house" — taken from the George A. Smith 1841-1845 Journal, Number 6, p. 148, Ms/f/96/#l/Archives.]

February the first 1844 my Self and wife Vilate was annonnted Preast and Preastest unto our God under the Hands of B Young, and by the ways of the Holy order.

I met with the quorum for Prayer &c at / Elder Youngs Bro & Sister Wm W Phelps / attended with us Bro Phelps spoke concerning his / appointment as a Lawyer in Israel Brother & / Sister Wm W Phelps received their 2d Anointing & / sealing.

In the evening of this day the quorum / met at Josephs store Brothers Wm Clayton & / Joseph Young met with them But I was not / present. * * * Joseph Young & wife & Wm Clayton / received their 2d Endowments &c.

Sunday, 4. — I attended prayer-meeting with the quorum [of the Holy Order] in the assembly room, and made some remarks respecting the hundred and forty four thousand mentioned by John the Revelator, showing that the selection of persons to form that number had already commenced.

[This Joseph could confidently say inasmuch as over 20 brethren had just received their second anointings.]

I met with the quorum in the evening Br / & Sister Lott was present we had a good / time in prayer Br Joseph gave us good instrution in meekness & humility the revelator / John remarks was quoted to in the evening / concerning the 144000 of the tribes of Israel / Cornelius P Lott &

33

wife received their 2d Anointing / & sealing.

Met with the Twelve in the assembly room concerning the Oregon and California Exploring Expedition; Hyrum and Sidney present. I told them I wanted an exploration of all that mountain country. Perhaps it would be best to go direct to Santa Fe. "Send twenty-five men: let them preach the Gospel wherever they go. * * * Appoint a leader, and let them beat up for volunteers. I want every man that goes to be a king and a priest. When he gets on the mountains he may want to talk with his God; when with the savage nations have power to govern, &c.

I met with / the quorum in the evening but meeting / closed soon after we arived Fathers John . Smith & wife & Isaac Morley & wife met with / the quorum in the afternoon & evening * * * Father John Smith & wife Isaac Morley & wife had their 2d anointing & sealing.

I think this people is abundantly able to build this temple, and much depends upon it for our endowments and sealing powers; and many blessings depend upon it.

["He told us to pray 'that you may live to go into this Temple and be sealed in your foreheads,'- — putting his hand upon his forehead — for said he, 'It is your right to live until you are three score years and ten.' (Wandle Mace Journal, p. 129)]

The spirit, power, and calling of Elijah is, that ye have power to hold the key of the revelation, ordinances, oracles, powers and endowments of the fullness of the Melchizedek Priesthood and of the kingdom of God on the earth; and to receive, obtain, and perform all the ordinances belonging to the kingdom of God, even unto the turning of the hearts of the fathers

unto the children, and the hearts of the children unto the fathers, even those who are in heaven.

* * *

. . . the power of Elijah is sufficient to make our calling and election sure.

* * *

Although David was a king, he never did obtain the spirit and power of Elijah and the fullness of the Priesthood; and the priesthood that he received, and the throne and kingdom of David is to be taken from him and given to another by the name of David in the last days, raised

34

up out of his lineage. * * *

Again: The doctrine or sealing power of Elijah is as follows:--lf you have [the sealing] power to seal on earth and in heaven, then we should be wise. The first thing you do, go and seal on earth your sons and daughters unto yourself, and yourself unto your fathers in eternal glory.

Apriel the first day 1844 I Heber C Kimball received the washing of my feet, and was annointed by my wife Vilate fore my burial, that is my feet head Stomach. Even as Mary did Jesus, that She mite have a claim on him in the Reserrection

in the City of Nauvoo [next page]

In 1845 I recieved the washing of my feet by [left blank in the original; Heber C. Kimball's handwriting stops here and Vilate Kimball's begins:]

I Vilate Kimball do hereby certify that on the first day of April 1844 I attended to washing and anointing the head Stomach and feet of my dear companion Heber C Kimball, that I may have claim upon him in the morning of the first resurrection

/s/ Vilate Kimball

The declaration this morning is, that as soon as the Temple and baptismal font are prepared, we calculate to give the Elders of Israel their washings and anointings, and attend to those last and more impressive ordinances, without which we cannot obtain celestial thrones. But there must be a holy place prepared for that purpose. There was a proclamation made during the time that the foundation of the Temple was laid to that effect, and there are provisions made until the work is completed, so that men may receive their endowments and be made kings and priests unto the Most High God, having nothing to do with temporal things, but their whole time will be taken up with things pertaining to the house of God. * * * . . .every man who wishes to save his father, mother, brothers, sisters and friends, must go through all the ordinances for each one of them separately, the same as for himself, from baptism to ordination, washing and anointings and receive all the keys and powers of the Priesthood, the same as for himself.

I am going on in my progress for eternal life. It is not only necessary that you should be baptized for your dead, but you will have to go through all the ordinances for them, the same as you have gone through to save yourselves. There will be 144,000 saviors on Mount Zion, and with

35

them an innumerable host that no man can number. Oh! I beseech you to go forward, go forward and make your calling and election sure.

I called my family together & blessed them. Phoebe washed my feet that I might be clean every whit.

[Comments by Elder John Taylor:]

Elder Rigdon was appointed by President Smith to go to Pittsburg and build up a church; but he was expressly forbid to take any one with him. Now I would ask, has Elder Rigdon accomplished his mission? Has he sought to build up the church according to President Smith's order? No. He has been holding secret meetings; he has ordained men illegally, and contrary to the order of the priesthood; he has been ordaining men to the offices of prophets, priests and kings; whereas he does not hold that office himself; who does not know that this is wrong? There is not an officer belonging to the church but what is acquainted with this fact. Can a teacher ordain a priest? Can a priest ordain an elder? Can an elder ordain a high priest, or any of the former ordain an apostle? You all know they could not, it is contrary to the order of God; and yet we find that President Rigdon, a man who ought to know better — who does know better — has been ordaining men to offices that he does not hold himself: and yet he has come to us with a revelation to lead this church to the Celestial kingdom of God; and even if he had the authority to ordain these men, he could not do it in and of himself without the accompanying ordinances, and under the circumstances which he did.

[Comments by Heber C. Kimball:]

He (Sidney Rigdon) has no authority only what he receives from the church, if he was one with us, why was he not in our councils? He was not in the council pertaining to the High Priesthood until just before he started for Pittsburgh. Brother Phelps was the means of bringing him in [i.e., Phelps helped him get the endowment.], but he has not got the same authority [a fulness of the priesthood through the second anointing ordinance] as others; there are more than thirty men who have got higher authority than he has. * * *

There are men here, brethren who have got authority, but we don't want to mention their names, for the enemy will try to kill them.

36

Minutes of a meeting of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints held on the meeting ground of the city of Nauvoo. * * *

Elder W. W. Phelps moved that Elder Sidney Rigdon be cut off from the church, and delivered over to the buffetings of satan until he repent.

Bishop Newel K. Whitney then presented the motion to the high council (who was trying the case) and the vote was unanimous in the affirmative. * * *

President Young arose and delivered Sidney Rigdon over to the buffetings of satan in the name of the Lord, and all the people said. Amen.

[Footnote comments by B. H. Roberts:]

Very serious charges are made against Elder Rigdon for insubordination, for claiming to hold keys and authority above any man or set of men in the church, even superior authority and keys thereof than those held by the Twelve; and likewise he had ordained men to positions — places and offices not recognized as properly belonging to the church.

Sept. 19th, 1844

Dear E. Robinson,

You probably may have received something by way of counsel from Nauvoo from Brother Young, if so, I trust you will regard it as coming from "the proper source." We have had a charge given us by our prophet, and that charge we intend to honor and magnify. It was given in March last. He said; "let no man take your crown, and though you should have to walk right into death, fear not, neither be dismayed." "You have to die but once." "To us were committed the Keys of the Kingdom, and every gift, key and power, that Joseph ever had," confirmed upon our heads by an anointing, which Bro. Rigdon never did receive.

We know the charge which the prophet gave us, and the responsibility which the Spirit of the living God laid on us through him, and we know that Elder Rigdon does not know what it was. We have counted the cost of the stand we have taken, and have firmly and unitedly, with prayer and with fasting — with signs and with tokens, with garments and with girdle, decreed in the name of Jesus Christ, that we will honor our calling, and faithfully carry out the measures of the prophet so far as we have power, relying on the arm of God for strength in every time of need.

I know that the curse of God will fall upon every one that tries to give us trouble or to weaken our hands in the work in which we are engaged, for this promise we have obtained from the Lord in solemn convocation.

I want you to read this letter to the Saints in Pittsburg, not to the world.

My kind love to all the Saints, to yourself and family.

Yours truly, Orson Hyde

37

[This letter was later printed in The Return, Vol. 2, No. 4, (April, 1890), p. 253.]

The truth is, religion — old fashioned Abel, Noah, Abraham, Israel, Moses, Shadrach, Meshach, Abendnego, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Daniel, Jesus Christ, Apostolic, Mormon religion — is made up of "obedience," come life or death, with crowns for crosses; being ordained to eternal life [through the second anointing] after sin is overcome [through the washing of the feet]. Therefore brethren, endure, like good soldiers, to the end, and you will be ordained [kings & priests] to this highest honor of the priesthood.

Yes, brethren, we verily know and bear testimony, that a cloud of blessing and of endowment, and of the keys of the fulness of the priesthood, and of things pertaining to eternal life, is hanging over us, and ready to burst upon us; or upon as many as live worthy of it, so soon as there is a place found on earth to receive it. Therefore, let no cunningly devised fable, no false delusive spirit, or vision, no man or set of men who go out from us, but are not of us, have any influence on your minds for a moment, to draw your minds away from this all important work. But enter steadily and regularly upon a strict observance of the law of tithing, and of freewill offerings, till Jehovah shall say it is enough; your offerings are accepted; then come up to the House of the Lord, and be taught in his ways, and walk in his paths; yea, enter his sanctuary; and receive the oil of joy for mourning, and the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness.

[29 December 1844, discourse by Amasa Lyman:]

Now I say unto you come try all what your teachers tell you and you will receive light & wisdom knowledge and truth, wash yourselves, keep yourselves clean for the lord will have clean vessels and he is a god of order therefore we must have our bodys washed and anointed that we may be clean Also our feet that we may receive our Endowment and hands Laid on to Exalt ourSelves to the highest glory and Exaltation. But there are some gone out from us that have no order. They ordained kings and Priests and know not them Selves nor understand the order of the kingdom, and they drew away some with them. But the time will come that they will say Lord Lord have we not prophesied in thy name Cast out devils in thy name Laid hands on the sick and done many mighty works in thy name But the Lord will Say depart from me ye workers of Iniquity for I know you not for ye have not kept the commandments as it becomes Saints. Amen.

38

[31 December 1844, remarks by Heber C. Kimball:]

If we [are] to become Kings and Priests unto God we must make our children just as happy as they can be & we must be rulers over them to give them their inheritance.

He [Joseph Smith] proceeded to confer on elder Young, the President of the Twelve, the keys of the sealing power, as conferred in the last days by the spirit and power of Elijah, in order to seal the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the hearts of the children to the fathers, lest the whole earth should be smitten with a curse.

This last key of the priesthood is the most sacred of all, and pertains exclusively to the first presidency of the church, without whose sanction and approval or authority, no sealing blessing shall be administered pertaining to things of the resurrection and the life to come.

27***////**i n the / Evning received the washing / of my feet by Sarah Wfhitney]

The despised and degraded son of the forest, who has wandered in dejection and sorrow, and suffered reproach, shall then drop his disguise and stand forth in manly dignity, and exclaim to the Gentiles who have envied and sold him — "I am Joseph; does my father yet live?" or, in other words, I am a descendant of that Joseph who was sold into Egypt. You have hated me, and sold me, and thought I was dead; but lo! I live and am heir to the inheritance, titles, honours, priesthood, sceptre, crown, throne, and eternal life and dignity of my fathers, who live for evermore.

He shall then be ordained, washed, anointed with holy oil, and arrayed in fine linen, even in the glorious and beautiful garments and royal robes of the high priesthood, which is after the order of the Son of God; and shall enter into the Holy of Holies, there to be crowned with authority and power which shall never end.

The spirit of the Lord shall then descend upon him like the dew upon the mountains of Hermon, and like refreshing showers of rain upon the flowers of Paradise.

His heart shall expand with knowledge, wide as eternity, and his mind shall comprehend the vast creations of his God, and his eternal purpose of redemption, glory, and exaltation, which was devised in heaven before the worlds were organized; but made manifest in these last days.

39

for the fulness of the Gentiles, and for the exaltation of Israel.

He shall also behold his Redeemer, and be filled with His presence, while the cloud of His glory shall be seen in His temple.

The Lord has led this people all the while in this way, by giving them here a little and there a little, thus he increases their wisdom, and he that receives a little and is thankful for that shall receive more and more, and more even to the fullness of the eternal Godhead: there is no stopping place, but the weak capacity of man cannot understand it unless the spirit of the eternal God is in their hearts, and then they can comprehend but a little of it.

The next thing we will speak of will be the reward that will be bestowed upon the resurrected Saints. This is something upon which all inspired men have spoken and written; and it is a theme that rejoices the hearts of the Saints while contemplating it.

The Saints will not receive their crowns of glory until after their resurrection. When the curse in part shall be removed from the world; when wickedness and abomination shall be known no more in the land, then will the Saints come forth clothed with immortality, and be crowned with power and glory as a reward for all their labors. No person will be crowned with power in the eternal world, (we are to be kings and priests to God to all eternity,) unless they have been ordained thereto in this life, previous to their death, or by some friend acting as proxy for them afterwards, and receiving it for them. What is it to be kings and priests? It is to have honor, authority and dominion, having kingdoms to preside over, and subjects to govern, and possessing the ability ever to increase their authority and glory, and extend their dominion.

In the City of Nauvoo in 1845 I received the washing of my feet.

[p. 2] President Brigham Young as president of the whole church anointed brother Heber

40

C. Kimball first, this being according to the order in which the ordinances of the Lords House are at all times first communicated to the children of men that he who holds the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven to minister to men on earth as President Brigham Young now does, should confer the ordinances upon some faithful man who should in turn minister to him according to the pattern of heavenly things.

This is the order observed by the Prophet Joseph, he first baptized Oliver, then Oliver baptised him. [p. 3]

Entry No. 1. Jan. 8th 1846.

Marinda Pratt, & Leonora Taylor Assembled in Pres. B. Young's Room No. 1. Dressed

themselves [in] Holy Robes. The hymn now let us rejoice in the Day of Salvation, was sung and Elder Heber C. Kimble offered Prayer at the Alter after offering up the Signs of the Priesthood. Pres. Brigham Young proceeded to anoint Br. Heber C. Kimble and Vilate his wife- — and pronounced the following blessing namely

Bro Heber C. Kimble in the name of Jesus Christ we pour upon thy head this Holy oil & we anoint thee a King and Priest unto the most High God & in & over the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Days Saints and also Israel in this the Holy Temple of the Lord, at Nauvoo the City of Joseph State of Ills. & I seal upon you power to bind on Earth & it Shall be bound in Heaven & whomsoever thou Shalt loose on Earth shall be loosed in Heaven, & whomsoever thou shalt curse Shalt be cursed, & whomsoever thou shalt bless, shall be blessed & I anoint thy head that it may be sound & thy brains shall be quick to think & to regulate thy whole body. & thine ears to hear the cries of the Poor & needy of thy Brethren, who shall come to thee for council & thine eyes that thou mayest see and understand the things of God--& that thou mayest behold Angels & thy mouth that [p. 4] thou mayest speak forth the great things of God & Seal upon you all the blessings of thy Progenitors Even Abraham Isaac & Jacob-- & even as Far back as the Priesthood: & I say that thou shalt live to a good old age Even to three score & ten & longer if thou desire it — & thou shalt have Power to redeem thy progenitors & thou shalt have power over thy Posterity & shall Save all of them & bring them into thy Kingdom we also seal upon thee all the power & blessing of the Holy Reserection Even to the Eternal God head & no blessing that thy heart can conceive will be withheld from you & in the name of the Father & of the Son & of the Holy Spirit Amen — He then anointed Sister Vilate Kimble a queen and Priestess unto her Husband [H.C. Kimball] in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Days Saints & in Israel. & pronounced all the blessings upon her head in common with her husband.

/s/ John D. Lee

41

7, 1846; Book end title: "W. Richards" in gold leaf; C.H.D., CR/342/3/box 4. Second anointing blessing given to Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball officiating; Evan Melbourne Green, Clerk; Recorded by C. W. Wandell Smith; Received 11 January 1846.

[Entry] No. 2.

Sunday Jan 11th 1846. 31 minutes to 7 P.M. Assembled in Pres. Brigham Youngs Room No. 1. in the atic Story of the Lords House. Pres. B. Young Heber C. Kimble, Orson Hyde, P.P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, Willard Richards, John Taylor, Amasa Lyman, N.K. Whitney, Geo. Miller Edmund-- Ellsworth, Mary Young, Vilate Kimble Leonora Taylor, Elizabeth An Whitney & Elizabeth Ellsworth. Bro. J. Taylor started the hymn This Earth was once a garden place all being clothed in Priestly garments [robes]--Pres. B. Young Prayed, all having nelted [knelt] a round the Alter--previous to prare [prayer] they all arose - sang a Hymn & offered up the signs of the Holy Priesthood - then Br Heber C. Kimball proceeded to anoint and consecrate Pres. Brigham Young a King & a Priest unto the most High God over the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints & over the whole House of Iseral-

Brother Brigham Young, I pour this holy, consecrated oil, upon your head, and anoint thee a King and a Priest of the Most High God over the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, and unto all Israel: and I anoint thy head, that thy brain may be healthy and active and quick to think and to understand and to direct thy whole body and I anoint thy eyes that they may see and per- ceive, and that thou mayest not be deceived in what thou beholdest, and that thy sight may never fail thee: and I anoint thy ears that they may be quick to hear and communicate to thy understanding; and that thou mayest hear the secret deliberations of thy enemies, and thereby thou shalt be enabled to overreach their designs: and I anoint thy nose that thou may scent, and relish the fragrance of the good things of the earth: and I anoint thy mouth that thou mayest be enabled to speak the great things of God, and confound all the wisdom of man, and put to nought all who shall raise up to oppose thee, in all countries where thou goest for thou shalt build up the Kingdom of God among many people, and in the midst of mighty nations: so thy glory shall be established, and whosoever thou shalt bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whomsoever thou shalt loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven; for there shall be given unto thee crowns, and kingdoms, and dominions; and thou shalt receive all thy heart shall desire; and thy soul shall be satisfied with a multitude of blessings which thou shalt receive; for princes shall bow at thy feet and deliver unto thee their treasures; and thou shalt teach them the principles of salvation. And I seal thee up unto Eternal Life, that thou shalt come forth in the morn of the first resurrection, and receive all these blessings, in their fulness. And thou shalt attain unto [the] Eternal Godhead, and receive a fulness of joy, and glory, and power; and that thou mayest do all things whatsoever is wisdom that thou shouldest do, even if it be to create worlds and redeem them: so shall thy joy be full to the praise and glory of God: Amen.

Elder Heber Chase Kimbal then anointed Mary An Young a Queen & Priestess unto her husband [Brigham Young] in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints & in the house of Iseral-

Sister Mary Ann Young, I pour upon thy head this holy, consecrated oil, and seal upon

42

thee all the blessings of the everlasting priesthood, in conjunction with thy husband: and I anoint thee to be a Queen and Priestess unto thy husband, over the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints; and thou shalt be heir to all the blessings which are sealed upon him, inasmuch as thou dost obey his counsel; and thou shalt receive glory, honor, power and exaltation in his exaltation: and thou shalt be a strength in thy mind for thou shalt have visions, and manifestations of the Holy Spirit, and the time shall come that Angels shall visit thee, and minister unto thee, and teach thee: and in absence of thy husband shall comfort thee, and make known his situation.

Thou shalt be a wise counsellor to many of thy sex, and they shall look unto thee for precept and or example.

Thou shalt be noted and honored for thy generosity, and the freedom and good feelings with which thou shalt relieve the wants of the distressed; and the disgression [discretion] with which thou shalt act in thy sphere [p. 5] in all things. And I seal thee up unto Eternal Life, thou shalt come forth in the morning of the first resurrection and inherit with him all the honors, glories, and power of Eternal Lives, and that thou shalt attain unto the eternal Godhead, so thy exaltation shall be perfect, and thy glory be full, in a fulness of power and exaltation.

And the glory, honor and power shall be ascribed unto the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost:

Amen.

I spent the day in the temple about 3. 0 my family came up into the temple also Bro. Kimball's Bro. 0 Hyde's Bro N.K. Whitney's we had a good visit and they met in my room together with others & I received my last anointing under the hands of brother H. C. Kimball —

[Entry] No. 3. Jan. 12th 1846. at 12. o. clock. Assembled in Room No. 1. Pres Brigham Young, Heber C Kimble, P.P. Pratt, Amasa Lyman, John Taylor, Geo Miller, Isaac Morley, Orson Spencer, Ezra T Benson, Newell K Whitney--after the usual ceremony pre-requisite to the ordinance of anointing — Pres Brigham Young anointed Newell Kimble Whitney a King & a Priest unto the Most [High] God--in the church of Jesus Christ of Latter Days Saints & in the House of

Iseral & among thy Brethren in this the House of the Lord Elizabeth An Whitney was then

anointed a Queen & Priestess unto her Husband N.K. Whitney, in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints & to all Iseral —

43

. . .the day I spent in the temple. In the evening Evan M. Greene; my clerk through sickness was compelled to retire from his labour. Bro John D. Lee appointed to take his place There being few records to be kept separately & apart containing the first sealings of the living & of proxy & of adoption & also that of the 2nd anointings which I found to be a great task for one man to perform therefore I employed Bro. Franklin Richard to assist in keeping those records above alluded too —

[This record indicates that Joseph Smith Jr., received by proxy on this date his second anointing. This record gives no date whatsoever for Emma receiving these ordinances.]

13 Spent the afternoon of the 13th, in the Temple, and received a promise from Heber C. Kimball to receive my second ordinances during the week upon a condition of being prayerful and faithful which was complied with to the best of my ability.

I went to the house of the Lord with my wife, Bathsheba W., and [were] sealed by President Brigham Young, in the presence of witnesses, which was duly recorded. We then received a second anointing under the hands of Orson Hyde.

On the 14th attended in the Temple and was favored with the privilege of helping to form a Quorum of Priesthood to the receiving of the Second ordinances &c.

I was among the first to receive my washing and anointings, and even received my second anointing [this date], which made me an equal in the order of the priesthood, with the right and authority to build up the kingdom in all the earth, and power to fill any vacancy that might occur. I have officiated in all the different branches, from the highest to the lowest. There were about forty men who attained to that order in the Priesthood, including the twelve Apostles and the first presidency, and to them was intrusted the keeping of the records.

In the Temple I took three more wives--Martha Berry, Polly Ann Workman and Delethea

44

Morris, and had all my family sealed to me over the altar, in the Temple, and six of them received their second anointings, that is, the first six wives did, but the last three we had not time to attend to.

2 of my family came through the washings and anointings. ..we went into room No. 1 where we being clothed in Priestly apparel-kneeled over the alter-rather before the Holy Alter and over it the sacred, the solemn covenant and sealing was entered into and ratified in the presence of 3 witnesses-From thus we were conducted to Room No. 2 where we received our anointings.

From [room No. 1] thus we were conducted to Room No 2 where we received our anointings yea. Holy anointings in the Temple of the Lord under the hands of Elder Orson Hyde this certainly produced more joy comfort and pleasure & reconciliation of feeling - than could possibly have been imagined.

The 17th, was a day of great enjoyment for me, it gave birth to the greatest blessings and an higher exaltation in the Priesthood than ever had been anticipated by me. I received my Second ordinances in the Priesthood with my wife Margaret and Sister Sariah Gibbon, under the hands of George Miller, President of the High Priest Quorum, in room No. 4 attick story of the Temple of the Lord. I was called upon by the President to open the Meeting by prayer which I complied with, with feelins of much gratitude to my Heavenly Father and my brethren that surrounded us. The Services of this holy anointing commenced at the hour of 6 o'clock in the afternoon and closed at 7. We then resumed our seat in the celestial department of the Temple and heard a number of lectures from the brethren on the principles of Priesthood pertaining to exaltation. We also listened with pleasure to the verses of Solomon Hancock, composed on the removal of the Saints to California, with a number of others of the songs of Zion.

Monday, the 19th [January 1846], went with my wife to the Temple in the morning to attend to our sealing, but there was a council to be held, which put other business [first].

In the evening I went into the Holy of Holies with Emily, my wife, where, by President

45

Brigham Young we were, according to the holy order of the Priesthood, sealed together for time and all eternity and sealed up unto eternal life and against all sin except the sin against the Holy Ghost. May God keep us faithful in his ordinances. Amen! 75. "Experiences in the Life of Rhoda Ann Fullmer," p. 7 of typescript, BYU Special Collections. Original in CHO; January 19 & 20, 1846

On December 15, 1845 we [David Fullmer and her] received our endowments and on the 19th of January, 1846, in the Temple of the Lord at Nauvoo we received our second anointings and ordination and the next day, the 20th of January we attended to the last anointings, that of the feet.

Willard Richards born Jan 24 1804 Hopkinton Middlesex Mass-- & Jenntte Richards, (was born Aug 21--1817. Walkerford Chaidgley Lancashire England deceased) were sealed Husband & wife for time & all Eternity Amelia Elizabeth Peirson acting proxy for & in behalf of the (deceased) who died at Nauvoo; July 9th 1845 Done in presance of Heber Chase Kimble Orson Hyde & J.D. Lee Pres. B. Young officiating at the Alter done at 5 minutes to 9. evening —

Jennette Richards was Sealed to Willard as his wife for time and all Eternity--& with him attended to all the ordinances pertaining to the House of the Lord--to & including the washing of feet in the days of Pres. Joseph Smith Jr the first Prophet of the Church of the Last days-

F. D. Richards

[Note: This entry was in the handwriting of the recorder John D. Lee, though F. D. Richards was the clerk on the occasion of the performance of the ordinances.]

January 22d 1846. Visited the Temple with Wealthy she was sealed to me by the Prophet B. Young and then we repaired to the High Priests room where we were Anointed King and Queen, Priest and Priestess to the Most high God for Time and through out all Eternity by P.P. Pratt as mouth...

February 1st I labored in the Temple the last 8 working days Annointing in the High Priests Room, learnt the ordnance of the washing & anointing of feet for burial.

46

On the 23rd of December, myself and wife Elizabeth received our washing and anointing in the Temple, and on the 19th of January, 1846, we were sealed, agreeable to the order of the Holy Priesthood, for time and for all Eternity. On the 22nd of January we received our second anointing, on which day my Father and Mother also received theirs.

Jan 22 at 7 o clock PM myself and wife received the ordinance of sealing by Pres Brigham Young. The next morning at 10 o clock we received the ordinance of second anointing by Pres H.C. Kimbal.

I received with Artimesia and Minerva the sealing and further endowments. The Spirit, Power, and Wisdom of God reigned continually in the Temple, and all felt satisfied that during the two months we occupied it in the endowment of the Saints, we were amply paid for all our labors in building it.

During this time in the winter of 45 and 46 not withstanding my sickness I went into the Temple in Nauvoo and received my endowment by washing and anointing and was sealed to my wife Sophia for time and all eternity, and afterwards we[re] annointed the second time a king and queen in the Kingdom of God which annointing in the reality is the third annointing with which I have been annointed in the name of the Lord; for I received my first washing and annointing in the House of the Lord in Kirtland, Ohio, and had neglected to mention it in its place [in this life's review],

Tuesday morning the washing commenced in both departments the Sealings were attendfed] to day of myself Heber C. Kimball and A. Lyman -- The 2nd anointings likewise carried on in Room no 2 & 4 0. Hyde P.P. Pratt 0 Pratt officiating in No 2 & 4 G A Smith & W. Richards are absent on account of sickness - —

47

I am daily under direction of the Trustees at the Temple Office and on Dec. 8, 1845 I received an Endowment in the upper room of the Temple in Nauvoo, the City of Joseph, also was sealed to Bishop Newel K. Whitney as his son on Jan. 17, 1846 and at the same time Dorcas Adelia Moore and Loenza A. Pond were sealed to him as daughters and the two daughters were sealed to me to be my wives for time and eternity by Pres. Brigham Young, and on 28th or 29th Jan. 1846 I received my Second Anointing with my two wives, under the hands of Pres. Orson Pratt in the North East Room in the upper part of the Temple in the City of Nauvoo.

[Antoine W. Ivins Journal 15:73-4 records: "Jos. C. Kingsbury with wife gets 1st and 2nd anointing."]

Sealed to Sally Coburn and Lydia Goldthwait as wives for time and eternity and we the same Day was anointed King and Priest, and Queen and Priestess by the hand of Heber C. Kimball, for which we feel to thank the Lord for his mercy towards us, by the power of the Priesthood with the Lord confered upon his church in these last days.

John Milton Bernhisel (June 23, 1799)

Tyrone, Cumberland Co. Pennsylvania this day came to the sacred Alter in the upper room of the "House of the Lord" founded by Prest. Joseph Smith (Martyred) the Prophet Seer and Revelator to the church and there upon gave himself to Prest. Joseph Smith (martyred) to become his son by the law of adoption and to become a legal heir to all the blessings bestowed upon Joseph Smith pertaining to exaltations even to the eternal Godhead with a solemn covenant to observe all the rights & ordinances pertaining to the new & everlasting covenant as far as now is or shall hereafter be made known unto him done in the presence of Patriarch John Smith, Pres. Brigham Young Heber C. Kimbal, Amasa Lyman, 0. Hyde & George A. Smith at 4 0. clock P.M.

Friday -- The endowments were continued in the evening. I again repaired to the House of the Lord with my father, Udney, my wife Emily, my daughter Elsie P., and Miss Matilda Stoel. In the course of the night my father, daughter, and Miss Matilda received their washing and anointing, and about 11 o'clock I with my wife Emily, received my second anointing and was ordained a King and Priest unto God in room no. 4.

48

It will be seen by the above diagram that there are kingdoms of all sizes, an infinite variety to suit all grades of merit and ability. The chosen vessels unto God are the kings and priests that are placed at the head of these kingdoms. These have received their washings and anointings in the temple of God on this earth; they have been chosen, ordained, and anointed kings and priests, to reign as such in the resurrection of the just. Such as have not received the fulness of the priesthood, (for the fulness of the priesthood includes the authority of both king and priest) and have not been anointed and ordained in the temple of the Most High, may obtain salvation in the celestial kingdom, but not a celestial crown. Many are called to enjoy a celestial glory, yet few are chosen to wear a celestial crown, or rather, to be rulers in the celestial kingdom.

Brother Franklin D. Richards, a worthy young man, who has received the fulness of the priesthood in the Temple of God, will be our successor to the editorial department of this paper, and also will take the presidency of the whole church in the British Isles under the direction and instruction of the Council of the Twelve Apostles. With all confidence we resign our trust into his hands, being satisfied of his competency and ability to perform the work assigned him; and what is still better, we know that God is with him. We leave our blessing upon him in the name of the Lord, and say to the Saints, listen to his counsel and instruction; in doing so you shall be blessed with life and salvation. He that blesseth him shall be blest, and he that curseth him shall be cursed. Whomsoever he blesses shall be blessed, and whomsoever he curses shall be cursed. --We are happy to introduce him through the medium of the STAR to the Saints, and we can assure them that the more they become acquainted with him the better they will like him. Uphold him by your faith and prayers, by your love, and by your good will, and heaven will bless you.

Winter Quarters, 0.., Frid., Feb. 5th 1847.

Morning pleasant. Pres. B. Young's health is improving. * * * About 9 I was washed in salaratus and water from head to foot, afterward in spirits, then anointed in like manner by Louisa [No. 3] and Rachel [No. 6] (as I told them) preparatory to my burial. They both were very kind and attentive to me. In the eve. I felt some better. Weather warm.

49

So, she, Nancy Wilson, departed this life at the age of 41 years having been the mother of eleven living children, nine of them on my hands. . .[she] died having been in the church 15 years, having become a member at the age of 26 years during which time she has attended every ordinance of the Gospel that has been offered in her day, and in fact all that I know anything about. She was baptized for the remission of her sins and had hands laid upon her for the reception of the Holy Ghost, and confirmed in the Church and has received blessings from time to time.

At the temple at Nauvoo she received her washings and anointings even to become a queen and a priestess, after which time she attended to one other ordinance which was to wash the feet of her husband and anoint him to be her king and priest and Savior, that she might have claim on him at the resurrection... Nancy Wilson, who knew and died in triumph of faith in the gospel of the Son of God, after having lived and obeyed all the laws and ordinances of the Church. . . died full in the faith of a glorious resurrection with the just and was buried on the Missouri Bluff just above Kanesville [20 July 1851],

Now we see the reason why they are to wear crowns, for they will be made Kings and Priests on the earth: the Lord then, must have some way to give this kingly power.

Do you understand this, brethren and sisters? If you were to speak, I should hear innumerable voices respond, "Yes, we understand it; the Lord has revealed the ordinances; we know how the sons and daughters of God obtain this kingly office, while living here in this mortal tabernacle.

We will pass over that; suffice it to say, that death does not wrench it from them; for they are to be kings, not for a day, not for this short life, but they are to remain to all eternity kings; having their thrones, and acting in the duties belonging to their kingly office. Compared with this, what are all the little, petty kingdoms of this earth worth? They are not worth one snap of the finger. The kings of the world exercise a certain authority over the nations — over their subjects, issuing laws, and framing governments, and controlling them; and do you suppose that the Saints will be kings in the eternal world, and sit down upon thrones, in silence, not exercising the functions of their office? No. That is not the way the Lord has organized His creations; if there are kings, you may depend upon it they will have kingdoms under their control; they will have authority and dominion; they will give laws to those subjects over whom they bear rule; they will control them by the priestly office, for it is combined with the kingly office, and neither can be separated and contracted in His feelings, in His views and disposition, that He would limit the authority of the priestly office to this little globe we inhabit? No. God has more expansive views; His works are without beginning, and without end; they are one eternal round. What kind of works are they? They are to make creations, and people them with living beings, and place them in a condition to prove themselves; and to exercise the kingly and priestly office to redeem them after they have suffered pain, and sorrow, and distress; and to bring them up into the presence

50

of God; that they, in their turn, may become kings and priests for other creations that shall be made, and that shall be governed and ruled over by those possessing the proper authority.

I have received the holy anointing, and I can never rest till the last enemy is conquered, death destroyed, and truth reigns triumphant.

Letter Extract of the First Presidency:

Think not, 0 ye Elders of Israel! that your eternal heirship is won, and immutably secured, because you have attained to a portion of the Holy Priesthood, and a few of its initiating ordinances, while as yet your life and the security of all your great and glorious blessings in hope and prospect, are as a vapour before the sun; as yet depending wholly on your meekness, faith- fulness, and perseverance to the end, in everything good. Think not that you are legally entitled to even one wife, while you live on this earth, unless you are sealed up to everlasting lives, by the will and decree of the Eternal Father, and a knowledge of the fact has been communicated to you, through the proper source, and not direct, to you in person. And consider that the blessings you have hitherto received, through the mercies of Him who loveth you, even your Father in heaven, will all be wrested from you, like David's of old, should you err like him.

The Priesthood of God is the great supreme, legal authority that governs the inhabitants of all redeemed and glorified worlds. * * * The Kingly authority is not separate and distinct from the Priesthood, but merely a branch or portion of the same. The Priestly authority is universal, having power over all things; the Kingly authority until perfected is limited to the kingdoms placed under its jurisdiction: the former appoints and ordains the latter; but the latter never appoints and ordains the former: the first controls the laws of nature, and exercises jurisdiction over the elements, as well as over men; the last controls men only, and administers just and righteous laws for their government. Where the two are combined and the individual perfected, he has almighty power both as a King and as Priest; both offices are then merged in one. The distinctions then, will be merely in the name and not in the authority; either as a King or a Priest, he will then have power and dominion over all things, and reign over all. Both titles, combined.

51

will then not give him any more power than either one singly.

[See also 23 July 1843 where Joseph Smith said he would advance from prophet to priest (which happened 28 Sep 1843) and then to king of this earth (which took place 11 Apr 1844). Kings who rule over the different nations, and kings who rule under God in eternity are different functions. The former king has no priesthood, while the latter king holds a fulness of the priesthood.

. . .the Saint who has been sealed unto eternal life and falls into transgression and does not repent, but dies in his sin, will be afflicted and tormented after he leaves this vale of tears until the day of redemption; but having been sealed with the [holy] spirit of promise through the ordinances of the house of God, those things which have been sealed upon his head will be realized by him in the morning of the resurrection.

To have such a promise [of receiving eternal lives] so sealed upon our heads, which no power on earth, in heaven, or beneath the earth can take from us, to be sealed up to the day of redemption and have the promise of eternal lives, is the greatest gift of all. The people do not fully understand these things and have them not in full vision before their minds, if they did I will tell you, plainly and in honesty, that there is not a trial which the Saints are called to pass through that they would not realize and acknowledge to be their greatest blessing.

Says one, "How will you explain this to me?" We understand we are to be made kings and Priests unto God; now if I be made the king and lawgiver to my family, and if I have many sons, I shall become the father of many fathers, for they will have sons, and their sons will have sons, and so on, from generation to generation, and, in this way, I may become the father of many fathers, or the king of many kings. This will constitute every man a prince, king, lord, or whatever the Father sees fit to confer upon us.

In this way we can become King of kings, and Lord of lords, or Father of fathers, or Prince of princes, and this is the only course, for another man is not going to raise up a kingdom for you.

52

President Young thought none would inherit this earth when it became celestial & translated into the presence of God, but those who would be crowned as Gods & able to endure the fulness of the presence of God, except they might be permitted to take with them some servants for whom they would be held responsible. All others would have to inherit another kingdom, even that kingdom agreeing with the law which they had kept.

[Heber C. Kimball] came to our room [and] said he did not feel well, spoke of an ordinance which he had previously taught and said that only one of his wives had attended to it. he then spoke of our Savior and his wives but more particularly of Mary [and her] faithfulness to her Lord Said Mary felt to say that she intended to devote her time to him for he had told her that his time was short and he must soon leave them Now she says I design to attend to his words and teaching Let Martha and the rest say what they would. The Savior then told Martha to let Mary alone for she had chosen the better part which should never be taken from her Now said He follow me and you shall see my father This she did even to the tomb and was the first to see him resurrected from the grave. 99. Journal of Discourses, Vol. 5:18-19; Discourse by Pres. Heber C. Kimball, delivered in the Bowery, Salt Lake City; April 6, 1857.

If I obtain all the blessings of the Priesthood, all the endowments, all the blessings that God has to confer upon us in this probation, and keep those things sacred while I live, I am then as pure and holy as it is possible for a man to be while in the flesh. Then, if my wives are one with me, my children and their posterity will partake of those blessings which have been placed upon me. Every blessing conferred upon me tends to benefit my posterity. Those blessings are for every righteous man; and the blessings that are conferred upon faithful men and women in their holy anointings and sealings will rest upon their posterity after them for ever and for ever, through their faithfulness; and there is no end to it. * * * If we live so as to attain to the principles and fulness of perfection and to secure the promises of eternal lives, then those blessings will rest upon us and our children. * * *

We are now attending to matters that will answer every purpose, until that Temple is completed. Those who go through their endowments now and are sealed up unto eternal lives, those blessings will stick to them, if they will stick to the blessings and promises that are made over unto them, and step forward with one heart and one mind to do the will of God as made known to them from time to time from this stand.

53

On the seventeenth of July 1857 we received our sealing by Brigham Young the prophet of the Lord in the house of endowments at the Alter of the Lord Belinda acting Proxy I first had Elizabeth Cambell sealed to me for eternity. Afterwards I had Sarah Catharine Gibbs sealed to me for eternity Afterwards I had Belinda Miles sealed to me for time and all eternity Brigham also blessed me and my wives with an endless Priesthood and posterity and the gift of eternal lives through faithfulness.

If they had been sanctified and holy, the children of Israel would not have traveled one year with Moses before they would have received their endowments and the Melchizedek Priesthood. But they could not receive them, and never did. Moses left them, and they did not receive the fullness of that Priesthood. *** The Lord told Moses that he would show himself to the people; but they begged Moses to plead with the Lord not to do so. 102. Journal History, Friday, December 18, 1857; Manuscript History of Brigham Young, 1857, p. 904.

Some of the Brethren inquired upon Pres. Young to make inquiries upon certain teachings of Joseph concerning the endowments. Elder Geo. A. Smith said that Joseph taught that but one king and priest could be anointed at one meeting in a private room dedicated by permission to anoint in, and but one person could be anointed in a day, but in the Temple several could be anointed in a day, but at each anointing the meeting was dismissed and then came together again. Pres. Young said that Joseph taught him to take the quorum* and anoint them kings and priests to God, and when he got through with that begin at the beginning again to administer for the dead. When the Temple is finished and a place duly prepared we should not be confined to any particular number in sealing and anointing. The rooms next to the east pulpit, or over it will be the place to attend to the second anointings. Under the pulpit in the west end will be the place to offer sacrifices; there will be an altar prepared for that purpose so that when any sacrifices are to be offered they should be offered there.

*[ln the Wilford Woodruff journal for this date it reads:]

President Young said Joseph taught him to take the Quorums of the Church in their order beginning at the oldest of each Quorum & Anoint them Kings & Priests unto God, when I got through with that begin at the beginning again to administer for the dead.

54

Passing through the veil into the "Celestial glory" ends the first anointing. . . .arrived at this point, the candidate, is prepared to proceed to the second anointing. This I have never received, and for various reasons, not the least of which was, that very few have received this as yet, and not until the new temple at Salt Lake City if finished. I had also heard hinted, that the "second anointing" was administered without clothing of any kind; and more over as will be seen hereafter, I had reason to doubt somewhat though not entirely to discard Mormonism.

The sectarian world, as we call them, is a professed church of God, without the Priesthood. Sectarians have not the Priesthood; but all of them who live according to the best light and intelligence they can obtain through faithfulness to what they believe, as taught unto them, will receive a kingdom and glory that will far transcend all their expectations, imaginations, or visions in their most excited moments, whether in their falling-down power, jumping power, or squawling power. All they have ever desired to anticipated they will receive, and far more; but they cannot dwell with the Father and Son, unless they go through those ordeals that are ordained for the Church of the Firstborn. The ordinances of the house of God are expressly for the Church of the Firstborn. * * *

Let us so live, that when we receive our bodies in the resurrection, we will be received in the presence of the Father and the Son. This kingdom is designed expressly to prepare the people to dwell with God the Father and his Son Jesus Christ, and all the world beside will receive according to their works upon the earth. This is a joy that is unspeakable; it is a glory beyond the capacity of our minds at the present time to appreciate. It is a great joy to me.

I will give you a few words of doctrine, upon which there has been much inquiry, and with regard to which considerable ignorance exists. Br. Watt will write it, but it is not my intention to have it published; therefore pay good attention, and store it up in your memories. * * *

Woman must atone for sins committed by the volition of her own choice, but she will

never become an angel to the devil, and sin so far as to place herself beyond the reach of mercy.

* * *

I wish to say to my young sisters, if you can go into the hands of a man, that will lead you into the kingdom of heaven, and exalt you there to become an Eve--a queen of heaven--the wife of a god; and you can remain with that man whom your soul delights.

55

Cyrus Standford and wife get second anointing in the Historian's Office.

We talk a great deal about our religion. It is not now my intention to deliver a discourse on this subject, enumerating facts and producing evidences in my possession which are unanswerable, but I will merely give a text, or make a declaration, that our religion is simply the truth. It is all said in this one expression — it embraces all truth, wherever found, in all the works of God and man that are visible or invisible to mortal eye. It is the only system of religion known in heaven or on earth that can exalt a man to the Godhead, and this it will do to all those who embrace its laws and faithfully observe its precepts. This thought gives joy and delight to the reflecting mind, for, as has been observed, man possesses the germ of all the attributes and power that are possessed by God his heavenly Father. * * *

There are some of the sealing ordinances that cannot be administered in the house that we are now using [the Endowment House]; we can only administer in it some of the first ordinances of the Priesthood pertaining to the endowment. There are more advanced ordinances that cannot be administered there; we would, therefore, like a Temple, but I am willing to wait a few years for it. I want to see the Temple built in a manner that it will endure through the Millennium. This is not the only Temple we shall build; There will be hundreds of them built and dedicated to the Lord. This Temple will be known as the first Temple built in the mountains by the Latter-day Saints. And when the Millennium is over, and all the sons and daughters of Adam and Eve, down to the last of their posterity, who come within the reach of the clemency of the Gospel, have been redeemed in hundreds of Temples through the administration of their children as proxies for them, I want that Temple still to stand as a proud monument of the faith, perseverance and industry of the Saints of God in the mountains, in the nineteenth century. * * *

Some of us are not dependent on the Temple for our endowment blessings, for we have received them under the hands of Joseph the Prophet, and know where to go to bestow the same on others. You may ask me whether the leaders of this Church have received all their endowment blessings. I think that we have got all that you can get in your probation, if you live to be the age of Methuselah; and we can give what we possess to others who are worthy.

A few words in explanation of this may not be amiss. When the Holy Priesthood, which is after the order of the Son of God, is upon the earth, and its organizations, ordinances, gospel, powers, authorities and blessings are enjoyed by the children of men; then by means of sealing powers and keys, and an everlasting covenant, the sons of men become the sons of God by regeneration, and are entitled, every man in his order, to the privileges, exaltations, principalities

56 and powers, kingdoms and thrones, which are held and enjoyed, by the Great Father of our race; and all these are obtained through the law of natural increase, and the saving of that which the Father puts into our power. * * * We have not yet received our kingdoms, neither will we, until we have finished our work on the earth, passed through the ordeals, are brought up by the power of the resurrection, and are crowned with glory and eternal lives. Then he that has overcome and is found worthy, will be made a king of kings, and lord of lords over his own posterity, or in other words: A father of fathers. This latter rendering, is more strictly in accordance with the original text.

Not only after this [the marriage of her daughter, Clara, to John A. Young], my husband one day told me that a select few had been chosen to receive the Second Endowments, and that we were to be honored with the same privilege. This I was told was one of the highest honours that could be conferred upon us, as the Second Endowments had never been given to anyone since the Mormons left Nauvoo.

When we reached the Endowment Flouse, we ladies were shown into one room and our husband into another. We then proceeded to array ourselves in our robes, caps, and aprons--the same as when we received our first Endowments--and when all was ready we were ushered into another room by one of the brethren, who was also dressed in his Temple robes. There we met our husband and several other brethren, all dressed the same way. We sat down, and oil was then poured upon the head of our husband by two of the brethren--Daniel H. Wells and another- -and he was ordained a King and Priest to all eternity. After that, we two wives were anointed in like manner, and ordained Queens and Priestesses, to reign and rule with our husbands over his kingdom in the celestial world.

When a man revolts against the work of God and against the counsels of his servants, and will not be subject to the Holy Ghost which dwells in him, he commits treason against God, and against his authority on the earth, and neither the Father, nor the Son, nor the Holy Ghost will take up their abode with such a man, and he may bid farewell to the guidance of good angels.*** But the day will come when the Lord will choose a people out of this people [church of the Firstborn], upon whom he will bestow his choicest blessings.

I met with the Presidency and Twelve at President Young's Office at about 12 o'clock. The subject of the Endowments & 2nd Anointings was presented when President Young said that the

57

order of the 2d Anointings was for the persons to be anointed to be clothed in their Priestly robes the man upon the right hand and wife or wives upon the left hand, the administrator may be dressed in his usual clothing or in his Priestly robes as he may see fit. The meeting should be opened by prayer then the administrator should anoint the man a King & Priest unto the Most High God, then he should anoint his wife or wives. Queens & Priestesses unto her husband. There should be but one man anointed at any one meeting. If more than one man is anointed in a day, they should come together and open by Prayer as though there had not been any meeting before and thus continue to the end. President Young said when a woman was anointed a Queen to a good man, and he died & the woman was sealed to another man for time, it was not necessary for her to be anointed a Queen again, but if she was anointed a Queen to a man who was not worthy of a wife & she is sealed to another man, she should be anointed a Queen unto him. When a good man dies & his wives have not been anointed Queens unto him they may be anointed Queens to him after his death without any proxy.

31st ... To day the first Presidency & twelve commenced to give Second Endowments. Bro Wells & family received theirs....

Tuesday Jan. 1, '67... the same parties with the addition of Joseph A. Young met at the endowment house. Geo. Q Cannon and his three wives were anointed: the services were the same as yesterday.

I met with the Presidency and 8 of the Twelve and Joseph F. Smith. Joseph A. Young and Brigham Young Jr. dressed and prayed. Then President Brigham Young gave his son Joseph A. Young his second anointings. It was decided by President Young that we dress and offer up the signs of the Holy Priesthood before we give the 2d anointing and only one man and his wives in one day at one place.

58

We met at the Endowment House at 12 o'clock, dressed & prayed after which Brigham Young Jr. received his second anointing.

January 6, 1867... I met in the Prayer Circle with the President & Twelve C. C. Rich prayed & E.T. Benson was mouth . . . While at President Youngs House in the Evening for Prayer He divided the Twelve in 3 companies to attend to the Second Anointings.

Br. W Woodruff Notified me in person that I could receive my 2nd anointing on Saturday Feb. 9th at 2 ocl P.M. Accordingly I sent to my wives Emeline & Abigail. According they arrived on Friday afternoon at my Residency in the city.

9th Saturday all being Ready we proceeded to the Historian's Office & there Received in Regular Order My 2nd anointing & Blessings also my Wives Emeline Jane Elizabeth & Abigail all there in Regular Order with there Blessings....Br. George A. Smith & Woodruff officiated. Br. Smith being mouth.

Will the time ever come that we can commence and organize this people as a family? It will. Do we know how? Yes; what was lacking in these revelations from Joseph to enable us to do so was revealed to me. Do you think we will ever be one? When we get home to our Father and God will we not wish to be in the family? Will it not be our highest ambition and desire to be reckoned as the sons of the living God, as the daughters of the Almighty, with a right to the household, and the faith that belongs to the household, heirs of the Father, His goods. His wealth. His power. His excellency. His knowledge and wisdom? Ought it not to be our highest ambition to attain to this? How many families do you think there will be then?

59

The following received their second anointings on the following days:

3rd: Jesse N. Smith

4th: Charles Lambet & wife

5th: Samuel Malin & 2 wives

6th: Samual Merrill & wives

7th: Edward Stephanson; John Murdock & 1 living wife & 3 dead 8th: Joseph W. Johnson & 3 living wives, and 1 dead

15th: James Agee Smith (literal descendant of John Smith who was saved by

Poccahontas.)

I met at 8 o'clock & gave Isaac Whittaker & 2 wives their second anointing & in a 2d meeting I gave Brother Earl and wife their second anointing & I took down my back room and cleared the ground. * * *

Tuesday 30 Saw Pres. Young by Direction of Pres. Young informed Bro. Geo. A that he wish him to give me my 2nd anointing at 10 o clock I met with the circle & received the same this was an unexpected blessing to me, I pray I may never act so as to deprive me of the Blessings promised.

This fall I was called to go to Salt Lake City with my wives to get our second anointings. We left home on the 16th of September and it was the rainiest day I had seen for years and it truly seemed that the Devil was determined to prevent our going, however we got started about one o'clock p.m. and got into the city at daylight on the 17th of September.

We went to the Endowment House and Heber C. Kimball and D. H. Wells officiated in giving us our second anointings. My wife, Melissa, stood proxy for my wife, Eunice, and then Melissa, and Mary received their blessings.

After the services we had a very pleasant visit with our Brethren and went home thankful that we had lived and been considered worthy to receive that blessing.

60

October 2 Went with wife to President B Youngs Mansion to receive our blessings or second anointings which is a fullness of our endowments. President E Snow presided assisted by Robert Garner John M Moody F. B. Wooley J W Crosby assisting.

I was quite unwell with a severe cold in my lungs but went to the Historian's office & attended 2nd Anointing of (Rosetta Benbow) then went to Endowment House & gave endowments to 32. I sealed my son Wilford Woodruff, Jun & Emily Jane Smith in the bonds of matrimony over the alter according to the order of God.

. . .In the fall, Willber and myself went to Great Salt Lake City. In '62, I moved my first wife to St. George. She was very sick in '63 and '64. We then all settled in Pine Valley, and got some good farming land, and in 1867, I was called upon to take my wives and go to Salt Lake to get our second anointings.

Prest. Smith, on rising. . . .spoke of the Solemn Assembly which convened in Kirtland nearly forty years ago, and of the great blessings poured out by the Lord on that occasion. He felt glad to see present here today perhaps forty witnesses of what then took place. He alluded to councils which had been held in Nauvoo, and to the fact of the Prophet Joseph calling the Twelve together, and, at a meeting called for that purpose, of Joseph and Hyrum the Patriarch admi- nistering to Brigham Young, then President of the Twelve Apostles, what is known as the Second Anointing, and instructing him to administer in like manner to his brethren of the Twelve, which he did to the nine of the Twelve who were then at home. He stated that the Twelve were then instructed to administer in the ordinances of the Gospel for the dead, beginning with baptism and the laying on of hands. This work was at once commenced. It soon became apparent that some had long records of their dead, for whom they wished to administer. This was seen to be but the beginning of an immense work, and that to administer all the ordinances of the Gospel to

61

the hosts of the dead was no light task. The Twelve asked Joseph if there could not be some shorter method of administering for so many. Joseph in effect replied — "The laws of the Lord are immutable, we must act in perfect compliance with what is revealed to us. We need not expect to do this vast work for the dead in a short time. I expect it will take at least a thousand years."

Brother George A. Smith, in the foregoing recital incidentally remarked that Elder Sidney Rigdon had never received the Second Anointing, nor the keys pertaining to baptism for the dead. The speaker warmly and most earnestly exhorted the people to energetically prosecute the work on the St. George Temple, so that President Young and the Twelve might have the opportunity of going therein to communicate the keys of knowledge and power which the Prophet Joseph had conferred upon them, and which could only be conferred on others in a Temple, (p. 66)

* * *

Brigham Jr & My self wrote out a part of the Ceremony of the Endowments *** I spent the Evening with President Yg He told me their was no necessity of dressing in the Temple Clothing while giving the Second Anointing any more than in administering it first anointing or ordaining He also said that we should use the Bible in the garden & Bible & Book of Mormon in the Telestial room and add the Covenants to it in the Terrestrial room.

I gave the second anointing to Philemon Christopher & Syrena Dustin Merrill.

Wed 7 . . .also Sarah Johnson McDonald anointed to A.F. McDonald his wife. Elizabeth Graham McD. as proxy — Fanny Van Cott McDonald was also anointed to A.F. McDonald — W. Woodruff anointing. H.W. Bigler held the horn.

Wed 14 at the Temple. Recorder at the font for 468. J McAllister for 324 also Recorder in the Sealing Room at 28 Second Anointings. Bro. W. Woodruff anointed, myself & D. H. Cannon held the horn. * * * A. P. Winsor had his 2nd Anointings.

Sat 24 Bro. W Woodruff anointed A. P. Winsor held the horn- * * * I was mouth in consecrating & dedicating oil for 2 Anointings.

Wed 28. At Temple. I officiated as Recorder at Font * * * Also attended at 9. Second Anointings.

62

February 24th 1877 myself and wives received our sec'd anointing under the hands of Elder Wilford Woodruff, to whom we were subsequently adopted as son and daughter.

Sat 24. At the Temple attended as Recorder at 21 Second Anointings Bro. W Woodruff anointed A.P. Winsor held the horn. * * * I was mouth in consecrating & dedicating oil for 2 Anointings.

March 13, 1877 — Tuesday. Today I took Abigail and Sarah into the Temple and we received great and glorious blessings and powers which few of the children of Adam ever attained to.

I Wilford Woodruff, bear testimony, that Prest. B. Young, told me to go to work and prepare the Temple for giving Endowments and I had made the preparations according to his acceptance. And on the 9th of Jan. 1877 we repaired to the Temple, and for the first time the Ordinance of baptism for the dead was performed in the Temple of St. George. * * * Prest. Young requested me to take charge of the Temple, which I did. * * * On the 8th of April 1877 W.

Woodruff was appointed in the public assembly to take charge of the Temple and preside over it.

* * *

Prest. Young gave me power and authority to give second anointings and seal women to men as I might be led by the Spirit of God. * * *

Salt Lake City March 26, 1883 /s/ Wilford Woodruff

[Statistics from Jan 9. to Mar. 31. 1877:]

Jan Feb Mar Total No of Second

63

Anointings.

2

73

52

127

Second Anointing. Living 6 dead 2 total 8.

Sealings and second anointings by myself, [p. 219] * * * My wife Ann received her second anointings and acted with me for her Father and Mother in their second anointings, [p. 254]

Went to the Temple. Bro. W. D. Johnson Jr and wife J. G. Brown and wife had endowments for some of their dead, after which they obtained their 2d Annointings.

Monday 22 September 1879 the evening of the fifty second Anniversary of the Angel delivering of the Plates of the Book of Mormon to Joseph Smith the Prophet of the Lord, I dedicated the house and room also blest the Oil after which my Ruth Anointed my feet and wiped them with the hair of her head, then kissed them after the pattern as written in the Testament of the Lord Jesus Christ.

The Lord informed the prophet that the temples were the places to receive "the fullness of the priesthood." He said: "for a baptismal font there is not upon the earth, that my Saints may be baptized for those who are dead; for this ordinance belongeth to my house," (a temple) "and cannot be acceptable to me, only in the days of your poverty, wherein ye are not able to build a house unto me."

These additional powers include all the keys that belong to the holy priesthood on the earth, or were ever revealed to man in any dispensation, and which admit men and women within the veil. They enable them to pass by the angels and the gods, until they get into the presence of the Father and the Son. They make of them kings and priests, queens and priestesses to God, to rule and reign as such over their posterity and those who may be given to them by adoption, in the great jubilee of rest which is near at hand. It gives them the right to the tree of life, and the "seal of the living God in their foreheads," spoken of by John the revelator. No marvel, then, that the Lord requires sacred places for such great and glorious things--"the fullness

64

of the holy priesthood" to be restored.

I went to Washington, 6 miles (from St. George); when I returned home I found Zina there comfortably visiting with the family. She and I went to Bro. McAllister's who very kindly consented to suspend some of the rules of the Temple, or rather the usages and accommodate Zina and me by giving me "second annointing" and attending to the ordinance of adoption for us and family on the following day instead of as usual on Friday.

My wife, her mother, Nelly and I went to the [St. George] Temple according to previous arrangement with Zina and Bro. McAllister and spent the forenoon in sealings of adoptions -- My father's family and my mother's father, mother and children all were adopted to my father, then father and mother were adopted to grandfather Huntington also all his brothers and sisters were adopted to him.

Next grandfather and mother were adopted to Joseph Smith. After that my wife and I received second annointing. I received second annointing for grandfather Huntington and Zina for his two wives.

At Cedar Springs (on my way home from St. George) I had an interview with old Sister Huldy Barns, a wife of Heber C. Kimball, now 77 years old; and from her I learned the following items of intelligence, that are perhaps no where written. They were the natural outgrowth of conversation and question.

"In the temple at Nauvoo she assisted in giving endowments as long as anyone. There were 90 persons that received their second annointings. None was given to the dead by proxy."

[The above statement by sister Barns is not at all accurate as can be seen from the "Book of Anointings", Nauvoo Temple. There were over 200 living who received their second anointings, and there were several given by proxy to the dead.]

Those who are ordained kings and priests unto God will receive all things either in time or eternity and will become counselors to the Savior and dwell and labor with him throughout all eternity and we are the noble spirits who were appointed to come and dwell on the earth in the last dispensation and to labor with him in the building up his Kingdom and prepare it for his coming, to prepare the world for the judgments of God.

65

and James Rollins to President John Taylor.

President John Taylor St. George--May 22nd 1882

Dear Brother

Mrs Elizabeth Gilbert, (who is in her Eighty-second year) is here for the purpose of obtaining her Second Anointing, together with her husband, Algernon Sidney Gilbert, who Died when Zion's Camp went up to Missouri-My Brother Henry Rollins, Stands as Proxy for her husband--his uncle.

I also wish to know if the sealing of My Mother to Mr. John M. Burk, in Nauvoo can be changed. As she did not wish to be Sealed to him-But Brother Young told her to let it be so for the present, and it could be changed afterward, (or words to that effect).

Must her sealing remain as it was in Nauvoo? Or she be sealed to Joseph--For that is our Desire Henry desires to be adopted into Josephs Kingdom-

Respectfully

/s/ Mary Elizabeth], [Rollins] Lightner /s/ James A. Rollins Dear President Taylor as I understand you are well acquainted with Bro James A. Rollins and his sister Mary E. who is the wife of Joseph the Prophet. It does not require a great deal of writing from me, he has had his Second Anointing, and can act for his uncle if approved. They are very much exercised about their Mother. He informs me it was understood when living at President Smith's that he was to be in his family, and would like his mother sealed to him.

Your Bro in the Gospel

John D. T. McAllister

St George

22 May/82

NB. please to answer by wire. If the Mother is to be sealed to Joseph, please to say Henry Rollins Gilbert second, and all approved. If the mother remains where she is. I will understand the usual form

JDTMA

66

Hence, while they are saviors, preach to the spirits in prison and judge the dead, we build temples and administer for them upon the earth, and thus become, as it is written, "saviors upon Mount Zion," operating and co-operating with the Priesthood behind the veil, in the interest, happiness, salvation and exaltation of the human family. Thus shall we also become legitimately and by right through the atonement and adoption. Kings and Priests — Priests to administer in the holy ordinances pertaining to the endowments and exaltation; and Kings, under Christ, who is King of Kings and Lord of Lords, to rule and govern, according to the eternal laws of justice and equity, those who are thus redeemed and exalted. * * *

"For this Melchizedek was ordained a priest after the order of the Son of God, which order was without father, without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of days nor end of life. And all those who are ordained unto this priesthood are made like unto the Son of God, abiding a priest continually." (I.V. Heb. 7)

In Genesis, inspired translation, chapter xiv, it is also stated regarding Melchizedek:

"Thus, having been approved of God, he was ordained an high priest after the order of the covenant which God made with Enoch, it being after the order of the Son of God; which order came, not by man, nor the will of man; neither by father, nor mother; neither by beginning of days, nor end of years; but of God. And it was delivered unto men by the calling of his own voice, according to his own will, unto as many as believed on his name. For God having sworn unto Enoch and unto his seed with an oath by himself, that every one being ordained after this order and calling should have [the sealing] power, by faith, to break mountains, to divide the seas, to dry up waters, to turn them out of their course, to put at defiance the armies of nations, to divide the earth, to break every band, to stand in the presence of God; to do all things according to his will, according to his command, subdue principalities and powers; and this by the will of the Son of God, which was from before the foundation of the world. And men having this faith, coming up unto this order of God, were translated and taken up into heaven. And now, Melchizedek was a priest of this order; therefore he obtained peace in Salem, and was called the Prince of peace, and his people wrought righteousness, and obtained heaven, and sought for the city of Enoch which God had before taken; separating it from the earth, having reserved it unto the latter-days, or the end of the world, and hath said, and sworn with an oath, that the heavens and the earth should come together; and the sons of God should be tried so as by fire. And this Melchizedek, having thus established righteousness, was called the king of heaven by his people, or, in other words, the King of peace."

From the above it would seem that this people possessed the power of Translation, and that they "obtained heaven, and sought for the city of Enoch which God had before taken," or which was before translated.

The principle of power also over the varied creations of God, above spoken of, pertaining to the Holy Priesthood after the order of the Son of God, has, by faith, been manifested to the world in the lives and actions of numbers of the servants of the Most High. The power of Enoch, wherein he caused the earth to tremble, whilst mountains fled at his command, and rivers were turned out of their course, has already been referred to. By this power, exercised in mighty faith, Melchizedek stopped the mouths of lions and quenched the violence of fire [I.V. Gen 14:26]; by it the waters of the Red Sea were divided by Moses, and the children of Israel passed through dry shod [Ex 14:21]; by it Elijah [2 Kings 2:7-8] and Elisha [2 Kings 2:14] smote the waters of the

67

Jordan and crossed on dry land; by it Daniel escaped the ferocity of the lions [Dan 6:16-23], and the three Hebrew children were delivered from the fiery furnace [Dan 3:19-27],

By this same power in the Messianic dispensation the Apostles were delivered from the bonds and imprisonment; by it Paul shook off the viper that had fastened upon his hand [Acts 28:3-6]; by it Philip [Acts 8:39] was caught away by the Spirit of the Lord after he had baptized the Ethiopian eunuch; by it John was preserved when he was cast into a cauldron of boiling oil, that it did not hurt him; by it the dead were raised, the lepers cleansed, the sick healed, devils cast out, and other mighty works performed by Jesus and His disciples; and by it Christ broke the bands of death and became the resurrection and the life, the first fruits of them that slept, the conqueror of death, the Savior of the world and Redeemer of mankind.

Again, on this continent, one of the Nephite Prophets, Jacob, the son of Lehi, records: "We truly can command in the name of Jesus, and the very trees obey us, or the mountains, or the waves of the sea." (Jacob, 4:6). By faith the brother of Jared, who held this power, said unto the mountain Zerin, Remove; and it was removed [Ether 12:30]; by it Alma and Amulek caused the walls of the prison in Ammonihah to tumble to the ground [Alma 14:26-29]; by it Nephi and Lehi wrought the surpassing change upon the Lamanites that they were baptized with fire and the Holy Ghost [Hel 5:43-49]; by it Ammon and his brethren wrought so great a miracle in the conversion of the Lamanites [Alma 17-27]; and by it also the disciples of Jesus who tarried amongst the Nephites showed forth the power spoken of in the following passage:

"Therefore they did exercise power and authority over the disciples of Jesus who did tarry with them, and they did cast them into prison; but by the power of the word of God, which was in them, the prisons were rent in twain, and they went forth doing mighty miracles among them. Nevertheless, and notwithstanding all these miracles, the people did harden their hearts, and did seek to kill them, even as the Jews at Jerusalem sought to kill Jesus, according to his word; and they did cast them into furnaces of fire, and they came forth receiving no harm; and they also cast them into dens of wild beasts, and they

did play with the wild beasts even as a child with a lamb; and they did come forth from among them, receiving no harm." 4 Nephi 1:30-33.

This same power has also been abundantly manifested in these latter days in the midst of the Saints of God, in deliverances from evil, in escapes from enemies, in the quelling of mobs, in the stilling of the angry waves of the sea, in the healing of the sick, in the casting out of unclean spirits, and in many other miraculous manifestations of the power and goodness of God, and of the authority with which He has invested His servants who are endowed and clothed upon with the Priesthood, which is endless and after the order of the Son of God.

This new and everlasting covenant reveals unto us the keys of the Holy Priesthood and ordinances thereof. It is the grant keystone of the arch which the Lord is building in the earth. In other words, it is that which completes the exaltation and glory of the righteous who receive the everlasting Gospel, and without it they could not attain unto the eternal power and Godhead and the fullness of celestial glory. Now, many may enter into the glory of God, and become servants

68

in the house of God and in the celestial kingdom of God, who are not able to abide this new and everlasting covenant; but as we are told in the Doctrine and Covenants, with them there is an end to their exaltation, but they enter not into the order of the Gods. They cannot progress through the ceaseless rounds of eternity except they abide in the covenant, and abide in the covenant, and abide the law that governs it, and the Lord will not be mocked in these things.

When he [Brigham Young] sealed a man up to eternal life, he bestowed upon him the blessings pertaining to eternity, and to the Godhead, or when he delegated others to do it in his stead, God in the eternal world recorded the act; the blessings that were sealed upon that man or that woman, they were sealed to be binding in this life, and in that life which is to come; they became part of the records of eternity, and would be fulfilled to the very letter upon the heads of those upon whom they were pronounced, provided they were faithful before God, and fulfilled their part of the covenant.

The [Nauvoo] Temple was completed so far as to give endowments therein and sometime in December [1845] I received my endowments and blessings therein, and was again sealed over the Altar.

On January first 1846 I had a son born who was named Nephi by his Father. Sometime in this month or the first of Feb I received my second anointing in the [Nauvoo] Temple.

Forty years ago [1884], when President Merril was the President in the logan Temple he gave me a great blessing while I was there with my husband having our second endowments. He said my mission on this earth was to tend the sick. He commanded me to go forth and take care of the sick. * * * It is evident that this blessing was inspired and he also said I would live long on the earth and be a queen among queens in the eternal worlds and said many more great things that I cannot remember at this time. I had to be helped into the temple but walked out without help. This had always been a strong testimony to me.

69

[Elder Erastus Snow speaking at Taylor, Utah:]

Let us be careful not to take upon ourselves these Covenants [of plural marriage] too hastily, before we have had a proper training. The Lord is trying to elevate his people upon a higher plane, to be Kings and priests unto him forever. We can only come upon this higher plane by putting away evil from our midst.

We welcome Sisters Eliza and Zina, as our Elect Lady and her Counselor as the presidents of all the feminine portion of the human race. Although few recognize their right to this authority yet we know they have been set apart as leading priestesses of this dispensation. As such we honor them. We welcome them as the honored wives of our revered and martyred prophet Joseph Smith.

A letter was reed (July 11/87) from Bro. E. G. Williams of Ogden, asking for 2nd anointings for himself and wives, living & dead, a letter was written to Prest. Shurtliff & counselors asking for information as to this Brother.

A letter was received from Prest L. W. Shurtliff, Ogden, July 22, respecting the request of Brother Ezra G. Williams for 2nd Anointing which was approved and Bro. William's letter was so endorsed for himself and wives living and dead.

Nov. 6, Sunday. These men [Apostle J. H. Smith, Pres. J.N. Smith, and L.H. Hatch] held meeting at 2 P.M. and at 7 P.M. I received a very kind and interesting letter from M.M. Steele in which he suggested that I go back to Utah and get my second anointing. 156. Samuel Bateman "Diary"; Mor/M270.1/B317; November 30, 1887.

Wednesday the 30. At Do. Got up at half past 6 o'clock. After breakfast we all went to the

70

Temple. I was ordained an elder by Bro. A. Peterson in behalf of my dead Father and got endowments for him and took my Mother through the veil and also stood proxy for my Father at the altar for my mother to be sealed to him; also took both of my wives through the veil; also my daughter, Marinda, and had our 4 oldest children sealed to us. And my wives and I received our second anointings under the hands of President Merrill and Bro. Moore. In the evening Joseph E. Taylor came to Sister Curtis's. Snowed about 2 inches in the night.

George Thomas, Sr. Received his second anointings on Nov. 30, 1887 under the hands of M. W. Merrill in Logan Temple. Martha Howells Thomas and Mary Ann Griffiths Thomas Wives of George Thomas Received their second anointings on Dec. 23rd 1887 in Logan Temple.

[Note: The two wives had already passed away prior to 1887, and therefore the work was performed for them by proxy.]

I continued to work for the firm for many months & attended to my duties as a Bishop of the 3rd Ward Ogdon & Done work in the Logan Temple for the Dead received my 2nd anointings in connection with my wives [p. 156] Br James Banes & wife was adopted in to my family & got their 2nd anointings the happy day I ever saw.

Salt Lake City Feb 24th

President Woodruff Dear Brother Will you please answer a few questions. I wish to ask. you I am the widow of Thomas. C Jones of your Circle he died soon after we came from Logan Temple working for our Dead and having our 2d Ontingins where we told to attend to the Washing of Feet at home the baby was sick after we came home so I asked Bro Jones when we should attend to it and he said we had better wait till the baby is better but he was taken sick and Died before it was attended to can that be done by Proxy or not as I feel sorry about it for he was a good man and I gave him 2 living Wives and 3 Dead ones and worked hard to help him to keep them.

[Letter from Pres. Woodruff to Eliza I. Jones; Church Archives under date:]

71

Feb. 24th, 1888.

Mr. Eliza I. Jones

10th Ward, Salt Lake City

Dear Sister:

The ordinance of which you speak, and which you say you failed to attend to before the death of your husband, is one that should not be written about, and it cannot be attended to by proxy. Your husband is dead and, so far as the ordinances is concerned, it is all right.

I spoke to Prest Woodruff respecting Peter W. Conover of Provo obtaining his Second anointings. He told me to write to him informing him that he can have those blessings upon submitting his recommend properly signed.

[See February 19, 1889 for Pres. Woodruff's action on this recommend.]

Pres. Woodruff at my request signed a recommend for Peter W. Conover of Provo & his wives to receive their 2nd Anointings. I wrote a letter to Bro. Conover enclosing his recommend. 162. Deseret News, Vol. 39:17, July 1889; Priesthood meeting. May 19, 1889; Sanpete Stake Conference, Manti; Pres. George Q. Cannon.

Jesus has given us to understand that it is impossible for his disciples to be perfect; for he says: "Be ye therefore perfect even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect." He did not mean by that that we should attain to the fulness of the godhead in this life, but that we should carry out in our lives and exemplify in our conduct those laws and principles which God has revealed, and which are the principles of perfection and godliness.

Pres. Woodruff spoke in regard to second anointings and said the Presidents of Stakes were to be judges of who were worthy to receive them, but it was an ordinance of the eternal

72

world which belonged particularly to old men.

Tuesday, Nov 19, 1889. The Presidency at the office. Prest Woodruff signed 7 recommends. It rained some during the night. Recommends were signed by Pres' Woodruff for Bro Daniel Graves & wives of Provo for their 2nd anointings. His wives names are Elizabeth Sarah Baker, Mary Newman, and Selina World.

Apr. 8. Tuesday. We went up to the Temple, which is a magnificent building

standing on the bench above the city. We did some work in the temple. I had my father adopted to the prophet Joseph Smith. I would have been sealed to my father, but as my sisters who were in the church were not present, it was thought best to postpone this work. I received my second anointing also my wife Eliza did. She also acted for my wife Mary Campbell in having her second anointing.

March 22, 1892. I went with my wives, Sarah and Prudence to Manti Temple and received our Second Annointings under the hands of President A. H. Lund.

Had a talk with Pres. W. Woodruff about sister Baratts Temple Work. Asked him for her to receive her 2nd annointing. He asked me who to; I told him Pres. John Taylor. He asked me who would represent Prest. Taylor, I told him that I intended to do so. He said that was all right and signed recommends.

Sister M. M. Barratt born January 17, 1834, at Stockport Cheshme England, was sealed to Pres. John Taylor, I being proxy. She was afterwards annointed to him.

73

[After describing the Holy of Holies room in the Salt Lake Temple, Elder Talmage makes this comment:]

This room [the holy of holies] is reserved for the higher ordinances in the Priesthood relating to the exaltation of both living and dead.

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 7th, 1893 ... At 6 o'clock I went to the [Salt Lake] Temple where I met my folks, we having received permission from Pres. Woodruff to receive our second anointings. Father [George Q. Cannon of the First Presidency] was there to perform the ceremony. Bro. [Francis M.] Lyman was also there to be with his wife Susan D. Ca Mister Lyman as she received this blessing. Father anointed and spoke the words, John D. T. McAllister held the horn [containing the consecrated oil], and Lorenzo Snow and John R. Winder were the witnesses. Sister Lyman was the first anointed in the presence of us all, she thus being the first to receive this blessing in this building. I then received mine, and my wives followed in the order of their marriages. I felt very much pleased to be thus favored. The ordinance of the washing of feet was explained by Bro. McAllister, after the anointings had been given.

It has been the rule in Logan Temple not to allow any person who had not been married under the covenant to officiate at the marriage alter in behalf of the dead. This rule, he [W. Woodruff] said was wrong and must not be acted upon in the future. The reception of the endowment enabled a person to act in behalf of the dead in any of the ordinances in the house of the Lord, except the highest [second anointing].

The Presidents of Stakes are authorized to recommend aged and faithful persons to receive their second anointings, but no others have this authority to issue recommends for this purpose.

Sunday Even not very well & spent the day at home. I had a Dream in the night — I met with Benjamin Franklin. I thought he was on the Earth. I spent several hours with him And talked over our Endowments. He wanted some more work done for Him than had been done which I promised him He should have. I thought then he died and while waiting for burial I awoke. I thought very strange of my dream. I made up my mind to get 2d Anointing for Benjamin Franklin & George Washington.

Now, the question I wanted to ask you is this: We have fourteen hundred million people on this earth, and over them there hangs a cloud of darkness almost entirely upon their shoulders. Can you tell me where the people are who will be shielded and protected from these great calamities and judgments which are even now at our doors? I'll tell you. The priesthood of God who honor their priesthood, and who are worthy of their [second] blessings are the only ones who shall have this safety and protection. They are the only mortal beings. No other people have a right to be shielded from these judgments. * * *

Three of the sisters. Sister Zina D. Young, who is the President of the sisters in the Temple, with Sister Bathsheba W. Smith, and Minnie J. Snow, her two counselors, spoke briefly of their joy in the work. Aunt Bathsheba mentioned the fact that she had received her blessings in Nauvoo under the hands of the Prophet Joseph Smith, she being now the only living woman who has so received these blessings. * * *

There's Sister Bathsheba Smith, she and I both had our endowments under the hands of the Prophet Joseph Smith. I had my second anointings and sealings under his hands. There is not a single principle in this Church that he did not lay the foundation for. * * *

In the Salt Lake Temple — A sister who died before receiving her second anointings is allowed to receive them by proxy.

At 2 pm Pres Lorenzo Snow & Bro Salmon called and stayed for 1 1/2 hours & we conversed together. He gave me a list of Salt Lake Temple work since the commencement. May 22, 1893 to March 31, 1897 showing ...*** 2d anointing 1017 living, 17936 dead.

75

April 12 1898 / Ovando C. Beebe & Clara Beebe / My Dear Children / Enclosed find a Recommend to / president Snow for your Second / Annointing I am very thankful that / I have lived to be able to grant / you and Asahel & Owen this / glorious privilege You Stand in / Need of it You are worthy of it and / it is the Highest Ordinance to be / bestowed upon any one in the Church / You will have to be Dressed in your / Temple Clothes I think Clara / had better Converse with her Mother / about the Day to go. / God Bless you & your Children / Your Affectionate Father / Wilford Woodruff // I think it would be a good plan for you / And Asahel to go together for you Both / WW

Keep this sent to Me & President Snow President Lorenzo Snow / This is to Certify that I hereby / Recommend My Son in Law (Ovando C. Beebe) And / His Wife My Daughter / Clara Beebe Worthy of their / Second Anointing They have both / of them been true & faithful in / All of their Administrations in the / Church & Kingdom of God on the Earth / Wilford Woodruff

Why did the Lord ask such things of Abraham? Because, knowing what his future would be and that he would be the father of an innumerable posterity, for he was determined to test him. * * * He [God] tries us for our own good that we may know ourselves; for it is most important that a man should know himself.

He required Abraham to submit to this trial because He intended to make him a king and a priest, to share with Himself the glory, power and dominion which He exercised.

1899: May 24, Was a good deal better. I went to the Temple with my son, Ernest, who was going upon a mission. Also my wives with me. We received our Second Anointings by Apostle Merrianor (sic) W. Merrill. I was called upon to speak to the Saints that were going through. I felt well. (p. 96)

76

Teach them [the children] to pay their tithing while they are young. You mothers, teach your children that when they get any money they should pay one tenth of it to the Lord, however little it may be. Educate them to pay their tithing in full. Then we will have a people prepared to go to Jackson County. President Smith was talking yesterday about the land of Zion. Yes, surely, this entire continent is the land of Zion, and the time will come when there will be Temples established over every portion of the land, and we will go into these Temples and work for our kindred dead night and day, that the work of the Lord may be speedily accomplished, that Jesus may come and present the kingdom to His Father. He is coming soon, too. But we will not hear His voice until we build up Jackson County. Now we should make the preparation for this. We are not only going to have Zion throughout this continent, but we will have it over the whole earth. The whole earth is the Lord's The time will come when it will be translated and be filled with the spirit and power of God. The atmosphere around it will be the spirit of the Almighty. We will breathe that Spirit instead of the atmosphere that we now breathe. But now it is for us to make the preparation, that we may be worthy to be called into the house of the Lord and receive our second blessings. I do not want the presidents of Stakes to send any person to our Temples to receive the highest blessings that have ever been bestowed upon man since the world began, until it can be said of him, "He pays his full tithing." When you find an honest faithful Latter-day Saint who is worthy of receiving His blessings, send him along. I do not care how fast they come. The time is now at hand when the Latter-day Saints can be greatly and abundantly blessed, so that they can make the preparation in its fulness.

Thanksgiving Day - 1899 - President Snow called Joseph Musser and his wife to the temple to receive "my second blessings." (Four other couples were present, none of them having plural wives.) There was a "Patriarchal Blessing" given in connection with second anointings.

In the year 1900 my wife and I were called to go to Utah to receive our second anointing in the temple of the Lord, so we started by rail in company with Bro. Hyrum S. Phelps & part of his family, on the 17th day of August. On arriving there, we went to work in the Logan temple where we worked for about three weeks & did a good deal of work for my wife's folks who were dead. We also did work for some of my folks & the sealing for my grandparents for five generations

77

back. We also rec'd our second anointing & returned home in Sept. 1900, feeling thankful that we had been counted worthy to receive such great blessings in the house of the Lord.

[Charles Hopkins Allen was born in New York on October 15, 1830. He lived shortly in Kirtland, Ohio, and then moved to Nauvoo with the saints. He personally knew the Prophet Joseph, Brigham Young, Eliza R. Snow and other church leaders. His parents received their "blessings" in the Nauvoo temple during the winter of 1845-46 before moving west with the saints. In 1912 he was ordained a patriarch by Elder James E. Talmage and passed away in 1922, in Mesa, Arizona, a faithful member of the church.] 183. John M. Whitaker Journals; BYU Special Coll, Mor/M270.1/W58/V.2/p.512; Originals at Univ of Utah; September 19, 1900.

Thursday the 19th of September 1900 was the OUTSTANDING DAY OF OUR LIFE, President Frank Y. Taylor was authorized by the First Presidency of the Church to invite Ida and I TO RECEIVE OUR SECOND ANNOINTINGS, AND IN THE TEMPLE, ON THIS MOMENTOUS DAY, President John R. Winder, President of the Temple, explained fully what the 2nd annointings were and told us of the glorious promises offered to those who keep the commandments of the Lord and live a worthy and holy life: that these were the highest of all earthly blessings and no one receives them but those selected by the President of the Church. No one else has that right. How wonderful they were, what hopes they inspire, what a strength they give, what anticipations they awaken in our hearts and how wonderful it is to feel a nearness to the Lord by righteous living. We were thrilled in expectancy and joyous in hopes of living worthy to secure all that was promised us. We have started on an everlasting journey and all depends on whether we endure until the end.

Elder Adelbert Henderson and wife,

Clifton, Idaho

Dear Brother,

In harmony with the wishes of President Snow, to the effect of the leading brethren and sisters of the several Wards and Stakes of Zion, should be granted the privilege of receiving their second blessings in the House of the Lord, and in view of your continued faithfulness and untiring activity in the great cause our Father has established, for the exaltation of his children,-- it affords us true pleasure to enclose you herewith your Temple recommend, duly signed, with the invitation to proceed to the Temple at your earliest convenience and receive this great blessing your second annointing.

May the Lord bless and preserve you in the purity of these high covenants, we are with

78

warmest regards.

Your Brethren,

George C. Parkinson

Solomon H. Hales

Joseph S. Giddes

Thurs. 3. Went to the Temple of the Lord with Flora and received our Second annointings. Prest. John R. Winder officiating. The greatest day of my life.

After the opening exercises Prest Lorenzo Snow spoke upon the Subject of the giving of Second Anointings. He said that this blessing brought a person to a greater knowledge of the things pertaining to God and his purposes in the earth, that the glorious things of the kingdom were made clear to the understanding of man. Therefore it would be a very serious thing for a man to apostatize after he had received this great blessing. He warned the Presidents of Stakes that they should exercise great care when giving recommends to those of his stake to receive these great blessings and should know by their work their integrity and devotion to the cause of the Gospel, for the responsibility would rest upon them if any were recommended unworthily or that apostatized. * * *

Prest. Jos. F. Smith then made a few remarks on the Subject of the Second Anointing. He said that it was the crowning blessing of and the highest gift to be conferred by the Melchizedek Priesthood. Elders should do something to be worthy to receive this great blessing and there are many ways out of the ordinary routine duties by which a man could earn the good will of God to the obtaining of this blessing. Every man should be determined to place every thing on the altar even to the laying down of life itself for the gospel sake in order to be truly worthy of this blessing.

Meeting of Presidency, Apostles & Church Officers. Prest. Snow said that persons who are recommended for second anointings should be those who have made an exceptional record, that they are persons who will never apostatize. Prest. of Stakes assume a great responsibility when they recommend persons for second anointings. Now I wish to say a word in regard to going back to Jackson County. The time is nearer than many of us suppose. I want to impress upon the minds of all that they cannot go back to Jackson County unless they obey the law of tithing. Jos. Smith

79

had a book in which all of the names of tithe payers was recorded which was called the Book of the Law of the Lord. This Church as a Church will never go back to Jackson Co. till the people learn to observe the law of the Lord. I fear that some of the bishops do not fully believe in the law of tithing - Excellent remarks.

Bro. Jos. F. Smith said - No man receives a fullness of the Melchizedek Priesthood till he has received his second anointings. Men recommended for this sacred ordinance should be men of God whose faith and integrity are unquestioned.

30 May 1901 [Thursday]: . . . This afternoon my wife and I took train for Salt Lake City to get our second anointings and attend 100th anniversary of Brigham Young's birth.

31 May 1901 [Friday]: Went to Temple this morning presenting recommend which Pres. Snow gave me about 3 months ago. We had not come before for our second anointing as the baby was young, and because we desired to become settled in our new home.

I was called to speak during the services of the temple. Dwelt principally upon the necessity of keeping awake during temple services and keeping awake in our duties. I consider this a very great honor to be called to speak in the House of the Lord. Bp John R Winder annointed us and Elder Madsen instructed us. These are the greatest blessings that are bestowed upon man in the flesh. We were both melted in tears and I felt the patriarchal spirit of pure affection more than I have done before. The witnesses to the annointing were John R. Winder annointed. Adolph Madsen assisted John Nicholson Recorder.

21 June 1901 [Friday; at their home; he was the Wasatch Stake President in Heber Utah at this time]: This evening from about 9-30 to 12 O.C. my wife and I attended to the second part of the ordinance of second anointings. We besides the ordinance itself sang "We thank thee 0 God for a prophet," conversed concerning our duties to each other and children, read from John XII: 1- 8 verses, read the Rev. on the Eternity of the Marriage Covenant, Section 132. We dedicated [the] room for the purpose of this meeting. Closed by singing: "Oh my father thou that dwellest." Anna was mouth in preliminary prayer, I gave the dedicatory prayer and the benediction. The spirit of the Lord was with us and we felt nearer together than usual: were much encouraged in pressing onward in an endeavor to succeed in life. We fasted during the day and broke our fast together a little after 12 O.C.

President Cannon. Pres. Brigham Young left St. George on 16 April 1877 for Salt Lake City and on the 17 April Prest. Young blessed me and set me apart to do sealings, adoptions, 2nd Anointings and all work

80

in this holy Temple. This was done in Bellvieu (sic) at the house of Brother Jacob Gates. I rejoice in this work and hope the time is not far distant when the temple will be filled with saints laboring for their dead. Be attentive and calm; see and hear what is done and said. Keep a record of what you do.

Christmas day 1901 at home.

I thought of the desire I expressed to Brother [F.M.] Lyman that his son Richard and wife should receive a certain ordinance in the Temple, which they have since received, and I don't know of any two people who more greatly appreciated it. /s/ John R. Winder

Second Blessings same as second anointings — Joseph B. Keeler.

Stake President can recommend someone who is dead and do it by proxy. Stake Presidents personally recommend them and personally responsible.

Worthiness, fitness, unshaken integrity, didn't matter whether in presiding position or not, those who have gathered to Zion, those who do have presiding positions ought to have them.

We cannot speak too emphatically on this subject to our brethren who are on missions, by way of caution against the infraction of their covenants, and in condemnation of those who do this for the purpose of impressing others with their self-importance when they boast of having received "the highest blessings," conveying the idea that they are more advanced in those things than some of their fellow laborers. "The secrets of the Lord are with them that fear him," and they who do not "fear him" sufficiently to keep to themselves that which was only intended for them and which they are forbidden to make known to others, prove themselves unworthy to receive the fulfillment of the promise of God, to "crown them with honor, immortality, and eternal life."

I obtained the ear of Presidents Heber J. Grant and Anthony W. Ivins and presented the following matters to them which they approved:

81

"Fourth, that in the ceremony of the Second Endowments the name of the husband should be given after the words, your husband in the anointing and again the sealing of the anointing."

Called upon Presidents Grant & Ivins and presented to them the rulings & instructions given & on record pertaining to the Second Anointings.

January 1, 1926. I went through the temple for Samuel York who was dead. My son, Jesse L., also went through and received his endowments and sealed to Miss Lucile Cottam. My wife Julia Ann went through and received her second anointing at the same time.

Only in the temple of the Lord can the fulness of the Priesthood be received. Now that temples are on the earth, there is no other place where the endowment and the sealing powers for all eternity can be given . No man can receive the keys of exaltation in any other place. Joseph Smith has said that "the Saints have not too much time to save and redeem their dead, and gather together their living relatives * * * before the earth will be smitten and the consumption decreed falls upon the world." When that day comes those who have professed to believe in the latter day work, and who have rejected the doctrine of temple building and the ceremonial endowments therein, will find themselves shut out of the kingdom of God. This subject occupied the mind of the Prophet Joseph Smith for several years before his death, for the Lord revealed to him all things pertaining to the work in the temples, and he revealed them unto others that the work might on. In the Temples the Saints are performing the ordinances which will insure, through faithfulness, the fulness of the blessings of the kingdom of God , (p.57)

Latter-day Saints believe in this progression in eternity until, eventually, we become worthy through knowledge, wisdom, humility, and obedience, to be like God, and then to have the privilege of being made equal in power, might and dominion (D.C. 76:95), and to possess all that the Father hath (D.C. 84:38) as members of "the Church of the First-born." (D.C. 76:54,94.)

Elijah was clothed with the fulness of Priesthood and by this authority all things done in

82

the name of the Lord are made valid. * * *

The Church of the Firstborn

Each person baptized into the Church is under obligation to keep the commandments of the Lord. He is under covenant, for baptism is a "new and an everlasting covenant." (D&C 22:1) When he has proved himself by a worthy life, having been faithful in all things required of him then it is his privilege to receive other covenants and to take upon himself other obligations which will make of him an heir, and he will become a member of the "Church of the Firstborn ." Into his hands, "the Father has given all things." He will be a priest and a king, receiving of the Father's fulness and of his glory. Is this worth having? It cannot be obtained without some effort. It cannot be obtained without knowledge of the things of God. We frequently hear quoted these words of the Lord to Joseph Smith: "It is impossible for a man to be saved in ignorance." In ignorance of what" the philosophies of the world? No! In ignorance of the Gospel truth — the saving principles and ordinances by which salvation comes! These must not only be understood, but they must be lived! These must not only be understood, but they must be lived! Knowledge of them will not in itself save us! Obedience thereto will! And then will come the fulness of knowledge, bringing with it wisdom, power and dominion. And the fulness of these blessings can only be obtained in the temple of the Lord ! * * *

In the evening I performed the ordinance of sealing Maud May Babcock to President Brigham Young, Willard Young acting for his father. I also administered Seconds to her.

I wrote Prest. Heber J. Grant as fol:

Dear Pres. Grant:

If the following named brethren. General Authorities of the Church, and their wives have received their Second blessings, the Salt Lake Temple Records do not disclose that fact, I therefore conclude that they have not except possibly Pres Hart who may have received his blessings in the Logan Temple:

J. Reuben Clark Jr.

Charles H. Hart

Antoine R. Ivins

Samuel 0. Bennion

John H. Taylor

[GAin 1933]

[GA in 1906]

[GA in 1909]

[GAin 1933]

[GAin 1933]

I understand that it is in order for a member of the Council of Twelve to recommend worthy members to the President of the Church to receive their Second blessings.

83

Accordingly, I recommend that these brethren and their wives be invited to receive their blessings.

It was from him [Joseph Smith] that I learned that the highest dignity of womanhood was to stand as a queen and priestess to her husband, and to reign for ever and ever as the queen mother of her numerous and still increasing offspring.

Mr. N. B. Lundwall

P.O.Box 2033 May 25, 1940

Salt Lake City, Utah

Dear Brother:

Regarding your proposed new book on "Temples of the Most High", I suggest that you confine your statistics to those which have already been approved by the General Authorities for publicity. Even some already published by the Arizona Temple, by Brother Frank T. Pomeroy, are now withheld from the general public. No statistics should be given out by any of the Temples until the items are first submitted to the First Presidency. Bishop Christiansen was right when he answered you to this effect.

Again, thanking you for a copy of "The Vision", I remain

Sincerely yours.

/s/ David O. McKay

December 10, 1942:

I attended regular Thursday], meetings. At the 10:-A.M. meeting of the Presidency, the Twelve and the Patriarch held in the Temple, the matter of allowing the administration of second blessings was considered. I brought up the subject at our last Quarterly meeting of the Twelve held in the Temple Sept. 29th last. I made quite an extended talk on the subject at that time at the conclusion of which it was decided by vote to present the question to the Council of the First Presidency, the Twelve and the Patriarch. To-day all were present except Geo. Albert Smith, Richard R. Lyman and Sylvester Q. Cannon and I suggested to Pres. Clawson that he bring the question forward, which he did. I had a chance to explain, and it was decided that the four

84 members of the Council, viz. J. Reuben Clark Jr., Albert E. Bowen, Harold B. Lee and the Patriarch Jos. F. Smith should be privileged to receive theirs and others whom the members of this council may recommend and the Council sustain. Pres. Grant appointed me to administer these blessings. I suggested that Jos. Fielding Smith be appointed to assist me in this work. We are to make the appointment, i.e. Jos. Fielding & I, for the brethren.

I have anxiously looked forward to this action.

The records show that there have been 32,495 such blessings administered in the Church and that during the last 12 years there have been but 8 administrations. Thirteen of the 32 General Authorities had not had theirs and at least two others who have had them with their first wives have later wives not yet anointed to their husbands.

December 24, 1942:

I obtained permission of Pres. Grant to see him at his home. I found him in bed and his condition seemed worse than I had expected to find. I gave him a blessing, and recommended that he issue recommends to all the General Authorities and their wives who have not received their second blessings and give it [to] them for Christmas which he approved and authorized also approved Stephen L. Chipman & Wife whom I recommended. I reported to Joseph Anderson, who had recommends made. These I took to the President and he signed them. I returned the signed recommends to Joseph Anderson, the President's Secretary, for distribution. I feel that this day's accomplishments has been inspired and is a wonderful accomplishment. May the Lord be praised for ever.

This is one of the most happy days of my life. I am sure it will endure over Christmas. December 31, 1942:

This has been a wonderful year for me and my family. . . .1 have also been instrumental in renewing the former practice in the Church of administering Second Anointings to faithful members, the practice having gone practically into disuse, only eight such blessings having been administered in the past twelve years. Up to twelve years ago there had been administered in the Church thirty two thousand plus of such blessings. The day before Christmas I was instrumental in getting Pres. Grant to sign recommends for thirteen of the general authorities and their wives and the wives of two others of the Council to their husbands; also a recommend for Stephen L. Chipman and wife, he having had his previously. I am sure that the Lord has inspired what I have been able to do along these lines. Pres. Grant, in our council meeting of a few weeks ago appointed me to administer these blessings and at my request appointed Elder Jos. Fielding Smith to assist me. We are the only ones in the Church having this authority by appointment.

October 14, 1943:

Attended 10:00 A.M. meeting of the First Presidency, the Twelve & the Patriarch. The council approved my recommendation that 2nds be offered the following: Harold S. Snow of St. George Temple, El Ray Christiansen Pres, of Logan Temple and David Smith, Pres, of Idaho Falls Temple.

August 12, 1949:

85

I attended quarterly meeting of the Twelve where I presided and presented my views respecting the non administration of seconds, which received approval with the request by motion made by Stephen L. Richards that I present the matter to the Presidency if I could get a hearing, either to them alone or in the Council of the First Presidency & the Twelve.

August 18, 1949:

At the 10:00 A.M. Council meeting of the Presidency and Twelve I read a paper of 5 or 6 pages deploring the neglect on our part in not administering Second blessings as formerly. The paper and other statements made by me in connection therewith were accepted 100%.

[Excerpts from the paper referred to are given here:]

To the Members of the First Presidency

and the Quorum of the Twelve:

Dear Brethren:

For a long time I have felt that I would like to express to you the disappointment I feel that we have practically discontinued the administration of Second Anointings in the Church, and to give to you some of the reasons why I feel as I do.

I have not been able to bring myself to feel that the Lord is pleased with us in neglecting such an important and sacred endowment, which He has given us to be administered in His holy temples to worthy members of His Church.

The Second Anointings were given by revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith to be administered to worthy members of the Church, both the living and the dead; and from the days of the Prophet Joseph to the days of President Heber J. Grant that practice continued.

[Quotes: D&C 124:40,41 and D&C 124:47,48; and then says:] These things' I understand to mean and include the Second Anointings, a neglect to administer which in the temples reared for that purpose will be attended by the Lord's displeasure, and bring upon us cursings instead of blessings, wrath, indignation and judgments. We calculate to give the Elders of Israel their washings, and anointings, to attend to those last and more impressive ordinances without which we cannot obtain Celestial thrones . . . .Joseph Smith's Teachings, p. 362.

This refers directly to the Second Anointings. Nowhere else in Church ordinances are men made kings and priests unto the Most High God.

In olden times, kings in Israel were anointed such by the Prophets of God. Should not those who are to become kings and priests and attain to Godhood be anointed thereto while here on earth? That is the nature of the work of Second Anointings .

Every man and woman who has received his or her first endowments has received a PROMISE that through faithfulness they would be privileged to receive the Second Anointings.

"Brethren and Sisters, if you are true and faithful, the day will come when you will be chosen, called up and anointed kings and queens, priests and priestesses, whereas you are now anointed only to become such. The realization of these blessings depends upon your

86

faithfulness." (Endowment Ceremonies, p. 1x2.

Thousands of good and faithful men and women are dying without receiving a fulfillment of the promise made them in connection with the temple ceremonies.

When living members receive their Second blessings, or anointings, they are given a charge that they must not speak of those things to anybody; that only those who are invited by the President of the Church are to receive them, and that none others are supposed to know anything about them.

Formerly, the Stake Presidents made their recommendations for Second Anointings to the President of the Church, and when approved by him the individuals so approved received their invitation from the President of the Church, and on presentation of that recommend to the Temple President of the temple district where the individuals resided, the temple president officiated for them. The Stake Presidents had SPECIAL recommend books for that purpose.

About 1928 an incident occurred which so incensed the First Presidency that they had all the recommend books brought in to the President's office, and instructions were given that no recommends of that character should be given by stake presidents thereafter.

The Twelve were authorized to make recommendations; but their recom- mendations were rarely ever acted upon favorably, so that the administering Seconds almost entirely ceased. In twelve years, from 1930 to 1942, when these facts were tabulated, but eight such blessings were administered in the Church. Only EIGHT blessings in twelve years!

The following tabulation of Second Blessings administered in the temples where such blessings were administered will no doubt be of interest to you:

Temple

Period

Living Dead Total

Salt Lake

Logan

St. George

Manti

Nauvoo

To Dec. 10, 1942

To Oct. 13, 1931 3,139

To Jan. 13, 1938 1,885

To Dec. 12, 1929 2,407

In Jan. & Feb. 1846

14,847 6,226 21,073

1,229 4,368

1,619 3,504

1,143 3,550

406

Totals .... 22,278 10,217 32,901 The incident above mentioned which so exasperated the First Presidency was as follows: A brother who had received his Second Blessings, while speaking in a priesthood meeting in one of the Idaho stakes, told the brethren that they all should have their Second Blessings. Of course that was a serious infraction of the charge which he received when he had his Second Anointings; but I have never learned of any serious consequences to follow, except the action on the part of the Authorities, discontinuing the administration of those blessings in the Church.

It appears to me that the mistake made by the good brother in Idaho was not so serious as to justify letting those sacred ordinances come into disuse in the Church. I think now is the time to act; with such modifications as to details as the brethren might feel to make, insuring that these blessings be administered only to those who are worthy to receive them. * * *

87

If there is condemnation resting upon us for our neglect, the longer we delay action the greater will be our condemnation. . . .

Temples under construction now and in the future should be provided with a room for the administration of these blessings

alone, to be known as the Holy of Holies, for if we do not move in the matter before us, some others coming after us will do so for it must be done, and temples should be designed and constructed with that thought in mind.

It is to be hoped that this communication will not be shelved and forgotten without full consideration by this Council. For several years these matters have given me great mental anxiety and spiritual concern, and but for want of courage I would have sought an opportunity to be heard years ago. I do not want to leave this sphere of action without VIGOROUSLY protesting our indifference and neglect.

Sincerely and affectionately your brother,

GEORGE F. RICHARDS, President, Council of Twelve.

December 7, 1949:

I went to the temple at 11:00 a.m. and assisted Elder Jos. Fielding Smith, administered Seconds to Preston D. Richards and wife Barbara, and the members of Emigration Stake Presidency and their wives.

January 6, 1950:

I went to the Temple by appointment, and administered Second blessings to three of the general authorities and their wives. Elders Eldred G. Smith [GA since 1947], Milton R. Hunter [GA since 1945] and Bp. Thorp B. Isaacson [GA since 1946], Bro. T. B. Isaacson stood as proxy for Samuel F. Ball who is dead & Betsy Hollings Richards for Adena Christena Anderson Ball.

April 20, 1950:

I obtained permission from President Geo. Albert Smith for my Sons Oliver and Ray and their wives to receive their Second Anointings.

Washings, Anointings

Mormon

Second anointing

"A rather common phrase at times in Mormon communities was the phrase the "second endowments."

Very little information can be gathered about the "second endowments."

88

SECOND ANOINTINGS

The "Second anointing" was rather clearly a temple ordinance. It seemed to have something to do with elevating the rights or privileges or authority of an already "endowed" person (initiate) to a level "equal" with some select group of persons already high in authority.

(In Nauvoo, ILL. in the Winter of 1845)

". . .a few men had dispensations granted them to enter into plural marriages which were thought to be the stepping-stone to celestial exaltation. Without plural marriage a man could not attain to the fullness of the holy priesthood and be made equal to our savior."

The first floor will be devoted to an assembly room, rooms in the wings of the block U annex. The second floor will be devoted entirely to ordinance rooms. The third floor will include a large assembly room, similar to that on the top floor of the Salt Lake Temple, where sacred assemblies are held on rare occasions.

Eternal life is life in the presence of the Father and the Son. Those who receive it become members of the "Church of the Firstborn" and are heirs as sons and daughters of God. They receive the fulness of blessings. They become like the Father and the Son and are joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, [p. 9] * * *

We must continue to the end; we must obey the commandments. We must keep the ordinances. We must receive covenants, sealings, the sealing power, and privileges which are obtained in the temple of the Lord, and then live in accordance with them. That we must do. [p. 15] * * *

Comparatively few of the children of men will find the salvation which is found in the celestial kingdom, or in other words the exaltation which will make of them heirs of God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ — even sons of God. Those who gain this exaltation receive the fulness of the power, might, and dominion of that kingdom. They overcome all things. They are crowned as priests and kings and become like Jesus Christ, [p. 24] * * *

Those who are faithful in obtaining the priesthood and magnifying their calling become members of the Church of the Firstborn, receiving all that the Father hath; and this is according to an oath and covenant that cannot be broken. * * *

The destiny of the faithful man in this Church and the faithful woman is to become a son and daughter of God. * * *

89

Now how are we going to become the sons of God and, of course, daughters as well? How is it done? Can we become the sons and heirs of our Eternal Father simply by being baptized for the remission of our sins after we have repented and have had faith, and have had hands laid upon us for the gift of the Holy Ghost, and have come into the Church? No, it takes more than that. * * * If you would become a son or a daughter of God and an heir of the kingdom, then you must go to the house of the Lord and receive blessings which there can be obtained and which cannot be obtained elsewhere; and you must keep those commandments and those covenants to the end. * * *

The ordinances of the temple, the endowment and sealings, pertain to exaltation in the celestial kingdom, where the sons and daughters are. The sons and daughters have access to the home where he dwells, and you cannot receive that access until you go to the temple. Why? Because you must receive certain key words as well as make covenants by which you are able to enter. * * * You get your key in the temple, which will admit you. ***

Those who become servants are those who are not willing to receive these blessings in the house of the Lord and abide in them. They are not sons; they are not daughters. They are children of God, it is true, for all men are his children. But they do not inherit, and therefore they remain servants throughout eternity. * * * There will be a great many servants, but there will not be many heirs. * * *

Those who gain exaltation in the celestial kingdom are those who are members of the Church of the Firstborn; in other words, those who keep all the commandments of the Lord. There will be many who are members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints who shall never become members of the Church of the Firstborn.

So being ordained an elder, or a high priest, or an apostle, or even President of the Church, is not the thing that brings the exaltation, but obedience to the laws and the ordinances and the covenants required to those who desire to become members of the Church of the Firstborn, as these are administered in the house of the Lord. To become a member of the Church of the Firstborn, as I understand it, is to become one of the inner circle. We are all members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints by being baptized and confirmed, and there are many who seem to be content to remain such without obtaining the privileges of exaltation.

The Lord has made it possible for us to become members of the Church of the Firstborn, by receiving the blessings of the house of the Lord and overcoming all things. Thus we become heirs, "priests and kings, who have received of his fulness, and of his glory," who shall "dwell in the presence of God and his Christ forever and ever," with full exaltation. Are such blessings worth having? * * *

If you want salvation in the fullest, that is exaltation in the kingdom of God, so that you may become his sons and his daughters, you have got to go into the temple of the Lord and receive these holy ordinances which belong to that house, which cannot be had elsewhere. No man shall receive the fulness of eternity, of exaltation, alone; no woman shall receive that blessing along; but man and wife, when they receive the sealing power in the temple of the Lord, if they thereafter keep all the commandments, shall pass on to exaltation, and shall continue and become like the Lord. And that is the destiny of men; that is what the Lord desires for his

90

children. * * *

The endowments are for advancement in that kingdom, and the sealings for our perfection, provided we keep our covenants and obligations, [pp. 35-45]

FULNESS OF THE PRIESTHOOD

How Christ Gained Fulness of Priesthood. Joseph Smith said: "If a man gets a fulness of the priesthood of God, he has to get it in the same way that Jesus Christ obtained it, and that was by keeping all the commandments and obeying all the ordinances of the house of the Lord."

I hope we understand that. If we want to receive the fulness of the priesthood of God, then we must receive the fulness of the ordinances of the house of the Lord and keep his commandments. * * *

Let me put this in a little different way. I do not care what office you hold in this Church-- you may be an apostle, you may be a patriarch, a high priest, or anything else-you cannot receive the fulness of the priesthood unless you go into the temple of the Lord and receive these ordinances of which the Prophet [Joseph] speaks. No man can get the fulness of the priesthood outside of the temple of the Lord. There was a time when that could be done, for the Lord could give these things on the mountain tops--no doubt that is where Moses got it, that is no doubt where Elijah got it--and the Lord said that in the days of poverty, when there was no house prepared in which to receive these things, that they can be received on the mountain tops. [pp. 131-32] * * *

There is nothing in the teachings of the gospel which declares that men are superior to women. The Lord has given unto men the power of priesthood and sent them forth to labor in his service. A woman's calling is in a different direction. The most noble, exalting calling of all is that which has been given to women as the mothers of men. Women do not hold the priesthood, but if they are faithful and true, they will become priestesses and queens in the kingdom of God, and that implies that they will be given authority. The women do not hold the priesthood with their husbands, but they do reap the benefits coming from that priesthood, [p. 178]

Brother Robert Bushman questioned Elder Harold B. Lee at a BYU faculty meeting [sometime before 1965] about the second endowment and Elder Lee said there was no tie in with that and seeing Jesus. The second endowment is being done [inferred he had been called up to it]. Pres. McKay called some up. He refused to associate the second endowment with seeing Jesus. He refused to comment on it.

91

After a person has advanced in righteousness, light, and truth to the point that the fulness of the ordinances of the house of the Lord have been received so that he has been sealed up unto eternal life, then as expressed in the Prophet's language, the law is: "If a man commit adultery, he cannot receive the celestial kingdom of God. Even if he is saved in any kingdoms, it cannot be the celestial kingdom." (H.C. Vol 6:81) [pp. 24-25]

The President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints holds the keys of salvation for all men now living because he is the only one by whose authorization the sealing power of the priesthood can be used to seal men up to salvation and exaltation in the kingdom of God. [p. 411]

In an interview with Elder Theodore Burton on December 8, 1966 he told Kenneth W. Godfrey that the complete Nauvoo temple book was in the Salt Lake Temple. He further stated that in this book was the full ceremony relative to giving second endowments. This ceremony is confidential and only given to a person when called by the First Presidency of the Church. He also stated that temple work is done differently today than it was then in that not as many people receive their second endowments. He further stated that he had not had his second endowment as yet but that his father and mother had had theirs before their deaths.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie received his second anointings in 1966.

Temple recommends for second anointings still require the signature of the President of the Church.

What a glorious thing it is to know that the Lord has offered to each of us the fullness of the priesthood, and has promised us that if we will receive this priesthood and magnify our callings, we shall gain an everlasting inheritance with him in his kingdom! * * *

To prepare the way for the coming of Elijah and the restoration of the sealing power, because of which men may receive the fullness of the priesthood, John the Baptist came in May of 1829 and conferred upon Joseph and Oliver the Aaronic Priesthood. A short time later Peter,

92

James, and John came and gave them the Melchizedek Priesthood.

Then on April 3, 1836, in the Kirtland Temple, Elijah the prophet returned and bestowed upon them the sealing power, the power to use the priesthood to bind on earth and seal in heaven.

Then in 1841 the Lord revealed to the Prophet that "the fullness of the priesthood" was available to men only in the temple in "a house" built to his name. (See D&C 124.) And in 1843 the Prophet said: "If a man gets a fullness of the priesthood of God he has to get it in the same way that Jesus Christ obtained it and that was by keeping all the commandments and obeying all the ordinances of the house of the Lord." (D.H.C., Vol 5:244)

Let me put this in a little different way. I do not care what office you hold in the Church — you may be an apostle, you may be a patriarch, a high priest or anything else — but you cannot receive the fullness of the priesthood and the fullness of eternal reward unless you receive the ordinances of the house of the Lord; and when you receive these ordinances, the door is then open so you can obtain all the blessings which any man can gain.

Do not think because someone has a higher office in the Church than you have that you are barred from receiving the fullness of the Lord's blessings. You can have them sealed upon you as an elder if you are faithful; and when you receive them, and live faithfully and keep these covenants you then have all that any man can get. There is no exaltation in the kingdom of God without the fullness of the priesthood, and every man who receives the Melchizedek Priesthood does so with an oath and a covenant that he shall be exalted. 213. Comment by Paul Royall, 1970.

Paul F. Royall, General Secretary of the Genealogical Society, across whose desk records of all temple endowments and other ordinances must pass, stated that 13 second anointings were done last year (1970).

THE HIGHEST PRIESTHOOD BLESSING

The Lord through Moses revealed that it was his purpose to bring to pass man's resurrection and also his eternal life, or godhood; it was designed in the heavens that through priesthood powers the blessing of exaltation would be received. (Moses 1:39; D&C 128:5) * * *

The temple has been built to provide a place where the endowment, eternal marriage, and the fullness of the priesthood may be received. (D&C 124:25-28; TPJS, p. 308) The Prophet said the following regarding women in the Church:

The faithful members of the Relief Society should receive them [the keys of the Priesthood] with their husbands. (Ibid., p. 226)

93

Joseph Smith bestowed upon the Twelve apostles all the keys and authority and power that he himself possessed and that he had received from the Lord. He gave unto them every endowment, every washing and anointing, and administered unto them the sealing ordinances.

June 4- . . . President Spencer W. Kimball called me in to notify me that Dantzel and I were to report to the temple on June 9.

June 9-Dantzel and I were privileged to enter the temple on this Sabbath day to attend a special meeting at the invitation of President Spencer W. Kimball. The sacred nature of this event precludes our mentioning more about it here other than to say that it did take place, but this experience is of the greatest importance to us and to our family.

It is not necessary however for one to hold the keys of the Priesthood, that is, become President of the Church, in order to have a fulness of the Priesthood. As President Smith says: 'If we want to receive the fulness of the Priesthood of God, then we must receive the fulness of the ordinances of the house of the Lord and keep his commandments. . .No man can get the fulness of the Priesthood outside of the temple of the Lord. . . .Every man who is faithful and will receive these ordinances and blessings obtains a fulness of the Priesthood and the Lord has said that he makes them equal in power, and in might, and in dominion.'

Thus in the restoration of the Melchizedek Priesthood. . .the Lord has provided the means that men may. . .go to the temples of the Lord and receive the higher ordinances and a fulness of the Priesthood, so that if they are faithful to their covenants they may become joint-heirs with Jesus Christ.

In order for men to obtain exaltation they must not only receive the Gospel, they must receive the Melchizedek Priesthood, and not only the Melchizedek Priesthood, but the fulness of the Priesthood, meaning the fulness of the blessings of the Priesthood, which can be obtained only in the temples of the Lord through the holy endowment and the sealing ordinances of the Priesthood.

94

The entire top floor of the [Washington] temple is occupied by a single large room — the assembly room. It is here that Mormons assembled for the formal dedicatory services which consecrated the temple for its intended use. ***

The three tierd rostrums at each end of the building were occupied by priesthood representatives. Now the room is used periodically for special sessions as convened by the First Presidency.

Salvation could not come to this world without the mediation of Jesus Christ. How shall God come to the rescue of the generations? He will send Elijah the prophet. The law revealed to Moses in Horeb never was revealed to the children of Israel as a nation. Elijah shall reveal the covenants to seal the hearts of the fathers to the children and the children to the fathers. The anointing and sealing is to be called, elected, and the election made sure.

I know that God lives. I know that Jesus Christ lives," said John Taylor, my predecessor, "for I have seen him." I bear this testimony to you brethren in the name of Jesus Christ, Amen.

[Note: The reference to the anointing and sealing comes from Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 323: "The anointing and sealing is to be called, elected and made sure", and refers to the second anointing and subsequent sealing which makes a person's calling and election sure.]

D&C 131:1-4. Which temple ordinance is required for entrance into the highest degree of the celestial kingdom?

In this regard. President Joseph Fielding Smith wrote, "No man shall receive the FULNESS OF ETERNITY, of exaltation, alone; no woman shall receive that blessing alone; but man and wife, when they RECEIVE THE SEALING POWER IN THE TEMPLE OF THE LORD, if they thereafter keep all the commandments, shall pass on to exaltation, and shall continue and become like the Lord, and That is the destiny of men; that is what the Lord desires for his children." (D.S. 2:44)

I made the decision that I wanted to walk in high places — not in an aspiring way, but I wanted to serve. It appeared to me that leaders did most of the serving.

When I was about eighteen, I heard of solemn assemblies and priesthood leadership meetings held in conjunction with stake conferences. I heard about nine-hour testimony

95

meetings in the mission field. I heard about meetings in the assembly room in the temple, and I longed to be worthy to one day attend such meetings. I didn't ever want anything to come into my life that would prevent me from having such opportunities.

96
