ON THE SUBJECT OF THE SECOND ANOINTING

Salt Lake City

10 Oct 1878

Pres. Jos. F. Smith

City-

Dear Bro:~

Sis. Caroline Carter an aged lady has my permission to receive her Second Anointings at your convenience. Her husband has received his first endowments and is dead. She was sealed to him. Bro. D. C. Thompson will act in behalf of bro. Carter.

Your Brother,

/s/ John Taylor

Salt Lake City

Nov. 8, 1878

Prest. J. D. T. McAllister,

St. George,

Dear Brother:- I very much object to telegrams such as that regarding Bp. Dorius. It compromises all parties concerned, the principals, the sender, and the receiver, and much prefer that communications on such matters be made through the mail. Those desiring such work done must make the proper arrangements before hand or they must wait.

Bp Dorius has our consent to his request.

Your Brother in the Gospel

/s/ John Taylor

97

4.

St George Utah

4th Dec 1885

President J. D. T. McAllister

St. George Temple

My Dear Brother

To satisfy a feeling which has been on my mind for some time. I submit the following; My Son George Q. who died in this City when he was 18 years and 21 days old, was very faithful to us as a son, and also in the Holy Priesthood so far as he had opportunity when a Deacon, he was 1st Councilor to the President of the Quorum, which position he filled honorably, untill ordained an Elder, previous to receiving his Endowment. He was appointed Clk of the (p. 2) 1st Quorum of Elders in the Stake, being naturally of a religious turn of mind it seemed natural for him to perform his spiritual duties. He acted as a Teacher in the Ward, with entire satisfaction to the Saints up to the time of his death.

When on his death bed I asked him if there was any thing that he would like me to do for him, he said "I would like you to have some wives sealed to me." According to this request I have had two girls who died in the Church sealed to him. Two others, apreciating his worth have expressed a desire to have their daughters sealed to him, which will be done. These tokens of respect fills our hearts (p. 3) with joy feeling as we do, that our dear boy was worthy.

Now the question is, do you think he was old enough to receive his 2d Anointing?

Bro McAllister it is not my desire to seek blessings for my sons that they are not entitled to. But I had great hopes in this son, for I fully appreciated his worth, and would like to see that every blessing was put in his reach, to which his faithfulness entitled him.

You as the Prest. of the St George Stake knew him, hence I submit the question to you.

I am very respectfully

Your Brother in the Gospel

/s/ D. H. Cannon

D H Cannon

St George Temple

4th Deer 1885

98

Dec 9/ 85

Dear President Taylor

I can fully endorse the words expressed by Bp D. H. Cannon in relation to his son George Q. He lived and died a good young man.

I think you are acquainted with him, as also his Uncle George Q.

I address this to you personally.

God our Father be with you all.

Your Bro. in the Gospel

/s/John D.T. McAllister

Deer 9th 1885

President John D. T. McAllister.

St. George Temple.

Dear Brother:

Though the deceased son of Bishop David H. Cannon--George Q.-- was quite young when he died, still as he is so highly recommended, you may administer to his representative and the representative of the deceased who have been seal'd to him the ordinance of Second Anointing.

With Kind regards.

Your Brother.

/s/ John Taylor

March 4, 1886

Mrs. Eliza Perry Benson

Logan Temple

Dear Sister:

99

Your letter asking the priviledge of 2nd anointing for your parents John Perry and Grace Williams Perry who are deceased, has been received.

You are at liberty to have them officiated for and receive their 2nd Anointings; but those who officiate for them must be those who have already had that sacred ordinance.

By presenting this to Bro. M. W. Merrill he will have the Ordinance

attended to.

Very respectfully,

John Taylor

May 1, 1886.

Logan May 1st 1886

President John Taylor may I ask a favor of You. I wish to have my father adopted to President Joseph Smith it was my Fathers wish when he was alive.

I am here to do some work and would be very much pleased to have this work done.

I also wish to give my Bro. Graham and his two wives their second annointing.

No more at present - 1 am yours as ever

Your Bro. In the Gospel

Zebedee Coltrin

Cedar City Iron Co Utah

May 11, 1886

President John Taylor

Dear Brother.

The theme of my correspondence on the present occasion will be a subject that has engrossed my mind for many years and especially of late.

I have just returned from St George wither I had been with a portion of my family to work for my dead relatives and friends in the Temple of the Lord.

I find in looking over my record that my Father died an Elder; I reed for him some 7 years ago his second anointings. He was a good man and was called hence without a moments warning by a Stoke of lightning at the age of 63. He was Killed on Beaver City some 27 years ago and I am

100

very desirious to receive for him the ordination as an High Priest that he may belong to the same quorum as my Brother Joshua and myself If it meets with your approval, (p. 2) Bro Erastus Snow was some little acquainted with Father and to him I refer as his advocate.

My Brother Joshua had his failings, like many more, but my mind has been set at rest for many years in regard to his present condition and situation in the spirit world. He was never cut off the Church altho he demeaned himself very improperly for some time before his death and no doubt brought about his early demise thro his bad habit of drinking. Nevertheless from manifestations I have received since his death I am satisfied that he has sorrowfully repented and is now engaged in doing all the good he can on the other side. If it meets with your approval I would very much like him to receive his second anointings. I was rebaptized for him in the Temple at St George some 8 years ago I take pleasure in mentioning the names of Judge Elias Smith and Prest Daniel H Wells as his advocates.

I have another Brother dead named Benjamin he lived on Greenville Beaver Co (p. 3) also died in the faith. I should be pleased to receive for him his second anointings and will mention the name of Prest John R. Murdock of Beaver Stake as his advocate.

I hope dear brother you will not deem me presumptous in asking for blessings for my dead relatives-they are very dear to me and I am fully satisfied that the three I have mention'd are doing all they can according to their calling and Priesthood to further on the work of the Lord where they are--l have done for them all I can--l have reed the blessings mention'd for myself and earnestly wish that these near and dear to my heart should share in the same blessings and privileges that I by the clemency of the Priesthood have been permitted to receive.

Praying the Lord to shield and protect you and the brethrn with you in the future as he has in the past and with due respect I desire to subscribe myself you[r] Brother in the Gospel

/s/ C J Arthur [L. John Nuttall indicated on the letter that it was received by the office on 15 May 1886]

Salt Lake City

June 6th, 1886

President John Taylor

Dear Brother

Three years ago I got ready by the council of Apostle George Teasdale to go to St. George, to attend to Temple work also to get my second anointings in connection with my wives. One of my wives Maria was taken sick which hindered me from going at that time, afterward my wife Eliza now seventy nine years old, became too feable to travel that distance. I have been in hiding Seventeen months past but I think I can go safely to the Logan Temple. I aske if I now with my wives can have the privilege of this great blessing. I therefore think and feel as if I ought not to neglect this matter any longer if the privelege is mine I would also like my first wife

101

Ann who is dead, died three years and a half ago, to recieve the blessing through one of my living wives acting for her.

Please endorse upon the recommends, if you will grant me this privilege and return to me that I may know how to prepare, as I am not known by my right name here please send the recommends to Brother Joseph E. Taylor with whom I am acquainted.

I will see him and ask him to recieve them for me.

I remain your Brother in the Gospel

/s/ John S. Hawkins

Sept 18th 1886

Bishop C. J. Arthur.

Cedar City

Dear Brother:

Enclosed please find the endorsed recommends of the two widows of your father-in law for them to get their Second Anointing; and you are at liberty to act for him and receive this ordinance with them in his behalf.

Enclosed is seen a certificate for Marion Brown Arthur. As we suppose this was your wife I have endorsed it for her to receive her second anointing; though you do not mention, or ask in the letter. If this is not your wife, she ought not to receive her second anointing on the strength of this recommend.

With Kind Regards,

Your Brother,

/s/ John Taylor

November 18th 1886

Prest. J.D.T. McAllister

St George.

Dear Brother:

102

In reply to your letter of the 12th of November. There is no objection to Brother Noah Brimhall receiving his second anointing and I have endorsed his recommend accordingly. But his present wife cannot be anointed to him as she is only his wife for time, and when she receives her anointings to her deceased husband, Bailey Lake, his other two wives should also receive theirs.

If Brother Brimhall were to act for Bailey Lake and she were to be anointed to him as proxy, it might lead to confusion. The better way, in order that the records may be straight, is for some one to act for Brother Lake and the three wives be anointed at the same time. Brother George Lake having one these wives and being his brothers heir could do this with the greatest (p. 2) propriety, if he should be worthy of the ordinance.

Under the circumstances I think Brother Brimhall had better get a relative of his own, or of his deceased wifes, or in the absence of such a relative, some friend who has had her second anointing to act as proxy for his deceased wife, and let Sister Lavina Jones Lake Brimhall wait for this ordinance until arrangements can be made for the other wives of Brother Lake to join her in obtaining this ordinance

With Kind regards

Your Brother,

/s/ John Taylor

I think President Taylor will recollect a young English sister in Nauvoo by the name of Hannah Ells. She was sealed to Joseph the Prophet before his death. She died in Nauvoo in sister Sarah Kimball's house. I loved her very much--was present at her death. I have had endowments for her. Sister Zina is in Logan and will, with your permission, have second anointing for her.

St George Jan 29th -87

Pres John Taylor

Dear Brother

I again come to you For Temple Priviledges for Those I feel asured are of The Worthy Dead . . . .

. . .-May He Recive his 2d Anointing through me as Proxy and may some of my wives rec for her ?

. . .and as I have great Love for him as a friend I do wish to do his further work and get for

103

him & wife his 2d anointings & if it would be right--and so wait and hope, for another favorable Reply, and Remain very Truly yours

B F Johnson

PS

And now it has come to me to ask the Priviledge of 2d anointing for my son James Fransis, who is the Present Bishop at Tempe, and I think Bps Agent of that Stake. Fie is over 30 years of age and apears really one of the comeing young men of Zion, and as he expects to come for me the coming spring or early Summer, I should much like if you felt it like his priviledge, that he too have his 2d anointing while Flere

BFJ

Sept. 2nd. 1887

Elder James H. Martineau

Logan

Dear Brother:

The Indian girl Viroqua Johnson concerning whose second anointings you write to me, I think is a case that should be deferred for the present. You are at liberty to have her baptized for and have someone have Endowments for her: but at present I think it is improper for the ordinance of Second Anointing to be administered in her behalf.

With kind regards

Your Brother. Wilford Woodruff

Sept. 19th, 1887

Elder J. H. Martineau

Logan, Utah

Dear Brother,

Your letter of the 14th inst., in which you suggest the propriety of Sister Adeline B. Benson, wife of Brother E. T. Benson, deceased, acting for the wife of Brother Joel H. Johnson, who is deceased, in receiving second anointings, has been received and considered.

104

I see no objection to Sister Benson acting in this capacity for Sister Johnson inasmuch as she is the latter's friend and Sister Johnson has none other kin who are in a position to receive this ordinance for her.

With kind regards. Your Brother,

Wilford Woodruff

October 26th, 1887

Elder James H. Martineau

Logan

Dear Brother,

Your letter of the 18th inst. in which you express your wishes concerning an Indian girl who has been sealed to you receiving her second anointing, and also respecting her doing work for 7 or 8 of the early martyrs, unmarried women, and having them sealed to you, has been received.

I think it is better for you to defer the ordinance of second anointing for this indian girl who has been sealed to you since her death. It will be no lost to her for the present.

As to the martyrs of whom you speak, we see no impropriety in having the ordinance of baptism attended to for them, especially if you know who they are: but before having them sealed to you, you should certainly have some knowledge of them and of your right to have them, as others may claim that they have a better right than you hereafter.

With kind regards.

Your Brother,

Wilford Woodruff

James Pexton died 1st May 1887, born 9th March 1831.

His wife Hannah Pexton married him in England and they were sealed in the Endowment House 1855. He took another wife considerably neglected his first and she obtained a divorce

105

from him through the courts. Now comes the question of Second Anointing raised by the eldest son who [is] doing work in the Temple, wished his father to receive his full blessings with his mother Hannah Pexton. She reports to James Pexton came to her in a dream and asked her to forgive him. She is willing to forgive him. Wishes to know if she should be resealed to him, and whether it would be proper for him to have his full blessings and she enjoy the same with him. The son James D. Pexton is 39 years of age [and is the] 2nd Counselor to Bp Thos H. G. Parks of the North Ward Nephi. Is he old enough to receive his full blessings? and then stand for his father. Sister Hannah Pexton who lives in Nephi, called upon Pres. Woodruff and asked these questions and it was taken under advisement.

(signed) George Teasdale

January 24th, 1888

President Angus M. Cannon,

Salt Lake Stake.

Dear Brother, -

Your letter in reply to mine upon the subject of second anointings for Brother George Lufkin and Brother James Townsend, has been received and considered. Whoever attends to the ordinances for Brother Townsend should certainly take his last wife to the Temple with them, so that she might receive the blessing as well as the deceased wife. Is Bro- ther George Lufkin the proper person, who is as worthy as he, who is nearer as heir to the Townsend Family than he is? If he is the proper party to represent Brother Townsend, under the circumstances you are at liberty to inform him that if he will get his recommendation properly signed, I will endorse it for him to receive his second anointing and to act for Brother Townsend, on condition, also, that he takes Brother Townsend's surviving wife with him.

Now, in relation to the other subject which you mention--the cases of worthy men and women who are aged who have not had their second anointings, and who, are waiting to have this privilege accorded to them, being counseled by, you not to ask for the privilege. We think such cases deserve consideration, and where you know of aged men and woman who are worthy to receive this ordinance, I would like you to forward their names to me for consideration: and these that we decide as proper persons to receive this ordinance can have their recommendations signed to that effect.

With kind regards,

I am

106

Your Brother,

W. Woodruff.

On February 7th, 1888

Mrs. E. J. D. Townsend,

Your letter of the 4th., describing your case in past relations and your wish concerning receiving your second anointings again, came duly to hand and has been considered. I think you should be permitted to have your second anointings with your husband. Brother Townsend, and if a recommendation be forwarded to me, properly signed by your Bishop and the president of the stake, I will have it endorsed for you to receive that ordinance with your husband.

With kind regards,

your brother,

W. Woodruff.

Ward, Salt Lake City; Church Archives; Wilford Woodruff Collection.

Salt Lake City Feb 24th

President Woodruff Dear Brother

Will you please answer a few questions. I wish to ask. you I am the widow of Thomas. C Jones of your Circle he died soon after we came from Logan Temple working for our Dead and haveing our 2d Ontingins whear we told to attend to the Washing of Feet at home the baby was sick after we came home so I asked Bro Jones when we should attend to it and he sead we had better wait till the baby is better but he was taken sick and Died before it was attended to can that be done by Proxey or not as I feel sorry about it for he was a good man and I gave him 2 liveing Wifes and 3 Dead ones and worked hard to help him to keep them.

[Letter from Pres. Woodruff to Eliza I. Jones; Church Archives under date:]

Feb. 24th, 1888.

107

Mrs. Eliza I. Jones

10th Ward, Salt Lake City

Dear Sister:

The ordinance of which you speak, and which you say you failed to attend to before the death of your husband, is one that should not be written about, and it cannot be attended to by proxy. Your husband is dead and, so far as the ordinances is concerned, it is all right. If there are any.of his children who were not born in the covenant and they are dead, a living child, or children can officiate for them in being sealed to their parents.

You ask a question whether a sister can be sealed to her first husband, who never heard the Gospel, if she has embraced it and been married and sealed to another.

We do not consider it safe for a woman in the Church to be sealed to a man who died before receiving the Gospel.

With kind regards.

Your Brother,

/s/ W. Woodruff

March 8th, 1888

Elder Brigham Young,

Dear Brother,

Sister Zina D. H. Young has written to me concerning two of your father's deceased wives receiving their second anointings. She desires to officiate for them, to which I have consented. As you are the heir, some arrangements should be made by yourself and her for some person to act in your father's stead in this ordinance. She will probably try to see you. If you can communicate with her and let her know where you can be found, no doubt she will appreciate it.

With kind regards.

Your Brother,

W. Woodruff

108

March 29th, 1888

Prest. M. W. Merrill,

Logan Temple.

Dear Brother: Brother Lyman 0. Little field has applied to me for the ordinance of second anointing for himself and his wives, whom he represents as 8 in number. Brother Littlefield is one of Zion's Camp and I think that he is entitled to this sacred ordinance. You will, therefore, please administer it to him and his living wife or wives, and to them also on behalf of his deceased wife.

With kind regards.

Your Brother,

W. Woodruff

April 23rd, 1888

President M. W. Merrill

Logan Temple

Dear Brother:

Brother Lyman 0. Littlefield's wife was the widdow of Bro. Luman Heath, a faithful elder in the Church, who died many years ago. She was sealed to her husband in the Nauvoo Temple and at that time acted as proxy for a deceased wife of Brother Heath's. Bro. Littlefield has applied to me to have the privilege granted to officiate for Bro. Luman Heath, that he and his deceased wife and sister Littlefield should receive their second anointing. You are hereby authorized to administer this ordinance to Bro. Littlefield for Bro. Heath, and to his wife (who is Bro. Heath's wife for eternity) for the sister Heath who is dead, and for herself.

With kind regards,

I remain your brother

Wilford Woodruff

109

PRESIDENT'S OFFICE,

Salt Lake City, Utah, May 22, 1888

Bishop S. A. Woolley,

Ninth Ward, Salt Lake City.

Dear Brother:

I have read with interest your favor of the 16th., in which you set forth the circumstances connected with the life and demise of your son Samuel Henry.

I have no doubt that he was a most excellent young man, as what you say about him is fully corroborated by Brother George Q. Cannon, who appears to have been well acquainted with him. It would give me pleasure to grant the request which you make concerning his receiving his second anointing if I did not have a feeling that there is an impropriety in administering this ordinance to young men, either living or dead, at the present time. In the days of the Prophet Joseph and Brigham this ordinance was not sought for and would not have been administered to any who did seek for it. It was administered only to aged people, or men who were advanced in life, who had been well tried and proved. I have received since President Taylor's death a number of requests from parents and others whose sons have died, asking me to grant them the privilege of officiating in this ordinance on behalf of their sons. I have invariably declined to grant these requests, because I have felt under the circumstances it would not be proper to do so. Your son will lose nothing by not having this attended to now, and you can comfort your heart with the reflection that you have done all that you can for him at[p.2]the present.

You ask whether a person who has once been married in the Endowment House or Temple, and is left a widow or a widower, commit adultery by marrying again when the ceremony is performed by a justice of the peace or civil officer.

There is a manifest impropriety, which every Latter-day Saint who has had his or her endowments should perceive, in such a person going to a civil officer to have a ceremony of marriage performed. The fact that such a person does so is an evidence that he or she is falling away, because if in good standing a recommendation could be obtained for the Temple, where the ceremony could be performed according to the order which God has instituted. But a person marrying under such circumstances does not commit adultery.

You ask some other questions concerning how many living wives a man must have to fulfil the law.

When a man, according to the revelation, marries a wife under the holy order which God has revealed and then marries another in the same way, he enters into the new and everlasting covenant, and so far as he has gone he has obeyed the law. I know of no require-

110

ment which makes it necessary for a man to have three living wives at a time.

I enclose herewith the answer to Sister Fail. I sent it to you that you may see its contents and then hand it to her.

The case of Henry Lovesey and Emma Townsend, which you describe, is not very savory one in all its particulars, and I feel that she had better let the matter rest for the present. I do not feel clear in my mind about breaking the seal "with the [p.3] old man" or consenting to the change that she seems anxious to make.

With kind regards,

I remain Your Brother,

W. Woodruff

PRESIDENT'S OFFICE

Salt Lake City, Utah, May 24, 1888

Elder J. Don Carlos Young,

Architect Salt Lake Temple.

Dear Brother:

I take the liberty of making the following suggestions to you respecting the Temple as they now occur to us, and it is proper that they should be before you for your consideration, that you may be able as you progress to make the necessary arrangements to carry out these suggestions:

A room should be prepared, convenient to the entrance, for the President of the Temple to hold private interviews with parties who may wish his counsel.

Care should be taken to have the Recorder's Room conveniently situated for the work they have to do, be well lighted, and should have at least one vault immediately connected with it. It must not be understood from this that one vault only is needed in this Temple. The vaults which are to contain books and papers should be well ventilated, and have communication with the outside air.

In the Logan and Manti Temples the rooms designed for the ordinance of second anointing are quite plain. In this Temple the rooms should be as well situated and at least as elegantly decorated as any other room in the building, so as to impress those who receive this sacred ordinance with its importance and elevated and solemn character. It would be well if two small dressing rooms could be near by or connected with it.

Ill

A good room convenient for its purposes should be provided for the President of the Temple; also suitable rooms for the Presidency of the Church and the leading authorities.

We shall from time to time, probably, amek further suggestions as they may occur to us in regard to the interior arrangements of the Temple. We desire that the greatest pains will be taken by yourself to have everything done in the most perfect manner, and so carefully considered beforehand that we will not be under the necessity of making changes or tearing down work that has already been done. We know that you have labored under disadvantages because of the incompleteness of the plans turned over to you, and also because of the improvements that you have felt compelled to make in those plans. We would much prefer holding the work in abeyance till you can feel sure that whatever is required to be done is done properly, than to have it pushed forward without the plan being well matured. At any time when you wish to submit any questions concerning the work we shall be glad to accord you an interview upon your notifying us to that effect.

It will be well for you to keep this letter where you can refer to it.

With kind regards, and praying the Lord to bless you in the performance of the important labor entrusted to you,

I remain.

Your Brother,

/s/ Wilford Woodruff

June 26, 1888

President Daniel H. Wells:

. . . . You mentioned the name of Brother Lewis Anderson, assistant Recorder. I infer that he is a young man: I have felt impressed not to grant permission for this ordinance (2nd Anointing) to be administered to any but aged and faithful men, and if you can get along without administering this ordinance to him, it would be better.

Wilford Woodruff

Holiness to the Lord.

ST GEORGE TEMPLE.

112

P.O. Box 531.

St George, Utah, 7th Aug 1888

Elder Alonzo H. Russell

Grafton.

Dear Brother.

Yourself and wives are approved for Second Anointing.

The Temple will open for ordinance work on the 4th of September next. Bring Temple clothing and two towels each. Kind regards to all in Grafton. Bishop [unreadable].

Your Brother

/s/John D.T. McAllister

PRESIDENT'S OFFICE

Salt Lake City, Utah, Oct 22, 1888

President W. G. Smith

Morgan.

Dear Brother:

Your pencil memeranda, dated Oct 18th, showing a list of names of persons in Morgan Stake deemed worthy to receive their second anointings, came duly to hand.

There seems to be some misunderstanding in these matters by you in sending such a formidable list, and in such a manner as the one received. In such an important matter as second anointings it is not expected that the Stake or the Wards are to be hunted over to find names to recommend for such an ordinance. It is only contemplated that we be furnished with the names of those who are deemed worthy by the Presidency of the Stake, and who are quite ages, and whose life and labors in the Church have been such as to entitle them to this blessing. When such names are submitted the ages of the parties should be noted, and you will be informed as to their acceptance before the parties receive any information or their recommends are endorsed to go to the Temple.

Trusting that you will now understand this matter thoroughly and will act accordingly, and with kind regards.

I am. Your Brother,

113

W. Woodruff

CR/l/20/#16.

Oct 24, 1888

Elder Charles Sperry

. ... In such sacred matters as second anointings it must be understood that those only who are quite aged, and whose life and labors in the Church entitles them to this blessing shall be recommended by the Presidency of the Stake, and in submitting such names the ages of the parties should be noted.

Wilford Woodruff

PRESIDENT'S OFFICE

Salt Lake City, Utah, Nov. 13, 1888

President D. H. Wells,

Manti Temple.

Dear Brother:-Your letter of Nov. 9th representing the wishes of Sister Sarah Clarke who was sealed to David Wood in Salt Lake City in 1854 to have her second anointings, also to officiate for Brother Wood's First wife who is dead, has been received.

You say that Brother David Wood received his second anointing in 1867, but neither of his wives was anointed to him at that time because his first wife was not present. You are hereby authorized to administer that ordinance in behalf of Brother Wood's first wife, and afterwards Sister Smith can also be anointed to Brother Wood. It will be necessary for some persons who have received this ordinance to officiate for Brother and Sister Wood, deceased, and Sister Smith can act for herself. You can arrange about that.

In regard to establishing a rule in such cases as this one, as you intimate in your letter, I do not desire it be so; but prefer that all matters pertaining to this ordinance shall first be referred to me, as also all cases where a liv[p.860]ing man has had his blessings and brings his wife or wives to receive theirs: he and they should first have permission before the ordinance is performed.

With kind regards.

Your Brother in the Gospel,

114

W. Woodruff

March 16th, 1889

President Ira N. Hinckley,

Fillmore.

Dear Brother:-The enclosed recommend for Christian P. Boreguard and his wife Anna to obtain their second anointings, is returned herewith for corrections.

In regard to these matters, I will say that it is not expected that the Bishops will take these cases in hand and recommend persons for this ordinance.

The instructions which have been given on this subject are, that the President of the Stake, as they shall find from time to time in their Stake those brothren who are aged, and who have been faithful in the Church during their lives, and through their untiring energies have proven themselves worthy of this blessing, will take note of such cases and, through the President, will submit to me the names of such persons and their wives, both living and dead, who have also been faithful and are worthy for consideration. In forwarding to me the names of such persons, I must have the age, in years, of each one named. It is not expected that any person will be informed of what action is being taken until [p.425] after their names are approved and their recommends properly endorsed by me. Faithful and worthy aged brothren who have died without this blessing, should be remembered with their wives in this connection.

After names of worthy aged persons have been submitted by the President of the Stakes and been approved by me. the usual recommend can then be forwarded, with a slip of paper calling my attention to the fact.

Trusting this will be satisfactory to you, and with kind regards,

I am your Brother

W. Woodruff

March 19th 1889

President John D.T. McAllister,

St. George Temple.

Dear Brother:-Your letter of Feb. 27th, asking certain questions pertaining to Temple ordinances, has been received and considered.

115

In regard to your last question, pertaining to a woman having been sealed and anointed [second anointing] to her husband, but subsequently divorced from him, he continuing a faithful, good man, etc, is she to be anointed to a second good man as though she never had been anointed? I answer. No. In such a case it will not be proper for the sister to be again anointed. Your second question as to my having any word for you in relation to adoption —

I would say it will be well to leave the matter of adoption for the present as they have been, and not make any changes. This will also answer your question in regard to going back as far as records can be obtained correctly in adoptions, [p.2]

In relation to children who are old enough to be baptized [&] who are dead, receiving their endowments. I will say that in performing ordinances for the dead it is safe to follow the rules observed in regard to the living, unless there may be special occasions which can be attended to when the circumstances require.

With kind regards,

I am you Brother,

W. Woodruff

Garden City Rich Co Utah

11th of June 1889

President Woodruff

Salt Lake City, Dear Brother,

I with my youngest wife, have received our 2d anointing, but the 2 older ones have not yet been able to get to the temple, to attend to theirs but intend to as soon as circumstances will permit. I was informed there was another ordinance which might be given at some future time in an upper room. Can we not pass through them all for that is my blessing given by the Patriarch. So I feel to ask for all, although the day may be breaking, I cannot let thee go, except thou bless me. So said our father Jacob. I have one wife who died in the faith. She was a good saint, she had her endowment in the Endowment house in Salt Lake, and was sealed to me by permission of President Taylor. Can she receive the 2d anointing by Proxey. Should not those wives that have been sealed to me who died out of the church, be adopted to their parents who will have done the work for [her] in the temple. And should not those parents, who adopted to us who have done this work for them, as we have been adopted. I suppose none of these recieve a 2d anointing who have not recieved the gospel in the flesh. Please excuse me, for so much inquisitiveness for I know not where else to apply for this information. The spirit prompts me to ask is there not another ordinance yet concerning a rod, if so can I receive it. I do not know that there is, but I feel to ask for all that is for me. Your brother

(over) Phineas W. Cook

116

Jesus said seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you, I feel that a blessing that is not worth asking for is not worth having, and if I ask and am refused I hope it will not injure me. P.W.C.

[In pencil & different handwriting]:

He has got all the ordinances he has a right to.

June 18th, 1889

Elder Phineas W. Cook,

Garden City, Rich Co.

Dear Brother:-! have received your letter of the 11th inst., in which you speak of another ordinance in addition to the second anointing, which might be given at some future time in an upper room.

You have received all the ordinances which we administer. The ordinance to which you refer is one between yourself and your family, and which doubtless was explained to you when you received your second anointing.

Your wife who is dead, and who, you say, was a faithful woman, can receive her second anointing. One of your other wives can act for her. Those who died out of the Church, and who have been sealed to you since, need not at the present time receive this ordinance. We do not administer it to those who are in this condition.

As to the ordinance connected with the rod, we know nothing of that. You will have to wait for awhile or until we meet Aaron.

Of course, your present living wives, if they are worthy and can obtain recommendations from the Bishop, can receive the ordinance of second anointing, whenever it will be convenient to you and to them.

With kind regards,

I am your brother.

W. Woodruff

Jan. 21, 1890

President D. H. Wells,

117

Manti Temple

Dear Brother:~Your favor of 16th inst. suggesting that Elder John Hollister and his wife Lovina, both deceased, be granted the privilege of Second Anointings is received and the request granted.

Brother Reynolds says, that if he informed Sister Cox she had not received her Second Anointing he was in error as according to the record Cordelia C. Morley born at Kirtland 28th Nov. 1823 was anointed to the Prophet Joseph Smith in the Temple at Nauvoo 27th Jan. 1846; Elder Parley P. Pratt officiating.

Your Brother

W. Woodruff

April 23, 1890

President D.H. Wells,

Manti Temple.

Dear Brother:

The following brethren and sisters have been recommended by President Canute Petersen, and approved by me, to receive their second anointings, when they present themselves at the Temple, with their recommends you are authorized to perform that cerimony in their behalf:

David Candland, Chester, age 71.

Annie Candland 52

Hannah 50

Mary Ann 44 [deceased]

Mary Jane" 22

Carline Margaret Olsen, Mayfield, [deceased] age, 66 Jonathan Midgley, Wales, age 68 Ann K. 66

Peter M. Olsen, Spring City, age 64

Karen Marie Olsen, 66

Jonas Ottenstrom, Ephraim, [deceased] age 64.

Marie Kaisq 65.

Sildq Amela 56.

Peter nela [deceased] 50.

Slen Marie 67.

Your Brother in the Gospel,

118

W. Woodruff

Mar 13 1891

Prest D. D. McArthur.

St George.

Dear Brother:

In reply to yours of the 9th inst. I am directed to say that the late Elder Newton Daniel Hall and his two wives are approved for further blessings. This does not include his wife Sarah who married Peter Markin.

In all these cases I am requested to remind you that President Woodruff wishes to know the ages of all who are thus recommended. Upon receipt of the propet recommends for Bro Hall & wives the Prest will endorse it.

Respectfully your Brother

/s/ L. John Nuttall

Dear Brethren'

It has been decided that it is no longer necessary for those going to the Temples to attend to ordinances therein to send their recommends to President Woodruff to be by him endorsed. The signatures of the Bishop and Stake President will be all that is required.

This decision applies to all ordinances attended to in the House of the Lord, except Second Anointings, which last named will still require the approval of the President of the Church before they can be administered. This being the decision. Bishops of Wards and Presidents of Stakes will see the increased necessity for care, so that no unworthy person will be re- commended for ordinances in the Temples.

Your Brethren,

Wilford Woodruff,

119

George Q. Cannon,

Joseph F. Smith

The First Presidency of the Church

of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints

Salt Lake City Utah

26 Aug 1893

Prest. J. D. T. McAllister,

Manti Temple,

Dear Brother:-

We have made the following ruling which is Self-explanatory, and send it to you for your guidance as President of the Manti Temple.

"Persons having received their endowments, who are otherwise qualified, may act for the dead in the ordinances, of sealing and adoption, without having been Sealed or adopted themselves. But in Second Anointings, none shall be eligible to act for the dead, unless they have received this blessing themselves."

Your Brethren,

Wilford Woodruff

Geo. Q. Cannon

Jos. F. Smith.

Bro. Mc.Allister:

Pres. Woodruff declines to give Seconds to any members of the Church excepting those who have gathered to Zion; he says he must draw the line some where, and this is where he draws it. He says too that all faithful saints who have died without having

120

the privilege of gathering with the body of the Church will receive all the blessings they are entitled to hereafter.

Yours &c.,

Geo. P. Gibbs Secy.

Prest. David H. Cannon, St. George.

Dear Brother,

During the lifetime of the late President Wilford Woodruff a rule was established by him not to permit a woman to be anointed to a man unless she had lived with him as a wife. This was a restriction of the rule in such cases which obtained during the lifetime of Presidents Brigham Young and John Taylor. After considering the matter we have concluded to restore the practice as expressed in the following, and which will govern in such cases in the future:

Any woman, who has been sealed to a man in life or by proxy, whether she has lived with him or not, shall have the privilege of being anointed to him inasmuch as he shall have had his second blessings.

Lorenzo Snow

George Q. Cannon

Joseph F. Smith

Dec. 22, 1900

Elder D. H. Cannon

Prest. St. George Temple

Dear Brother:

With respect to Zadok K. Judd's letter (herewith enclosed) asking for second blessings for his father and grandfather, Prest. Snow says that many faithful people have gone into the spirit world without those blessings, and they will lose nothing by it; and all such cases he prefers to refer to the future than to undertake to endorse recommends for persons who cannot be regularly recommended.

Yours etc.

Geo. F. Gibbs

121

4 January 1902

President Moses W. Taylor

Coalville.

Dear Brother:--

This is in answer to your note on the back of a letter written by Elder William Asber to Bishop Joseph Hopkin, of Echoe, in which Brother Asber requests the bishop to take steps to procure for him a recommend in favor of Elias Asber and wife, his deceased brother and sister-in-law.

In the first place we would say that recommends for second blessings are not Bishop's recommends and their names therefore should not appear on them at all. The President of Stakes alone are held responsible for people recommended for second annointings, and where they are not personally acquainted with the parties to be recommended, it would be in order for them of course to satisfy themselves through other reliable sources. In the next place we would say that it is not expected that people shall be found asking that this most sacred ordinance shall be administered to them, but you should take pains to seek out the worthy people under your Jurisdiction, and this by means of your counselors and Bishops. In this particular case however you will be perfectly safe in issuing the recommends sought for, as we personally know the parties to be worthy.

Your brethren,

Joseph F. Smith

John R. Winder

Anthon H. Lund

First Presidency

5 January 1902

President Thomas E. Bassett

Rexburg.

Dear Brother:--

This is in answer to yours of the 3rd inst.

122

It is not in order for people to ask for recommends for second blessings. They should be chosen through the Stake Presidency because of their faithfulness, fitness and worthiness to receive this higher ordinance of the house of the Lord. It is understood of course that you have received second anointings yourself, otherwise you had better refrain from recommending for the present. We may say however that second blessings are not administered to single individuals of either sex, but to men and their wives.

Your brethren,

Joseph F. Smith

John R. Winder

Anthon H. Lund

First Presidency

4 Feb. 1902

President Thos. E. Bassett,

Rexburg

*** Further "as far as possible the person recommended ought to be personally known you (sic) and persons recommended should be instructed to regard their business to the temple as strictly private. It is taken for grandid that you will confer with your counselors about such matters, also in cases where the parties are not sufficiently known to you to justify your recommending them, it is understood that you will be free to talk with their bishops or anyone else in whom he may have confidence about them for the purpose of satisfying yourself as to their worthiness to receive these higher blessings, but it should not be known why you make your inquiry about them. It was never intended that bishops should recommend for second blessings: neither that people should ask for recommends to obtain them. On the contrary, they should be sought out, and the strictest privacy should be observed in everything pertaining to this matter."

Your brethren,

Joseph F. Smith

John R. Winder

Anthon H. Lund

123

Jos. B. Keeler,

L. Holbrook,

Counselors.

OFFICE OF
