Mark E. Petersen, Joshua: Man of Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1978)

COMPANION SCRIPTURES

When the Prophet Joseph Smith prepared to send missionaries westward from Kirtland, twelve of the elders met together for their instructions before departing.

On February 9, 1831, the Lord gave a revelation to the Prophet for the guidance of these missionaries; among other things he said: "And again, the elders, priests and teachers of this church shall teach the principles of my gospel, which are in the Bible and the Book of Mormon, in the which is the fulness of the gospel." (D&C 42:12.)

Nothing was said at this time about accepting the Bible "as far as it is translated correctly." That came later, and with good reason.

But here is a direct statement from the Lord to the effect that between the Bible and the Book of Mormon the fulness of the gospel may be found and from them it should be preached! Does not that make the Bible fully acceptable to us, his people?

He mentioned the Bible first. We name it first in our Articles of Faith wherein we say: "We believe the Bible to be the word of God as far as it is translated correctly; we also believe the Book of Mormon to be the word of God." (Article of Faith 8.)

The Lord gave us these two "sticks> ( the stick of Judah and the stick of Joseph. (Ezekiel 37:15-20.) They sustain each other. The prophet said that we of latter days would hold the two as one in our hands.

When the Prophet Joseph declared that there were errors in the translation of the Bible, of course he was correct. He studied Hebrew in order to better understand the Old Testament in its original language.

The mistakes in the earliest translations of the Bible were legion, some of them deliberate, others from poor work on the part of the printers.

It seems unthinkable that any man or set of men would deliberately change the text of the word of God to further their own selfish ends. Yet it was done, and repeatedly, as the early versions of the Bible were distributed.

The Church of England published its Bishop's Bible as a means of combating some of the biased versions brought out by the protestors of that day.

The Wycliffe Bible, whose translator brought it out under the worst kind of persecution in 1380, was an honest effort to present the word of God in such a way that it could be understood by the common people. But even that Bible reflected the translator's personal views. This was true of the Tyndale Bible of 1525 and the Matthews Bible of 1537 and the Taveners Bible of 1539.

When the Douay version, or the Vulgate, appeared in 1582, it presented the point of view of the Roman Catholic Church. When Dr. J. P. Arendzen, under assignment of the Roman Catholic hierarchy of Great Britain, produced his 1947 revision of the Douay Bible, he frankly said in the preface that it was done because the 1582 version carried too much of the Reformation flavor.

In 1965, while the Catholic Church in England was waiting for the completion of its own modern translation, permission was sought and obtained to produce a Catholic edition of the Revised Standard Version of the Protestants; this was published in England in 1965. It contains many changes. The preface says:

"For four hundred years, following the great upheaval of the Reformation, Catholics and Protestants have gone their separate ways and suspected each other's translations of the Bible of having been in some way manipulated in the interests of doctrinal pre-suppositions. It must be admitted that these suspicions were not always without foundation."

Some writers allege that in Oliver Cromwell's day he bribed the printers with a thousand pounds sterling to falsify the text in one edition to support the Cromwell party in its efforts to have the clergy elected by the congregations.

In one of the poorly printed early English Bibles, the seventh commandment reads: "Thou shalt commit adultery"; and Paul's announcement to the Corinthians (1 1 Cor. 6:9) appeared as "The unrighteous shall inherit the Kingdom of Heaven."

Not until the Oxford standard edition of the King James Bible appeared did we have a text of the Authorized Version such as we have today. But even then errors persisted. Where in Numbers we are told "the murderer shall surely be put to death," it read "the murderer shall surely be put together."

And speaking of murderers, the 1801 printing of Jude 16 read "murderers" instead of the correct "murmurers."

We in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints today accept the present King James Bible as the official Bible of our church, and with good reason. That reason is the Book of Mormon itself, which quotes many Bible passages almost precisely as they appear in the King James Bible. Some have thought that Joseph Smith copied those sections out of the Bible and inserted them in the Book of Mormon, which is not true.

No one reading the beautiful language of the Savior, for example, or the heroic defense of Abinadi, both of whom entwine their own words with quotations from the prophets, would ever suppose that Joseph Smith was capable of doing such a thing.

At the time the Book of Mormon was translated, Joseph was a very unlearned man, just as Isaiah said he would be (Isa. 29), and was in no way qualified either as a writer or as an editor. He translated the gold plates as he was given power by God, pure and simple. Those Bible quotations were originally from the brass plates; then in Mormon's day they were placed on the gold plates; and from the gold plates Joseph Smith translated them for publication in the Book of Mormon.

The Book of Mormon is the strongest testimonial there is to the general accuracy of the King James Version. Read, for example, the twenty-fourth chapter of Third Nephi, and examine the quotations from Malachi. Or read the Sermon on the Mount, and compare it with the King James rendering.

The Isaiah chapters were direct translations of that early prophet's writings, as they were transmitted first by means of the brass plates and then the gold.

There are minor problems with the new translations of some passages in the Bible, and none of them agree word for word. But the real meaning is there for the most part. When the various new translations are compared, no one need mistake the intent of the original writer. To obtain the proper understanding is the main thing. And where there is still any question, we always have reference to our modern scriptures and our living prophets.

Unless he expected the Bible to be used, believed, and preached, the Lord would never have spoken as he did to the twelve elders leaving for their mission westward from Kirtland. (D&C 42:12.)

And this, of course, means that we accept the Bible account of Moses and Joshua, the miracles in which they were involved, and the covenants they made with the people of the Lord.

What wonderful direction we find in Joshua's words: "As for me and my house, we will serve the Lord."

As we read the story of his great career, we may know that it really happened—because the modern scriptures tell us so, and they are true!
