Carlos E. Asay, Family Pecan Trees: Planting a Legacy of Faith at Home ( 1992)

Acknowledgments

I had the privilege of visiting with President Marion G. Romney in his office soon after the death of his wife. In the middle of our conversation, he directed my attention to a picture hanging on the wall. He asked, "Do you know who that angel woman is?" I responded, "That is your wife." With great emotion, he told me about his "beloved Ida" and extolled her many virtues. As he concluded the tender tribute to Sister Romney, he said, with a tear in his eye, "When I see her next, it will not be one moment too soon."

I, too, have a "beloved companion"—one who has been my "angel woman," inspiration, synergist, and lover for many years. I cannot remember when I didn't know her (we grew up together); and, it is difficult for me to remember when I didn't love her. Everything good and decent in my life, I relate to Colleen in one way or another. She is the one who is most responsible for making our home a heaven on earth. And, she is the one who encouraged me to write this book.

If I bring to this work any qualifications worthy of note, they are: I was born of goodly parents who planted in our home many of the "pecan tree" practices discussed within these pages; I married a saintly woman with strong faith who believed in the imperative need of perfecting and exalting practices at home; and my wife and I were blessed with children (Marcianne, James, Marcus, Brent, Clair, Timothy, and Carleen) who seemed to bring with them from another sphere of existence an inclination to love God and to serve each other.

I hope that what I have written within these covers, including many personal experiences, will give others a glimpse of marriage and family as I have experienced them and inspire an even greater attention to home and loved ones.

A story is told of a man who displayed family portraits in his office. One day a visitor asked about the pictures. "That's the jury," said the man. "These are the pictures of my family. Every once in a while I have to ask the question, 'What would they expect of me?'"

I relate to this story because I, too, proudly display pictures of my family in my office. They are both my judge and jury. Whenever I look at them, I am reminded of my first and foremost responsibilities, and of the need to plant and cultivate family "pecan tree" practices at home.

I acknowledge the professional assistance of my secretary, Margie McKnight, and my editor, Jack M. Lyon. Both have extended me valuable suggestions and ideas and expedited the completion of this writing project.

I also acknowledge the cooperation of many who have corroborated some of the experiences and materials included in this book. The list of those who have verified selected pages includes: Mark Benson (chapter 12), the C. Terry Graff family (chapter 13), the James R. Boone family (chapter 14), Henry Haurand (chapter 15), Dr. William G. Dyer and Dr. Phillip R. Kunz (appendix).

Admittedly, a number of the personal accounts used to explain or illustrate ideas in this book may be colored slightly by personal biases or shaded by fading memory. I have, however, tried to constrain my imagination and to rely heavily upon entries made in my personal papers at the time or soon after the experiences occurred in order to preserve the integrity of the book.

I do assume full responsibility for what is written, and I pray that no reader will be offended by what is printed. Rather, I hope that someone or many may be inspired by my thoughts about families and "pecan tree" practices to initiate actions that will strengthen the home and those who live in it.
