Carlos E. Asay, Family Pecan Trees: Planting a Legacy of Faith at Home ( 1992)

Chapter Three

Family Home Evenings

Go ye unto your homes, and ponder upon the things which I have said, and ask of the Father, in my name, that ye may understand, and prepare your minds for the morrow, and I come unto you again (3 Nephi 17:3).

How would you like to be 99 percent or even 100 percent successful in rearing your children? Such phenomenal success is realistic and within your reach, according to three latter-day prophets. President Wilford Woodruff promised, "Ninety-nine out of every hundred children who are taught by their parents the principles of honesty and integrity, truth and virtue, will observe them through life" (Discourses of Wilford Woodruff, pp. 266-68). Said President Joseph F. Smith, "Not one child in a hundred would go astray, if the home environment, example and training, were in harmony with the truth in the gospel of Christ, as revealed and taught to the Latter-day Saints" (Gospel Doctrine, p. 302). President Harold B. Lee summarized: "If you will have your Family Home Evenings and teach your children in the home, the promise has been made that there won't be one in a hundred that will ever go astray. And if you will see to it that as the Home Teachers visit every home every month and do what the Home Teachers are supposed to do, you will have a strength in the raising of your family that will be far beyond any pulling power to the opposite" (BYU Sixth Stake Quarterly Conference, April 27, 1969).

Knowing of such wonderful and far-reaching statements made by presidents of the Church, who would be so foolish as to ignore this "pecan tree" practice with a promise? The practice is simply gospel instruction in the home by loving and caring parents; the promise is righteous children who will remain faithful. The overall result will be family unity and happiness in this life and eternal joy in the life to come.

Instructions of the First Presidency

To help fathers and mothers fulfill their divine responsibilities at home, the First Presidency made this announcement in 1915:

We counsel the Latter-day Saints to observe more closely the commandment of the Lord given in the 68th section of the Doctrine and Covenants (verses 25-28). . . .

To this end we advise and urge the inauguration of a "Home Evening" throughout the Church, at which time fathers and mothers may gather their boys and girls about them in the home and teach them the word of the Lord. They may thus learn more fully the needs and requirements of their families; at the same time familiarizing themselves and their children more thoroughly with the principles of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. . . .

If the Saints obey this counsel, we promise that great blessings will result. Love at home and obedience to parents will increase. Faith will be developed in the hearts of the youth of Israel, and they will gain power to combat the evil influences and temptations which beset them. (Messages of the First Presidency, pp. 337-38.)

Over the years, the family home evening program has been reannounced and reemphasized many times by Church leaders. The First Presidency wrote in the Family Home Evening Resource Book in 1983: "We live in a time when selfishness, violence, immorality, and every other form of unrighteousness increases unrestrained in most of the world. The family is being assailed on every side. It is with deep concern that we urge you as parents to gather your children around you and build love, loyalty, and companionship in your homes. You are responsible to teach your children to walk uprightly before the Lord.

"Hold family councils. Talk to your children in personal parent interviews. Read the scriptures together. Enjoy playing together. Have family prayers. Hold family home evenings. But above all, be a worthy example."

Lest we think that Church leaders are less than fully committed to the family home evening program, we should review the instructions given in the General Handbook of Instructions. Note the following: "Parents are to hold a weekly family home evening to teach and strengthen their families. Stake and ward leaders are to reserve Monday evenings for families and keep those evenings free of stake and ward meetings and activities. Monday family home evenings may include instruction in gospel principles, in addition to gospel study on Sunday, learning Church hymns and songs, and family activities. The Church provides lessons and other materials for families to use in their family home evenings" (General Handbook of Instructions, March 1989, pp. 2-6).

It shouldn't be necessary to review other official announcements pertaining to the conduct of family home evenings. The counsel received from Church leaders about this "pecan tree" practice is voluminous and consistent over the years. Therefore, those who believe that leaders are inspired will comply with instructions received and become "doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving [their] own selves" (James 1:22). Otherwise, the promised blessings associated with the program will be forfeited and the welfare of children placed in jeopardy.

Considerations

It is not an easy thing to conduct a successful family home evening, especially if several children of varying ages are involved. Anyone who says it is easy has probably never done it or has extremely high tolerance for confusion, unexpected emergencies, and other distractions. Like anything else of value, success can be achieved if the right price is paid in terms of planning, preparation, and honest effort.

If my own performance as a father in conducting family home evenings had been impeccable, it would be easy for me to propose a "things to do" list. (I am not suggesting that I have failed as a father. Thanks to a wonderful wife and children naturally inclined toward righteousness, things have turned out quite well despite my shortcomings.) I shall, therefore, mention some considerations based primarily upon the statements of those we sustain as prophets, seers, and revelators. Regard the following thoughts as only a beginning. Other and perhaps even better ideas may surface as you seek to faithfully hold home evenings with your family.

The father can improve family home evenings by drawing close to his children during the week, by making it a habit to tuck them in bed every night, to talk with them, to listen to them, and turn his heart to them.

I learned a great lesson from one of the Brethren a few years ago—one that has meant much to our family.

"I leave my briefcase at the office," he said.

I didn't know what he meant, but he explained further.

"When I have work to do I may stay at the office even until midnight, but when I go home my briefcase is left at the office. When I am home, I am home and available to my children."

We have tried to follow this example in our family. It is difficult to follow, but it is possible. To follow it as a rule, with the necessary exceptions, is infinitely better than to have made no rule at all. If the father will do this, every evening can be something of a family home evening ("How the Priesthood Can Help Improve Family Home Evenings," December 1968, p. 4).

Parents, draw your children around you and, with great love, teach them about the Savior and his commandments. Help them to develop individual strength and commitment to keep the laws of God. Build lasting unity in a setting of learning and fun.

In conducting family home evenings, be flexible so that you may be guided by the Spirit. Let prayer, music, the scriptures, and brotherhood be the essentials of your home evenings. . . .

We promise again that as you faithfully plan and hold quality family home evenings, you will gain strength to withstand the temptations of the world and will receive many blessings which will help qualify you to enjoy your families through eternity in the Celestial Kingdom (Spencer W. Kimball, N. Eldon Tanner, Marion G. Romney, Family Home Evening, 1978, p. 2).

Prior to our move abroad on a Church assignment, a well-meaning friend approached me and asked, "Don't you hate the thoughts of leaving home?"

"No," I answered. "I'm taking my wife with me."

Home is where your love is. So long as you are accompanied or surrounded by those who love you and whom you love, you are home. It is not so much a place as it is a way of loving and living.

Of this type of family gathering, President Spencer W. Kimball said: "Concerning the governing of our families, we have been correctly taught that the family council is the most basic council of the Church. Under the direction of the father and mother, who should also counsel together, family councils may discuss family matters, discuss family finances, make plans, and support and strengthen family members. The Brethren have stated that an atmosphere of listening, honest communication, and respect for the opinions and feelings of others is vital to the success of these meetings" (The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982], pp. 343-44).

Under the direction of the father, the family should hold a regular family home evening each week. The Church has kept Monday evening free of other activities so that families can be together to hold family home evening.

As patriarch of his home, the father presides (acts as president and gives direction) at the family home evening. The father (himself) conducts or appoints a family member to conduct the home evening.

The father either teaches the lesson or delegates the teaching of the lesson to his wife or to children who are old enough. Everyone who is old enough should be given opportunities to participate. Small children can help in such ways as leading the music, quoting scriptures, answering questions, holding pictures, passing out refreshments, and praying.

Wherever there is a family, home evenings can be held. A family may consist of one individual or of a man and his wife; it may include children and other relatives. Whatever the individual situation, each family will be blessed by holding (as they hold) home evenings.

If the father is absent from the family, the mother should assume the leadership and should carry out the family home evening responsibilities.

The following suggests a sample home evening program:

Opening song (by family)

Opening prayer (by a child)

Poem or scripture reading (by a family member)

Lesson (by father, mother, or an older child)

Activity (a game led by a family member and played by all of the family)

Closing song (by family)

Closing prayer (by family member)

Refreshments

A family can hold a home evening in many other ways. Any activity that brings the family together and strengthens their love for each other, as well as fostering righteous living, fills the function of a family home evening. Such activities include reading the scriptures, discussing the gospel, sharing testimonies, performing a service project, singing together, going on a picnic, playing a family game, hiking, and others. All home evenings should include prayer (Family Guidebook, pp. 7-9).

I quote two paragraphs from the introduction to the resource book printed under the caption "The Responsibility of Parents":

In the home, parents and children learn together to apply the gospel's teachings in their lives. You teach your children all day, every day whether you realize it or not. They pick up your habits, your prejudices, and your values from what you do as well as from what you say. The Lord has called you to be a parent, and he knows you can do it. You are part of his plan for his children.

Don't expect perfection from your children or from yourself all at once. Strive with your children to improve your lives little by little, step by step, line upon line each day. This book has been assembled to help you in your awesome responsibility as a parent. (Family Home Evening: Resource Book [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1983]).

These considerations may seem less important to parents who were raised in the pre-television and pre-video years, for there was a time when the activities of families were of necessity more home-centered. In a former day, each evening was spent at home, in the house, with parents and siblings. All activities, or nearly all, were homemade and held close to the hearth.

But times have changed. Many intrusions have been made upon the home, not the least of which is the electronic media. Moreover, society has become more mobile, and many influences have emerged that tend to pull youngsters out of the home and away from parents, even in the crucial formative years. Such conditions, if not checked, will weaken family ties and result in the demise of the most important organization of all—the family.

Learning the Hard Way

We all have a tendency to take certain things for granted until we are shocked into a realization of their importance. Such was the case with me and the need to hold regular family home evenings. The shock occurred when I was serving as a full-time mission president with my wife and seven children, ages five to eighteen.

I began the mission assignment with the firm resolve that I would serve with all my heart, might, mind, and strength, so that I might stand blameless before God (see D&C 4:2). I determined that I would go whenever and wherever someone needed me, and that I would not lose one missionary.

Once in the mission field, I was soon caught up in a whirlwind of activities. There was a continual round of zone conferences and missionary interviews to hold; an endless number of stake conferences to attend; and many, many firesides, cottage meetings, and training sessions. Each day was scheduled to the limit and beyond, leaving little or no time for the family.

My conscience bothered me for neglecting my wife, sons, and daughters. However, I rationalized away my errant behavior by telling myself that I was doing the Lord's work and shepherding his divinely called representatives.

One day I returned to the mission home from a long trip. My wife met me in the garage and indicated to me that we were slated to attend a "Back-to-School" program that evening in an elementary school where three of our children attended. "I'm too busy," I protested. "I have other commitments tonight."

My wife bristled slightly and stated firmly, "No, you have been neglecting the children, and you must go with me tonight for their sakes!"

Reluctantly, I canceled an appointment and accompanied my wife to the school. We went into the auditorium, where a brief orientation meeting was held. We were then instructed to visit each home room and view the work done by our children. In my organized way, I said, "Honey, you take one room and I'll take another. Then we will meet together in the third and last room." I was determined to get out of the school as soon as possible.

When we met at the third room, the teacher told us that there were two exhibits for us to see—one at the desk and one at the bulletin board. "You take the desk," I instructed my wife, "and I'll look at the board, and then we are out of here." I could not have been more impatient or selfish in my desires.

I quickly inspected a drawing made by our son. Then I glanced toward the desk, where my wife stood looking at a paper written by our boy. She stood there crying in the midst of the crowd. I rushed to her side and asked, "What is wrong?" She didn't say a word—just pointed to the paper on the desk. I read the following:

Essay—My LifeBy ——— Asay

I am a dumb boy.I belong to a dumb family.I live in a dumb house.I go to a dumb church.

More lines followed, each punctuated by the word dumb. I felt as if someone had struck me over the head with a baseball bat. How very nearsighted I had been! How very negligent I had been as a husband and father in fulfilling my most important priesthood responsibilities.

I returned home from that sobering experience with the determination that I would do whatever was necessary to erase the word dumb from my son's vocabulary. I determined that I would hold regular family home evenings once again and reinstate other family "pecan tree" practices that I had pushed aside or placed in limbo.

Moreover, I initiated the practice of being home on Monday afternoons to receive the children as they returned from school. I did so in casual clothes so that they would be assured that our family home evenings would not be disturbed or preempted by meetings or appointments of less significance.

I like to think that I have succeeded with the son who suffered from my negligence. I like to think that he and all of our children have been blessed by my example and teachings, including those presented in family home evenings. Perhaps the word dumb is in their vocabulary, but I hope that none are chained or burdened in their personal lives by its negative connotations.

Closing Thoughts

Anyone who is tempted to neglect the teaching and training of children in the home through family home evenings or other means should heed the following warning: "Parents are under obligation most solemn to instruct, train, and provide for their children. If they are indifferent or negligent and the children become evil or wicked, the parents are held responsible" (Heber J. Grant, Anthony W. Ivins, J. Reuben Clark, Jr., Messages of the First Presidency, June 17, 1933, p. 318).

On the other hand, those who do plant the "pecan tree" practice of family home evenings and who teach their children properly will nearly always reap success. This success has two parts. The first part relates to the future of each child, as expressed in this verse: "Train up a child in the way he should go: and when he is old, he will not depart from it" (Proverbs 22:6). The second part relates to the feelings children will forever harbor about home as expressed in the lyrics of a "There is my home, the spot I love so well, whose worth and beauty pen nor tongue can tell" (Hymns, no. 37).

What parent does not want a child to "turn out right?" What parent does not want a child to carry sweet memories of home? What parent does not long to declare:

I have no greater joy than to hear that my children walk in truth (3 John 1:4).
