Carlos E. Asay, Family Pecan Trees: Planting a Legacy of Faith at Home ( 1992)

Chapter Five

Names of Significance

A good name is rather to be chosen than great riches (Proverbs 22:1; emphasis added). A good name is better than precious ointment (Ecclesiastes 7:1; emphasis added).

"I hate my name!" exclaimed a young lady sitting onstage at a family reunion. She sobbed, "People mispronounce it, misspell it, and often make jokes about it. I'm going to have it changed to something that is easier to say and more pleasing to hear." Other feelings of disgust for her name were vented by the actress as she performed before a large audience of relatives.

Located on the set behind the young lady was a large tree with a person sequestered within the branches. This person asked, "Why do you criticize your family name?"

Somewhat startled by the talking tree, the girl blurted out, "Because it embarrasses me at times and makes me the brunt of snide remarks."

Said the hidden voice, "How much do you know about your name, its origins, and the people who bore it?"

In the ensuing dialogue between the tree and the girl, it was revealed that the complaining young lady knew little about her surname. Moreover, she acknowledged openly that her knowledge of the family tree, including its roots and branches, was woefully lacking.

For the next several minutes the Asay family history was acted out on stage before the young lady and a very interested group of spectators. The man in the tree served as the narrator, and a cast of actors, young and old, assumed the roles and played the parts.

One scene centered upon the earliest known beginnings of the Asay family in the state of New Jersey. Another scene highlighted those who forsook family and friends and embraced the restored gospel of Jesus Christ. This chapter of the family history was a wrenching one to watch and to contemplate as great personal sacrifices were made by Grandfather and Grandmother Asay. Still another scene depicted the adventures and harsh life experienced by our forebears in emigrating westward to Utah and participating in pioneer settlements. More scenes followed in sequence as the Asay story was told in word and song.

Throughout the dramatization, tribute was paid to those who had gone before and who had distinguished the Asay name. It was demonstrated that our grandfathers and grandmothers had glorious views of the future—views that prompted them to plant family pecan trees for the good of succeeding generations. It was emphasized that our forebears possessed love, faith, goodness, and other rare virtues and strengths of character. It was proven that the Asay name was more than a strange combination of four letters of the alphabet with heavy accent on the first "a." Asay was the name of a God-fearing, family-oriented, fun-loving, Christian-living, and foresighted people.

When the curtain fell at the close of the drama, a rather subdued and teary-eyed young lady was seen on stage. One could observe that she had repented many times over of the rash statements made earlier about her name. She expressed gratitude not only for the name but also for the parade of ancestors who had provided her such a rich heritage. Like many of us, she had complained and criticized out of ignorance. Not until she knew the facts about her people and their glorious past did she understand who she really was. And with that understanding, her name became a significant and precious possession.

Scriptures and Names

It is significant that "Adam gave names to all cattle, and to the fowl of the air, and to every beast of the field" while in the Garden of Eden (Moses 3:20). He also called his helpmeet "Woman, because she was taken out of man" (Moses 3:23). Later, according to the record, Adam called his wife's name Eve. He did not refer to her as "Ma," "dame," "madame," "it," or some other trivial or meaningless designation. He gave her that noble name of Eve, for it means "the mother of all living" (Moses 4:26; italics added).

The inspired pattern established by Adam in giving names of significance to others is well-established in the scriptures. For example, God changed Abram's name to Abraham when he was made a father of many nations (see Genesis 17:1-8). Sarai's name was changed to Sarah after she was blessed and told that she would be a "mother of nations" (Genesis 17:16). Joseph and Mary were commanded to name their son Jesus, "for he shall save his people from their sins"(Matthew 1:21). It was also revealed that others would call Christ's name "Emmanuel, which being interpreted is, God with us" (Matthew 1:23). And, so it has been with many, many others down through the stream of sacred and secular history.

Though all of Adam's children may not have received names of significance, many have, and it has made a difference. It made a difference in the lives of Helaman's sons, Nephi and Lehi. We read:

They remembered the words which their father Helaman spake unto them. And these are the words which he spake:

Behold, my sons, I desire that ye should remember to keep the commandments of God; and I would that ye should declare unto the people these words. Behold, I have given unto you the names of our first parents who came out of the land of Jerusalem; and this I have done that when you remember your names ye may remember them; and when ye remember them ye may remember their works; and when ye remember their works ye may know how that it is said, and also written, that they were good.

Therefore, my sons, I would that ye should do that which is good, that it may be said of you, and also written, even as it has been said and written of them (Helaman 5:5-7).

The record attests that Nephi and Lehi did pattern their lives after their forebears or namesakes and did bring honor to the names given them.

A Good Name

A modern illustration of the profound influence that a good name may have upon a person is provided by President George Albert Smith, the eighth president of the Church. Said he:

A number of years ago I was seriously ill. In fact, I think everyone gave me up but my wife. With my family I went to St. George, Utah, to see if it would improve my health. We went as far as we could by train, and then continued the journey in a wagon, in the bottom of which a bed had been made for me.

In St. George we arranged for a tent for my health and comfort, with a built-in floor raised about a foot above the ground, and we could roll up the south side of the tent to make the sunshine and fresh air available. I became so weak as to be scarcely able to move. It was a slow and exhausting effort for me even to turn over in bed.

One day, under these conditions, I lost consciousness of my surroundings and thought I had passed to the Other Side. I found myself standing with my back to a large and beautiful lake, facing a great forest of trees. There was no one in sight, and there was no boat upon the lake or any other visible means to indicate how I might have arrived there. I realized, or seemed to realize, that I had finished my work in mortality and had gone home. I began to look around, to see if I could not find someone. There was no evidence of anyone's living there, just those great, beautiful trees in front of me and the wonderful lake behind me.

I began to explore, and soon I found a trail through the woods which seemed to have been used very little, and which was almost obscured by grass. I followed this trail, and after I had walked for some time and had traveled a considerable distance through the forest, I saw a man coming towards me. I became aware that he was a very large man, and I hurried my steps to reach him, because I recognized him as my grandfather. In mortality he weighed over three hundred pounds, so you may know he was a large man. I remember how happy I was to see him coming. I had been given his name and had always been proud of it.

When Grandfather came within a few feet of me, he stopped. His stopping was an invitation for me to stop. Then—and this I would like the boys and girls and young people never to forget—he looked at me very earnestly and said:

"I would like to know what you have done with my name."

Everything I had ever done passed before me as though it were a flying picture on a screen—everything I had done. Quickly this vivid retrospect came down to the very time I was standing there. My whole life had passed before me. I smiled and looked at my grandfather and said:

"I have never done anything with your name of which you need be ashamed."

He stepped forward and took me in his arms, and as he did so, I became conscious again of my earthly surroundings. My pillow was as wet as though water had been poured on it—wet with tears of gratitude that I could answer unashamed.

I have thought of this many times, and I want to tell you that I have been trying, more than ever since that time, to take care of that name. So I want to say to the boys and girls, to the young men and women, to the youth of the Church and of all the world: Honor your fathers and your mothers. Honor the names that you bear, because some day you will have the privilege and the obligation of reporting to them (and to your Father in heaven) what you have done with their name. ("Your Good Name," Improvement Era, March 1947, p. 139.)

Names of Daughters

My wife and I named our first daughter Marcianne. We did so for many reasons, not the least of which was the fact that we both loved and revered the name of my wife's grandmother. Our Marcianne was born as Grandmother Marci was dying. The one was introduced to the other in a brief moment of cradling on a deathbed. At the time it was wondered whether the one was conscious of the other in that brief exchange of love and whether a spiritual bonding had taken place.

Such bonding, however, did take place in some wonderful way. For as the years have passed, we have observed in Marci the younger's life a gradual acquisition of the priceless virtues shown in the life of Marci the elder. Yes, we have extolled to our daughter the goodnesses of her namesake time and time again. Yes, we have tried to keep alive the name of an elect lady who helped bring my wife and me together. But a miracle has happened to our daughter as she has acquired the personality, disposition, and inherent Christ-like qualities of one who lived years before. In some marvelous manner, a linkage between two people of different generations has occurred through a name and through a stream of blessed memories.

Our youngest daughter is named Carleen—half of Carlos and half of Colleen. The name was given after long thought and consideration and at the end of a line of five consecutive sons. We assigned the name because it represents the scripture, "Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife, and they shall be one flesh" (Abraham 5:18). From the very beginning, our hopes have been that she would imitate and acquire the best from each of us and rise far above the stature we have carved out for ourselves. She is not disappointing us in the least degree. She is everything and more than we ever expected.

Names—Priesthood Ordinance

In The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, there is a priesthood ordinance referred to as the naming and blessing of children. This ordinance is performed by the power and authority of the Holy Melchizedek Priesthood and includes giving a child a name, adding words of blessings as the Spirit dictates, and closing in the name of Jesus Christ. It is written: "Every member of the church of Christ having children is to bring them unto the elders before the church, who are to lay their hands upon them in the name of Jesus Christ, and bless them in his name" (D&C 20:70).

This ordinance is sacred and should be performed properly. It must not be performed in a perfunctory manner with little thought to form or substance. It should be done with the child's best interests at heart and in the spirit of love and prophecy. Those who bring honor to this practice do the following: (1) select prayerfully and carefully the name to be given, (2) seek for inspiration and guidance in what to say, (3) retain in mind the blessing pronounced, and (4) help the child understand and gain appreciation for the name and blessing as he or she grows to maturity. By doing those things, the ordinance can become a sacred and happy experience for the family.

We should never forget that the ultimate pattern for the blessing of children was set by the Savior: "He took them [children] up in his arms, put his hands upon them, and blessed them" (Mark 10:16). "He took their little children, one by one, and blessed them, and prayed unto the Father for them" (3 Nephi 17:21).

First to Know

I like the spirit and humble intent shown in the following practice among some African people: "By ancient custom, for the next seven days, there was but a single task with which Omoro would seriously occupy himself: the selection of a name for his firstborn son. It would have to be a name rich with history and with promise, for the people of his tribe—the Mandinkas—believed that a child would develop seven of the characteristics of whomever or whatever he was named for. . . . Omoro then walked out before all the assembled people of the village. Moving to his wife's side, he lifted up the infant and, as all watched, whispered three times into his son's ears the name he had chosen for him. It was the first time the name had ever been spoken as this child's name, for Omoro's people felt that each human being should be the first to know who he was." (Alex Haley, Roots [Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday & Co., 1976], pp. 2-3; italics added.)

Whenever I think of Omoro and the custom practiced by his people, I am reminded of some family folklore. It is said in family circles that only moments after my wife's birth, her father wrapped her in a towel and walked out of the house and onto the front porch. He then lifted his first-born child high into the air and declared, "Colleen, look at the world." According to the story reported in an old baby book, the infant stopped crying, opened her eyes, and looked about.

I don't suspect that anyone has ever been able to count or even estimate the number of times a person hears, reads, or says his or her name during a lifetime. The number is unquestionably high and in the millions. To most, I would guess, the sound or sight is pleasing and provokes good feelings. To others, however, the result is unfortunately the opposite. What makes the difference? It is in the choosing, the giving, and the guarding of the words that designate "you" and cause "you" to stand out from all the rest.

How very important it is that parents plant the "pecan tree" of names of significance in their family gardens and cause that tree to grow and to bear fruit! They must not pull names blindly from a hat and pin them upon their children. They must not bring disgrace upon the names shared with children, causing them to seek a change like the children of Amulon—children who were so displeased with the conduct of their fathers that they forsook the names of their fathers and took upon themselves another name (see Mosiah 25:1-12). Parents must help children retain good names in remembrance (see Jacob 1:10-11), cause good names to be written in their hearts (see Mosiah 5:12), and safeguard the names given by way of inspiration.

Keep Names Alive

Shakespeare wrote:

But he that filches [steals] from me my good name, Robs me of that which not enriches him, And makes me poor indeed. (Othello.)

These words remind us that we should safeguard our names by living beyond reproach and by seeking to bring honor to namesakes and family members who have provided us with a rich inheritance.

Joseph Smith, Jr., must have been sobered somewhat when he learned of the prophecy made by Joseph, the son of Jacob, who was carried captive into Egypt. The prophecy was: "Behold, that seer will the Lord bless; and they that seek to destroy him shall be confounded; for this promise, which I have obtained of the Lord, of the fruit of my loins, shall be fulfilled. Behold, I am sure of the fulfilling of this promise; and his name shall be called after me; and it shall be after the name of his father. And he shall be like unto me; for the thing, which the Lord shall bring forth by his hand, by the power of the Lord shall bring my people unto salvation" (2 Nephi 3:14-15).

Not only was Joseph Smith commissioned to keep alive an important name, but he was also commissioned to be "like unto" his namesakes—his father and Joseph of old. One can conjecture that the prophecy made and the name given did much to keep the prophet of the restoration in the path of duty. He had important promises to keep and high expectations to fulfill.

I ask three questions: If we don't keep alive the names of yesterday's heroes, who will? If we don't bestow names of significance, how will we weld one generation to another? If we don't help the rising generation bear nobly the names given them by parents, how shall they bear properly the name given them when they come unto Christ and take upon them his holy name? (see Moroni chapters 4 and 5).

Christians

We read of a great leader who rallied his followers in defense of their country by writing upon a piece of his coat and holding it before his people. The inscription read, "In memory of our God, our religion, and freedom, and our peace, our wives, and our children" (Alma 46:12).

This leader, whose name was Moroni, led the armies of a people "who were true believers in Christ" and who "took upon [themselves], gladly, the name of Christ, or Christians as they were called" (Alma 46:15). Chief Captain Moroni and his troops were willing to bear the name of Christ and were deeply honored to be members of his Church. They knew that if they were called by some other name, they would be found on the left hand of God. They also knew that the name could only be blotted out through transgression. Consequently, they retained the name written always in their hearts and heard and knew the voice by which they were called, and also the name by which God would call them (see Mosiah 5:10-12).

Those who take upon themselves the name of Christ are prepared to do so by bearing their family and given names nobly and honorably. True believers in Christ honor their fathers and their mothers; they possess a special love for family members; they fight zealously in defense of their God, religion, freedom, peace, wives, children, and their good names; and, they will not allow transgression or any influence to blemish the name that distinguishes them from all other members of Adam's family.

Some converts to the doctrine of Christ pleaded for a name that would distinguish themselves from all others. A name was given. Later, this same group of people "were also distinguished for their zeal towards God, and also towards men; for they were perfectly honest and upright in all things; and they were firm in the faith of Christ, even unto the end" (Alma 27:26-27). Just how much the name influenced the righteousness of the people of Ammon is not certain. But one is led to believe that the name helped to motivate the people in living as real Christians.

God Knows Our Names

In his personal history, Joseph Smith describes in detail his first vision or visit with the Father and the Son. Said Joseph: "One of them spake unto me, calling me by name and said, pointing to the other—'This is My Beloved Son, Hear Him!'" (Joseph Smith-History 1:17; italics added).

Joseph must have thrilled at the sound of his name. God knew him! And, God acknowledged his presence by saying, "Joseph." It wasn't, "Hey, you," or "Fella," or some other impersonal and casual greeting. He was addressed by the name given him by his loving parents, even the name of his own father.

Later, the Angel Moroni also called Joseph by name. We read from Joseph's account, "He called me by name, and said unto me that he was a messenger sent from the presence of God to me, and that his name was Moroni; that God had a work for me to do; and that my name should be had for good and evil among all nations, kindreds, and tongues, or that it should be both good and evil spoken of among all people" (Joseph Smith-History 1:33; italics added).

Two names were used in this conversation—the name of the messenger (Moroni) and the name of the person visited (Joseph). Both Moroni and Joseph were known to God, and both were worthy of the names given them. Remember always,

As the new heavens and the new earth, which I will make, shall remain before me, saith the Lord, so shall your seed and your name remain (Isaiah 66:22; emphasis added).
