Carlos E. Asay, Family Pecan Trees: Planting a Legacy of Faith at Home ( 1992)

Chapter Six

Personal Parent Interviews

Accordingly, as I had been commanded, I went at the end of each year, and at each time I found the same messenger there, and received instruction and intelligence from him at each of our interviews, respecting what the Lord was going to do, and how and in what manner his kingdom was to be conducted in the last days (Joseph Smith-History 1:54; emphasis added).

Few men and women are privileged to communicate face to face with angels as did the Prophet Joseph Smith. Such spiritual experiences are usually reserved for those who have special missions to perform or special purposes to fulfill. Nevertheless, all of God's children, including our sons and daughters, deserve the opportunity of being interviewed from time to time by loving parents who converse "like unto angels of God" and who speak with the Holy Ghost or "tongue of angels" (D&C 42:6; 2 Nephi 32:2).

I am intrigued that Joseph referred to his interviews with the Angel Moroni as "our interviews." One concludes that Joseph, the interviewee, was fully involved as he received instructions and intelligence from his interviewer, else why would he use the word "our"? Though the record doesn't provide us with any details about Joseph's participation in the interview, other than listening, one does wonder whether he answered questions or expressed personal views.

A Model

When I think of the interviews conducted by the Angel Moroni with Joseph Smith, my mind turns to that inspiring exchange between the risen Christ and Peter: "When they had dined, Jesus saith to Simon Peter, Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me more than these? He saith unto him, Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love thee. He saith unto him, Feed my lambs. He saith to him again the second time, Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me? He saith unto him, Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love thee. He saith unto him, Feed my sheep. He saith unto him the third time, Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me? Peter was grieved because he said unto him the third time, Lovest thou me? And he said unto him, Lord, thou knowest all things; thou knowest that I love thee. Jesus saith unto him, Feed my sheep" (John 21:15-17).

Included in this sacred conversation between the Master and the chief apostle are all the elements of a successful interview. Questions were asked evoking personal feelings; answers were given revealing a depth of faith; a commission was given; and a commitment was received. No idle words were spoken, nor was there any obliqueness of purpose shown by either party.

Too many parents, I fear, ignore these examples and fail to hold parent-child interviews. Some may feel too busy to do so. Others may feel they can save all the children as a flock or as part of the herd. But whatever the excuse, those who allow this "pecan tree" practice to wilt and die are making a terrible mistake, forfeiting opportunities to give and receive instruction and intelligence.

Wet or Dry?

Several years ago, I approached one of my daughters and said, "My dear, it's time for an interview." Her response was less than enthusiastic, and I determined within my own mind that she might have found our past interviews somewhat boring. So instead of subjecting her to a formal conversation, I invited her into the car and drove to the Dairy Queen, where we both enjoyed a root beer float. All the way to and from the store, I asked questions, and she freely responded. She didn't even realize that she was being interviewed—or at least that is what I thought. A few weeks later, I announced once again that I wanted to interview her. This time she promptly asked, "Wet or dry?"

I wonder if our conduct of good practices—even the conducting of interviews with our children—is sometimes done in a dry and deadening manner. Is it possible that in our drive to perform or fulfill a Church expectancy, we collide with purpose? Can we not become so obsessed with form that we forget family? If so, perhaps we should ask ourselves whether within we are "full of dead men's bones" (Matthew 23:27).

When I think of dry performances, my mind turns to the ancients who altered the lesser law. They multiplied rituals, ceremonies, and symbols to the extent that the law itself was worshiped more than the Lord. In fact, the law was so abused that it pointed people away from, not forward to, the Messiah.

The acceptable performance, I feel, is made "wet" and given zest by the living waters that issue from Christ. It is a performance founded upon such inspired teachings as:

Â "[You] must have no other object in view . . . but to glorify God, and must not be influenced by any other motive than that of building his kingdom" (Joseph Smith-History 1:46).

Â "He that is greatest among you shall be your servant" (Matthew 23:11).

Â "The letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life" (2 Corinthians 3:6).

Â "When thou doest alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doeth" (Matthew 6:3).

Living performances are void of vain repetition and stiffness and self-centered tendencies. They are made by Saints who speak and act according to the feelings of their hearts and the Spirit of the Lord, which is in them (see 2 Nephi 4:12).

A Classic Interview

Alma's interview with Helaman is a classic "wet" and refreshing performance. It is a short, three-question, forty-five second exchange between father and son. According to the record, Alma was approaching the end of his ministry. He knew that he must select someone to assume prophetic and record-keeping responsibilities. Helaman was his choice. Alma came to his son and asked: "Believest thou the words which I spake unto thee concerning those records which have been kept?"

Without hesitation, Helaman answered: "Yea, I believe." He might have said, "Yes, I believe in the scriptures; and yes, I believe all that you have taught me."

Alma's second question was simply, "Believest thou in Jesus Christ, who shall come?" Again, without delay, Helaman stated, "Yea, I believe all the words which thou hast spoken."

What a tribute to the father! He had talked of Christ, rejoiced in Christ, preached of Christ, and taught his son to know the source to which he might look for a remission of his sins (see 2 Nephi 25:26).

Up to this point in the interview, the father's questions were sampling the son's basic beliefs. Now it was essential that those beliefs be tested and determined as being more than idle lip service. Alma's capstone inquiry was, "Will ye keep my commandments?"

I am not certain what went through Helaman's mind as he prepared to give his final response. He knew the necessity of honoring his parents and respecting priesthood authority. His previous actions had verified this fact. I like to think that Helaman's reply was promoted by a heartfelt desire to be obedient rather than by a fear of authority. Deep love of God and father were reflected in his words: "Yea, I will keep thy commandments with all my heart."

It is a marvelous thing when a father is able to make his commandments square perfectly with God's expectations. Apparently, this condition was achieved by Alma, for Helaman was ready and willing to obey with all his heart.

This short, informative, and inspiring interview must have pleased Alma greatly. Not only had he communicated heart-to-heart and soul-to-soul with his son, but the son had openly declared his faith and pledged his devotion. To culminate the exchange, Alma, under the inspiration of the Spirit, prophesied and extended this blessing: "Blessed art thou; and the Lord shall prosper thee in this land" (see Alma 45:2-8).

I wonder if our interviews with our children are as inspirational and building as the one between Alma and Helaman. I find it significant that the father came to the son; the son was not summoned to stand inspection or to give a report. I find it refreshing that the conversation was direct and without any verbal sparring; it was not labored or rehearsed. I find it exemplary that commitment was drawn without prying, wringing, or pressuring. And I find it most beautiful that the father concluded with a tender blessing.

Is this not a performance, or a pattern of communicating, that we should follow? And I refer to the principles involved, not necessarily to the form.

Applying the Alma-Helaman Approach

On one occasion when I arrived home late from an assignment, my wife expressed concern about one of our sons. She was worried that his mind was not riveted upon serving a mission, and she said as much to me. Her concerns certainly captured my attention, and I asked where the son was. She told me that he was in his room getting ready for bed. Immediately I went to the room and sat on the edge of his bed. When I asked if I could speak with him a moment, he said, "Certainly."

The hour was late. He was tired, and so was I. I could see that nothing would be gained by a long conversation. And following the direct Alma-and-Helaman approach, the conversation went something like this:

"Son, are you still planning on serving a mission?"

"Yes," he answered. "I've always planned on serving, and I haven't changed."

"Son, do you know what qualifies a young man to serve a mission? Do you know what worthiness means?"

"Yes, Dad," he said. "I understand the requirements and standards of worthiness that must be met."

I said, "Thank you. I have one last question: Are you clean and worthy to serve? Could you accept a call if one were issued you today?"

There was a moment of reflective silence; then he declared: "It isn't easy. Temptation is real and found everywhere. However, since you've asked, I am clean and I am worthy to serve."

This was a wonderful, beautiful, spontaneous, and sanctifying experience.

I thanked my son, kissed him, assured him of my love, and bid him goodnight. I returned to my bedroom and told my wife that all was well and that she could sleep peacefully.

Interviewing Skills

Textbooks have been written about interviewing skills and practices. Various experts have discussed the importance of creating the ideal setting, using the right body language, asking the right questions, and voicing the appropriate cues. But, however important these patterns and forms may be, no elements are more essential to a successful interview than purity of motive and a willingness to listen.

Children can discern quickly whether they are loved and appreciated. In conversations with adults, they can part the curtain of deceit and sort out the chaff very quickly. They can readily tell if your attention is divided or if your mind is running ahead to another appointment. Yes, they can perceive if the conversation is intended to fulfill your appointment or to fulfill their needs.

My wife is the world's best conversationalist. She can talk freely and easily with anyone, especially with our children. Her success is not attributed to her mouth, but rather to her ear and heart. She listens willingly and with empathy. Any conversation with her is face-to-face, ear-to-ear, and heart-to-heart.

Commitments

In my youth, I had a priesthood leader who believed in the worth of personal interviews. He was a marvelous speaker at the pulpit, and I enjoyed listening to his many sermons. However, as I think back over the years when I heard him instruct at stake conferences, I cannot identify one specific talk he gave. All of the messages he ever gave in my presence have melded into one general impression that rests in my mind.

What I do recall with great detail, however, are the three personal interviews he held with me—one on a bank corner, one on the welfare farm in a sugar-beet field, and one in his home. On each occasion, he centered all of his attention upon me and no one else. He didn't have to tell me he loved me and cared about my welfare. The effort he made to meet with me and the time allocated in my behalf was evidence enough. I was the focal point; my goals and aspirations were his concern; obtaining righteous commitments was his intent. I hold the man in cherished memory for what he did for me through personal interviews.

How wonderful it would be if parents followed the example of my former leader and did the same! Children and youth thrive upon the attention gained through one-on-one contacts and receive wonderful direction from those who care, who take the time to sit with one of the "little ones" and talk.

"Dad, May We Talk?"

While I was serving as a mission president, one of my sons taught me a valuable lesson. He returned home at the close of a school day with a burden on his mind—a burden too heavy for him to carry alone. He came immediately to my office but was turned away by an assistant who informed him that I had missionary interviews scheduled well into the evening. This information disappointed my son because he needed me now, not later. He sat in a corner brooding and wondering what he could do to change the situation. After a few minutes, he noticed that the assistant had placed a stack of interview sheets outside my office door on a chair and that I was working my way down the stack sheet-by-sheet, missionary-by-missionary. When the assistant's attention was distracted, my son took one of the interview sheets, scribbled on it, and placed it on top of the stack.

I opened the door and picked up a sheet. It read: "Dad, may we talk? I have a serious problem!" I did, of course, oblige my son, conducting one of the most important interviews I have ever held.

Children must have access to parents, especially when crises arise. The door must be kept ajar so that sons and daughters may enter and so that questions may be answered, instructions given, and assurance voiced at the moment children are ready to learn.

A Concluding Word

I do see great wisdom in the practices and performances we encourage parents to follow in the Church. There is virtue in sponsoring family home evenings, in conducting family prayers, in giving blessings, and in holding parent-child interviews. All of these are important and have their place. However, the participation in such performances and the reporting of such activity must not become the end. They are means of involving, teaching, and blessing people. All should be engaged in for the purpose of saving and exalting souls.

I thank God for my wife and my children; they make life so very meaningful. I thank God for the restored Church and for living prophets who have provided inspired programs that benefit me, my family, and others. And I'm grateful for the gospel, which comes from the fountain of living waters—even Jesus Christ.

It is imperative that we not confuse means and ends or become confused with performances at the expense of the spirit underlying all commandments. May our interviews, our prayers, our communications with our children, and other family practices be sanctifying to ourselves and our loved ones and free of dryness and "dead men's bones."

The fruit of the "pecan tree" practice of personal interviews is sweet and "desirable to make one happy" (1 Nephi 8:10). Those who plant and cultivate it carefully may rejoice as Lehi rejoiced:

I did go forth and partake of the fruit thereof; and I beheld that it was most sweet, above all that I ever before tasted. Yea, and I beheld that the fruit thereof was white, to exceed all the whiteness that I had ever seen. And as I partook of the fruit thereof it filled my soul with exceedingly great joy; wherefore, I began to be desirous that my family should partake of it also; for I knew that it was desirable above all other fruit (1 Nephi 8:11-12).
