Carlos E. Asay, Family Pecan Trees: Planting a Legacy of Faith at Home ( 1992)

Chapter Seven

Memories

In memory of our God, our religion, and freedom, and our peace, our wives, and our children (Alma 46:12).

A few years ago, I delivered a devotional address at Brigham Young University. I was introduced by President Jeffrey R. Holland, who gave a rather long and flowery biographical sketch of my life, including some flattering remarks about my basketball career at the University of Utah. My response began with these words: "President Holland's remarks about my former athletic accomplishments remind me that there is some virtue in growing older. That virtue is: (1) record books become covered with dust, and (2) memories of people tend to become fuzzy. Therefore, one can ride the bench with a team at the university, yet ten years later, in the minds of most, have been a regular performer. Twenty years after graduation, he is remembered as an all-conference player. Thirty years later, he is an all-American. In just two more years, if dust is not blown off the books and memories refreshed, I fully expect to be inducted into the Basketball Hall of Fame in Springfield, Massachusetts" (BYU Marriott Center, February 26, 1985).

Record books do collect dust if not used, and memories of people do fade with time unless something is done to preserve special experiences. That is why conscientious and caring parents not only strive to provide their children with pleasant and unforgettable experiences, but they also try to retain these experiences with the use of photographs, diaries, tape recorders, and other means of storing memorable occurrences. All of this is done, I believe, because memories, especially those of parents and home, constitute a kind of "security blanket" for most people—a blanket that can be handled and cradled in times of emotional stress, imminent danger, or extreme challenge.

I have wondered about the circumstances of the one who wrote:

I cannot go to rest, but linger still In meditation at my window sill, While, like the twinkling stars in heaven's dome, Come one by one sweet memories of home. And wouldst thou ask me where my fancy roves To reproduce the happy scenes it loves, Where hope and memory together dwell And paint the pictured beauties that I tell? . . . There is my home, the spot I love so well, Whose worth and beauty pen nor tongue can tell. (Hymns, no. 37; italics added.)

I wonder, too, what the Whitney family did to plant in the heart of Orson F. the feelings he expressed in these lines. His blanket of tender memories was surely not woven by chance or accident. It must have been sewn by those who knew that the "pecan tree" practice of preserving cherished memories was a matter of great importance.

The Mind

I find it incredible that the human brain has the storage capacity of one quadrillion bits of information, as some experts have said. If this is true, allowing for the possible error of ten or twelve bits, why do we have such difficulty memorizing the thirteen Articles of Faith, the six missionary discussions, the basics of a biology course? Or, why is it sometimes so hard to recall our home telephone number on the spur of the moment?

Nevertheless, the mind, where memories are stored, is a marvelous phenomenon. "The mind," said John Milton, "is its own place, and in itself can make a heaven of hell, and a hell of heaven." The difference would be in its contents and use. As stated in Proverbs: "The memory of the just is blessed: but the name of the wicked shall rot" (Proverbs 10:7).

I am not qualified to treat this topic as a professional psychologist would, nor as someone else would who understands the wonders of the human mind. I do, however, want to share some thoughts and feelings about memory and remembering, as related to the gospel of Jesus Christ and our spiritual welfare. I hope the thoughts I share will help you preserve cherished memories for yourself and your family.

Memory and Mood

Memory, according to the experts, often conditions our moods. Those who remember only the disappointing experiences of life tend to become bitter and cynical. Those who recall only their enemies and the forces mustered against them may lose their courage. Those who recall only past injuries may continue to feud with the world. But those who recall the positive and encouraging things remain bright and optimistic.

Dr. Ernest A. Fitzgerald observed: "The memory is a window through which life is viewed. The color of that window determines the color of our world." How awful it would be to walk through life with everything distorted by the red of anger, the blue of despair, the black of fear, or the green of envy.

I do not know the color of Enos's life when he went into the forests to hunt beasts and had his wrestle before God. I am led to think it was somewhat gray, for he had not received a remission of his sins. However, as he stimulated his memory by recalling the words of eternal life spoken by his father, and as he reflected upon the joy of the Saints, the cloud of gloom was dispelled. Through prayer and the exercise of faith, Enos emerged from the woods colored in the rays of heavenly light (see Enos 1:1-8).

I know the color of Alma's life as he and others sought to destroy the church of God. He states that when he remembered all of his sins, he was racked with eternal torment. Then, when he remembered all that his father had prophesied about Christ's atonement, something marvelous occurred. He said: "When I thought this, I could remember my pains no more; yea, I was harrowed up by the memory of my sins no more. And oh, what joy, and what marvelous light I did behold; yea, my soul was filled with joy as exceeding as was my pain! Yea, . . . there could be nothing so exquisite and so bitter as were my pains. Yea, and . . . on the other hand, there can be nothing so exquisite and sweet as was my joy" (Alma 36:19-21).

Elijah is another interesting case in point. Even though he had slain the prophets of Baal and witnessed heavenly powers, he lost his courage and the desire to live when hunted by wicked Queen Jezebel. The Lord sent an angel, the whisperings of "a still small voice," and other reassurances to change his mood (see 1 Kings 19).

At a critical time in Nephite history, Moroni rent his coat and wrote upon it, "In memory of our God, our religion, and freedom, and our peace, our wives, and our children" (Alma 46:12). This "Title of Liberty" was hoisted before the people to rally them to the colors of "true believers" or Christians. By stirring the memories of his people in this manner, their moods were changed, and a just cause was defended.

Do you allow your mind to wallow in memory of past hurts and injuries, thus becoming blind to everything else? Or do you recall the positive and encouraging things that cause your life to remain bright and optimistic? What is the color of your memories? Remember, the memories are yours, and the palette and brushes are in your hands. Be certain that you use the right colors as you paint the past and niche it in your mind.

Memory and Testimony

In our missionary service, we frequently invite our investigator friends to obtain a testimony by reading the Book of Mormon and praying about its contents. Our point of reference is chapter 10 of Moroni, verses 3-5. We usually say to our friends: "Read this book and ask God if it is not true." Then we promise, as the book states, that "he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost."

I don't fault any who have used this process. I do, however, suggest a better and more successful approach. Let me read the verses and highlight four steps to a testimony, two of which are often neglected: "Behold, I would exhort you that when ye shall [1] read these things, . . . that ye would [2] remember how merciful the Lord hath been unto the children of men, from the creation of Adam even down until the time that ye shall receive these things, and [3] ponder it in your hearts. . . . I would exhort you that ye would [4] ask God . . . if these things are not true; and . . . he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost" (Moroni 10:3-4; italics added).

I emphasize two words, remember and ponder. I do so because I feel strongly that reading the things of God without remembering and pondering how those things fit into the divine scheme tends to confuse, not enlighten. Enlightenment occurs and truth is revealed as things are fitted together in an understandable way. In the process, the mind is stimulated, the memory is stirred, and the heart is prepared to respond to the whisperings of the Spirit.

Ammon rehearsed many truths to King Lamoni before he was converted. Among other things, "he began at the creation of the world, and also the creation of Adam, and told him all the things concerning the fall of man, and . . . laid before him the records and the holy scriptures of the people, which had been spoken by the prophets" (Alma 18:36).

Similarly, Aaron did the same with the father of Lamoni. He, as did Ammon, preached of Adam, the Fall, the plan of redemption, and the atonement of Christ. All of this was done to place things in proper perspective and to build the foundations of a testimony.

When your testimony sags or appears to stumble along the way, why not remember the goodness of the Lord? In the process of positive recall, perhaps you can experience the spiritual healing that King Lamoni and his father expressed. How exhilarating it is to ponder the merciful nature of God, and how healing it is to remember the eternal gifts of Christ!

Memories and Models

Most of us have been deeply influenced by other men and women. I suspect that this is the way it should be. Elder James E. Talmage wrote that the Father's original purpose was "to use persuasive influences of wholesome precept and sacrificing example with the inhabitants of the earth, then to leave them free to choose for themselves" (The Articles of Faith, 12th ed. [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1924], p. 55; italics added).

All of us, I would guess, have a model or hero tucked away in the recesses of our memory. You could have many. From time to time you may think of that model and from him or her draw needed inspiration. This is particularly true when the hill you are required to climb seems insurmountable or the decision to be made seems especially difficult.

Helaman knew the value of memories and models, for he instructed his sons: "I have given unto you the names of our first parents who came out of the land of Jerusalem; and this I have done that when you remember your names ye may remember them; and when ye remember them ye may remember their works; and when ye remember their works ye may know how that it is said, and also written, that they were good. Therefore, my sons, I would that ye should do that which is good, that it may be said of you, and also written, even as it has been said and written of them" (Helaman 5:6-7).

You should not clutter your memories with men or women of doubtful reputation. They will disappoint you and drag you downward. Rather, you should selectively place in your mind the giants of goodness and, each time you think of them, resolve that you will walk in their footprints and go beyond their mark.

Memory and Thoughts

"The mind," said Dr. Ernest A. Fitzgerald, "feeds on the food that is placed at its disposal." Therefore, "what we give to our minds will eventually determine what they contain." This certainly is no startling fact; everyone seems to know it. Yet, people continue to read pornographic materials, view smutty and suggestive films, and sing songs with filthy lyrics. Wittingly or not, those who do these things will store polluted memories and reap a bitter harvest.

I find it difficult to understand how some members of the Church can blatantly disregard this divine injunction: "Let virtue garnish thy thoughts unceasingly; then shall thy confidence wax strong in the presence of God; and the doctrine of the priesthood shall distil upon thy soul as the dews from heaven. The Holy Ghost shall be thy constant companion, and thy scepter an unchanging scepter of righteousness and truth" (D&C 121:45-46).

What a gold mine of promises is hidden in this scripture! Who in his or her right mind would place in jeopardy the promise of confidence, the doctrine of the priesthood, and the companionship of the Holy Ghost?

Christina Rossetti wrote:

I have a room where into no one enters Save I myself alone. There sits a blessed memory on a throne There my life centers. (Italics added.)

If we counted or enthroned our blessings more, our memories would become pleasant, and our lives would be much happier. I like these thoughts:

The sun was shining in my eyes And I could hardly see To do the necessary task That was allotted me. Resentment of the vivid glow I started to complain When all at once upon the air I heard the blindman's cane. (Earl Musselman.)

Over and beyond the counting of blessings and the garnishing of thoughts with virtue, let me share one more thing pertaining to memory and thoughts. A noted physician counseled: "Know the great souls that make up the moral radium of the world. You must be born of the spirit, initiated into their fraternity. . . . Life is a straight, plain business [game], and the way is clear, blazed for you by generations of strong men, into whose labours you enter and whose ideals must be your inspiration" (A Way of Life, pp. 37-38).

Do not become enslaved by destructive or degrading thoughts. They can become as strong and debilitating as Satan's iron chains. There is an old story about a man who was recalling the hardships of his early life. He exaggerated to such limits that his wife felt constrained to correct him. "Be quiet," he said to her. "Half of the fun of remembering the good old days is rearranging them." To rearrange one's memories may not be too bad, if we don't embellish to the point that we lose contact with truth.

I was in a meeting with one of my friends when he was requested to tell a story, one he had related on many occasions. Knowing his own tendency to embellish, he smiled and asked, "Do you want me to tell it as I told it last time or as it actually happened?"

Do not forget that memory and thoughts are inseparably connected; one runs into the other. So garnish your thoughts with virtue, count your blessings, and have fellowship with the great minds of the race. Those actions will build you a sacred sanctuary of pleasant memories.

Memory and You

A number of years ago, I read these words: "It is said that God gave us memory so we could have roses in winter. But it is also true that without memory we could not have self in any season. The more memories you have, the more 'you' you have. That is why, as Swift said, no wise man ever wished to be younger" (George F. Will, "On Turning 40," Newsweek, April 27, 1981, p. 104).

I did not fully appreciate memories and self until I, with the help of others, compiled my oral history. I gave my wife a rough copy of my life story and asked her to edit it. My instructions were, "You know me better than I know myself, so please read it carefully and polish the manuscript."

A half hour later, when I returned to see how she was doing, she was crying. I said, "My goodness, is it that bad?"

"No," she answered, "it is that good!"

"Have you made any changes?" I asked.

"No," she replied, "it is you speaking, and I don't want to erase or edit you out of the record."

We later gave bound copies of my history to our children. Both of us thought that the book would probably be placed on a shelf and remain unread. A few weeks later, however, one of our daughters said to me, "Dad, I love you so very much."

I asked: "What brought this on?"

She explained, "It was your oral history; I have been reading about your life."

Do we not read that records kept by the ancients enlarged the memory of the people? Of course they did. Records do preserve language, safeguard truth, and inspire future readers if they are kept properly.

What a pity it would be if your children and grandchildren were denied that part of you that really should be recorded. Make certain that you are transmitting to your posterity, along with other graces of life, your innermost thoughts, your poignant feelings, and your sincere testimonies. You owe the rising generation this blessing and more.

Enlarge the memories of those who follow you with your records, leave for them a part of you, and extend to them an opportunity to hold you in cherished memory.

I could say so much more about memory and remembering as related to you and the gospel of Jesus Christ. For instance, I've said nothing about the need to remember our sacred covenants, our vows, our ordinances. I've said nothing about all of the "types and shadows" mentioned in the scriptures that have been given to direct our thoughts in the proper direction and keep us on the right path. Nor have I alluded to the role that memory will play on Judgment Day. I leave it up to you to research the subject further and to fill in all the blanks.

I stress the importance of memory. It does mold our moods. It is associated with testimony. It should include models of righteousness. Of a certainty, it is the product of thoughts. And, in the end, it is you.

The Formative Years

As you adopt the "pecan tree" practice of creating and preserving cherished memories, remember the critical nature of the "formative years"—those childhood years when the days of learning are saturated with new discoveries, when experiences are planted indelibly in the mind and heart. Of these formative years spent mostly at home, Robert Southey, a poet laureate of England, is reported to have said, "The first 20 years are the longest half of your life. They appear so while they are passing; they seem to have been so when we look back on them; and they take up more room in our memory than all the years that follow" (Bruce Schechter, "Why Time Flies," Reader's Digest, January 1992, p. 14; italics added).

If Southey's observation is correct or only partially correct, loving and caring parents will help their children obtain a room full of cherished and even sacred memories. How is this done? Here are a few suggestions:

Â By doing things with them that they love doing and that are uplifting. Such activities might be as restful as reading a book together or as rugged as climbing a mountain.

Â By involving them in creative work. Weeding a garden you have planted may be a dull chore for them, but weeding a garden they have planted themselves is a thrilling experience well worth remembering.

Â By accentuating successes attained, however modest or simple the achievement may have been. Children have a way of blocking out the losses, especially when parents help them cover the past with wins.

Â By providing children with special experiences that are well-planned and out of the ordinary. These experiences might be the result of a trip to some distant place, the observance of a birthday, a graduation party, or something else that allows performances to exceed expectations.

Â By encouraging children to pause occasionally and reflect upon things of import that have happened to them. Keeping a journal may help young ones catalog memorable occurrences; preparing a report for a family gathering may have similar benefits. A blurred experience can become focused in the mind by reflecting about it and recording it for future reference.

Â By teaching children how to savor time, which comes and goes on wings of lightning. Don't let them grow up too fast. Help them understand there is a time and season for all things—a time to be a child, a time to be a youth, and a time to be an adult. But, at the same time, don't allow them to stay longer than they should on any one stage of their lives. We need to take time to smell the roses, but not to watch them grow.

Ponder the "longest half of your life" and do whatever is necessary to place the "security blanket" of cherished memories into the hands of your family members. In doing so, keep in mind the words of Peter, who advised:

I stir up your pure minds by way of remembrance: that ye may be mindful of the words which were spoken before by the holy prophets, and of the commandment of us the apostles of the Lord and Saviour (2 Peter 3:1-2).
