Carlos E. Asay, Family Pecan Trees: Planting a Legacy of Faith at Home ( 1992)

Chapter Eight

Good Humor

A merry heart maketh a cheerful countenance: but by sorrow of the heart the spirit is broken. . . . All the days of the afflicted are evil: but he that is of a merry heart hath a continual feast. . . . A merry heart doeth good like a medicine: but a broken spirit drieth the bones (Proverbs 15:13, 15; 17:22).

Several years ago, one of our sons asked permission to bring a girl friend to one of our family home evenings. We had no objections, providing the young lady's parents gave their consent. It was not our desire to intrude upon someone else's home night.

She came and had a delightful time. Though reluctant at first, she participated as invited when the formal lesson was given. Later, when we played games and ate refreshments, she entered into the activities just as if she were a member of our family. No one laughed harder; no one seemed happier; and no one enjoyed the evening more than she.

As the evening drew to a close and she prepared to be escorted home by our son, she thanked us profusely and asked if she could come again. She said that there was no laughter and no fun in her own home. Her father, she explained, was very strict and staid in his ways and frowned upon any behavior that seemed spontaneous and lighthearted.

She did come to other family home evenings in the months that followed, and her personality seemed to become more and more sparkling as time went by and as we became better acquainted with her. Since moving from the community in which the young lady lived, I have wondered whether she was successful in changing the somber mood of her parents and whether she has been successful in establishing a happy home of her own. I pray that she has learned this truth: "Happy laughter and friendly voices in the home will keep more kids off the streets at night than the loudest curfew" (Burton Millis).

Moisture or Juice

Elizabeth Gray Vining wrote: "The word humor, according to the Oxford Dictionary, originally meant moisture or juice and only fairly recently, that is to say from the 17th century, came to mean that quality of action, speech or writing which excites amusement, or the faculty of perceiving what is ludicrous or amusing. As anyone who has experienced the lubricating effect of even a small joke in a household well knows, humor still has an element of juice. It keeps life from drying up, gives it freshness and flavor"(italics added).

Learning under the tutelage of a stoic and humorless teacher is much like eating an orange that has already been juiced. The instruction is dry, tasteless, and without flavor. Under such a condition the pulp of the subject is difficult to swallow, and the desire for more is quenched almost before the first mouthful. It is the same living with and learning under the direction of a humorless father or mother in the home. Without "spoons full of sugar" or spoons full of humor, parental teachings do not go down very well.

"The sense of humor," states C. S. Merriam, "is the oil of life's engine. Without it, the machinery creaks and groans. No lot is so hard, no aspect of things is so grim, but it relaxes before a hearty laugh."

Humor Heals

In his delightful book Anatomy of an Illness, Norman Cousins includes some interesting thoughts on humor. Some of the thoughts are his own and others are statements made by noted persons. Included in his writing are the following, along with some personal comments of my own:

Â Sir William Osler regarded laughter as the "music of life" (Norman Cousins, Anatomy of an Illness [New York: Bantam Books, 1979], p. 85). This is particularly true when the melodious laughter of children is allowed to blend with the laughter of parents. Such mirth is a sure indicator of harmony in the home.

Â Robert Burton observed that "humor purges the blood, making the body young, lively, and fit for any manner of employment" (p. 84). I am not familiar with the chemical changes within the human body resulting from good humor and laughter. I do know, however, that good humor can alleviate feelings of stress, change one's outlook on life, and rid the body of many negative influences.

Â Immanuel Kant stated that "he never knew a man who possessed the gift of hearty laughter to be burdened by constipation" (p. 84). I don't know of any medical evidence that would support this claim, but the older I grow the more plausible this statement seems.

Â Norman Cousins said, "It has always seemed to me that hearty laughter is a good way to jog internally without having to go outdoors" (p. 84). Have you ever laughed to the extent that you felt physically spent and emotionally drained? If you have, the words of Cousins make sense. Hearty and appropriate laughter is stretching to the spirit, just as jogging is stimulating to the physical body.

Â Cousins also said that laughter is "as specific and tangible as any other form of physical exercise" (p. 85). He added: "It provides internal exercise for a person flat on his or her back—a form of jogging for the innards. . . . It creates a mood in which the other positive emotions can be put to work, too. In short, it helps make it possible for good things to happen" (pp. 145-46).

Â It is said of Albert Schweitzer that "his use of humor . . . was so artistic that one had the feeling he almost regarded it as a musical instrument" (p. 82). Schweitzer was an "artist" of religion and music. He knew the importance of timing and the use of appropriate selections. And his renditions of humor were allowed to complement his organ and piano renditions.

Cousins claimed that humor was a major factor in curing his life-threatening illness. It was his feeling that humor had an anesthetic effect upon him when he needed some pain-free sleep. He also regarded humor as therapy and became an expert on slapstick comedy.

I, too, have experienced the healing influence of good humor. At a critical time during a recent illness, my bishop delivered a box full of cards, drawings, and messages prepared by the Primary children of my home ward. Some had tried their hand at verse; others expressed themselves in sketches and cut-outs. All were sweet remembrances that touched my heart.

A number of the greetings, however, were very funny. For example, one young lad drew a picture of me stretched out on a coffin. Protruding out of my chest was a single rose. Off to the side of the sketch were these words: "Please get well, but if not, have fun!" I laughed so loud and hard that the nurses came rushing into the room, wondering what was wrong. Those moments of humor were lifting to my spirits and, I believe, healing to my body.

Good and Bad Humor

Like almost everything else in life, humor has both a good and a bad side. It can heal, or it can hurt; it has the power to lift and the power to pull down; it can exalt, or it can demean. Those who use it in or out of the home must be prudent and wise so that it blesses rather than curses others.

The various types of humor are described plainly in the following words: "There is a humor that heals, a humor that helps, and a humor that harms and hurts. And one kind of humor that hurts is the humor that brings embarrassing attention to adverse personal attributes and physical features; the humor, for example, that ridicules what people can't help: The 'baldy,' 'fatty,' 'skinny,' 'stand-up-shorty' kind of humor that is, at best, unkind, and is, at worst, cruel and crude and cutting" (Richard L. Evans).

"The manner of jesting ought not to be extravagant or immoderate, but refined and witty. . . . There are, generally speaking, two sorts of jests: The one, coarse, rude, vicious, indecent; the other polite, refined, clever, witty [which], if well timed, is becoming to the most dignified person. The other is unfit for any gentleman" (Cicero).

In my youth, I shared a questionable story with a friend as my parents listened in. I thought the account was most humorous despite its light-mindedness. My friend felt the same as I did and laughed heartily. Mother and Father, however, didn't even smile. After some awkward moments, my mother said to me in a soft voice, "Carlos, I never thought that I would ever hear you speak such degrading words."

Elder Richard L. Evans taught:

Humor is essential to a full and happy life. It is a reliever and relaxer of pressure and tension, and the saving element in many situations. But there are different kinds of humor, prompted by different spirits, some sincere, some unacceptable. There is a delightful, wholesome humor that heals and helps the spirit and gives a lift to life. There is giddy, trivial humor that produces light-minded laughter—the all-but-vacant and inconsequential kind that comes with little content, little cause. There is evil humor, grim humor, humor that embarrasses, and humor that is cruel, unkind. There is humor that is unclean, and that has no place among considerate people or in decent society. There is an account of a man who cautioned a speaker against telling off-color stories, because, said he, "There are ladies present"—to which someone added the observation that there were also gentlemen present. The assumption that something suggestive, low-minded, or unclean is all right in one kind of audience but not in another is a questionable assumption. Anything filthy or basically unclean is wrong in any audience (Improvement Era, February 1968, p. 71).

Though I still enjoy a good story and have sought to maintain a sense of humor, I have never forgotten my mother's disappointment in me. To this day, my rule-of-thumb in telling stories or in using humor is to share only those accounts that I feel might appropriately be told in the presence of my mother.

Guidelines

Here are some added guidelines for the use of humor that may prove helpful. Such guidelines apply to the use of humor in any situation, particularly in the home:

Â Look for the humor in tense situations. Don't allow circumstances to control your moods. An out-of-humor person is not pleasant to be around.

Â Laugh more at yourself than at others. Fun at the expense of others is too expensive. If anyone is to be the brunt of a joke, let it be yourself. "You grow up the day you have your first real laugh—at yourself" (Ethel Barrymore).

Â Be conscious of the feelings of others. There is no place for sick humor—the humor that demeans others and injures feelings. "The best humor," said William Makepeace Thackeray, "is that which contains the most humanity, that which is flavored throughout with tenderness and kindness." The worst humor, if it may be called humor, is sarcasm or cutting remarks that dampen the spirit of others.

Â Keep it clean. Don't permit the use of smutty or suggestive stories. Said Goethe, "By nothing do men show their character more than by the things they laugh at."

Â Use humor as the means, not the end, of conversation. I was told of a man who performed brilliantly before an audience, cracking one joke after another. Later, he asked a colleague to evaluate his talk. The response: "Some of the listeners will remember some of your stories and jokes, but I question whether any of the people will remember any of the truths you 'danced' around."

Â Shun the "cute syndrome." Those who try to be "cute" in the presence of others often value entertainment and social reassurances more than propriety, honesty, and accuracy. Their humor is short-lived, if lived at all.

Â Watch the timing. Ill-timed humor is worse than no humor at all. It is capable of injuring when healing was the intent. But if the timing is right, humor can serve as a safety valve and release pent-up emotions. President Hugh B. Brown commented: "A wholesome sense of humor will be a safety valve that will enable you to apply the lighter touch to heavy problems and to learn some lessons in problem solving that 'sweat and tears' often fail to dissolve. A line from Proverbs advises us that 'a merry heart doeth good like a medicine: but a broken spirit drieth the bones' (Proverbs 17:22)." (Conference Report, April 1968, p. 100.)

Â Avoid excesses. Don't let the laughter get out of hand. A quiet story or joke that provokes a simple chuckle can easily grow into an exchange of crude guffaws unless some restraint is exercised. In one scripture, we read, "Do these things with thanksgiving, with cheerful hearts and countenances, not with much laughter, for this is sin, but with a glad heart and a cheerful countenance" (D&C 59:15).

Happiness

Reference to a "glad heart" and a "cheerful countenance" reminds us of a statement made by the Prophet Joseph Smith. Said he, "Happiness is the object and design of our existence; and will be the end thereof, if we pursue the path that leads to it; and this path is virtue, uprightness, faithfulness, holiness, and keeping all the commandments of God" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1938], pp. 255-56).

Much has been written about the purpose of our existence. It is significant that the plan of salvation or the gospel of Jesus Christ is referred to as "the great plan of happiness" (Alma 42:8, 16). It is interesting to note that Lehi "beheld a tree, whose fruit was desirable to make one happy" (1 Nephi 8:10). It is noteworthy that Alma warned his son that "wickedness never was happiness" (Alma 41:10). All of these scriptures and many more instruct us that life can and should be a time of happiness, and that we can live happily if we keep the commandments and labor for the happiness of others.

No, life was not meant to be a frivolous experience or a quest for worldly pleasure. Happiness—true happiness—is the goal. That type of happiness is described beautifully by Elder James E. Talmage:

Happiness includes all that is really desirable and of true worth in pleasure, and much beside. Happiness is genuine gold, pleasure but gilded brass, which corrodes in the hand, and is soon converted into poisonous verdigris. Happiness is as the genuine diamond, which, rough or polished, shines with its own inimitable luster; pleasure is as the paste imitation that glows only when artificially embellished. Happiness is as the ruby, red as the heart's blood, hard and enduring; pleasure, as stained glass, soft, brittle, and of but transitory beauty.

Happiness is true food, wholesome, nutritious and sweet; it builds up the body and generates energy for action, physical, mental and spiritual. . . .

Happiness leaves no bad after-taste, it is followed by no depressing reaction; it calls for no repentance, brings no regret, entails no remorse. . . .

True happiness is lived over and over again in memory, always with a renewal of the original good. . . .

Happiness is not akin with levity, nor is it one with light-minded mirth. It springs from the deeper fountains of the soul, and is not infrequently accompanied by tears. Have you never been so happy that you have had to weep? I have ("A Greeting to the Missionaries," Improvement Era, December 1913, p. 173).

In the minds of many, religion is a supremely solemn proposition, something almost devoid of happiness. Suffering, deprivation, seclusion, extreme seriousness, limited funeral-parlor conversation, and other aspects of a weary life are seen as appropriate observances of religion. This fallacious notion is refuted by latter-day prophets. Note their words:

I do not believe the Lord intends and desires that we should pull a long face and look sanctimonious and hypocritical. I think he expects us to be happy and of a cheerful countenance (Joseph F. Smith, Jr., Conference Report, October 1916, p. 70).

I have never believed that in order to be righteous one must be sad-faced and solemn. People approved of the Lord have always been those who have laughed and danced and sung as well as worshipped, but at all times within the proper bounds and not to excess (Harold B. Lee).

Good humor expressed in the home must become a contributor to happiness. It should be free of "light-mindedness," of a "bad after-taste," and of similar negative effects. It should be full of nutrition, renewing to the spirit, and building in every respect. In the end, it must be allowed to gladden the heart and give rise to the cheerful countenance.

Joy

A discussion of good humor and happiness would be incomplete without some reference to the gospel concept of joy. Good humor, I believe, contributes towards one's happiness; happiness can grow into joy.

Joy is one of the fruits of the Spirit (see Galatians 5:22). It is a fruit of missionary service (see Alma 29:9). It was a part of the message given to herald the birth of Jesus: "I bring you good tidings of great joy" (Luke 2:10). In a modern declaration, the Lord states, "In me your joy is full" (D&C 101:36). These and a string of other scriptures help us to understand something about the inspired couplet, "Adam fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joy" (2 Nephi 2:25).

How is this joy obtained? I believe that President Marion G. Romney said it best: "The key to happiness (or joy) is to get the Spirit and keep it" (Conference Report, October 1961, p. 61). The Spirit will not abide with us unless we watch our thoughts, our words, and our deeds, and "observe the commandments of God" (see Mosiah 4:29-30).

If joy is the fruit of one's living, happiness is the plant, and good humor, as mentioned previously, is the juice that gives the fruit its flavor.

A Model

The Prophet Joseph Smith, by his own admission, sought "jovial company" and possessed a "cheery temperament" (Joseph Smith-History 1:28). There is no question that he was a seeker of joy and happiness, and he had a place for humor in his life. It is written of him:

The Prophet recognized as unhealthy the mind that lacked balance, perspective, and humor. In the society of his day there were many earnest people who habitually looked on the serious side of things that had no serious side, who regarded humor as incompatible with religion. It was common for these descendants of the Puritans to see displays of humor as a mark of insincerity. For humor suggested that nothing really mattered and that life was basically comic. To be overly humorous, they thought, was to be cynical toward life. But Joseph Smith saw humor and religion as quite reconcilable. As he saw it, once one acknowledges that there is something beyond laughter—a core of life that is solemn, serious, and tender—there is still plenty of room for jesting. At least, that is the way he was—"a jolly good fellow" as one contemporary described him (Leonard J. Arrington, "Joseph Smith and the Lighter View," New Era, August 1976, p. 10; italics added).

Happy Homes

We are warned against the evils of loud laughter, evil-speaking, light-mindedness, and other forms of shallow living that make a mockery of sacred things. Yet we are expected to keep our homes warm and inviting to all who cross the threshold. We must, therefore, find the proper balance between the "core of life" or pure religion and the "spice of life" in planting the "pecan tree" practice of good humor in our families.

President Ezra Taft Benson declared: "One great thing the Lord requires of each of us is to provide a home where a happy, positive influence for good exists. In future years the costliness of home furnishings or the number of bathrooms will not matter much, but what will matter significantly is whether our children felt love and acceptance in the home. It will greatly matter whether there was happiness and laughter, or bickering and contention" (Ezra Taft Benson, Ensign, April 1981, p. 34; italics added).

Without humor, the home can become cold and uninviting. Parents are seen as ogres, and children are regarded as things to be seen and not heard. The atmosphere can become tense, and the relationships between family members can become strained. With appropriate and good humor, however, the "inner man or woman" is provided quiet refreshment through jovial company and lively conversation.

Remember always:

If thou art merry, praise the Lord with singing, with music, with dancing, and with a prayer of praise and thanksgiving. If thou art sorrowful, call on the Lord thy God with supplication, that your souls may be joyful (D&C 136:28-29).
