Carlos E. Asay, Family Pecan Trees: Planting a Legacy of Faith at Home ( 1992)

Chapter Nine

Personal and Family Histories

Whatsoever things we write upon anything save it be upon plates must perish and vanish away; but we can write a few words upon plates, which will give our children, and also our beloved brethren, a small degree of knowledge concerning us, or concerning their fathers (Jacob 4:2).

There are two general approaches to personal and family histories. One approach is taken by genealogists who dig or research into the past looking for facts and artifacts that tie one generation to another. The second approach is taken by record-keepers who plant or preserve information for the good of children, grandchildren, and unborn posterity. Both historical efforts are essential, for they produce information that serves as a "welding link" between generations and turn "the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers" (D&C 128:18; Malachi 4:6).

Since all of us are expected to invest ourselves in digging and planting personal and family histories, I shall discuss each approach in turn. My intent is not to make historiographers of all readers; I have neither the expertise nor space to accomplish this task. Rather, my intent is to help readers understand what records are important, why histories must be written, and how we may become involved in history-making and soul-saving activities.

"Digging" History (Research)

The Lord said to Moses, "This is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39). This is a short and powerful declaration of God's avowed purpose; however, what does it really mean? Such meaning emerges from an understanding of the two pivotal words contained in the statement: immortality and eternal life. When we compare these words, we can see some interesting distinctions or comparisons.

Three general conclusions may be drawn from this chart. They are:

Obviously, living men and women may fulfill the conditions of eternal life by accepting the truth as it is preached to them, submitting themselves to saving ordinances (such as baptism, celestial marriage, and so on) and by living righteously. But what about those millions of people who have lived upon the earth and never heard the name of Christ? Are they loved any less by God—the same God who gave them life? Are their souls less precious to God than the souls of those who are privileged to live in the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times? (see Alma 39:17-19).

Our minds are set at rest about these questions when we read and ponder the scriptures and the words of modern prophets, for it is through revealed truths that we learn of doctrines pertaining to salvation for the dead. We learn that the gospel is preached to those who are dead and who have not had the opportunity to hear of Jesus Christ. The Savior himself was involved in this missionary effort (see 1 Peter 3:19-20; 4:6; D&C 138:30-34). We learn that baptism for the dead was performed in New Testament times and reinstituted during the nineteenth century, after the holy priesthood was restored to the earth (see 1 Corinthians 15:29; D&C 128:15-18). Yes, we learn that "God is no respecter of persons: but in every nation [and in every age, I might add] he that feareth him, and worketh righteousness, is accepted with him" (Acts 10:34-35).

With these truths planted in our minds and hearts, the "true believers in Jesus Christ" (Alma 46:14) immerse themselves in the work for their kindred dead; that is, they dig history as genealogists and strive to identify individuals and family members who have not had the saving ordinances performed in their behalf. Names are found, family lines traced, dates established, and past generations tied to the living generation. Said Elder Dallin H. Oaks: "The process by which we identify our place in our eternal family is called genealogy. Genealogy is family history" (Regional Representatives Seminar, April 3, 1987).

The purpose of digging or researching family history is explained succinctly by David H. Pratt: "LDS interest in family history is based on the fundamental doctrines of salvation, agency, and exaltation. It is the plan of God that all persons shall have the opportunity to hear the gospel of Jesus Christ and receive the saving ordinances, regardless of when they lived on earth. If they do not hear the gospel preached through the Lord's authorized servants in this life, they will hear it in the spirit world after death. Latter-day Saints identify their ancestors and arrange for baptism and other ordinances to be performed by proxy—that is, with a living person standing in for the deceased person—in a temple. This is not an optional function of LDS belief: it is, rather, a commandment of God. As Elder Oaks further explained, 'We are not hobbyists in genealogy work. We do family history work in order to provide the ordinances of salvation for the living and the dead' (Ensign, 19 [June 1989]:6)" ("Family History, Genealogy," Encyclopedia of Mormonism [New York: Macmillan Publishing Co., 1991], p. 492; italics added).

Some bystanders observe the Latter-day Saints digging the records and moving in and out of the temple in rapid succession and ask: Why are you so intent in getting this work done? Why do you store the volumes of records and labor with the computers? We respond with the words of Joseph Smith, the Prophet. He wrote: "Let me assure you that these are principles in relation to the dead and the living that cannot be lightly passed over, as pertaining to our salvation. For their salvation is necessary and essential to our salvation, as Paul says concerning the fathers—that they without us cannot be made perfect—neither can we without our dead be made perfect" (D&C 128:15).

We add the words of Brigham Young: "We have a work to do just as important in its sphere as the Savior's work was in its sphere. . . . We are now called upon to do ours; which is to be the greatest work man ever performed on the earth. . . . All the angels in heaven are looking at this little handful of people, and stimulating them to the salvation of the human family" (Journal of Discourses, 18:213, 304).

If the work for the dead is something that "cannot be lightly passed over" and something that "all the angels of heaven are looking at," little wonder that President Wilford Woodruff declared: "We want the Latter day Saints from this time to trace their genealogies as far as they can, and to be sealed to their fathers and mothers. Have children sealed to their parents, and run this chain through as far as you can get it. . . . This is the will of the Lord to this people . . . we have got to enter into those temples and redeem our dead—not only the dead of our own family, but the dead of the whole spirit world" (Messages of the First Presidency 3:256-57).

"Digging" or researching personal and family history must not be regarded as just a hobby or another way of idling away one's free time. Actually, it is a matter of life or death! Unless we seek out our dead and perform vicarious ordinances in their behalf, their progress is stopped and their possibilities of obtaining eternal life are placed in abeyance. We must, therefore, look to the past as genealogists and link ourselves to our fathers. Moreover, we must become partners with the Savior—even saviors on Mount Zion (Obadiah 1:21)—by doing for dead ancestors things that they cannot do for themselves.

"Greater love hath no man than this," said Jesus, "that a man lay down his life for his friends" (John 15:13). No one is asked to give up his or her life in fulfilling family history responsibilities. Intense suffering in Gethsemane or a walk to Calvary is not a requirement for any of us. All that is expected of us is that we think of others and sacrifice some time and effort. In the process, we demonstrate our love of God and of forebears who have left us blessings without number.

President Joseph Fielding Smith had this to say about love for humankind and family history and temple work: "It is a work that enlarges the soul of man, broadens his views regarding the welfare of his fellowman, and plants in his heart a love for all the children of our Heavenly Father. There is no work equal to that in the temple for the dead in teaching a man to love his neighbor as himself" (Doctrines of Salvation, vol. 2 [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1955], p. 144; italics added).

"Planting" History (Recording)

Let us now turn our attention to the second approach to personal and family history—the approach I call "planting" or recording history.

A noted scholar wrote: "If nothing were to remain of present-day American culture a thousand years hence but a single one-cent piece, any historian of that day would nevertheless be able to make some shrewd guesses about the man who designed the coin, and still more about the civilization in which he lived, merely from a careful analysis of the coin itself. Even a casual glance at the Lincoln penny will suffice to prove that statement" (Louis Gottschalk, Understanding History [New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1965], pp. 87-88).

Take out a penny and look at it. You will note that it reveals a culture that had some knowledge of metallurgy and agriculture; of dies and engravings; of barbering; of cloth and tailoring; of English and Latin; of Arabic numerals; of chronology and geography; of God ("In God We Trust"), liberty, and political confederation ("E Pluribus Unum"—out of many, one); of arithmetic and the decimal system; and perhaps of other cultural features.

Gottschalk's provocative statement about culture and a coin causes me to wonder about the legacy we will leave our posterity. I wonder whether you and I will leave behind us, when we complete our mortal experiences, evidences of our faith, love, belief in God, devotion to family, and other "pennies" of worth. I wonder what our grandchildren, great-grandchildren, and others in some future generation will guess about us after examining our remnants, such as memories, traditions, family folklore, records, histories, artifacts, pictures, and other traces of our existence.

Journals and Records

During the three years I served abroad in an Area Presidency for the Church, I kept a record I referred to as my "Narrative Report." I was not required to write this account, nor was I asked to submit it to Church Headquarters. Nonetheless, I maintained this monthly history because I wanted to preserve memories and evidences of my stay in Europe. I wanted proof beyond doubt that I was actually there, that my ministry was sprinkled generously with spiritual experiences, and that the Lord blessed me in the calling.

The report contained a log of my travels in Africa, the British Isles, Europe, the Middle East, and beyond. In it are the names of people I met and the experiences we shared. Highlighted, of course, are many, many spiritual and faith-promoting experiences.

Who knows? Perhaps someday my narrative report (now bound professionally and placed in the family library) will be the means of lifting a sagging soul or inspiring a progenitor to serve a mission. It will certainly enable readers to know me better, for much of "me" is preserved in it. Most important of all, those who read my report, whether tomorrow or a hundred years hence, will have no cause to question my love of God or speculate about the depth of my faith.

One of President Spencer W. Kimball's own journal entries of July 1951 reads: "I might hope that my children will take from my many journals and write a simple story or biography for me. I would like for my posterity to remember me and to know that I have tried so hard to measure up and to live worthy."

My European report was not my first attempt at record-keeping. I maintained religiously a missionary journal (day-by-day) while serving in the Holy Land years ago. That record was priceless when written and gains added value with each passing year. In it are two types of entries—the day-to-day happenings and the collection of spiritual and unusual experiences. I relive the mission each time I peruse the journal, and so will my children and grandchildren live my mission vicariously when they read what I have written. In the end, perhaps the journal will help to turn the hearts of my children to their father (see D&C 2:2).

Records—Language—Faith

One need not probe very deeply into the scriptures to learn that record-keeping is a well-established expectancy in the eyes of the Lord. Father Adam, earth's first man, was commanded to keep a book of remembrance. It is written: "And a book of remembrance was kept, in the which was recorded, in the language of Adam, for it was given unto as many as called upon God to write by the spirit of inspiration; and by them their children were taught to read and write, having a language which was pure and undefiled" (Moses 6:5-6).

This scripture turns our minds to another scripture about records and language. You will recall that Lehi sent his sons back to Jerusalem at the peril of losing their lives to obtain the plates of brass in the custody of Laban. Such action was justified in these terms: "It is wisdom in God that we should obtain these records, that we may preserve unto our children the language of our fathers; and also that we may preserve unto them the words which have been spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets, which have been delivered unto them by the Spirit and power of God, since the world began, even down unto this present time" (1 Nephi 3:19-20; italics added).

Who can doubt the "wisdom in God" concerning records, language, and the words of prophets? In the Book of Mormon, we read of a people who left Jerusalem at the time of King Zedekiah. This group, however, brought no records, as did Lehi and his family. Hence, "their language had become corrupted; and . . . they denied the being of their Creator" (Omni 1:17).

Three Lessons in Record-Keeping

Over and above the corruption of language and the loss of faith, other problems may develop in the absence of conscientious record-keeping and reporting, such as:

Loss of the priesthood. The children of an ancient people were "put from the priesthood" because some records were neglected, as recorded in the book of Ezra: "Of the children of the priests: the children of Habaiah, the children of Koz, the children of Barzillai; which took a wife of the daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite, and was called after their name: These sought their register among those that were reckoned by genealogy, but they were not found: therefore were they, as polluted, put from the priesthood" (Ezra 2:61-62).

Loss of faith-promoting experiences. After his resurrection, the Savior taught the Nephites a direct and very important lesson. He insisted that something which had been overlooked by the record-keepers be added to the books. Said Jesus: "How be it that ye have not written this thing, that many saints did arise and appear unto many and did minister unto them?" Then, "Nephi remembered that this thing had not been written. And it came to pass that Jesus commanded that it should be written; therefore it was written according as he commanded" (3 Nephi 23:11-13).

Loss of Church members. In conformity with what the Lord had counseled earlier about the need to know, number, and minister to the Saints (see 3 Nephi 18:31-32), the early inhabitants of the Americas followed this procedure: "After they had been received unto baptism, and were wrought upon and cleansed by the power of the Holy Ghost, they were numbered among the people of the church of Christ; and their names were taken, that they might be remembered and nourished by the good word of God, to keep them in the right way, to keep them continually watchful unto prayer, relying alone upon the merits of Christ, who was the author and the finisher of their faith" (Moroni 6:4).

Records—Thoughts

I have always been impressed by the wisdom of King Mosiah. When some records were delivered to him, he "read, and caused to be read" to his people the two accounts (Mosiah 25:15). He did this, I believe, to teach his subjects some valuable lessons and to evoke some poignant thoughts. I quote three verses:

"When they thought of their brethren who had been slain . . . they were filled with sorrow, and even shed many tears of sorrow."

"When they thought of the immediate goodness of God, and his power in delivering Alma and his brethren . . . they did raise their voices and give thanks to God."

"When they thought upon the Lamanites, who were their brethren, of their sinful and polluted state, they were filled with pain and anguish for the welfare of their souls" (Mosiah 25:9-11; italics added).

Mosiah's intent was not to entertain his listeners. His purpose in reading the histories of Zeniff and Alma was to humble his own followers and to help them profit from the mistakes of others. Thus, by use of the recorded materials, he took his people from the depths of sorrow to the peak of concern for the welfare of their enemies. And, whether he intended to do so or not, he surely must have reinforced in the minds of his listeners many of the reasons for record-keeping, including those already cited, which are:

The preservation of language.

The preservation of the words of the prophets.

The preservation of lineage and priesthood rights.

The preservation of faith-promoting experiences.

The retention of Church members.

The preservation of personal memories.

The welding of the readers (children) to the writers (parents).

These reasons and others that could be listed should convince us of the need to plant the "pecan tree" practice of personal and family histories. It should be our desire to "keep a proper and faithful record" of our lives (see D&C 128:9). In the end, we will have preserved for ourselves and for future generations a handful of "pennies" of worth.

President Spencer W. Kimball promised: "Those who keep a book of remembrance [or other historical records] are more likely to keep the Lord in remembrance in their daily lives. Journals [and similar books] are a way of counting our blessings and of leaving an inventory of these blessings for our posterity" (The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982], pp. 349-50).

Types of Records

Many types of records are used to compile personal and family histories. Each has its place, each serves its purpose, and each tells its story. But when many records are passed to the rising generation the story becomes more complete and more enticing to the "children."

Here are but a few of the records that deserve our attention:

One author described the fascination of a family album and the talk about progenitors that it provokes. In reference to his aging sister, he wrote: "And as a sort of dessert she tells us about the Danas, the Aikens and the Carnahans, who are, in various relationships, her progenitors. We gravitate into the other room, and presently she shows us, in the plush album, the portraits of various cousins, aunts, and uncles. And by-and-by Harriet warms up and begins to tell about the Scribrers, the MacIntoshes, and the Strayers, who are our progenitors" (David Grayson, Adventures in Friendship [Frederick, Colorado: Renaissance House Publishers], pp. 125-26).

Sometimes records are kept in Bibles or other books containing pages designed specifically for the recording of vital information. Family group records and pedigree charts published by the Church may also be used for this purpose. Whatever the tool or instrument used, the important thing is to preserve data that is accurate and capable of binding families together.

Since the pattern for writing a book of remembrance was given by God, it stands to reason that such books would be kept by those who feared or loved the Lord. Note the words of Malachi: "Then they that feared the Lord spake often one to another; and the Lord hearkened, and heard it, and a book of remembrance was written before him for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his name" (Malachi 3:16).

In a later article, President Kimball added:

You should continue on in this important work of recording the things you do, the things you say, the things you think, to be in accordance with the instructions of the Lord. Your story should be written now while it is fresh and while the true details are available. . . .

Your journal should contain your true self rather than a picture of you when you are "made up" for a public performance. There is a temptation to paint one's virtues in rich color and whitewash the vices, but there is also the opposite pitfall of accentuating the negative. . . .

I promise you that if you will keep your journals and records, they will indeed be a source of great inspiration to your families, to your children, your grandchildren, and others, on through the generations" ("President Kimball Speaks Out on Personal Journals," Ensign, December 1980, p. 61).

I don't suppose that President Kimball would care whether you used a notebook or a professionally printed book in which to record your personal story. He would, in all likelihood, say something like this: "Choose your book, and do it!" By listening to a Prophet's voice and taking appropriate action, you, too, will leave a record that will indeed be a source of great inspiration to your family.

Carolyn Gates wrote her life story. She claimed that the project was a catharsis for herself and a blessing to her children: "People now have such a sense of rootlessness and non-belonging. Give children and grandchildren something to live up to and attach to. They can say this is where I came from and where I'm going" (Barbara Bradley, "Writing Your Life Story Will Capture Memories Often Unknown to Younger Kin," Deseret News, April 17-18, 1991, p. 2C).

How sad it is when people fail to maintain records and write stories of themselves and loved ones. They allow great men and women to become known to their progenitors as just a name on a headstone, part of a vague memory recounted occasionally in family circles, or something less. Such negligence is an affront to heros and heroines of the past, and such negligence denies blessings to the children of the present.

Since I have been personally involved in the compilation of an oral history, I would offer four suggestions:

The interrogator must research the subject's life thoroughly and prepare an outline of each phase: ancestry, childhood, education, mission, and so on.

Recording sessions must be scheduled so that adequate time is allowed for reflection and recall.

In reviewing and polishing the transcription, the subject must not erase himself or herself from the account (this can happen if language is changed radically and style of presentation altered).

A professionally printed and bound copy of the history will add dignity to the project and entice broader readership (see chapter 7).

Years ago, Elder Boyd K. Packer offered an approach to personal histories that involves collection boxes, the phasing of one's life, vital records, and other things already discussed. It is worth repeating. Said he:

There is a place to begin. You don't need to begin with the pedigree charts or the stacks of forms, or the blank spaces, or the numbers, the procedures, or the regulations. You can begin with you. . . .

There are two very simple instructions. Here's what you are to do:

Get a cardboard box. Any kind of box will do. Put it some place where it is in the way . . . anywhere where it cannot go unnoticed. Then, over a period of a few weeks, collect and put into the box every record of your life . . . everything that you can find pertaining to your life—anything that is written or registered or recorded that testifies that you are alive and what you have done.

Don't try to do this in a day. Take your time with it. Most of us have these things scattered around here and there. . . .

Gather all of these together; put them in the box. Keep it there until you have collected everything you think you have. Then . . . sort out all that you have collected. Divide your life into three periods . . . [child], youth, and adult.

Start with the childhood section and begin with your birth certificate. Put together every record in chronological order. . . .

Once you have that accomplished you have what is necessary to complete your life story. Simply take your birth certificate and begin writing. . . .

It really won't take you long to write, or dictate into a tape recorder, the account of your life, and it will have an accuracy because you have collected those records.

Now don't say that you can't collect them. All you are asked to do is to collect what information you have and what you know. It is your obligation" ("Someone Up There Loves You," Ensign, January 1977, pp. 10-11).

In fulfillment of a divine expectation, we should use these forms so that individuals may be properly identified and so that saving ordinances may be performed in behalf of the dead in holy temples.

I have mentioned eight types of records used in developing personal and family histories. By way of review, they are: photo albums, vital records, books of remembrance, journals and diaries, autobiographies and biographies, oral histories, memorabilia chests, and Church family history forms. I have said nothing about scrapbooks, tape recordings, filmstrips, videos, and other means of preserving the treasures of the ever-changing generations.

It is left to you to choose the means most suitable to you and to your circumstances for the creation of histories. You may elect to start with one type of record and branch off into others as your time permits and as your interests expand.

As Elder Dallin H. Oaks counseled, "Our effort is not to compel everyone to do everything, but to encourage everyone to do something" (Ensign, June 1989, p. 6).

Conclusion

I have written about God's purposes, eternal life, genealogical research, saving ordinances, and temple activities. All of these subjects relate to the "digging" aspect of personal and family history. And all of these subjects remind us of the need to become "saviors on Mount Zion" (see Obadiah 1:21).

I have also written about pictures, memorabilia, biographies, and other traces of our existence. These traces, much like the Lincoln penny, will verify that we actually walked the earth and occupied a space in history. But whether those who pick up our remnants choose to follow in our footsteps will depend largely upon what we leave, where we leave it, and how we leave it. Such remnants will indicate the extent of our involvement in "planting" personal and family histories and our success in becoming "saviors of men" (see D&C 103:9-10).

The process of being "saviors on Mount Zion" and "saviors of men" is indeed humbling, particularly when one contemplates this statement of George Q. Cannon: "When you think that you are chosen to be saviors to the children of men, to stand as a medium through whom salvation shall flow unto unnumbered thousands, what manner of people ought we to be? They pray for you today in the spirit world, as they have been no doubt from the beginning praying for their descendants, that they may be faithful to the truth" (Journal of Discourses, 22:131).

In summary, I share the illustration on the following page:

I can promise you that a special spirit surrounds this work—the spirit of Elijah. So, I admonish us all to place the "pecan tree" practice of personal and family histories in our lives and to retain in mind these words:

In our pre-existent state, in the day of the great council, we made a certain agreement with the Almighty. The Lord proposed a plan, conceived by him. We accepted it. Since the plan is intended for all men, we become parties to the salvation of every person under the plan. We agreed, right then and there, to be not only saviors for ourselves, but measurably saviors for the whole human family. We went into a partnership with the Lord. The working out of the plan became then not merely the Father's work, and Savior's work, but also our work. The least of us, the humblest, is in partnership with the Almighty in achieving the purpose of the eternal plan of salvation (John A. Widtsoe, "The Worth of Souls," Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine, October 1934, p. 189).
