Carlos E. Asay, Family Pecan Trees: Planting a Legacy of Faith at Home ( 1992)

Chapter Thirteen

Love and Service at Home

Ye will teach them [children] to walk in the ways of truth and soberness; ye will teach them to love one another, and to serve one another (Mosiah 4:15).

A few years after our marriage, my wife and I purchased our first house. It was a modest brick building located in a new subdivision where land was relatively inexpensive. Though the number of square feet in the structure was limited and the construction very simple, we were thrilled with the prospects of moving in because we had been involved in the planning, and the place was to be "ours"!

Once the papers had been signed and the closure procedures completed, the contractor handed us the keys and gave us this charge: "I have constructed the house; now you must make it a home."

The contractor was a wise and experienced man. He knew that houses consist of wood, cement, bricks, mortar, and other perishable materials. He also knew that homes are built out of the nonperishable materials such as love, service, faith, and Christian living. His commission to us was not to drive more nails or to lay more bricks—the construction workers had already completed their assigned jobs. Rather, his commission to us was to do what the carpenters, painters, plumbers, and other workers could not do for us—to add the spirit and love that would transform our modest dwelling into a wonderful home.

Hearts Build Homes

I have learned over the years that hands build a house but hearts build a home. That is why I regard acts of service as the material out of which the bricks of an eternal family unit are molded, and love as the mortar that holds the bricks together. Both love and service are essential and inseparable. Love is that inner feeling that sparks the desire to do someone good; service—selfless service—is that outward expression of love that blesses the receiver and the giver. So, each heartbeat in behalf of others adds mass to the mansion, strength to the structure, and beauty to the building we call home.

King Benjamin knew all of this and more, much more, about love and service in the home. His ageless counsel to parents was: "Ye will not suffer your children that they go hungry, or naked; neither will ye suffer that they transgress the laws of God, and fight and quarrel one with another, and serve the devil, who is the master of sin, or who is the evil spirit which hath been spoken of by our fathers, he being an enemy to all righteousness. But ye will teach them to walk in the ways of truth and soberness; ye will teach them to love one another, and to serve one another (Mosiah 4:14-15; italics added).

This scripture reminds us that each home should be a school and every parent a teacher. Moreover, the words of King Benjamin suggest that the "core" of the home curriculum should be love and service. Such virtues provide the foundation upon which other teachings are added as students of righteousness are taught and as homes "arise and put on [their] beautiful garments" (see D&C 82:14).

Gifts of Love and Service

I once visited a home clad in beautiful garments. It was the home of a stake president whose unit I was visiting on assignment. The place was not ostentatious. Yet it was clean and comfortable and big enough to accommodate a large family. Every courtesy was extended me, including a lovely room and delicious meals.

Early on Sunday morning, the president and his wife invited me to participate in a daily family devotional. They, their children, and I gathered in the living room. Eight sons and one daughter surrounded the parents. When all were in place, Bibles were distributed, a prayer was given, and scripture reading took place. One by one around the circle the children read verses. Even the youngest son, a nonreader, recited a verse or two as prompted by an older and very patient brother.

When the reading period ended, the father announced to the children that he and their mother were celebrating a wedding anniversary that very day. The children exchanged knowing glances and smiles but said nothing. Three of the children rose to their feet, walked out of the room, and soon reappeared with packages in hand. A look of happiness and excitement was on every face.

A package was presented by one of the children to the mother. She unwrapped the gift, revealing a colorful hair dryer. As she thanked the giver, the father explained to me off to the side that the dryer was an old machine that had broken down months before. Some of the boys had repaired and polished the hair dryer and were now presenting it to their mother as a token of their love.

The second gift, much bigger than the first, was handed to the father. He opened it and found inside the long box a weed-eater. With a smile and an emotion-filled voice, he said to me that the tool had broken a year or so ago and that the boys, on their own, had purchased new parts and repaired the machine so that it now worked like a new one.

Finally, a third and even larger package was given to the parents. It proved to be an old, reconditioned, and operable vacuum cleaner. Like the other two gifts, the vacuum cleaner had been restored and made serviceable by the boys with purchased parts and clever labor.

What followed was an indescribable exchange of love and gratitude for each other. The children had given of themselves from the very depths of their hearts. The parents had received the gifts in a spirit of sincere gratitude and with a deep sense of joy felt by all mothers and fathers who know that their "children walk in truth" (3 John 1:4).

"I don't have a present to offer your mother," said the father to the children, "other than this: I love her with all my heart." Tears appeared in his eyes and in the eyes of all who were in the room. None seemed embarrassed or ill at ease by the open display of affection, for love and service had been taught in this home from the very beginning.

As I observed this exchange of love and service within the stake president's home, I recalled these words of Elder Richard L. Evans: "The gift without the giver is a very empty and hollow thing. Service must be an experience in the giving of oneself as well as of material things. It is a sharing experience, or it misses much of what it might hold for all of us, and much of the result that is hoped for it" (Richard L. Evans: The Man and the Message, comp. Richard L. Evans, Jr. [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1973], p. 239).

Scriptural Rootings—Love

Those who seek diligently to plant the family "pecan tree" practice of love and service in their home gardens are acting in full compliance with instructions received from the Lord through holy prophets living and dead.

John wrote: "If a man say, I love God, and hateth his brother, he is a liar: for he that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God whom he hath not seen? And this commandment have we from him, that he who loveth God love his brother also" (1 John 4:20-21).

The Savior himself spoke often of love and the need to share it with others. He identified love as something possessed by all of his true followers. Said Jesus: "A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another. By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another" (John 13:34-35; italics added).

Alma preached against contention and taught his people that "they should look forward with one eye, having one faith and one baptism, having their hearts knit together in unity and in love one towards another" (Mosiah 18:21).

Every family should seek to achieve the enviable condition described by Jacob. In reference to a loving people, he said: "Their husbands love their wives, and their wives love their husbands; and their husbands and their wives love their children" (Jacob 3:7). We might assume that the children responded favorably to this outpouring of love by loving and honoring their parents in return.

These and a groundswell of other scriptures that could be cited teach us that love of God, love of brother and sister, and love of all people are expected of all who have taken upon themselves the name of Christ. After all, "God is love" (1 John 4:8). "The pure love of Christ" is charity (Moroni 7:47). And love is the keystone of family unity (see Colossians 3:18-21).

Who is not inspired by the lyrics of the hymn "Love at Home"?

There is beauty all around When there's love at home; There is joy in ev'ry sound When there's love at home. Peace and plenty here abide, Smiling sweet on ev'ry side. Time doth softly, sweetly glide When there's love at home. In the cottage there is joy When there's love at home; Hate and envy ne'er annoy When there's love at home. Roses bloom beneath our feet; All the earth's a garden sweet, Making life a bliss complete When there's love at home. Kindly heaven smiles above When there's love at home; All the world is filled with love When there's love at home. Sweeter sings the brooklet by; Brighter beams the azure sky. Oh, there's One who smiles on high When there's love at home. (Hymns, no. 294.)

Scriptural Rootings—Service

It is significant, I believe, that the Lord distinguished the righteous from the wicked in terms of "him that serveth God and him that serveth him not" (3 Nephi 24:18; Malachi 3:18). I interpret this statement to mean that declaration of belief is not enough. As they say, talk is cheap and idle lip-service comes easy. However, those who have faith not only profess their love of God but also demonstrate their love by serving the Master and his followers (see Matthew 25:31-46).

Perhaps no one spoke more eloquently about service than did King Benjamin. Among other things, he declared: "When ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God. . . . I say unto you that if ye should serve him who has created you from the beginning, and is preserving you from day to day, by lending you breath, that ye may live and move and do according to your own will, and even supporting you from one moment to another—I say, if ye should serve him with all your whole souls yet ye would be unprofitable servants" (Mosiah 2:17, 21).

Commenting upon the Savior's teachings about love and service, President Gordon B. Hinckley said: "It seems to me that he [the Savior] is saying to each of us that unless we lose ourselves in the service of others our lives are largely lived to no real purpose. . . . He who lives only unto himself withers and dies, while he who forgets himself in the service of others grows and blossoms in this life and in eternity" ("Forget Yourself," in Speeches of the Year, 1977 [Provo: Brigham Young University Press, 1978], p. 43).

The tap-root statement pertaining to love and service was provided by the Apostle Paul, who wrote, "By love serve one another" (Galatians 5:13). Need more be said? We fulfill both the letter and the spirit of the law when we love each other and serve each other, beginning within the family circle and reaching beyond to all people.

Guidelines for Service

Library shelves are laden with books written to help families love and serve one another. As prompted by the Spirit, we should use the best of such books to guide all in planting the "pecan tree" practice of love and service. In the process, however, we must not neglect the teachings from the holy scriptures and the guidelines provided below.

Selection of Seed

Just as farmers carefully select their seed before planting, so must we determine with our spouses the type of marriage we want to create. We must take the time to create that marriage spiritually, in our minds, before the marriage is consummated. Such creation involves the setting of goals, reaching an understanding about children, resolving to create a real home founded upon love and service, and committing fully to the adventure that lies ahead. Those who fail to invest themselves in such a process will reach blindly into the bag of marriage possibilities and run the risk of selecting a blighted seed.

Plant the Seed

Seeds of love and service must be placed in the soil immediately and without delay. This is done by cultivating the right habits and practicing the right procedures well before children come. I refer to such habits and procedures as speaking kindly to one another, working together in the home, praying together, and doing other things of a helpful nature. If these good things do not become second nature to the couple before the children are born, new habits will need to be formed overnight, thus exposing the seed to the elements and jeopardizing its opportunity to sprout.

Water the Plant

An unknown author wrote, "The most important thing a father can do for his children is to love their mother." If she, in return, loves the father and both serve one another, they provide a model for the children that waters freely the "love and service" plant.

How awful it is when innocent children are exposed to contentious argument and physical abuse by their parents! Not only does this behavior mock sacred marriage vows, but it also raises questions in the minds of the impressionable young, such as: "Do mother and father love each other?" "Will they stay together?" God must weep over such actions. Surely he takes note of such offenses to his little ones (see Matthew 18:3-10).

It is a wonderful thing when grown men and women can reflect back upon their childhood experiences and attest that they never heard an ugly word pass between their parents. And it is equally wonderful when children can say of parents, "They conducted a lifetime courtship and lived for each other."

I know of a couple who loved and served in the right way. He was a small man; she was a large woman. In the evening after a day's work, he would sit in his soft easy chair to read the paper. She would come and sit gently on his lap and almost sink him out of sight. This open display of love and affection was observed and appreciated by the children. They had no reason to question the depth of love between mother and father or to wonder about their staying together.

Cultivate and Nourish the Plant

Cultivate and nourish the "love and service" plant:

Â By expressing love to one another openly and sincerely. Some people have a difficult time expressing their love because they haven't been taught to do so. For one reason or another they have grown up with the notion that verbalizing love cheapens the relationship. Or they are taught that too frequent use of the word love betrays its meaning.

I concur that expressions of love can be misused or overused. However, we shouldn't become so guarded in these expressions that we virtually erase them from our vocabulary. The Savior used the word love freely and with deep feeling. Should we not do the same?

Â By making mealtime or dinner time a special occasion when peace abides and love is communicated by word and deed. A proverb reads, "Better is a dinner of herbs where love is, than a stalled [fattened] ox and hatred therewith" (Proverbs 15:17). Teach the children to set the table, position the chairs, serve the meal, clear away the dishes, and do other helpful tasks. Engage the family in enlightening discussions governed by quiet talk and thoughtful listening.

Â By catching the children doing and saying good things. Too much of our time and energy is spent trying to catch children doing bad things. In doing so, we become more policeman than parent and teach the wrong lessons about love and trust. We must be positive in our approach, looking for good without countenancing evil, and allowing positive reinforcement to foster acts of love and service.

Â By engaging the children in family service opportunities, not chores. The word chore is frequently associated with dull and difficult duties imposed by others. This negative connotation does little to motivate children to respond in a congenial manner. Why not drop the term and appeal to the good nature of children by extending them "service opportunities?" And why not teach them that service opportunities are a special privilege extended to them?

We can help children understand that each act of kindness is an expression of love for someone else. It doesn't matter whether it is a shoe shined, a room cleaned, or an errand run—all declare the message "I care about you" and "I love you."

Moreover, we can teach the children that acts of love and service shared with another are acts of love and service shared with God. Over the long haul, the children will internalize this truth: "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me" (Matthew 25:40). Little by little, the foundation of family and church service will be established, and missionary, temple, and other service will follow naturally.

Laman and Lemuel accepted reluctantly some tasks received through their father. They never could make the connection between the chores and God. Nephi, however, possessed a deep faith and a sincere love for God, family, and father. He accepted the assignments given as service opportunities and completed them in a spirit of love and concern (see 1 Nephi chapters 3, 4, and 7).

Â By praying for each other. Love for family members is often expressed or implied in prayers. The seeds of service may also be planted in prayer. By personalizing our prayers and being more specific in our requests, the possibilities of evoking positive responses in the form of acts of love and service from those present and not present are increased.

Â By teaching the children that the home is a sacred place and that its occupants are special people. It has been said that the home is the most sacred and holy place outside of a dedicated temple. If this is a true statement, all parents should be devoted to the work of maintaining the quiet dignity of the home and making it a place of refuge for all family members. This can be accomplished only in an atmosphere of love and an environment of helpful service.

Â To parents—by modeling love and service in all you do. Said David Bly: "Tell a child which way to go and perhaps he'll go that way, but walk the path with him and he'll not stray from it."

Â To all—by remembering the tests of love, even true love, which are: (1) It is always founded in truth; (2) it does not offend or hurt or injure another; (3) it is a positive, active force (one that finds expression through service); and (4) it involves sacrifices in behalf of others (see John A. Widtsoe, An Understandable Religion [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1944], pp. 72-73).

I have often asked parents this searching question: If a stranger were to visit your home unannounced and spent only a few minutes with your family, what would he conclude about your faith? Exposure to chaos, rough language, furniture and furnishings in disarray, and so on might cause the stranger to go away wondering if you believed in anything of worth. If, however, he or she experienced cleanliness, congenial talk, and dignified behavior and surroundings, the stranger would know of your love for that which is good and of God.

I am not suggesting that a home should be void of play, laughter, or similar things. But I am suggesting that love and service will flourish best in an organized home of prayer, faith, learning, glory, order, and happiness (see D&C 109:8).

Models of Love and Service

Love and service come naturally to those who are reared in a home where both virtues are modeled by parents. In the little country community where I grew up, one of the great social occasions of the year was the annual fathers and sons' banquet. This gala event was held in the high-school gymnasium and featured a dinner and a special program. Most of the men and boys in the town looked forward to the affair with great anticipation. In fact, it was said by one enthusiast, "If you don't attend the banquet, you have lived a whole year for nothing."

Since there were four boys in our family, my father would take two sons with him on alternate years. He could not afford more than three tickets. So it was a bonus opportunity for me to attend the banquet on an "off year" when an uncle invited me to be his companion. I accepted his offer with joy and excitement for I loved being with him, and I savored the prospects of the evening's food and fun.

By prior arrangement, I was to meet my uncle at 7:30 on the appointed night in the school across the street from our home. My mother dressed me in my hand-me-down suit, opened the door, pointed me in the right direction, and instructed me to run quickly so that I wouldn't get wet in the rain and so that I wouldn't keep my uncle waiting.

I made my break out the door and leaped off the porch. But my feet slipped in the soft dirt, and I landed on my back in a large pool of water. I was drenched and covered with mud. Slowly, I rose to my feet and returned to the house crying and knowing that my evening had been spoiled.

Without wasting a moment, my mother took off my clothes, dried me, and placed several flatirons on our coal stove. At the same time, she soothed my injured feelings and assured me that all would be well. In a matter of just a few minutes, she cleaned me up, dried and pressed my suit, and had me poised at the door for one more try at the dash to the school.

The second dash was successful, and I had an enjoyable time at the community's big social function. As I reflect back upon that experience, I am reminded of my mother's deep love for me. A woman of less love and determination might have given in to the mud and water and written it off as just a bad break for her son. Mother knew, however, how much the banquet meant to me, and her quick service and demonstrated love will always be an inspiration to me.

My father was a farmer and schoolteacher. He taught school during the day, but in the evenings and on weekends he raised animals, cultivated a large vegetable garden, and cared for a fruit orchard. The animals, garden, and orchard served two purposes: they helped feed his large family, and they helped keep his boys engaged in meaningful work.

Dad had one cardinal rule for his young sons: Work in the morning; play in the afternoon. He also had the disposition to make the work as enjoyable as possible for my brothers and me. He could turn any chore into a game or add zest to any labor by placing a cold watermelon or cold root beer on the ditch bank as a reward for honest labor.

On one occasion, when we grumbled at the prospects of picking up apples and feeding the pigs, my father placed boards in the form of a man at the back of the pigpen. He then stepped off the distance from the board to form a pitcher's mound. Once the preparations were in place, we filled our buckets with apples that had fallen off the trees and rushed to the mound to strike out pretended batters. We threw the gathered apples at the wooden silhouette, just as a baseball pitcher would in a game. What could have been dull work and drudgery was transformed into something exciting and enjoyable by a loving father who cared more for his sons than for apples and pigs.

A Concluding Word

One day, all parents will stand before the judgment bar of God and give an accounting of their stewardships. Those who have taught their children to love and serve one another will stand before that bar with clear consciences. Those who have neglected to teach such virtues will shrink from the presence of God with scorched feelings and wish that they had been faithful to the commission given them. So, it should be the desire of each mother and father to become a wise and faithful steward, keeping in mind the words of John Ruskin: "This is the true nature of home, it is a place of peace, the shelter not only from all injury, but from terror, doubt, and division."

It would be well for all of us in preparation for that day of accounting to understand that the failure to teach children love and service is almost tantamount to teaching them to hate and to be selfish. The results of inaction and misguided action are often the same. We read of a people who taught their children to carry "an eternal hatred towards the children of Nephi" (Mosiah 10:17). However, we also know of many parents who simply omit from their schedules time to teach the crucial virtues of love and service on the pretext that they are too busy or that it isn't that important. Consequently, the rising generation is made to suffer in ignorance and unbelief (see Mosiah 26:1). We might wonder whether the sin of omission is greater than the sin of commission in this instance.

If any hatred is to be taught, it must be "an everlasting hatred against sin and iniquity" (Alma 37:32). If any teaching is to be omitted, it must be teachings that matter the least, not the weightier matters of the law or the core instructions of love and service.

Luther Burbank, one of the world's foremost naturalists said, "If we paid no more attention to our plants than we have to our children, we would now be living in a jungle of weeds." We may not be living in the weeds referred to by Burbank, but we are certainly living in a world overrun by selfishness and hate. Wars, rumors of wars, crime, abuse, divorce, and all the other problems of modern society are evidences that better gardening must occur among us, beginning within our own homes. A jungle of weeds is a Garden of Eden compared with the jungle of a serviceless and loveless people.

A modern song includes the line, "What the world needs most is love." I concur with these words as long as the love yearned for is founded in faith, centered in service, and grounded in goodness.

President Thomas S. Monson provides us with this provocative summary about love and service: "Time passes. Circumstances change. Conditions vary. Unaltered is the divine command to succor the weak and lift up the hands which hang down and strengthen the feeble knees. Each of us has the charge to be not a doubter, but a doer; not a leaner, but a lifter. But our complacency tree has many branches, and each spring more buds come into bloom. Often we live side by side but do not communicate heart to heart. There are those within the sphere of our own influence who, with outstretched hands, cry out: 'Is there no balm in Gilead . . . ?' (Jeremiah 8:22). Each of us must answer." (Ensign, December 1971, p. 132.)

God bless all parents everywhere to plant the "pecan tree" practice of love and service in their family gardens. My prayer is:

Â That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith; that ye [be] rooted and grounded in love (Ephesians 3:17; emphasis added).

Â That all of us will serve God and our families and others "with a perfect heart and with a willing mind" (1 Chronicles 28:9).
