Carlos E. Asay, Family Pecan Trees: Planting a Legacy of Faith at Home ( 1992)

Chapter Fourteen

Church Service

I tell you these things that ye may learn wisdom; that ye may learn that when ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God (Mosiah 2:17).

On a Sunday afternoon a family gathered for dinner following a ward sacrament service. After the blessing was spoken and as the food was being served, one of the teenage boys announced, "I'm never going to church again!"

A hush fell over the group. All were shocked by the announcement, and all eyes turned toward the father, who continued to fill his plate, almost as if he hadn't heard the rash statement.

An anxious mother broke the awkward silence by asking, "Why? Why do you say such a thing? Don't you enjoy church?"

The son blurted out, "I don't like church because every time I go they ask me to speak or pray or bless the sacrament or usher or run errands or to do something else. And," he continued, "I'm tired—I'm all participated out!"

"Son," said the wise father, eager to take advantage of a precious teaching moment, "I appreciate your feelings, but there is something you don't understand fully. God, Our Heavenly Father, loves us. He placed us on earth so that we might acquire knowledge, be tested, and gain experience. He established a Church organization with a lay leadership so that all might become involved and so that all might be edified—not just a select group of ministers."

Then, to clinch his point, the father added, "If God loved only one person in a ward or congregation and wanted only one person to grow toward perfection, only that one would be invited to pray, preach, sing, usher, and handle other necessary assignments. However, such is not the case. God cares about you and me and all of his children; he wants everyone to develop talents and to grow through Church service. Because he loves us and trusts us and wants us to become more like him, he extends us callings through his authorized representatives."

Service and Salvation

More than a few, both young and old, shy away from Church callings because they do not understand the relationship between Christian service and personal salvation. Hence, they show the empty hand to the beggar, turn their backs upon those who have been stripped and wounded, say no to priesthood leaders when invited to get involved, and live their own selfish lives as if they were alone on some remote island. Such people fail to remember that full salvation is the product of Christ's atonement (grace) and the good works of our faith. Consequently, they miss the joys of service and opportunities for personal growth, and they estrange themselves from the family of God.

Those parents who do understand the plan of life and salvation plant the "pecan tree" practice of Church service in the hearts of their children by teaching the following truths:

How very contradictory it is to profess love of Deity and then refuse an invitation to serve as a home teacher or in some other helpful position!

My answer to this question is, "He can't." We can never begin to appreciate Christ's infinite atonement until we place our own infinitesimal offering upon the altar by lifting another fellow being. No one can catch the slightest intimation of Jesus' profound love for humanity without becoming involved in service to others—service rendered without hint of recognition or recompense.

Fathers and mothers appreciate these truths more than most people do. They do so because they have experienced the special feeling that accompanies news that someone has extended saving and sanctifying service to a son or daughter living away from home. Whenever I hear that someone has blessed the life of a son or daughter serving in a faraway mission, I feel as though that someone has blessed me directly. The same applies to God and the whole human family.

It seems to me that growth grace-by-grace is related to growth service-by-service. The one refers to the merits of the Master and the other to our merits. And all of these merits blended together have bearing upon our salvation—our eternal destiny.

Dos and Don'ts

In addition to the truths discussed above, there are some dos and don'ts that all, particularly new converts and young ones, need to understand as the "pecan tree" of Church service is planted. Study the chart below, reading across the page or going from one "do" to a related "don't." Such reading, with some pondering, will help you appreciate service in the Lord's Church where "every man stand[s] in his own office, and labor[s] in his own calling . . . [so] that all may be edified together, that the system may be kept perfect" (D&C 84:109-110; italics added).

Church Service Dos and Don'ts

Â We do prepare ourselves to serve when called upon.

Â We do not seek or "politic" for offices or callings.

Â We do respond humbly and gratefully to all service opportunities.

Â We do not turn down or refuse callings extended us.

Â We do learn our duties and serve diligently in our specific assignments (see D&C 107:99-100).

Â We do not wait to be commanded or compelled to perform our work (see D&C 58:26-29).

Â We do magnify our offices and callings unto the Lord, and we do take upon ourselves the attendant responsibilities (see Jacob 1:19).

Â We do not serve half-heartedly, as caretakers only; nor do we forfeit or circumvent our obligations (see D&C 4:2).

Â We do sustain our leaders in righteousness, and we do seek to be faithful in our assigned stewardships.

Â We do not ignore scriptural commissions, instructions of leaders, or approved policies and procedures, nor do we hesitate to give an accounting of our services.

Â We do help others around us to develop talents, abilities, and gifts of the Spirit in preparation for added Church service.

Â We do not attempt to monopolize the work or to deny others opportunities for growth and development.

Â We do accept release graciously when the time comes, and we do support wholeheartedly those who succeed us in a calling.

Â We do not resist release or change of assignment when it is extended us, nor do we resent those who carry on after us.

Becoming Saints

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is an organization of people who are striving to become Saints (see D&C 125:2). We do not automatically become Saints by entering the waters of baptism. We become Saints by repenting, by being baptized, by receiving the Holy Ghost, by putting off the natural man, and by acquiring saintly virtues through Christian living and Christian service (see Mosiah 3:19).

Each commandment we live has a refining influence upon us. Each act of service or goodness shown others polishes us in some respect. So, we should serve one another willingly and gladly, knowing that in the process we shall grow grace by grace and become more like Christ.

All members of the Church should understand that (1) service distinguishes the righteous, (2) service is an expression of our love for God, (3) service enables us to know and draw closer to Christ, (4) service to others is service to God, (5) service enriches our lives, and (6) service to others can strengthen both the Church and the family. Would that all would regard Church callings and other personal services as blessings, not burdens; as sacred trusts, not social stations; and as opportunities for growth, not onerous tasks strapped upon our backs.

Blessings

Upon my return from the mission field as a young man, my father embraced me and said: "Welcome home, son! Please turn around and go back." He explained, "The Lord has showered us with many blessings during your absence." My father, like thousands of others, testified that service and a little sacrifice does bring forth the blessings of heaven.

Many families do prosper financially while supporting a missionary son or daughter. A few do not for reasons known only by the Lord. However, all acknowledge an increase of love and respect for home, parents, and other dear ones. Such spiritual blessings do not line the pocketbook, but they do pile up eternal riches that cannot be stolen by another nor destroyed by moth or rust.

Things to Do

Parents can do many things to make their children service-conscious. Here are a few ideas:

A Serving Family

I know of a family of sixteen who at last count had rendered more than thirty-two years of full-time missionary service. They have also served in almost every Church position on the ward and stake level during the past generation. In addition to all of this, they have made significant service contributions to community and professional causes. Service to God and others has forever been their watchword. One daughter commented, "We have a great heritage and so much to live up to because of the blessings we've been given" (Letter from Martha B. Checketts dated December 12, 1991).

Father Boone and his wife, James and Ruth, the parents of Martha Checketts and thirteen other children, planted the "pecan tree" practice of Church service in their family garden years ago. Such practice has been watered and cultivated by word and precept. Now they and the children are harvesting the fruits and joys of their Christ-like living and service. So, as with the Boones:

Give, and it shall be given unto you; good measure, pressed down, and shaken together, and running over, shall men give into your bosom. For with the same measure that ye mete withal it shall be measured to you again (Luke 6:38).
