Carlos E. Asay, Family Pecan Trees: Planting a Legacy of Faith at Home ( 1992)

Chapter Fifteen

Home and Church Worship

I desire that ye should remember these things, and that ye should work out your salvation with fear before God, and that ye should no more deny the coming of Christ; that ye contend no more against the Holy Ghost, but that ye receive it, and take upon you the name of Christ; that ye humble yourselves even to the dust, and worship God, in whatsoever place ye may be in, in spirit and in truth; and that ye live in thanksgiving daily, for the many mercies and blessings which he doth bestow upon you (Alma 34:37-38; emphasis added).

I have seen many beautiful sights in my lifetime, especially during the years that I have traveled about the earth on the Lord's business. For example, the view of Iguassu Falls, Brazil, was breathtaking; the view from the Eagle's Nest in Austria was spectacular; the view of the Holy Land from the crest of Mount Nebo was inspirational; the view of the Southern Lights from a jungle in Africa was heavenly. I could mention other marvelous views of nature and the handiwork of God that I have experienced. But none of these sights can compare in beauty with the scenes of home and church worship that I have been privileged to observe. I refer specifically to five scenarios: (1) a mother reading the scriptures with an impressionable child on her lap; (2) a husband and wife kneeling together at the bedside toward the close of a day; (3) a group gathered together near the fireside singing a hymn to begin a family home evening; (4) a father, mother, and children sitting and worshiping together in a sacrament service; and (5) a young couple exchanging vows in the house of the Lord with family members present. These five sights, and similar glimpses of godliness, please the eye, gladden the heart, and remind us that there is beauty all around when love of God and family is expressed at home, in church, and in other sacred places.

Worship is an act of religious devotion, wherein a person shows reverence, love, and adoration for Deity. It usually involves offerings of prayer, attendance at church services, the singing of beautiful hymns, and listening to inspirational sermons. It is not an act restricted to a specific place or bridled by a certain ritual. Love of God may be expressed in many ways, by many people, in many places, and under many circumstances. However, worship in its truest form seems to find its best expression in three sacred places: holy temples, happy homes, and dedicated chapels.

In the process of planting the "pecan tree" practice of home and church worship, we need to address these questions: Whom should I worship? Why should I worship? and How should I worship. Unless suitable answers to these questions are found, we may be led to engage in false worship—a type of worship that brings disappointment, damnation, and an emptiness of soul (see 2 Nephi 27:3).

Whom to Worship

Modern revelation warns us that people in these last days would walk in their own ways and after the images of their own gods, "whose image is in the likeness of the world, and whose substance is that of an idol" (D&C 1:16). This reminds us of what the Apostle Paul said about the last days: "Men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, trucebreakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, traitors, heady, highminded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God; having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof: from such turn away. . . . Ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth" (2 Timothy 3:2-5, 7).

Know God

Perhaps there have been times when God winked at ignorance and false worship, as intimated by Paul. You will recall that he observed the superstitious practices of the Athenians wherein they paid devotions "to the unknown God." His instructions to the Greeks are worthy of mention:

As I passed by, and beheld your devotions, I found an altar with this inscription, TO THE UNKNOWN GOD. Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you.

God that made the world and all things therein, seeing that he is Lord of heaven and earth, dwelleth not in temples made with hands; neither is worshipped with men's hands, as though he needed any thing, seeing he giveth to all life, and breath, and all things; and hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth, and hath determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation; that they should seek the Lord, if haply they might feel after him, and find him, though he be not far from every one of us: for in him we live, and move, and have our being; as certain also of your own poets have said, for we are also his offspring.

Forasmuch then as we are the offspring of God, we ought not to think that the Godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or stone, graven by art and man's device.

And the times of this ignorance God winked at; but now commandeth all men every where to repent: because he hath appointed a day, in the which he will judge the world in righteousness by that man whom he hath ordained; whereof he hath given assurance unto all men, in that he hath raised him from the dead (Acts 17:23-31).

If the time of winking at ignorance had passed in Paul's day, after the death and resurrection of Christ, it has surely passed in our day. For God has revealed himself in our day and dispelled the numerous and misguiding myths about his nature and purpose that had accumulated through centuries of spiritual darkness. Those who lived during the dark ages may have deserved the wink from Deity; however, we who live in the fullness of times and bask in the light of a restitution of all things have no excuse. Our worship should be conducted "in spirit and in truth" (Alma 34:38).

In Spirit and Truth

Worship in spirit indicates the need for thoughts and feelings to take precedence over form, pattern, or set words. Worship in truth requires a knowledge of the true nature and concept of God. Nephi explained: "The right way is to believe in Christ and deny him not . . . wherefore ye must bow down before him, and worship him with all your might, mind, and strength, and your whole soul" (2 Nephi 25:29; italics added). All of this is summarized by Christ himself, who stated: "True worshipers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth; for the Father seeketh such to worship him. For unto such hath God promised his Spirit. And they who worship him, must worship in spirit and in truth" (JST John 4:25-26).

Who is this Father or God to whom we pay our devotions? He is God, the Father of all spirits, the Father of mankind (see Hebrews 12:9). He is the "God of our fathers," the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob (1 Nephi 19:10). He is the only true and living God, and his name is Elohim. It was he who "so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son [Jesus Christ], that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life" (John 3:16).

This Only Begotten Son instructed, "I give unto you these sayings that you may understand and know how to worship, and know what you worship, that you may come unto the Father in my name, and in due time receive of his fulness" (D&C 93:19; italics added). We do, therefore, pray to the Father in the name of Jesus; we look to the Son as our advocate, redeemer, and savior, for it was he who wrought the holy atonement and broke the bands of death. He marked the path; he led the way; and he has provided us an escape from death and hell (see 2 Nephi 9:1-41). We do, therefore, come unto God the Father through Christ, for there is "no other name given nor any other way nor means whereby salvation can come unto the children of men, only in and through the name of Christ, the Lord Omnipotent" (Mosiah 3:17).

The veil of ignorance about the true nature of God was lifted in the spring of 1820 when two Personages appeared to the boy prophet, Joseph Smith. One of them called Joseph by name and said, pointing to the other, "This is My Beloved Son, Hear Him!" (JS-H 1:17). In one glorious moment, all myth and mystery concerning a living and personal God was dispelled. God was not dead or even mute. He was not some indescribable power or substance of the past who had nothing more to say to a modern world. He revealed himself as a glorified being. He introduced himself as the Father. He invited Joseph and all others to seek him, to feel after him, to find him, and to worship him.

Why Worship?

I offer six reasons for worship at home and at church. Many other justifications could be given. In reality, however, if our love of God is real and not pretended, there is no need to offer numerous reasons for our worship. The adoration and devotions we extend our Father in Heaven and his Only Begotten Son, the Savior of mankind, should flow freely and liberally from the love for Deity that wells up within us. Nevertheless, we worship them for other reasons as well.

A similar answer could be given to the question, Why worship? We respond, because God has commanded us to do so. Jesus taught, "Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve" (Matthew 4:10). Through Moses, God declared: "Thou shalt have none other gods before me. . . . Thou shalt not bow down thyself unto them [graven images]. . . . Keep the sabbath day to sanctify it. . . . The seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord thy God" (Deuteronomy 5:7, 9, 12, 14). Many other scriptures remind us that worship is a divine expectation and that it should be done in obedience to divine command.

Most of us seem to have the "Nephite cycle" as part of our character. There is a point when we are teachable; our humility enables us to grow and to ride the crest of spirituality. Then there are other times when we begin to feel self-sufficient and puffed up with pride. These times cause us to fall of our own weight and ill-doing into pits of spiritual darkness. How much better it would be if we kept in remembrance our God and our religion and broke the cycle by consistent worship and righteous living. How much better it would be if we were humbled by the word of the Lord and strong enough in spirit to remember our God in whatsoever circumstances we find ourselves (see Alma 32:12-25).

Afterward, he blessed the wine and gave it to the others to drink. Jesus said: "Blessed are ye for this thing which ye have done, for this is fulfilling my commandments, and this doth witness unto the Father that ye are willing to do that which I have commanded you. And this shall ye always do to those who repent and are baptized in my name; and ye shall do it in remembrance of my blood, which I have shed for you, that ye may witness unto the Father that ye do always remember me. And if ye do always remember me ye shall have my Spirit to be with you" (3 Nephi 18:10-11; italics added).

We therefore have the opportunity to attend Church service each week and partake of the sacrament. As we do so, we renew our covenants and pledge afresh to stand as witnesses of God.

Those who worship regularly in spirit and truth at home and at church build up an immunity against the worldly influences that stain or spoil their happiness. This process of spiritual immunization occurs as hymns are sung, prayers are uttered, covenants are renewed, new truths are learned, and resolve is strengthened. Each portion of this process is related to true worship.

It is imperatively necessary, at all times, and especially so when our associations do not afford us the moral and spiritual support which we require for our advancement, that we go to the house of the Lord to worship and mingle with the Saints, that their moral and spiritual influence may help to correct our false impressions and restore us to that life which the duties and obligations or our conscience and true religion impose upon us.

"Good times" are often dangerous times, and social fraternity, if not of the right character, will prove more harmful than helpful. Let us, therefore, in the midst of our worldly callings and associations, not forget that paramount duty which we owe to ourselves and to our God (Gospel Doctrine, 5th ed. [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1939], p. 243; italics added).

Beyond the family, no affiliation is more important or sanctifying than that found within The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. It was the Apostle Paul who said of those who took upon them the name of Christ, "Now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but fellowcitizens with the saints, and of the household of God" (Ephesians 2:19). It was Moroni who wrote about Church members and meetings, "The church did meet together oft, to fast and to pray, and to speak one with another concerning the welfare of their souls" (Moroni 6:5). Both Paul and Moroni knew the importance of mingling with good people.

There is truth in the saying that a family who prays together stays together. The same can be said of worshiping together, for it is through worship that family members are drawn closer, the family receives the support of friends and neighbors, and the family allows God to become a vital part of their lives.

I glean from these inspired words various thoughts about how we should worship:

Â We are commanded to meet together regularly.

Â A perfecting process is alluded to in verses 8 and 9. This process has two parts: (1) "Ye shall instruct [inform] and edify [build morally] each other . . . " Instruction may be given with or without the Spirit. Edification occurs only through the Spirit. Therefore, those who instruct must be prepared to disseminate information; they must also be prepared to do so under the direction of the Holy Ghost. (2) "Ye shall bind [obligate by duty or love] yourselves to act [covenant] . . . " Instruction and edification are short-lived if the participants fail to bind themselves to act upon those things taught. The listeners must resolve to improve their lives and to perfect their service at home or in the Church. Otherwise, they go their way and forget what manner of people they should be (see James 1:22-25).

Â Two promises are extended to those who perform the two parts of the process. One is hidden in the scripture cited above, and the other is clearly stated. They are: "[Ye shall] be sanctified by that which ye have received"—a personal blessing; and "glory shall be added to the kingdom"—a collective blessing.

In planting the "pecan tree" practice of home and church worship in your family garden, you will want to help your children find personal answers to the question, Why worship? Perhaps the six reasons discussed above will prove helpful to you as you encourage and teach the young ones. You may also choose to speak about:

Â The continuing need for spiritual nourishment.

Â The need to find refreshing escape from worldly influences.

Â The need for quiet reverence and a change of pace.

Â The need to make covenants and perform saving ordinances.

Â The need for Church service and the development of faith and spiritual gifts.

Â The need to be kept in "the right way."

Â The need to learn our duties and to stand as witnesses of Christ.

How to Worship

The Prophet Joseph Smith received this instruction from the Lord: "I give unto you these sayings that you may understand and know how to worship, and know what you worship, that you may come unto the Father in my name, and in due time receive of his fulness" (D&C 93:19; italics added).

This instruction was accompanied by an appeal to keep the commandments so that all might receive "grace for grace" the full blessings of God. Such "grace for grace" growth occurs as we seek to sanctify or cleanse our lives through righteous living and true worship.

True worship is more a matter of attitude and spirit than it is a matter of time and place. Let me illustrate this conclusion by sharing a personal experience.

A few years ago, a group of us stood in the celestial room of the Frankfurt Germany Temple. The building was under construction, and materials and tools were scattered over the floor. Workers were busily engaged in placing finishing touches on the walls and ceiling. Though the room was untidy and a beehive of activity, we were subdued by the emerging beauty of the place.

I asked Brother Henry Haurand, the construction supervisor, "Do the workers appreciate the significance of this project?"

"No," he answered. "They are not members of the Church, and they don't understand the sacred nature of temples. To them," he added, "this is just another job."

My wife inquired, "Do you always feel the Spirit of the Lord when you come here?"

"No, I do not," he responded. "When I enter the temple during the working day, I do so as a building supervisor, and I look with a critical eye for flaws in the construction. In this inspective mood, I feel nothing special about the place. But," Brother Haurand continued, "when I come here in the quiet of the evening and the place is free of noise and confusion, I am able to reflect upon the holy purposes of the temple. Then I am overwhelmed by the Spirit of the Lord."

I have pondered Brother Henry's words many, many times. I've concluded that he taught us two profound truths: (1) Sacred things are seen and appreciated only through "the eye of faith," and (2) things of the Spirit can only be discerned by "purer eyes" (Alma 5:15; D&C 131:7).

Eyes of Faith

I do not fault the workers who regarded the building of the temple as "just another job." They did their work, and they did it well, even though their eyes were blinded to the eternal worth of the building. Without knowledge of the restored gospel, without testimony of priesthood powers, and without faith in the living God, how could they have known that they were building something that would bridge heaven and earth?

People without faith and understanding of God's purposes "have eyes, and see not" (Jeremiah 5:21). Their vision is limited to immediate surroundings and the events of here and now. However, those who believe in the divine and who possess a hope in Christ have a more expanded view because they see through the eyes of faith.

A farmer who plants corn sees more than the warm earth and a small kernel in his hand. He exercises faith and envisions the ripened ear and the nourishment it will bring. We may look into the starry sky and marvel at the planets moving in their regular orbits. But when we scan the heavens through eyes of faith, the awesome wonders of the universe are magnified many times over, causing us to witness that there is a Supreme Creator (see Alma 30:44).

Sir Arthur Conan Doyle wrote, "God hath written Himself and His laws very broadly on all that is around us, if our dull eyes and duller souls could but read what He hath set before us" ("The White Company," in The Works of Doyle, p. 313; italics added).

Purer Eyes

Brother Haurand did not feel the Spirit of the Lord when he came into the temple looking for flaws in the construction. He was, however, overwhelmed by the Spirit when he entered in a reverent and charitable mood.

His experience reminds us that we see what we want to see; we feel what we want to feel. One with "purer eyes" will see and sense goodness in someone or something. But one with jaundiced eyes will never experience things of the Spirit.

"The light of the body," said Jesus, "is the eye: if therefore thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of light. But if thine eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full of darkness" (Matthew 6:22-23).

Moroni worried that readers would mock his record because of his weakness in writing. He was assured that fools would mock but weak things would become strong unto those who are meek, humble, and full of grace (see Ether 12:27).

We will never feel the Spirit of the Lord:

Â If we attend worship services and count the grammatical errors made by speakers.

Â If we look for flaws in the lives of Church leaders.

Â If we fix our gaze upon spurious doctrine or "look beyond the mark" (Jacob 4:14).

We will, however, feel a closeness to the Lord:

Â If we show charity toward all our brothers and sisters.

Â If we try to catch others doing something good.

Â If we look to living prophets and give heed to their inspired words (see D&C 1:14-38).

President Joseph F. Smith counseled: "Change the focus of your view, and of your eyes, from watching for evil to watching for that which is good, that which is pure. . . . Look for good in men, and where they fail to possess it try to build it up in them" (Conference Report, April 1913, p. 8; italics added).

Those who call themselves Saints have the continuing responsibility to sanctify their minds and bodies so that they might discern the finer or purer things of the Spirit (see D&C 131:7-8). Such a process begins when they discipline themselves to look for light rather than darkness. It grows as they become less inspective of others and more introspective of themselves. It matures as they learn to measure their words and throw light upon subjects discussed rather than spreading darkness. And it is fully achieved when they have cast out the beam from their own eyes and when they have actively sought "to be a light unto the world . . . and saviors of men" (see Matthew 7:1-5; D&C 103:9-10).

The Apostle Paul stated, "The natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned" (1 Corinthians 2:14). We must, therefore, put off the natural man and become Saints through the atonement of Christ. Then, as we acquire meekness, humility, patience, submissiveness, and love, we shall see through "purer eyes" and obtain a clearer vision of spiritual things (see Mosiah 3:19).

Other thoughts about how to worship are provided below. Each is worthy of prayerful consideration as the "pecan tree" practice of home and church worship is established in your home.

Meditation

President David O. McKay spoke these words in a General Conference of the Church:

I think we pay too little attention to the value of meditation, a principle of devotion. In our worship there are two elements: One is spiritual communion arising from our own meditation; the other, instruction from others, particularly from those who have authority to guide and instruct us. Of the two, the more profitable introspectively is the meditation. Meditation is the language of the soul. It is defined as "a form of private devotion, or spiritual exercise, consisting in deep, continued reflection on some religious theme." Meditation is a form of prayer. We can say prayers without having any spiritual response. We can say prayers as the unrighteous king in Hamlet who said: "My words fly up, my thoughts remain below: Words without thoughts never to heaven go . . . "

Meditation is one of the most secret, most sacred doors through which we pass into the presence of the Lord (In Conference Report, April 1946, p. 113; italics added).

When I was a young man and somewhat loathe to speak in Church, my father gave me some timely advice. He advised me to enter the chapel quietly, to take my seat promptly, to assume a reverent mood, to meditate about spiritual things, and to determine what I would say if called upon to speak. By doing so, he promised, I would be prepared to participate in the service if and when the invitation were extended; but, if not called upon, I would have heard at least one valuable sermon—the one I had outlined in my own mind.

Home and Church

As mentioned previously in this book, parents have the responsibility to teach their children to pray and to walk uprightly before the Lord. They fulfill this awesome responsibility through a combination of many things, including the blending of home and church worship.

At home, family prayers are said, family home evenings are held, scripture reading is encouraged, and other worshipful activities are conducted. These activities help to build character and to keep the lives of both parents and children ever Godward. Yet most families need additional assistance in teaching and caring for the spiritual welfare of children. Such assistance is obtained through Church officers and organizations. It is not intended that Church leaders and programs replace parents and home influences. To do so would be an abdication of duty on the part of the parents and an intrusion of others upon the prerogatives of the home. But bishoprics, quorum leaders, auxiliary officers, Sunday School presidencies, home and visiting teachers, and other groups of people are included in the Church organization to help parents with the needs of family members.

The Savior gave us a pattern to follow in correlating home and family worship. After his resurrection, Jesus visited the Nephites and taught them doctrine that he perceived they could not fully understand. He therefore instructed, "Go ye unto your homes, and ponder upon the things which I have said, and ask of the Father, in my name, that ye may understand, and prepare your minds for the morrow." (3 Nephi 17:3). Elder Bruce R. McConkie elaborated upon this pattern by saying:

We come together in congregations, seeking the guidance of the Holy Spirit, studying the revelations, reading the scriptures, and hearing expressions of doctrine and counsel given by those who are appointed. These teachings ought to be delivered by the power of the Holy Spirit. They ought to be received by the same power. And if they are, then the speaker and the hearer will be mutually edified, and we will have true and proper worship.

Then when the meeting is over, the amen should not end it. We should go to our homes and to our families and to our circles, and we should search out the revelations and find out what the Lord has said on the subjects involved. We should seek to get in tune with the Holy Spirit and to gain a witness, not solely of the truth and divinity of the work in which we are engaged but also of the doctrines that are taught by those who preach to us. We come into these congregations, and sometimes a speaker brings a jug of living water that has in it many gallons. And he pours it out on the congregation, all that the members have brought is a single cup and so that's all they take away. Or maybe they have their hands over the cups, and they don't get anything to speak of.

On other occasions we have meetings where the speaker comes and all he brings is a little cup of eternal truth, and the members of the congregation come with a large jug, and all they get in their jugs is the little dribble that came from a man who should have known better and who should have prepared himself and talked from the revelations and spoken by the power of the Holy Spirit. We are obligated in the Church to speak by the power of the Spirit. We are commanded to treasure up the words of light and truth and then give forth the portion that is appropriate and needful on every occasion (BYU Address, "The Seven Deadly Heresies," BYU Devotional Address, June 1, 1980).

By employing the pattern for home and church worship set by Jesus and as described by Elder McConkie, stewardships are honored and participants are strengthened. How could it be otherwise when parents take the lead and friends in the faith work cooperatively in teaching and guiding the young and the old? Under this inspired arrangement, the home is the launching and landing pad, with parents at the controls; the Church and its programs and programmers are the guidance systems provided as helps to the parents in guiding children along the right path.

Full Purpose of Heart

Said President John Taylor: "When we do meet to worship God, I like to see us worship him with all our hearts. I think it altogether out of place on such occasions to hear people talk about secular things: these are times, above all others perhaps, when our feelings and affections should be drawn out towards God. If we sing praises to God, let us do it in the proper spirit; if we pray, let every soul be engaged in prayer, doing it with all our hearts, that through our union our spirits may be blended in one, that our prayers and our worship may be available with God, whose Spirit permeates all things, and is always present in the assemblies of good and faithful Saints" (The Gospel Kingdom, sel. G. Homer Durham [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1943), p. 228).

We sometimes use the expressions "out of tune" or "in tune" in reference to people and worship services. The first expression describes those who drag the world into sacred settings and attempt to pay their devotions to God with half of their mind in Babylon and the other half in Zion. Since they are "double-minded" men and women, their actions are unstable and their words are contaminated. On the other hand, those who are "in tune" come before the Lord at home or at church with humble spirits and eyes upward. They have blocked out the lesser things of the world and are ready to receive instructions from on high (see James 1:8).

I like what President Spencer W. Kimball said about "true worship":

The best choir, the best speaker, the most noted lecturer, cannot bring true worship into your soul. It must proceed from within, out of a deep sense of love and devotion and dependence and humility. . . .

We do not go to Sabbath meetings to be entertained or even solely to be instructed. We go to worship the Lord. It is an individual responsibility, and regardless of what is said from the pulpit, if one wishes to worship the Lord in spirit and in truth, he may do so by attending his meetings, partaking of the sacrament, and contemplating the beauties of the gospel. If the service is a failure to you, you have failed. No one can worship for you; you must do your own waiting upon the Lord (The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982], pp. 514-15).

An Attitude of Reverence

In our materialistic and sometimes raucous world, there is a danger that we will become too accustomed to the noises about us. Such noises, if not controlled, may rouse savage instincts and feelings and bring out the worst in you and me. So, there are times when we must "be still and know that [there is a] God" (D&C 101:16). I speak of times when we sweep away the mundane things around us, cast away idle thoughts, and allow the intents of our hearts to center upon Him who is the discerner of the thoughts and intents of our hearts (see Hebrews 4:12). I speak of times when we assume a reverent posture and worship our Father in Heaven.

Worship and reverence are inseparable. Such was the contention of a modern prophet, President David O. McKay, who spoke often of reverence. In one conference setting, he declared:

Inseparable from the acceptance of the existence of God is an attitude of reverence. The greatest manifestation of spirituality is reverence; indeed, reverence is spirituality. Reverence is profound respect mingled with love. It is a "complex emotion made up of mingled feelings of the soul." Carlyle says it is "the highest of human feelings." If reverence is the highest, then irreverence is the lowest state in which a man can live in the world. Be that as it may, it is nevertheless true that an irreverent man has a crudeness about him that is repellent. He is cynical, often sneering, and always iconoclastic.

Reverence embraces regard, deference, honor, and esteem. Without some degree of it, therefore, there would be no courtesy, no gentility, no consideration of others' feelings or of others' rights. Reverence is the fundamental virtue in religion. It is one of the signs of strength; irreverence, one of the surest indications of weakness. "No man will rise high," says one man, "who jeers at sacred things. The fine loyalties of life must be reverenced or they will be foresworn in the day of trial." . . .

If there were more reverence in human hearts, there would be less room for sin and sorrow, and there would be increased capacity for joy and gladness. To make more cherished, more adaptable, more attractive this gem among brilliant virtues is a project worthy of the most united and prayerful efforts of every parent, every officer, and every member of the Church (Conference Report, April 1967, pp. 86-87).

A Shared Responsibility

One other aspect of worship, a how-to, if you will, should be mentioned. This appendage to the subject is best labeled "joint-preparation" or "shared responsibility." It can be introduced by a story that is now a part of LDS folklore. A rather harried mother awakes from a deep sleep on Sunday morning and anticipates the demands and expectations of the day. Through her mind races thoughts of meals, children, baths, dresses, and all the other trimmings of the day. She nudges her husband, who is snoring peacefully at her side, and brings him back to a state of consciousness. Then, she announces, "Honey, you wake up the children, give them a bath, clothe them, feed them breakfast, and do all else to get them ready for Church. I'll go sit in the car and honk the horn until you all arrive."

Too frequently, I suspect, the burdens of preparing for worship at home or church are strapped upon the back of the mother. Consequently, there is not much rest or refreshment in the Sabbath Day or the family home evening for her. Fathers and children must assume their fair share of the responsibility for family worship and help with the preparations. No one should sit and honk while others are engaged in needful work, attempting to do things with an eye single to the glory of God.

Conclusion

We read the scriptural accounts of the daughters of Onitah and the Hebrew sons who refused to worship gods of gold or wood or stone, even at the peril of their own lives, and we marvel at their moral integrity (see Abraham 1:11; Daniel 3:18). These young spiritual giants were determined not to pollute their worship or offend the living God. At the same time, we wonder why so many of our modern youth walk in their own way, after the image of their own god, "whose image is in the likeness of the world, and whose substance is that of an idol" (D&C 1:16). Is it possible that too few parents are planting and cultivating the "pecan tree" practice of true home and church worship?

We read of the ancient Zoramites who engaged in a false worship service one day of the week. Their rote and boastful prayers were misdirected and Satan-oriented. Their hearts were lifted up in pride and centered upon gold, silver, and all manner of fine goods. Moreover, after the set prayers had been spoken, "they returned to their homes, never speaking of their God again until they had assembled themselves together again to the holy stand" (Alma 31:23). Such practices seem repulsive to most of us. But, once again, we wonder why so many of our people, young and old, fail to worship God in an acceptable manner and fail to carry Sabbath teachings and spirit with them throughout the week and into the home. Would this be the case if the "pecan tree" practice of true home and church worship was growing in our family gardens?

One of our basic tenets is, "We claim the privilege of worshipping Almighty God according to the dictates of our own conscience, and allow all men the same privilege, let them worship how, where, or what they may" (Eleventh Article of Faith; italics added). Worship is a personal matter; it is a wonderful privilege, and all of us should be guardians of this inalienable right. But is it not our responsibility to help others, especially our children, "worship God, in whatsoever place [they] may be in, in spirit and truth"? (Alma 34:38). In the words of Alma, "their souls are precious . . . therefore, give unto us, O Lord, power and wisdom that we may bring these [our children] again unto thee" (Alma 31:35). Let us plant the "pecan tree" practice of home and Church worship, and

let us nourish it with great care, that it may get root, that it may grow up, and bring forth fruit unto us (Alma 32:37).
