Carlos E. Asay, Family Pecan Trees: Planting a Legacy of Faith at Home ( 1992)

Chapter Sixteen

Temple Activity and Worship

Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths (Isaiah 2:3).

"Temple worship [can] do more for an individual in all facets of his Church life than anything else," said Thomas Bell, former president of the Washington, D.C., Temple (LaRene Gaunt, "A Day in Heaven," Ensign, December 1991, p. 36). If this is true, and I believe that it is, no subject is more worthy of our consideration as we plant the last tree in our family grove of "pecan tree" practices.

On more than one occasion, President Ezra Taft Benson has spoken tenderly of the family and temple. I especially enjoy the following account:

Since my earliest childhood memory, the spirit of the temple has blessed our home. I remember as a little boy seeing my mother bending over the ironing board pressing long strips of white cloth, with beads of perspiration on her forehead. I asked her why. She answered, "These are temple robes, my son. Your father and I are going to the temple in Logan." She then put the old flatiron on the stove, drew a chair close to mine, and told me about temple work. I learned how vitally important it is to go to the temple and to participate there in sacred ordinances. Every time my parents returned from a visit to the temple, the experience brought renewed love and strength to our family circle.

I love the temple with all my heart and soul. Nearly every week, my beloved wife, Flora, and I receive the ordinances in the temple for a loved one.

The temple is an ever-present reminder that God intends the family to be eternal. We should share with our families our love of our forebears and our gratitude to be able to help them receive the saving ordinances, as my parents did with me. As we do so, increased bonds of appreciation and affection will develop within our families (Come unto Christ: Through Temple Ordinances and Covenants [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1987], p. 2).

I am not certain whether President Benson's mother realized the importance of that day with her ironing board, flatiron, and inquisitive son. But it is certain that she made the most of a precious teaching moment and instructed her son when his interest was high and his attention was undivided. There was nothing contrived or staged about this object lesson. It happened spontaneously, as a loving mother planted truths in a future prophet's mind and stirred a desire for temple activity and worship that never waned.

Related Concepts

Whenever I think of the family, I think instinctively of the temple. Why? Because the temple is the birthplace of the eternal family unit. Whenever I think of the house of the Lord, I think of my own house. Why? Because "only the home can compare with the temple in sacredness" (Bible Dictionary, p. 781). Whenever I think of the family and the temple, I think of the Holy Priesthood. Why? Because it is through the power of the priesthood that the family receives in the temple the crowning blessings of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

I have always appreciated the significance and the interrelatedness of the family, the temple, and the priesthood. Such concepts are keystones in the gospel arch that spans heaven and earth. However, I have gained fresh and added appreciation for this trio of saving principles through an experience with an unusual couple.

A Full Man

I had traveled to a distant place on a stake conference assignment. My first order of business was to interview a man to see if he was worthy and prepared to receive a restoration of blessings. The man explained to me how he had rebelled in times past, become estranged from the Church, suffered through a divorce, and, finally, found his present wife.

He said he had married his second wife after a short, whirlwind courtship. She was not a member of the Church at the time and knew nothing about her husband's past. A few weeks after their marriage, he awakened one morning out of a deep sleep and was startled to see his wife sitting next to the bed staring down at him. He wondered what was wrong. The conversation went something like this: "Joe, I love you, but sometimes you frighten me." She added, "There are times when I see in you absolute greatness, and there are times when I see nothing. You seem to be two persons—one with unlimited possibilities and one with ordinary talents and abilities. Please explain to me," she begged. "Why do I feel this way?"

After some thought and reflection, he responded: "Honey, you really don't know me at all. I am a Mormon."

"What is that?" she asked.

He then related the basics of his faith and previous Church activity. She listened intently. He said, "I am a high priest and hold the Holy Melchizedek Priesthood."

His wife replied, "What does that mean?"

Again, he gave an explanation. On and on the conversation continued until he had fully revealed himself to his sweet wife. The last subject he addressed was temple sealings and the eternal nature of the family. This subject melted her heart and caused her to weep openly.

When all the questions had been asked and the man's past had been fully disclosed, the woman inquired, "What would you have to do to bring all of the goodness you have mentioned back into your life so that it will remain and bless both of us?"

"Oh, it would be too long and too painful. I would need to find a stake president, confess my sins, and subject myself to Church discipline," was his reply.

The determined woman threw the telephone directory into her husband's lap and cried, "Find a stake president! Whatever is required, we will do it, and we will begin today."

They did find a stake president. The man's records were obtained, and disciplinary action was taken. Then the man began his long climb toward full fellowship in the Church. In the meantime, the wife was taught the gospel, received baptism, and became a very active Latter-day Saint.

The couple's story touched my heart and convinced me that the man's repentance had been complete, and I restored his blessings in accord with approved policies and procedures. Once the amen was pronounced, a beautiful and wonderful thing happened. The wife threw herself into her husband's arms and sobbed over and over again, "Now I have my full man. Now I have my full man."

I shall never forget the lesson taught by this unusual woman. She reminded me that without family, temple, and priesthood, I am only a shell of a man. With these concepts and related powers, however, I do have unlimited possibilities, and I can become a full man—even a "man of Christ" (see Helaman 3:29). She also reminded me that I must not take for granted or place in jeopardy those blessings and privileges that are more precious than life itself.

In planting the "pecan tree" practice of temple activity and worship, and in striving to become full men and women in Christ, we should remember that family refers to a people, temple to a place, and priesthood to a power.

As I discuss each of these concepts, consider, if you will, each one as a root of the plant, with the Spirit serving as the taproot or occupying the central position in the line of growth. Moreover, keep in mind that this "pecan tree" practice has the potential of doing for you what it did for President Benson, who testified, "[Each] visit to the temple . . . brought renewed love and strength to our family circle."

A People

Those who believe in the true and living God and who have sought to obey his commandments have been called by many names. In ancient times, such true believers were referred to as a "peculiar treasure," "a kingdom of priests," "an holy nation," and "a special people" (see Exodus 19:5-6; Deuteronomy 7:6). In the meridian of time, followers of Christ were not only designated as "an holy nation" and "a peculiar people" but also as "Christians" and "a royal priesthood" (see 1 Peter 2:9; Acts 11:26). In our modern day, the following expressions have been used: "a light unto the Gentiles," "a pure people," "salt of the earth," and a light or standard to the world (see D&C 86:11; 100:16; 101:39; 115:5). Common to all of these dispensations, however, is the term Saints, meaning those "'free from blemish' whether physical or moral" (see Bible Dictionary, p. 768).

A search of holy writ reveals that people who have entered into a covenant with God have been known as "Saints" from the days of ancient Israel to the present. Such a lofty title is not presumptive or something to boast about. It is a means of identifying those who are striving to become sanctified through covenant-making and covenant-keeping (see D&C 125:2). It refers to those who live with this thought uppermost in mind: "The natural man is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam, and will be, forever and ever, unless he yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and putteth off the natural man and becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord, and becometh as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father" (Mosiah 3:19).

To attain the measure of saintliness outlined in this scripture, we live in family units where truth is taught and modeled; we attend Church regularly and grow in the gospel of Jesus Christ; and we keep ourselves pointed for the temple, where the crowning blessings of the priesthood are received. No wonder the world regards us as a family-oriented, church-going, and temple-building people. If only they and we understood more perfectly the saving and exalting role of dedicated temples, perhaps all of us would accelerate our efforts to gain entrance into the house of the Lord and to become Saints in the full sense of the word.

The Psalmist declared: "Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? or who shall stand in his holy place? He that hath clean hands, and a pure heart; who hath not lifted up his soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully. He shall receive the blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of his salvation" (Psalm 24:3-5).

In my mind, "clean hands" suggests a cleanliness of body; a "pure heart" suggests a purity of motive; a soul not lifted up unto vanity is one who retains humility; and one who has not sworn deceitfully is one who enters the temple honorably and fully qualified to receive the blessings of the temple.

President Spencer W. Kimball adds this insight and warning about mechanical temple activity and worthiness: "All these ordinances are futile unless with them there is a great righteousness. . . . Sometimes people feel if they have complied with the more mechanical things that they are in line. And yet perhaps their hearts are not always pure. . . . With hearts that are absolutely purged and cleaned, and living the more mechanical things, we are prepared to come into the holy temple" (The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982], pp. 536-37).

One who enters the temple under false pretenses or engages in ordinance work like a robot is little better than the moneychangers who desecrated God's house and were routed from the premises by the Savior (see Matthew 21:12-13).

A few years ago, my wife and I attended an afternoon session in the Salt Lake Temple. The company was small, consisting of no more than a dozen men and a dozen women. I scanned the group, casually noting that all were strangers to me except my wife. We were instructed in the first room and then moved to the next. As we took our seats in the second room, there was a slight commotion. I looked about to see what was wrong. In doing so, I saw a woman leave the room. All of us assumed that she was ill or had perhaps forgotten a piece of clothing. The interruption was brief and the instruction resumed. It was a refreshing temple experience for us, and we returned home rejoicing.

The next day I received a very unusual telephone call. My secretary came to my office door and said, "A woman wants to speak with you, but she won't give me her name."

I picked up the phone and announced myself. The caller promptly asked, "Elder Asay, what do you know about me?"

"How can I answer your question," I responded, "when you haven't even given me your name?"

She continued, "You were in the three o'clock temple session yesterday, weren't you?"

"Yes," I answered, "I was there."

She said, "Do you remember someone walking out of the second room?"

"Yes," I replied.

"It was I who walked out of the temple yesterday. Elder Asay, what do you know about me?"

At this point the conversation was becoming a bit tedious, and I said, "My dear, please don't play games with me. Unless you tell me who you are, how can I respond to your query?"

Almost totally ignoring what I said, the woman confessed: "It was I who left the temple room yesterday before the instruction began. I did so because you looked at me with a searching look, and you made me feel as though I was unworthy to be there." Once again, she asked, "What do you know about me?"

I said: "Well, if you attended the temple worthily yesterday, I apologize for how I may have looked at you and for how I may have made you feel. However, if you were there unworthily, I make no apology."

There was a long silence and then soft sobbing over the telephone. Finally, the woman confessed: "I have committed a serious sin, and I attended the temple yesterday under false pretenses. However," she added, "I visited my bishop last night, and I will follow his counsel and advice."

This unusual experience reminded me of the words of Moroni:

Will ye longer deny the Christ, or can ye behold the Lamb of God? Do ye suppose that ye shall dwell with him under a consciousness of your guilt? Do ye suppose that ye could be happy to dwell with that holy Being, when your souls are racked with a consciousness of guilt that ye have ever abused his laws?

Behold, I say unto you that ye would be more miserable to dwell with a holy and just God, under a consciousness of your filthiness before him, than ye would to dwell with the damned souls in hell.

For behold, when ye shall be brought to see your nakedness before God, and also the glory of God, and the holiness of Jesus Christ, it will kindle a flame of unquenchable fire upon you (Mormon 9:3-5).

It is most significant that the woman judged herself through my eyes in the house of the Lord. She verified in part the truth that "no unclean thing can dwell with God" or abide his holy presence (1 Nephi 10:21), for "the piercing eye of the Almighty God" sees all (Jacob 2:10).

Nothing escapes his view, whether it be done in public or in private. Therefore, we should be consistent in our righteousness and strive to reach that state of goodness whereby we feel comfortable in his holy house—the place where he manifests himself to his people (see D&C 109:5).

Perhaps we should regard each visit to the temple as a time to examine and prove ourselves, whether we are planted firmly in the faith and whether we are the type of people we should be.

The discussion of temple activity and God's "peculiar people" would be incomplete if reference were not made to the ongoing temple expectations for Church members. I refer to those essential actions taken by the Saints to fulfill the duties specified by scripture and the teachings of priesthood leaders. They are:

Â Study the principles of the gospel relating to temples and temple covenants and ordinances and teach them to your children and others.

Â Obtain and retain a valid temple recommend, for it is a certificate of worthiness and serves as a shield against temptation.

Â Receive personal endowments and honor the covenants made in the house of the Lord, including the proper wearing of the garments.

Â Engage in family history and family research activities, thus welding one generation to another.

Â Perform vicarious ordinances for ancestors and seek to become a Savior on Mount Zion (see Obadiah 1:21).

Â Keep the family united in the gospel and the Church with the doors of your "tent" pitched always toward the temple (see Mosiah 2:6).

If temple activity and worship is to serve as an edifying "pecan tree" practice for members of the Church, it must not be performed in a perfunctory or mechanical manner. A superficial approach to the ordinances received in the house of the Lord mocks and offends God. It is also imperative that we meet temple expectations and ascend into his holy place with clean hands, pure hearts, and honest intent. Otherwise, our offerings to God may not be acceptable, nor will we be numbered among his chosen flock or known as "a pure people."

A Place

God's house, the temple, is a very special place. It has been referred to as a holy sanctuary, a refuge from the cares of a troubled world, an island of godliness in a godless sea, and as a place where God, his Holy Spirit, angels, and mortals mingle. In a dedicatory prayer, the Prophet Joseph Smith described the temple as "a house of prayer, a house of fasting, a house of faith, a house of learning, a house of glory, a house of order, a house of God" (D&C 109:8).

Another revelation contains this enlightening description: "A place of thanksgiving for all saints, and for a place of instruction for all those who are called to the work of the ministry in all their several callings and offices; that they may be perfected in the understanding of their ministry, in theory, in principle, and in doctrine, in all things pertaining to the kingdom of God on the earth, the keys of which kingdom have been conferred upon you. Yea, and my presence shall be there, for I will come into it, and all the pure in heart that shall come into it shall see God" (D&C 97:13-14, 16).

In summary, "a temple is literally a house of the Lord, a holy sanctuary in which sacred ceremonies and ordinances of the gospel are performed by and for the living and also in behalf of the dead. A place where the Lord may come, it is the most holy of any place of worship on the earth. Only the home can compare with the temple in sacredness" (Bible Dictionary, pp. 780-81).

Many ask, Why a temple? In addition to the answers given above, we respond, "That the Son of man might have a place to manifest himself to his people"; and, so that his people may feel God's power and feel constrained to acknowledge that the Lord has sanctified it, and that it is his house, even a house of his holiness (see D&C 109:5, 3). Furthermore, in the words of President Ezra Taft Benson, "The temple is the house of the Lord. Our attendance there blesses the dead and also blesses us, for it is a house of revelation" (Ezra Taft Benson, "A Sacred Responsibility," Ensign, May 1986, p. 78).

One cannot read section 109 of the Doctrine and Covenants without knowing that the prayer given by the Prophet Joseph Smith at the dedication of the temple in Kirtland, Ohio, was indeed given to him by revelation. This scripture is packed with truths that could come from only one source—God. For example, there is one short verse, consisting of only thirty-one words, that cites four reasons for temple building and temple attendance. Though these four reasons may not be all-inclusive of the many reasons for going to the temple, they are insightful and deserving of further comments: "That they [1] may grow up in thee, and [2] receive a fulness of the Holy Ghost, and [3] be organized according to thy laws, and [4] be prepared to obtain every needful thing" (D&C 109:15; italics added).

"That they may grow up in thee." In many respects, the temple is a school of the Saints. Initially, attendees are much like children in a grammar school. They know little about the covenants, ordinances, and related instructions. But as they return again and again to the temple, they learn line upon line and precept upon precept until they reach higher grades of knowledge and understanding. Then, in due time, they find added meaning in the temple procedures and gain deep insights into the plan of salvation. Gradually, they grow in obedience, devotion to duty, and other aspects of gospel living, thus gaining a maturity of faith. All of this is done in harmony with this divine injunction: "Seek ye diligently and teach one another words of wisdom; yea, seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom, seek learning even by study and also by faith" (D&C 109:7).

Said John A. Widtsoe: "Men grow mighty under the results of temple service; women grow strong under it; the community increases in power; until the devil has less influence than he ever had before" ("Temple Worship," Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine, April 1931, p. 51).

"[That they may] receive a fulness of the Holy Ghost." The Holy Ghost is manifested both as a power and as a gift. The power comes to us before baptism as a convincing witness that the gospel is true. The gift comes only after proper and authorized baptism: "The gift of the Holy Ghost is the right to have, whenever one is worthy, the companionship of the Holy Ghost." Such companionship "acts as a cleansing agent to purify a person and sanctify him from all sin" (see Bible Dictionary, p. 704).

We are told that we can speak with the tongue of angels when under the influence of the Holy Ghost (see 2 Nephi 31:13). We read that people are sealed with the Holy Ghost or the Holy Spirit of Promise (see Ephesians 1:13). We know that those who are wise receive the truth and take the Holy Spirit for their guide (see D&C 45:57). Hence, those who go to the temple and partake of its saving ordinances are endowed with power from on high, even the fullness of the Holy Ghost.

"[That they may] be organized according to [God's] laws." God is a God of law and order. His house is a house of order (D&C 109:8), his work is a work of order (D&C 20:68), his power or priesthood is referred to as the order of the priesthood (D&C 94:6). Of a surety, he is not a God of confusion, nor does he walk in crooked paths.

It is reasonable that the God of order would instruct his children thus: "All who will have a blessing at my hands shall abide the law which was appointed for that blessing, and the conditions thereof, as were instituted from before the foundation of the world" (D&C 132:5).

Elder Richard L. Evans taught, "One of the greatest blessings of life is law. . . . Without law, commandments, standards, discipline, we would be utterly loose and utterly lost."

Anyone who understands the workings of the Lord will agree with Elder Evans's statement and conclude that every "thou shalt" and every "thou shalt not" is an expression of God's love for us. If he did not love us, he would not provide us warnings and directions, nor would he pronounce laws and promised blessings. But since he is our loving Father in Heaven, he commands and invites us to receive the protection and goodness associated with his laws.

Whenever we attend the temple, we are reminded of God's laws, including the laws of the gospel, sacrifice, consecration, chastity, and other holy requirements. Moreover, we are reminded of the blessings and destiny promised those who are obedient. And if we live in accord with temple commitments, we do become organized.

"[That they may] obtain every needful thing." Speaking of the temple endowment, President Brigham Young declared: "Your endowment is, to receive all those ordinances in the House of the Lord, which are necessary for you, after you have departed this life, to enable you to walk back to the presence of the Father, passing the angels who stand as sentinels, being enabled to give them the key words, the signs and tokens, pertaining to the Holy Priesthood, and gain your eternal exaltation in spite of earth and hell" (Journal of Discourses 2:31).

Additional understanding about the temple endowment can be obtained from the writings of James E. Talmage. He wrote:

The Temple Endowment, as administered in modern temples, comprises instruction relating to the significance and sequence of past dispensations, and the importance of the present as the greatest and grandest era in human history. This course of instruction includes a recital of the most prominent events of the creative period, the condition of our first parents in the Garden of Eden, their disobedience and consequent expulsion from that blissful abode, their condition in the lone and dreary world when doomed to live by labor and sweat, the plan of redemption by which the great transgression may be atoned, the period of the great apostasy, the restoration of the Gospel with all its ancient powers and privileges, the absolute and indispensable condition of personal purity and devotion to the right in present life, and a strict compliance with Gospel requirements (The House of the Lord [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, rev. ed. 1976], pp. 83-84).

A master list of "needful things" obtained by the Saints through temple activity includes: the fulness of the priesthood is received; the patriarchal order is conferred upon men; men and women are sealed as husband and wife for time and for all eternity; the family unit is made eternal; the members perform vicarious ordinances in behalf of their kindred dead; members are taught how to gain eternal life; washings, anointings, and other saving ordinances are performed; and members are endowed with power from on high.

While serving as a bishop, I was requested to perform several civil marriages in the homes of Church members. In each instance, the people involved attempted to dignify the occasion and to make it as spiritual as possible. Usually the home was sparkling clean and decorated with fragrant flowers. All seemed intent upon making the experience special and memorable, especially for the more sensitive bride. But in every instance, I felt somewhat uncomfortable in performing the ceremony. I knew that I was properly authorized to speak the required words and to pronounce the couple man and wife. I knew that all was being done within the requirements of the law and in fulfillment of social expectations. At the same time, however, I knew that the ceremony included two restrictive clauses: (1) "as long as you both shall live," and (2) "legally and lawfully wedded for a period of your mortal lives." Such restrictive clauses made me feel as if I was not completing the job or doing all that God would have me do. I knew that the couple was not receiving the crowning blessings of the Holy Priesthood. I knew of a better way.

In recent years, I have been privileged to participate in the creation of new Church units, such as wards and stakes. Each of these occasions has been very rewarding, for I rejoice when observing the marvelous growth of the Church. However, none of these creations has brought me the joy and satisfaction that I feel when I seal a man and woman in the temple and create a new family—the most important unit in time or eternity. Though the unit begins with only two persons, I know that I am sealing a potential king and queen who will eventually rule over a kingdom of many subjects.

Celestial marriage is soul-satisfying because no restrictive clauses are spoken; participants are required to be morally clean and pure; the sealing is performed under the watchful eyes of God, angels, and living witnesses; a power to seal on earth that which is sealed in heaven is exercised; and vows exchanged are binding for time and for all eternity.

Temple activity encompasses work for both the living and the dead. The living receive endowments, participate in sealings, and do other things for themselves that bring blessings into their lives. But not until they become involved in vicarious ordinances in behalf of the dead do they become Saviors on Mount Zion. Such temple activity welds families together and enables participants to gain deep understanding of this scripture: "How knoweth a man the master whom he has not served, and who is a stranger unto him, and is far from the thoughts and intents of his heart?" (Mosiah 5:13).

What parent does not want his or her children to grow up in God, to receive a fullness of the Holy Ghost, to become organized according to God's laws, and to obtain every needful thing? What parent does not prefer celestial marriage over civil marriage? And what parent would not want a son or daughter to become a Savior on Mount Zion? All of this and more can be received by our children if we guide their feet toward the temple—a most sacred place.

A Power

Some may regard Latter-day Saints as a presumptive people when they speak of a power to baptize in behalf of the dead or to seal a couple together for time and all eternity. Such critics are unfamiliar with the restored gospel and the Church of Jesus Christ, else they would know the truthfulness of the following statement: "It may seem to some to be a very bold doctrine that we talk of—a power which records or binds on earth and binds in heaven. Nevertheless, in all ages of the world, whenever the Lord has given a dispensation of the priesthood to any man by actual revelation, or any set of men, this power has always been given. Hence, whatsoever those men did in authority, in the name of the Lord, and did it truly and faithfully, and kept a proper and faithful record of the same, it became a law on earth and in heaven, and could not be annulled, according to the decrees of the great Jehovah" (D&C 128:9).

We must not forget that the Savior instructed his disciples, "I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven" (Matthew 16:19).

The record states that the disciples went forth under Christ's commission or charge and "preached every where, the Lord working with them, and confirming the word with signs" (Mark 16:20). Like the Master, they healed the sick, performed baptisms, cast out evil spirits, and engaged in vicarious services for the dead (1 Corinthians 15:29). All of this was done in the name of Christ and in behalf of his holy cause.

Malachi, the last of the Old Testament prophets, prophesied that Elijah would return to the earth "before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord." The purpose of his coming was to restore lost powers and "turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, lest [God] come and smite the earth with a curse" (Malachi 4:5-6).

As forecasted, Elijah did return and restored through the Prophet Joseph Smith certain keys pertaining to the restoration of the priesthood and "the great work to be done in the temples of the Lord" (see D&C 27:9; 110:14-16; 128:17; 138:47-48). Since that memorable day, the spirit of Elijah has wrought upon the Saints and prompted significant family history and temple activity.

Speaking about the spirit of Elijah, Elder Boyd K. Packer wrote: "When a member of the Church comes under its influence, it is a powerful, compelling force which motivates him with a desire to be attending to genealogical and temple work. It leaves him anxious over the well-being of his forebears. When that spirit comes, somehow we desire to know more about those forebears—we desire to know them" (Boyd K. Packer, The Holy Temple [Salt Lake City, Bookcraft, 1986], p. 210).

One cannot think of the spirit of Elijah, the holy priesthood, and the temple without reflecting upon the "power of godliness," as described in the revelation on priesthood: "This greater priesthood administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God. Therefore, in the ordinances thereof, the power of godliness is manifest. And without the ordinances thereof, and the authority of the priesthood, the power of godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh; For without this no man can see the face of God, even the Father, and live" (D&C 84:19-22).

Let me add some words of a modern apostle: "The work done in the temples of the Lord represents the culmination of the obligations, privileges and blessings of the Priesthood. No man has completed—nor a woman with him—the Priesthood cycle until he has received the blessings that the temple has to offer" (John A. Widtsoe, Conference Report, April 1943, p. 37).

The dispensation of the fullness of times was ushered in through the instrumentality of the Prophet Joseph Smith. He and others have been privileged to receive the power and authority to act in the name of God and to perform saving ordinances for and in behalf of the living and the dead. Hence, there is nothing presumptive about temple activity sponsored under the leadership of a living prophet, for he holds the keys of the kingdom and uses them to unlock the doors of the temple and related ordinance work. And how blessed we are to share that priesthood power and to exercise it in behalf of ourselves, our families, and others.

Concluding Words

A number of years ago, I attended a session in the Manti Temple. I recall that the company was large and the proceedings rather long and drawn out. The rooms were crowded and very warm, making it difficult for me to stay awake and to keep my mind from wandering. At a moment when I was relaxed in thought, I heard a speaker quote the words of the Savior: "And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent" (John 17:3).

All of a sudden, I felt a spiritual nudging and became very alert. A voice within me seemed to shout, "That's it! That's why I am here! I am here in the Lord's house to become better acquainted with the only true and living God and his Son—the Savior of mankind." Then the voice in my mind asked, "Is there a better place than the temple to learn of God and his holy purposes?"

No one can really know another unless he has seen him in his home and visited with him in familiar surroundings. In intimate settings, pretenses are dropped, things are seen as they really are, and true perspectives are obtained. So it is with friends or neighbors in their homes, and so it is with God in his place of abode—the temple.

Each time I visit the Lord's house, I reflect upon that experience in the Manti Temple, and I am reminded of my continuing need to know my Maker and to seek eternal life. I feel privileged to be a guest of Deity in the temple. I feel humbled in his presence. And I come away hoping and praying that I might be acceptable to him and ever worthy of his divine love.

I repeat once more: family (a people), temple (a place), and priesthood (a power). These complementary concepts constitute the roots of the "pecan tree" practice of temple activity and worship. God bless you to

plant this word in your hearts [that ye may try the experiment of its goodness], and as it beginneth to swell even so nourish it by your faith. And behold, it will become a tree, springing up in you unto everlasting life (Alma 33:23; 32:41).
