Carlos E. Asay, Family Pecan Trees: Planting a Legacy of Faith at Home ( 1992)

Epilogue

The Law of the Harvest

Be not deceived; God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap. For he that soweth to his flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that soweth to the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting. And let us not be weary in well doing: for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not (Galatians 6:7-9; emphasis added).

"Don't plant a hundred-dollar tree in a ten-dollar hole!" was the horticulturist's advice to the customer. "The roots of the tree," he added, "must have room to expand and to absorb the nutrients from the soil. Moreover, the tree must be embedded in the ground deeply enough so that the roots can finger their way into the soil and eventually provide the plant with needed stability."

The horticulturist also counseled the customer to water the tree regularly and deeply so that the water would seep into the root system. "You must not depend upon the sprinkling of the lawn as the means to nourish the tree, nor must you consider the casting of fertilizer on the grass surrounding the plant as adequate feeding," said the expert. "Otherwise, the tree will flourish for a short season, then waste away."

And so it is with the planting of the "pecan tree" practices discussed in this book. Each practice should be regarded as a hundred-dollar tree, and each must be planted in a hundred-dollar hole, for each is a vital plant in your "grandchildren grove" and requires attention and nourishment.

Words of Warning

Those who initiate the practices of prayer, scripture reading, family home evenings, and all the other performances in a casual manner place something very sacred in a ten-dollar hole. They do not provide adequate space or time in their lives for the things that matter most. Things of lesser importance are allowed to take priority over things of eternal value. And in the absence of proper foresight, planning, and resolve, the practice is followed for a short time and then dropped. The "pecan tree" practice eventually dies of neglect or is blown aside by some wind of opposition.

Those who engage in priesthood blessings, names of significance, or personal interviews only sporadically never get the water down into the roots. A rhythm of observance is never established; a habit is never formed. In due time, the practice is starved and permitted to wilt away. What might have taken root, grown, and made fruitful is replaced by pressures of the moment or whatever comes easiest.

One man discussing "pecan tree" practices with me said, "I've planted those practices many times, but I have never practiced them consistently." He acknowledged that family histories, family organizations, family traditions, and so on are important. At the same time, however, he admitted his own weakness in cultivating "the precious plants" in his family garden. Perhaps he, like many others, forgets from time to time the blessings associated with each practice. So, he is forever planting and replanting and never harvesting the fruits of his labors.

"Let George Do It"

I fear that too many parents have the "let George do it" attitude. They think that the Church or community or some other agency will step in and do the family planting and harvesting for them. Those who harbor such thoughts fail to understand the limitations of programs sponsored by outside groups. Can an outside agency sponsor home worship? Can an outside organization foster family traditions? The answer is an emphatic, "No, not as they should be sponsored." Only the parents have the power to plant these practices properly. Others, in and out of the Church, may give parents some assistance with the pruning and spraying of the "pecan tree" practices. But there are no fit substitutes for loving parents, a congenial house, and home-spun activities.

Every parent should read and re-read this inspired counsel given by Elder A. Theodore Tuttle:

The Lord fixed families to give parents more influence on children than all other agencies combined. There is safety in this arrangement. It provides parents the privilege, the awesome privilege, of molding the life and character of a child, even though outside agencies have influence . . . .

We have been counseled to become self-reliant and independent temporally. It is as important spiritually! Suppose conditions changed. Suppose you could not receive all the services to which you have become accustomed. Suppose that much more responsibility were placed on your shoulders to care for the spiritual welfare of your family. Surely you cannot study the scriptures without knowing that perilous times are coming. Will you be unaffected?

Prepare now! Take steps now to strengthen your family. Spend time together. Establish and maintain family traditions that build happy memories. Maintain a discipline with fair rules and regulations. Express unconditional love to one another through word and act. Develop within each one self-esteem and self-respect by loving and believing in him and having him belong. Provide security that children need. These are the values of which life is made. Establish these, and then we won't need to worry about the frills (Ensign, November 1979, pp. 27-28).

Parents are urged to plan and plant wisely each "pecan tree" practice, knowing that each is important to family members. Once the practice is planted, persistence must become the watchword. Habits are not formed overnight, nor are living patterns created in a single doing. Perfecting and exalting habits are formed slowly as such good things as family worship and temple activity are repeated day by day, week by week, and month by month.

Too Much?

It is regrettable when parents look upon the "pecan tree" practices as onerous tasks or burdensome expectancies. I ask of such people, "Where is your faith? How much do you love your children? Do you want to leave your grandchildren a snarl of scraggly, unproductive plum branches? Or, do you want to leave them the substantial shade and sweetmeated nuts of the more enduring pecan trees?"

We all know that a negative attitude, much like the casual approach, is lethal when it comes to actions requiring selflessness and a liberal investment of personal time and energies. A negative attitude kills enthusiasm and stifles the spirit associated with all activities. Worse still, the negative attitude makes the gift of the practice stick to the fingers of the givers (the parents) and raises doubts in the minds of the receivers (the children).

In one of the Apostle Paul's epistles we read these words: "The letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life" (2 Corinthians 3:6). All of us should be intent upon keeping the commandments and in following the counsel of Church leaders. But we should not become so caught up in the mechanics and routines of the law that we forget purposes and run roughshod over people, particularly members of our family circle. The Lord, we are told, expects obedience to his will, yet he also requires "the heart and a willing mind" (D&C 64:34).

How very wonderful it is when parents become converted to the "pecan tree" practices and catch a vision of what each can do to bless the lives of family members! Such parents plant with faith and nourish each "pecan tree" with care. Every effort is made to give each practice lively thought, refreshing variety, and stimulating action, thus guarding against routineness or staleness. In the end, they create an orchard of productive trees that bear precious fruit.

One Step at a Time

I suspect that some, especially the newlywed or single parent families, will read what I have written and wonder whether they can do all that is suggested. My response to these young heads of households is "No, you cannot, and you shouldn't expect to do so overnight. The planting of the sixteen 'pecan tree' practices should occur step by step and as circumstances will permit. You should, however, start with one or two or three and grow into the others. All should be kept in mind and planted and cultivated in its proper season or as the opportunity presents itself."

"Be ye therefore perfect," said the Savior, "even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect" (Matthew 5:48). The Joseph Smith Translation of this same verse reads, "Ye are therefore commanded to be perfect . . . " (JST Matthew 5:50). To some, this command establishes an overwhelming, perhaps even impossible, expectancy. But, when we understand that "perfect" might mean complete, finished, or fully developed, as the Greek text suggests, the task doesn't seem quite so difficult. All of us can become "complete" in our bestowal of significant names upon our children; all of us can "finish" a personal or family history; and all of us can become "fully developed" in our preservation of cherished memories.

The Law of the Harvest

The law of the harvest has always been understood and taught by servants of God, for it is an eternal law. Said Job, "They that plow iniquity, and sow wickedness, reap the same" (Job 4:8). A Book of Mormon prophet quoted the Lord as saying, "If my people shall sow filthiness they shall reap the east wind, which bringeth immediate destruction" (Mosiah 7:31). In his interpretation of the parable of the sower, the Savior promised, "He that received seed into the good ground is he that heareth the word, and understandeth it; which also beareth fruit, and bringeth forth, some an hundredfold, some sixty, some thirty" (Matthew 13:23).

All of these quotations from the scriptures and many more remind us of a simple but profound truth: "Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap" (Galatians 6:7).

We may apply the harvest law in a variety of ways. For example, the faithless person might say, "The law is harsh and full of risk, so I will not plant at all." Such persons are "they [who] sow not, neither do they reap" (Matthew 6:26). And those lazy souls at the time of harvest may not be as fortunate as the ravens or other fowls of the air who are fed by someone else. Malnutrition and possible starvation may nip at their heels throughout life.

Then there are those who are careless in the selection of their seeds. They neither read the labels on packages nor take the time to inspect the seed that will be placed in the ground. Consequently, they inadvertently and otherwise sow filthiness and later reap the chaff thereof in the whirlwind (see Mosiah 7:30). Perhaps these wanton planters are surprised occasionally by a sweet fruit or two, but bitterness is generally associated with the fruit of careless efforts.

Still others plant cautiously, as if the seed would sprout better in their scrip than in the soil. They ignore the appendage to the law of the harvest taught by the Apostle Paul in these words: "He which soweth sparingly shall reap also sparingly; and he which soweth bountifully shall reap also bountifully" (2 Corinthians 9:6). Ofttimes, those who sow sparingly do so grudgingly and with selfish interests in their hearts. Their view is toward self, and their minds are blinded to the needs of children and future generations.

The appeal voiced by this book is simple and direct: Exercise faith, select the right seeds, and plant the "pecan tree" practices in your heart and in your family circle. Allow the seeds or practices to swell, sprout, and grow into perfecting and exalting performances. In due time, you will acknowledge the goodness of the seeds because they will get root, grow up into productive trees, and bring forth delicious fruit.

All to Grow

A group of farmers planted five seeds in each hole, as they sang:

One for the blackbird, One for the crow, One for the cutworm, Two to grow. (David Grayson, Adventures of Friendship [Frederick, Colo.: Renaissance House Publishers, 1989], p. 63.)

I admire the generosity implied in this jingle. How kind of the farmers to feed the blackbird, crow, and cutworm. At the same time, however, I deplore the submissive attitude of the farmers. They apparently acquiesced to the enemies of their crops and attempted to plant around them—an expensive and wasteful method of farming.

As I review the sixteen family performances proposed within the covers of this book, I see none that is superfluous. I see none for the birds or worms. All should be planted, watered, cultivated, and guarded carefully. No power or influence should be allowed to enter our gardens that would uproot these edifying performances or others of comparable worth.

God Gave the Increase

The Apostle Paul wrote: "I have planted, Apollos watered; but God gave the increase. So then neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that watereth; but God that giveth the increase. Now he that planteth and he that watereth are one: and every man shall receive his own reward according to his own labour. For we are labourers together with God: ye are God's husbandry, ye are God's building" (1 Corinthians 3:6-9; italics added).

These words of Paul and his apt analogy remind us of the need to plant and water, for we are a part of God's husbandry and building. At the same time, however, we are reminded that God determines the harvest. It is he who gives the increase; he is the "Lord of the harvest" (Alma 26:7). So, knowing that blessings are predicated upon obedience to law, we should strive to do our utmost in fulfilling those laws or commandments pertaining to family and home, placing ourselves in a position where God will shower goodnesses upon us and our posterity (see D&C 130:20-21).

Welding Links

I repeat a scripture cited previously in this writing: "It is sufficient to know . . . that the earth will be smitten with a curse unless there is a welding link of some kind or other between the fathers and the children. . . . For we without them cannot be made perfect; neither can they without us be made perfect" (D&C 128:18).

Many welding links exist between parents and their offspring, bonding them together as a closely knit organization. For some, it may be sports or outings that tie the group together. For others, it may be family business interests and the prospects of making money that bridges the generation gap. These and similar bonds can be fragile and tenuous depending upon the ebb and flow of relationships. The more prevailing welding links, however, that should be established between fathers and sons, mothers and daughters, are those that are not easily disturbed by time and circumstance. I speak of the welding links founded upon love, related to the gospel of Jesus Christ, and centered in saving principles and ordinances.

Earth and all of its inhabitants are cursed by broken families and estranged children. Of a certainty, the progress of both parents and children is slowed or altogether dammed when the linkage between the young and old is missing. It is incumbent upon all parents and children to weld the family together. Such can be done by courting the spirit of Elijah, searching out our kindred dead, writing family histories, performing temple ordinances for ourselves and others, establishing strong relationships within our families, and taking especial care of our children.

Love of God, Love of Children

Father Lehi saw in vision the tree of life. This tree "was a representation of the love of God" (1 Nephi 11:25). In a similar manner, I regard the "pecan tree" practices discussed in this book as representations of the love of parents for children. Each practice planted, cultivated, and allowed to grow within the family garden declares to the children, "We care; we love you." Each practice, if understood and employed,

shall be as a tree planted by the waters, and that spreadeth out her roots by the river, and shall not see when heat cometh, but her leaf shall be green; and shall not be careful in the year of drought, neither shall cease from yielding fruit (Jeremiah 17:8).
