By reading the Liahona regularly, I have come to realize the importance the messages and counsel in each issue have for us as Latter-day Saints. The beautiful stories and testimonies from members all across the world strengthen and encourage me.

Some time ago I learned I was about to lose my job. At this time the June 2000 Liahona arrived; it included a message from Elder Jeffrey R. Holland of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles titled “Cast Not Away Therefore Your Confidence.” I immediately thought, “This is for me.” Indeed it was. I read the message several times until I had gained what I needed in peace, confidence, and security. My faith increased, and I knew I was not alone.

By applying the principles Elder Holland taught, I was able to find a new job. My heart was filled with happiness and gratitude to my Heavenly Father because once again I had been a recipient of His goodness. I realized that adversity is necessary for our spiritual growth and that we should not cast away our confidence.
Freddy Baeza Sandi, Nuevo Loarque Ward, Tegucigalpa Honduras Toncontin Stake

The work of the Lord is not easy. It requires our abilities and our personal efforts, and it consumes our energy. Today many criticize The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. People have turned away from the truth and rely on their own wisdom. To counteract the world’s influence, the Lord needs men who honor the priesthood. Men in whom God can trust and who possess Christlike virtues are men who can help bring the restored gospel to the world.

Let us share the gospel without shame or fear. It has been restored in our dispensation, and I know it is true. Let us work diligently to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of others.
Elder Jean Paul Kabasubabo, Democratic Republic of Congo Kinshasa Mission

I am extremely grateful to God for the guidance He gives us through the prophet. President Gordon B. Hinckley’s counsel has given my life focus, and I have come to realize that living gospel principles means more than just obeying them, robotlike. It means feeling in my heart what I know in my mind. In other words, I have felt a deep change inside, including the peace that comes from following the prophet’s counsel.
Carlos Alberto Correa, Dolores Branch, Dolores Argentina District

Did you know that Teaching, No Greater Call (item no. 36123), a resource to help members improve the spiritual and technical aspects of their gospel teaching, is available in many languages? This publication can be used as a personal study guide, as a resource for helping parents teach their children, and as a text for teacher improvement meetings. Contact your local distribution center or your ward or branch leaders for ordering and price information.
