No specific author, Old Testament Apocrypha ( 100)

Chapter 3

3:1

Now when Darius reigned, he made a great feast unto all his subjects, and unto all his household, and unto all the princes of Media and Persia,

3:2

And to all the governors and captains and lieutenants that were under him, from India unto Ethiopia, of an hundred twenty and seven provinces.

3:3

And when they had eaten and drunken, and being satisfied were gone home, then Darius the king went into his bedchamber, and slept, and soon after awaked.

3:4

Then three young men, that were of the guard that kept the king's body, spake one to another;

3:5

Let every one of us speak a sentence: he that shall overcome, and whose sentence shall seem wiser than the others, unto him shall the king Darius give great gifts, and great things in token of victory:

3:6

As, to be clothed in purple, to drink in gold, and to sleep upon gold, and a chariot with bridles of gold, and an headtire of fine linen, and a chain about his neck:

3:7

And he shall sit next to Darius because of his wisdom, and shall be called Darius his cousin.

3:8

And then every one wrote his sentence, sealed it, and laid it under king Darius his pillow;

3:9

And said that, when the king is risen, some will give him the writings; and of whose side the king and the three princes of Persia shall judge that his sentence is the wisest, to him shall the victory be given, as was appointed.

3:10

The first wrote, Wine is the strongest.

3:11

The second wrote, The king is strongest.

3:12

The third wrote, Women are strongest: but above all things Truth beareth away the victory.

3:13

Now when the king was risen up, they took their writings, and delivered them unto him, and so he read them:

3:14

And sending forth he called all the princes of Persia and Media, and the governors, and the captains, and the lieutenants, and the chief officers;

3:15

And sat him down in the royal seat of judgment; and the writings were read before them.

3:16

And he said, Call the young men, and they shall declare their own sentences. So they were called, and came in.

3:17

And he said unto them, Declare unto us your mind concerning the writings. Then began the first, who had spoken of the strength of wine;

3:18

And he said thus, O ye men, how exceeding strong is wine! it causeth all men to err that drink it:

3:19

It maketh the mind of the king and of the fatherless child to be all one; of the bondman and of the freeman, of the poor man and of the rich:

3:20

It turneth also every thought into jollity and mirth, so that a man remembereth neither sorrow nor debt:

3:21

And it maketh every heart rich, so that a man remembereth neither king nor governor; and it maketh to speak all things by talents:

3:22

And when they are in their cups, they forget their love both to friends and brethren, and a little after draw out swords:

3:23

But when they are from the wine, they remember not what they have done.

3:24

O ye men, is not wine the strongest, that enforceth to do thus? And when he had so spoken, he held his peace.

100
