No specific author, Old Testament Apocrypha ( 100)

Chapter 9

9:1

O God of my fathers, and Lord of mercy, who hast made all things with thy word,

9:2

And ordained man through thy wisdom, that he should have dominion over the creatures which thou hast made,

9:3

And order the world according to equity and righteousness, and execute judgment with an upright heart:

9:4

Give me wisdom, that sitteth by thy throne; and reject me not from among thy children:

9:5

For I thy servant and son of thine handmaid am a feeble person, and of a short time, and too young for the understanding of judgment and laws.

9:6

For though a man be never so perfect among the children of men, yet if thy wisdom be not with him, he shall be nothing regarded.

9:7

Thou hast chosen me to be a king of thy people, and a judge of thy sons and daughters:

9:8

Thou hast commanded me to build a temple upon thy holy mount, and an altar in the city wherein thou dwellest, a resemblance of the holy tabernacle, which thou hast prepared from the beginning.

9:9

And wisdom was with thee: which knoweth thy works, and was present when thou madest the world, and knew what was acceptable in thy sight, and right in thy commandments.

9:10

O send her out of thy holy heavens, and from the throne of thy glory, that being present she may labour with me, that I may know what is pleasing unto thee.

9:11

For she knoweth and understandeth all things, and she shall lead me soberly in my doings, and preserve me in her power.

9:12

So shall my works be acceptable, and then shall I judge thy people righteously, and be worthy to sit in my father's seat.

9:13

For what man is he that can know the counsel of God? or who can think what the will of the Lord is?

9:14

For the thoughts of mortal men are miserable, and our devices are but uncertain.

9:15

For the corruptible body presseth down the soul, and the earthy tabernacle weigheth down the mind that museth upon many things.

9:16

And hardly do we guess aright at things that are upon earth, and with labour do we find the things that are before us: but the things that are in heaven who hath searched out?

9:17

And thy counsel who hath known, except thou give wisdom, and send thy Holy Spirit from above?

9:18

For so the ways of them which lived on the earth were reformed, and men were taught the things that are pleasing unto thee, and were saved through wisdom.

100
