No specific author, Old Testament Apocrypha ( 100)

Chapter 6

6:1

Instead of a friend become not an enemy; for thou shalt inherit an ill name, shame, and reproach: even so shall a sinner that hath a double tongue.

6:2

Extol not thyself in the counsel of thine own heart; that thy soul be not torn in pieces as a bull alone.]

6:3

Thou shalt eat up thy leaves, and lose thy fruit, and leave thyself as a dry tree.

6:4

A wicked soul shall destroy him that hath it, and shall make him to be laughed to scorn of his enemies.

6:5

Sweet language will multiply friends: and a fairspeaking tongue will increase kind greetings.

6:6

Be in peace with many: nevertheless have but one counsellor of a thousand.

6:7

If thou wouldest get a friend, prove him first and be not hasty to credit him.

6:8

For some man is a friend for his own occasion, and will not abide in the day of thy trouble.

6:9

And there is a friend, who being turned to enmity, and strife will discover thy reproach.

6:10

Again, some friend is a companion at the table, and will not continue in the day of thy affliction.

6:11

But in thy prosperity he will be as thyself, and will be bold over thy servants.

6:12

If thou be brought low, he will be against thee, and will hide himself from thy face.

6:13

Separate thyself from thine enemies, and take heed of thy friends.

6:14

A faithfull friend is a strong defence: and he that hath found such an one hath found a treasure.

6:15

Nothing doth countervail a faithful friend, and his excellency is invaluable.

6:16

A faithful friend is the medicine of life; and they that fear the Lord shall find him.

6:17

Whoso feareth the Lord shall direct his friendship aright: for as he is, so shall his neighbour be also.

6:18

My son, gather instruction from thy youth up: so shalt thou find wisdom till thine old age.

6:19

Come unto her as one that ploweth and soweth, and wait for her good fruits: for thou shalt not toil much in labouring about her, but thou shalt eat of her fruits right soon.

6:20

She is very unpleasant to the unlearned: he that is without understanding will not remain with her.

6:21

She will lie upon him as a mighty stone of trial; and he will cast her from him ere it be long.

6:22

For wisdom is according to her name, and she is not manifest unto many.

6:23

Give ear, my son, receive my advice, and refuse not my counsel,

6:24

And put thy feet into her fetters, and thy neck into her chain.

6:25

Bow down thy shoulder, and bear her, and be not grieved with her bonds.

6:26

Come unto her with thy whole heart, and keep her ways with all thy power.

6:27

Search, and seek, and she shall be made known unto thee: and when thou hast got hold of her, let her not go.

6:28

For at the last thou shalt find her rest, and that shall be turned to thy joy.

6:29

Then shall her fetters be a strong defence for thee, and her chains a robe of glory.

6:30

For there is a golden ornament upon her, and her bands are purple lace.

6:31

Thou shalt put her on as a robe of honour, and shalt put her about thee as a crown of joy.

6:32

My son, if thou wilt, thou shalt be taught: and if thou wilt apply thy mind, thou shalt be prudent.

6:33

If thou love to hear, thou shalt receive understanding: and if thou bow thine ear, thou shalt be wise,

6:34

Stand in the multitude of the elders; and cleave unto him that is wise.

6:35

Be willing to hear every godly discourse; and let not the parables of understanding escape thee.

6:36

And if thou seest a man of understanding, get thee betimes unto him, and let thy foot wear the steps of his door.

6:37

Let thy mind be upon the ordinances of the Lord and meditate continually in his commandments: he shall establish thine heart, and give thee wisdom at thine owns desire.

100
