No specific author, Old Testament Apocrypha ( 100)

Chapter 7

7:1

Do no evil, so shall no harm come unto thee.

7:2

Depart from the unjust, and iniquity shall turn away from thee.

7:3

My son, sow not upon the furrows of unrighteousness, and thou shalt not reap them sevenfold.

7:4

Seek not of the Lord preeminence, neither of the king the seat of honour.

7:5

justify not thyself before the Lord; and boast not of thy wisdom before the king.

7:6

Seek not to be judge, being not able to take away iniquity; lest at any time thou fear the person of the mighty, an stumblingblock in the way of thy uprightness.

7:7

Offend not against the multitude of a city, and then thou shalt not cast thyself down among the people.

7:8

Bind not one sin upon another; for in one thou shalt not be unpunished.

7:9

Say not, God will look upon the multitude of my oblations, and when I offer to the most high God, he will accept it.

7:10

Be not fainthearted when thou makest thy prayer, and neglect not to give alms.

7:11

Laugh no man to scorn in the bitterness of his soul: for there is one which humbleth and exalteth.

7:12

Devise not a lie against thy brother; neither do the like to thy friend.

7:13

Use not to make any manner of lie: for the custom thereof is not good.

7:14

Use not many words in a multitude of elders, and make not much babbling when thou prayest.

7:15

Hate not laborious work, neither husbandry, which the most High hath ordained.

7:16

Number not thyself among the multitude of sinners, but remember that wrath will not tarry long.

7:17

Humble thyself greatly: for the vengeance of the ungodly is fire and worms.

7:18

Change not a friend for any good by no means; neither a faithful brother for the gold of Ophir.

7:19

Forego not a wise and good woman: for her grace is above gold.

7:20

Whereas thy servant worketh truly, entreat him not evil. nor the hireling that bestoweth himself wholly for thee.

7:21

Let thy soul love a good servant, and defraud him not of liberty.

7:22

Hast thou cattle? have an eye to them: and if they be for thy profit, keep them with thee.

7:23

Hast thou children? instruct them, and bow down their neck from their youth.

7:24

Hast thou daughters? have a care of their body, and shew not thyself cheerful toward them.

7:25

Marry thy daughter, and so shalt thou have performed a weighty matter: but give her to a man of understanding.

7:26

Hast thou a wife after thy mind? forsake her not: but give not thyself over to a light woman.

7:27

Honour thy father with thy whole heart, and forget not the sorrows of thy mother.

7:28

Remember that thou wast begotten of them; and how canst thou recompense them the things that they have done for thee?

7:29

Fear the Lord with all thy soul, and reverence his priests.

7:30

Love him that made thee with all thy strength, and forsake not his ministers.

7:31

Fear the Lord, and honor the priest; and give him his portion, as it is commanded thee; the firstfruits, and the trespass offering, and the gift of the shoulders, and the sacrifice of sanctification, and the firstfruits of the holy things.

7:32

And stretch thine hand unto the poor, that thy blessing may be perfected.

7:33

A gift hath grace in the sight of every man living; and for the dead detain it not.

7:34

Fail not to be with them that weep, and mourn with them that mourn.

7:35

Be not slow to visit the sick: for that shall make thee to be beloved.

7:36

Whatsoever thou takest in hand, remember the end, and thou shalt never do amiss.

100
