No specific author, Old Testament Apocrypha ( 100)

Chapter 6

6:1

Hear therefore, O ye kings, and understand; learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth.

6:2

Give ear, ye that rule the people, and glory in the multitude of nations.

6:3

For power is given you of the Lord, and sovereignty from the Highest, who shall try your works, and search out your counsels.

6:4

Because, being ministers of his kingdom, ye have not judged aright, nor kept the law, nor walked after the counsel of God;

6:5

Horribly and speedily shall he come upon you: for a sharp judgment shall be to them that be in high places.

6:6

For mercy will soon pardon the meanest: but mighty men shall be mightily tormented.

6:7

For he which is Lord over all shall fear no man's person, neither shall he stand in awe of any man's greatness: for he hath made the small and great, and careth for all alike.

6:8

But a sore trial shall come upon the mighty.

6:9

Unto you therefore, O kings, do I speak, that ye may learn wisdom, and not fall away.

6:10

For they that keep holiness holily shall be judged holy: and they that have learned such things shall find what to answer.

6:11

Wherefore set your affection upon my words; desire them, and ye shall be instructed.

6:12

Wisdom is glorious, and never fadeth away: yea, she is easily seen of them that love her, and found of such as seek her.

6:13

She preventeth them that desire her, in making herself first known unto them.

6:14

Whoso seeketh her early shall have no great travail: for he shall find her sitting at his doors.

6:15

To think therefore upon her is perfection of wisdom: and whoso watcheth for her shall quickly be without care.

6:16

For she goeth about seeking such as are worthy of her, sheweth herself favourably unto them in the ways, and meeteth them in every thought.

6:17

For the very true beginning of her is the desire of discipline; and the care of discipline is love;

6:18

And love is the keeping of her laws; and the giving heed unto her laws is the assurance of incorruption;

6:19

And incorruption maketh us near unto God:

6:20

Therefore the desire of wisdom bringeth to a kingdom.

6:21

If your delight be then in thrones and sceptres, O ye kings of the people, honour wisdom, that ye may reign for evermore.

6:22

As for wisdom, what she is, and how she came up, I will tell you, and will not hide mysteries from you: but will seek her out from the beginning of her nativity, and bring the knowledge of her into light, and will not pass over the truth.

6:23

Neither will I go with consuming envy; for such a man shall have no fellowship with wisdom.

6:24

But the multitude of the wise is the welfare of the world: and a wise king is the upholding of the people.

6:25

Receive therefore instruction through my words, and it shall do you good.

100
