Andrew C. Skinner, Robert L. Millet, C. S. Lewis, the Man and His Message: An LDS Perspective ( 1999)

PREFACE

ON DECEMBER 4 AND 5, 1998, the colleges of Religious Education and Continuing Education at Brigham Young University sponsored a conference in honor of the one hundredth anniversary of the birth of C. S. Lewis, the great Anglican churchman and defender of the Christian faith. He was born November 29, 1898, in Belfast, Ireland. A man of profound intellect and deep belief in the divinity of our Lord, he possessed the remarkable ability to speak to people from all walks of life—to provide them either with reasons for coming to Christ or continuing their association with the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Brigham Young University's Lewis Conference was held in the hope that all who participated, as well as those who would later learn of it, would gain a greater appreciation not only for Lewis's thought but also for reasons why he continues to have such a broad appeal—especially among Latter-day Saints. Lewis was educated at Oxford University and became one of its fellows for thirty years. In 1954 he was honored with a faculty position at Cambridge University, becoming that institution's first Professor of Medieval and Renaissance English. But he was neither a recluse nor a pedant; he did not live in an ivory tower. He was an advocate and defender of "mere Christianity"—the kind taught in scripture and lived with fervor in the real world. Because Lewis was such a brilliant scholar, writer, poet, and literary critic, we cannot ignore these aspects of his life, nor have we in this present collection. However, from 1931 on, all such matters for Lewis seem to have taken second place behind the central message of Christianity—Jesus Christ and His Atonement. Lewis worked tirelessly to help others understand what it means to be a Christian and to live as a Christian. Ultimately, Lewis came to be regarded as everyone's preacher, every thinking Christian's supreme apologist.

That Lewis possessed a broad and comprehensive view of Christianity is attested by the very presentations delivered at the BYU Lewis conference. We are pleased to present the written texts of eleven of the fourteen presentations with only minor editorial changes.

It is hoped that this volume will bring back fond memories of the Lewis conference to those who attended and will benefit a broad spectrum of other individuals—Latter-day Saints as well as those not of our faith, those who know Lewis's writings well and those who have only a passing acquaintance with his life and work. Though Lewis was criticized for many years by colleagues for turning his considerable academic prowess and training to the defense of Christianity, he nevertheless felt that Christianity was worthy of a defense crafted from his best, most intense efforts. This volume aspires to recapitulate and elucidate some of those noble feelings and desires.

Andrew C. Skinner Robert L. Millet May 1999

1999 ﻿
