Andrew C. Skinner, Robert L. Millet, C. S. Lewis, the Man and His Message: An LDS Perspective ( 1999)

INTRODUCTION

C. S. LEWIS: The Man and His Message

Robert L. Millet

THE ESSAYS COMPRISING THIS BOOK are intended to celebrate the life and works of a remarkable human being whose influence on Christianity is significant, whose writings continue to stir the souls of men and women everywhere. The year 1998 represents the celebration of the one hundredth birthday of Clive Staples Lewis. He was born on 29 November 1898 and died on 22 November 1963, the same day that President John F. Kennedy was assassinated in Texas. (This is no doubt why so few people remember Lewis's death.) Conferences, symposia, and workshops of this type are being held around the world. In April of this year Professor Andrew Skinner and I attended one at Wheaton College in Illinois, and there are others here who attended a Lewis conference at Oxford and Cambridge during the summer.

Let me begin, first of all, with a disclaimer of sorts. This is not, strictly speaking, an academic study of the life or works of C. S. Lewis. This is not a forum for scholars to speak to scholars. The Lewis conference at Wheaton College had a wonderful title, one that describes Lewis's role perfectly; they called it "Returning Theology to the Masses." Many conferences are so analytical, so esoteric, so narrow that the interested observer or even the informed nonspecialist feels overwhelmed. We sought to make this conference the kind of gathering that anyone could enjoy and learn from. Some have inquired: Why haven't you involved more "Lewis scholars" in this symposium? Richard John Neuhaus remarked recently at a similar gathering at Cambridge: "The first thing I should say is that I am not a Lewis scholar. The second thing is that, from what I understand of the man, he would likely be amused that there are people called Lewis scholars. There are simply those who can stop reading Lewis, and those who can't. After a while, some of the latter find that they are thought to be Lewis scholars."fn

C. S. Lewis was a gifted writer, one whose books and articles have intrigued and inspired people from all walks of life. He is, arguably, one of the greatest defenders of the Christian faith of the twentieth century. As one of his closest friends, Austin Farrer, has observed: "Lewis was an apologist from temper, from conviction, and from modesty. From temper, for he loved an argument. From conviction, being traditionally orthodox. From modesty, because he laid no claim either to the learning which would have made him a theologian or to the grace which would have made him a spiritual guide." Farrer went on to explain that "it is commonly said that if rational argument is so seldom the cause of conviction, philosophical apologists must largely be wasting their shot. The premise is true, but the conclusion does not follow. For though argument does not create conviction, the lack of it destroys belief. What seems to be proved may not be embraced; but what no one shows the ability to defend is quickly abandoned. Rational argument does not create belief, but it maintains a climate in which belief may flourish. So the apologist who does nothing but defend may play a useful, though preparatory, part."fn And, I would add, few people have played that part quite as well as he has.

A man of profound intellect, Lewis had the capacity to speak to persons of varying educational, social, and religious backgrounds. Perhaps more than any other Christian writer, he had the ability to reduce complex theological issues to language and images and metaphors that are both substantive and memorable. He had a common touch with uncommon ideas. His Chronicles of Narnia have thrilled children (as well as adults) for half a century. The Great Divorce, The Abolition of Man, and The Problem of Pain continue to challenge philosophers and educators, while such works as Mere Christianity, The Weight of Glory, The Screwtape Letters, and Letters to Malcolm: Chiefly on Prayer stimulate theological minds and provide great material for lessons and sermonettes.

"My only function as a Christian writer," he once observed, "is to preach `Mere Christianity' not ad clerum but ad populum. Any success that has been given me has, I believe, been due to my strict observance of those limits."fn On another occasion he noted: "I wrote the books I should have liked to read. That's always been my reason for writing."fn Of Lewis, Richard John Neuhaus, a Roman Catholic scholar, has written: "He was, I think, inclined to assume that his experience was the common experience. In this sense, although he cherished excellence, he was not an elitist. Anything but. One might even risk calling him a populist. Whether it was `mere' Christianity or `mere' sex or the `mere' companionship of friends, his purpose was to elicit what is already there, if only we would open our eyes to see it—the wonder disguised in the `mere.'"fn

"Jack" Lewis, as his friends knew him, is tough to label or categorize. He "is not a theological liberal, but neither did his views square with fundamentalism."fn For example, "Most Evangelicals believe in the inerrancy of Scripture. C. S. Lewis . . . did not. The Bible for him was human literature, divinely inspired and authoritative, but not verbally inspired or without error."fn

In one sense, Lewis was far more practical than sacramental, far more prone to speak of personal engagement with divinity than to focus on ecclesiastical or liturgical matters. His popularity in the LDS culture, as with a broader Christian readership, is no doubt related to the fact that he does not come across as denominational or wedded to any particular religious persuasion. In a world strangled in existential despair, Lewis offered hope to the average person. As someone who knew him well pointed out, Lewis "probably accomplished as much as any modern writer, both in his fiction and in his sermons, to make Heaven believable."fn He seems almost to be every man's preacher, every woman's scriptural exegete. Lewis had a broad and comprehensive view of Christianity, and his writing, though direct and penetrating, seldom excluded any professed believer in Christ. "It is not for us to say who, in the deepest sense, is or is not close to the spirit of Christ. We do not see into men's hearts. We cannot judge, and are indeed forbidden to judge. It would be wicked arrogance for us to say that any man is, or is not, a Christian in this refined sense. . . When a man who accepts the Christian doctrine lives unworthily of it, it is much clearer to say he is a bad Christian than to say he is not a Christian."fn

Many of us value his work because of his tendency to focus primarily on doctrine. Two of his biographers, Roger Green and Walter Hooper, have written: "The truth is that Lewis never got on well with purely devotional books. What he infinitely preferred were solid works of theology that he had to work at to understand." Lewis once wrote, in fact: "For my own part, I tend to find the doctrinal books often more helpful in devotion than the devotional books, and I rather suspect that the same experience may await others. I believe that many who find that `nothing happens' when they sit down, or kneel down, to a book of devotion, would find that the heart sings unbidden while they are working their way through a tough bit of theology with a pipe in their teeth and a pencil in their hand."fn Other than the pipe in our teeth, many of us can identify with these sentiments and see a close tie to the words of President Boyd K. Packer that "true doctrine, understood, changes attitudes and behavior."fn

Of course, Clive Staples Lewis was not a Latter-day Saint, and we have no intention of contorting him into one. We cannot read his mind, nor can we always know assuredly what he meant by what he said. But then, neither can anyone else who reads him, unless they were intimately acquainted with him during his life. It is not even possible to say, "Well, Lewis must have meant this or that, inasmuch as he was an Anglican," or "Surely Jack intended to convey this or that idea, since he was a defender of the Christian faith." Why not? Because there are parts of Lewis's theology that defy rubric, that are not placed comfortably within any particular religious tradition. This breadth, this inclusiveness, this freshness and distinctiveness—these are the things that endear Lewis to many Latter-day Saints.

Lewis touches upon doctrinal matters that are at the heart of much of what we believe, as will be demonstrated again and again in this work. It would not take much effort to explore ideas about which Mormons would take issue with Lewis—the nature of God, ex nihilo creation, the Nicene Trinity, and a few others. And there are obviously things about Mormonism that would grind on Lewis, in terms of both doctrine and lifestyle. He once remarked in a letter, for example, that he strongly objected "to the tyrannic and unscriptural insolence of anything that calls itself a Church and makes teetotalism a condition of membership."fn But again, that is not the purpose of this presentation or this conference. Lewis is an important religious figure throughout the Christian world, including the Latter-day Saints, and his influence may be broader than many had even supposed.

C. S. Lewis is a thinking man's theologian, a writer whose views are crisp and sharp and challenging; his presentation is neither syrupy nor sentimental on the one hand, nor tedious on the other. His discussions are both spiritually satisfying and intellectually enlarging. He himself once described his task and his achievement: "When I began, Christianity came before the great mass of my unbelieving fellow-countrymen either in the highly emotional form offered by revivalists or in the unintelligible language of highly cultured clergymen. Most men were reached by neither. My task was therefore simply that of a translator—one turning Christian doctrine, or what he believed to be such, into the vernacular, into language that the unscholarly people would attend to and could understand."fn

In short, as Professor Tony Kimball, a Latter-day Saint, has written in tribute: "Lewis was able to deal with fundamentals without being fundamentalistic. He sought to revive Christian belief in the minds of men without being revivalistic. In this disposable age of paper plates and paper philosophies which are good for one use only, Lewis insisted that all things had to be tested spiritually, rationally, and experientially before an honest man could give allegiance to them. He believed that Christianity met every test."fn

Now again, I hasten to add that C. S. Lewis was not a Latter-day Saint, and not all of what he taught and believed is in harmony with what we believe. It does not take a nuclear scientist to point out differences. When we look seriously at his writings, however, there are a surprising number of similarities. Lewis was not an ordained apostle, though he certainly had a testimony of the divinity of Jesus Christ. He was not a prophet, though his writings have a relevance about them that make them both timely and timeless; Lewis's writings seem to anticipate, for example, much of the foolishness we see today in the so-called "Jesus Seminar." Thus Latter-day Saints do not turn to Lewis for the final word on doctrinal expansion or clarification or interpretation, nor do we measure truth by his insights. At the same time, we are eager to find truth wherever we can and excited to acknowledge it from whomever it flows. Joseph Smith stated: "One of the grand fundamental principles of `Mormonism' is to receive truth, let it come from whence it may."fn

As Latter-day Saints we are in an interesting and somewhat awkward position in the Christian world. We claim divine apostolic authority and claim to be possessors of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ. At the same time, we fully acknowledge that God is working His will through men and women throughout the earth, and that "every thing which inviteth to do good, and to persuade to believe in Christ, is sent forth by the power and gift of Christ; wherefore ye may know with a perfect knowledge it is of God" (Moro. 7:16). President Ezra Taft Benson explained that our Heavenly Father uses the people of the earth, especially good people, to accomplish His purposes. "It has been true in the past, it is true today, it will be true in the future."fn

As we read C. S. Lewis, let us open our minds to new truths and our hearts to new applications of those truths. Let us avoid narrowness and encourage in ourselves that breadth and openness that fosters growth and engenders humble gratitude for God and for those whose works point us more clearly toward God. C. S. Lewis had a brilliant mind, one that might well have been devoted exclusively to other fields within the academy. Criticized for many years by his colleagues for turning his gifts and training to the defense of Christianity, he nevertheless felt that Christianity was worthy of an intelligent defense, a labor that deserved his best effort. This was his legacy to the Christian world, a legacy we share with our brothers and sisters of other faiths, a legacy that fosters appreciation for a significant life.

Robert L. Millet is dean of Religious Education and professor of Ancient Scripture at Brigham Young University. He is the author of numerous books and articles, including The Mormon Faith: A New Look at Christianity.

Notes

1999 ﻿
