Andrew C. Skinner, Robert L. Millet, C. S. Lewis, the Man and His Message: An LDS Perspective ( 1999)

1

C. S. LEWIS: Insights on Discipleship

Neal A. Maxwell

THE KIND INVITATION FROM DEAN Robert Millet for me to participate in this symposium came many months ago. My health made accepting the invitation problematic, so I am especially grateful to be here. I come to you hoping to contribute, though not in robust condition.

There are so many different dimensions of C. S. Lewis and his works. For instance, there is Lewis's ready wit, one of the lesser-known examples of which was reported by Carolyn Keefe: "Lewis himself was not above the deliberate ploy. . . . The occasion was a dinner party. The main dish was . . . the blood and guts of a sheep. Lewis was seated next to a Portuguese dignitary who, while partaking . . . remarked that he felt like `a gastronomic Columbus.' `The comparison is wayward in your case,' remarked Lewis, `Why not a vascular da Gama?'"fn

It would be appropriate in this setting, as others will do, to speak about the various theological touching points between Lewis's beliefs and the beliefs of many of us here today. Instead, I have chosen to talk about the insights and contributions of C. S. Lewis concerning how exacting Christian discipleship really is. Tony Kimball, a friend of many of us here, wrote recently:

When Lewis wrote, "The hardness of God is kinder than the softness of men, and His compulsion is our liberation" (C. S. Lewis, Surprised by Joy: The Shape of My Early Life [New York: Harcourt, Brace and Company, 1955], p. 229), he affirmed he understood the absolute nature of the commitment required of a follower of Jesus Christ and he accepted that "yoke" willingly.fn

The journey of discipleship and the yoke to be born are rigorous, enough so that every encouragement is to be appreciated, and every insight is precious.

We are invited by Jesus, "Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me" (Matt. 11:29). In my opinion, so far as discipleship is concerned, this is the only way we really learn. Therefore, while it is not doctrine for which I look to Lewis, I find his depiction of discipleship especially articulate and helpful. The yield from Lewis in this respect is abundant.

I share the following examples of C. S. Lewis on discipleship while realizing that each of you has your own motivating collection.

Life's disclosures about the deficiencies in our individual discipleship are seldom convenient, hence I seem to recall C. S. Lewis saying that if you want to find out if there are rats in the cellar, then fling the cellar door open suddenly! Whether it is the suddenness of a cellar door or the routine disclosures of deficiencies amid seemingly humdrum daily life, we still need to be shown our shortcomings. It is in this connection that faith in our individual immortality is so vital, since it underscores our personal accountability as well as our personal possibilities, yet such faith today has receded in so many, just as Matthew Arnold wrote of in his "Dover Beach."

Its melancholy, long, withdrawing roar, Retreating, to the breath Of the night-wind, down the vast edges drear And naked shingles of the world.

This decline in such specific faith is much more rapid since Arnold's time. Certainly there is a lack of "faith unto repentance" (Alma 34:15), which causes many to avoid the demands of developmental discipleship. Likewise, the nature of our faith in God and His purposes clearly determines how we view ourselves and others. Lewis's words of perspective are loud and clear: "There are no ordinary people. [We] have never talked to a mere mortal. Nations, cultures, arts, civilisations—these are mortal, and their life is to ours as the life of a gnat. But it is immortals whom we joke with, work with, marry, snub, and exploit."fn

Furthermore, since discipleship occurs in a tight mortal time frame, it is all the more a rigorous and ongoing developmental journey. No wonder Lewis stressed our need to persist: "Now there are a good many things which would not be worth bothering about if I were going to live only seventy years, but which I had better bother about very seriously if I am going to live for ever. Perhaps my bad temper or my jealousy are gradually getting worse—so gradually that the increase in seventy years will not be very noticeable. But it might be absolute hell in a million years."fn

No wonder Christian discipleship assumes and requires a loving, tutorial God. His relationship with His children is one in which He truly seeks to have us, attribute by attribute, become more like Him and His Son, Jesus Christ. Such is a far different view of God than that held by many, as Lewis trenchantly observed: "The Life-Force is a sort of tame God. You can switch it on when you want, but it will not bother you. All the thrills of religion and none of the cost. Is the Life-Force the greatest achievement of wishful thinking the world has yet seen?"fn

And continuing: "We want, in fact, not so much a Father in Heaven as a grandfather in heaven—a senile benevolence who, as they say, liked to see young people enjoying themselves, and whose plan for the universe was simply that it might be truly said at the end of each day, `a good time was had by all.'"fn

Our knowing sufficiently the character and the purposes of God thus becomes exceedingly important. No wonder the Prophet Joseph Smith counseled, "If men do not comprehend the character of God, they do not comprehend themselves."fn Thus, striving to develop the godly attributes becomes a supernal quest which requires coming to understand the character of God. Illustratively, Lewis advised: "If God is Love, He is, by definition, something more than mere kindness. And it appears, from all the records, that though He has often rebuked us and condemned us, He has never regarded us with contempt. He has paid us the intolerable compliment of loving us, in the deepest, most tragic, most inexorable sense."fn

Gilbert Meilaender wrote well of Lewis in the fall 1998 issue of First Things, saying, "Every choice counts. Every choice contributes to determining what we ultimately love."fn

C. S. Lewis learned and concluded, as do all serious disciples, that when one gets involved with God, the loving Tutor doesn't stop halfway through.

When I was a child I often had toothache, and I knew that if I went to my mother she would give me something which would deaden the pain for that night and let me get to sleep. But I did not go to my mother—at least, not till the pain became very bad. And the reason I did not go was this. I did not doubt she would give me the aspirin; but I knew she would also do something else. I knew she would take me to the dentist next morning. . . . And I knew those dentists;. . . Our Lord is like the dentists. . . . Dozens of people go to Him to be cured of some one particular sin which they are ashamed of. . . . Well, He will cure it all right: but he will not stop there. That may be all you asked; but if once you call Him in, He will give you the full treatment.fn

There is someone else of whom Lewis reminds us: the Tempter, who is likewise concerned with the little things in our daily lives: "It does not matter how small the sins are, provided that their cumulative effect is to edge the man away from the Light and out into the Nothing. Murder is no better than cards if cards can do the trick. Indeed, the safest road to Hell is the gradual one—the gentle slope, soft underfoot, without sudden turnings, without milestones, without signposts."fn

Discipleship is likewise a precious but incremental process, as Lewis observed, in which "the Christian, trying to treat every one kindly, finds himself liking more and more people as he goes on—including people he could not even have imagined himself liking at the beginning."fn

But we are so easily deflected from the journey, aren't we? Lewis wrote of one reason "why": "The first step is to recognise the fact that your moods change. The next is . . . some of its main doctrines shall be deliberately held before your mind for some time every day. . . . To be continually reminded of what we believe. . . . If you examined a hundred people who had lost their faith in Christianity, I wonder how many of them would turn out to have been reasoned out of it by honest argument? Do not most people simply drift away?"fn

Brigham Young spoke similarly and emphatically about how all of life's daily moments are to be used, however ordinary and simple these moments may seem to be:

It is the aggregate of the acts which I perform through life that makes up the conduct that will be exhibited in the day of judgment, and when the books are opened, there will be the life which I have lived for me to look upon, and there also will be the acts of your lives for you to look upon. Do you not know that the building up of the kingdom of God, the gathering of Israel, is to be done by little acts? You breathe one breath at a time; each moment is set apart to its act, and each act to its moment. It is the moments and the little acts that make the sum of the life of man. Let every second, minute, hour, and day we live be spent in doing that which we know to be right.fn

In fact, if not so focused, we can end up passing some of life's major exams while still flunking some of the daily quizzes. So for serious disciples there are no ordinary people, but likewise there are really no ordinary moments.

Sobering is the only word, therefore, that I can use regarding daily discipleship. Gilbert Meilaender also very appropriately reminds us that Lewis, in The Pilgrim's Regress, spoke of how discipleship involves the "tether and pang of the particular," concluding of Lewis's insights: "We live with this duality of our being, with our hearts both tied to what is local and unique and drawn toward the universal. Living within that tension, as the Lewis poem puts it, `we pay dearly.'"fn

The gospel's inward and outward standards are both high. Even when we are bestowing kindnesses, Lewis counseled:

I have known people capable of real sacrifice whose lives were nevertheless a misery to themselves and to others, because self-concern and self-pity filled all their thoughts. Either condition will destroy the soul in the end. But till the end, give me the man who takes the best of everything (even at my expense) and then talks of other things, rather than the man who serves me and talks of himself, and whose very kindnesses are a continual reproach, a continual demand for pity, gratitude, and admiration.fn

Yes, life's tutorials, at times, can constitute "a severe mercy," but, viewed developmentally, such clinical experiences can actually reflect, instead, God's "tender mercies" (1 Ne. 1:20).

Consider what King Benjamin said about the process of becoming more saintly: "For the natural man is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam, and will be, forever and ever, unless he yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and putteth off the natural man and becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord, and becometh as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father" (Mosiah 3:19).

Notice King Benjamin's use of the word inflict, then think of Lewis's instructive poem about Jesus as "Lord of the narrow gate and the needle's eye."fn In fact, when the development of the Christian virtues is viewed or approached other than as King Benjamin sets forth—such as acting as if these attributes are in isolation from each other—troubles begin. The Christian attributes need each other just as do Christian disciples. Christian doctrines are not only strong and powerful, but they are also designed to be highly interactive. In our time, for instance, there has been a needless and sad separation of mercy from justice, something, unsurprisingly, about which C. S. Lewis wrote. "The Humanitarian theory wants simply to abolish Justice and substitute Mercy for it. . . . Mercy, detached from Justice, grows unmerciful. That is the important paradox. As there are plants which flourish only in mountain soil, so it appears that Mercy will flower only when it grows in the crannies of the rock of Justice: transplanted to the marshlands of mere Humanitarianism, it becomes a man-eating weed, all the more dangerous because it is still called by the same name as the mountain variety."fn

The need for us to develop composite Christian character is embodied in Peter's question, "What manner of persons ought ye to be" (2 Pet. 3:11). No wonder the resurrected Jesus, during His visit to the Nephites, inquired, "What manner of men ought ye to be?" He then answered, most significantly, that we are to become, in His words, "even as I am" (3 Ne. 27:27). Therefore, our being tutored cannot be episodic and still be fully effective. To be sure, we may choose not to be serious participants in that process. We may actually turn our backs on it. Nevertheless, when Jesus said, "Come unto me," He also promised, "and I will show unto you your weaknesses." Reassuringly, however, some weaknesses, the scriptures say, can actually become strengths (see Moro. 10:32; Ether 12:27; see also Rev. 22:17).

This necessary process is unrelenting as far as I can see, yet it is a process full of mercy and love, emblematic of Father's plan of happiness. It is the effort of a loving Father God and His redeeming Son, Jesus Christ, to do all They can to help us during the crowded time provided for this short, mortal classroom. To become more like Them involves both obedience to Their ordinances and emulation of Their attributes—all in order that we might return to Them.

No wonder, therefore, we are repeatedly urged to use our time wisely by forsaking the world and["[taking] up the cross daily" (Luke 9:23; emphasis added). I seem to remember that C. S. Lewis taught us that God is serious about joy (see Letters to Malcolm 17:17). Indeed, "Adam fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joy" (2 Ne. 2:25). Even so, there is neither cheap joy nor cost-free discipleship.

Given these cosmic facts and divine purposes, no wonder we must set our faces like flint against the varied expressions of modernity's ethical relativism—of which Lewis wrote, "What is the good of telling the ships how to steer so as to avoid collisions if, in fact, they are such crazy old tubs that they cannot be steered at all?"fn

Developmentally as well as doctrinally, all the other commandments hang on the two great and interactive commandments. As Lewis counseled: "All natural affections . . . can become rivals to spiritual love: but they can also be preparatory imitations of it, training (so to speak) of the spiritual muscles which Grace may later put to a higher service; as women nurse dolls in childhood and later nurse children."fn

Continuing, regarding such preparatory training, he wrote, "We are bidden to `put on Christ,' to become like God. That is, whether we like it or not, God intends to give us what we need, not what we now think we want."fn

Discernment as to our personal shortfalls during our development is, therefore, vital, including how we face suffering, especially when it comes to those we love. Said Lewis: "Love, in its own nature, demands the perfecting of the beloved; . . . mere `kindness' which tolerates anything except suffering in its object is, in that respect, at the opposite pole from Love."fn

Again, what Lewis wrote underscores the need for such spiritual submissiveness and meekness: "Man approaches God most nearly when he is in one sense least like God. For what can be more unlike than fullness and need, sovereignty and humility, righteousness and penitence, limitless power and a cry for help? This paradox staggered me when I first ran into it."fn

The paradox that "staggered" underscores why the first commandment is first and the second commandment is second. Yes, the second commandment is "like unto the first," but it is not the first! In fact, we worship the Perfect Object of the first commandment, while, though we are to love Them, we do not worship the imperfect objects of the second commandment. We gladly recognize the supremacy of the Object of the love spoken of in the first commandment.

Moreover, if a person really loves God with all of his or her heart, might, mind, and strength, this involves intellectual surrender to God, too. Alas, there are comparatively more knees bent in reverence to God than there are minds, a fact that often represents a failure to understand the nature of God.

As modern revelation tells us, Enoch learned what Paul called "the deep things of God" (1 Cor. 2:10). Enoch saw, personally, the Lord's tears, and he heard the Lord's lamentations about mankind. God, having given us our agency, commanded us to love one another and to love and choose Him. Yet the Lord's lament is that we mortals so often choose evil instead of choosing Him and His ways, which evoked the divine tears (see Moses 7).

Keeping the first commandment leads us to acknowledge and love the Lord sufficiently to accept His timing, even when, as Nephi acknowledged, we "do not know the meaning of all things" (1 Ne. 11:17). Hence there are, in fact, more people who partially keep the second commandment than truly keep the first. Thus it is the first commandment which sets the high tone and the standards. Otherwise, every man can walk in his own way and do his own thing, which will often include some useful but sidebar service to his fellow mortals (see D&C 1:16). Consider, for instance, the case of Morianton's actually dealing justly with his people but not with himself because of his whoring failure to love God's seventh commandment (see Ether 10:11).

Clearly, some mortal choices need not necessarily be wicked in order to do harm. Some choices are diversions more than they are transgressions. Yet such sins of omission do mount up, constituting deprivations we inflict upon our fellow human beings as the helpful things we might have done and said are sadly "omitted" (see Matt. 23:23).

Eric Shumway, president of BYU—Hawaii, wrote:

Why is it that we must love God first with all our heart, with all our soul, with all our strength, and with all our mind (see Luke 10:27) and then second, love our neighbor as ourself, which Christ taught means loving all humanity? Partly, it is because if we don't love God first and all he represents, instead of loving our neighbor as ourselves, we are just as likely to end up "loving" our neighbor's wife, or his goods, or his reputation, or his sins that complement and magnify our own. Love also needs both anchor and compass on our voyage. For me, loving God with all one's mind means not only putting one's critical faculties in God's service, but one's imagination as well. This requires a will to purity as well as analytical discernment, a passion for good, even perfection, as well as for beauty and understanding.fn

As we know, Lewis emphasized the length of the Lord's redemptive reach for us and His unceasing love. The Book of Mormon similarly describes how His arm is extended to us "all the day long" (2 Ne. 28:32). The prophet Mormon wrote in powerful lamentation of those who did not respond even though Jesus waited "with open arms to receive you" (Morm. 6:17). If we are fully deserving, the scriptures promise us that we can eventually know that sublime moment when we will be "clasped in the arms of Jesus" at the entrance to His kingdom (Morm. 5:11). There, Jesus, Himself, is "the keeper of the gate . . . and he employeth no servant there" (2 Ne. 9:41). If we truly yearn for the marvelous moment, our discipleship will be persistent.

King Lamoni's father had it right concerning one requirement. With his halting, initial faith concerning the God whose love he had felt, nevertheless, the king promised to "give away all my sins to know thee" (Alma 22:18). This deep requirement of discipleship is for all of us, including our sins of omission.

Yes, it is vital to know that God is, but also what God is like! Only as we come to know, to worship, and to love Him can His work truly become our own. C. S. Lewis has given us such valuable and stirring insights to help us in this journey of Christian discipleship. For this I gladly and publicly thank him, something I hope to do personally one day.

I gladly give you my testimony as a special witness of Jesus that our discipleship should strive to emulate Him in every way. He is "the light of the world" (John 8:12). How blessed we are to have His perfect example to guide us!

Jesus is the Lord of the Universe, having created it under the direction of the Father, but He is, likewise, the Great Redeemer, having atoned for the sins of each of us. Now He beckons us to follow Him into everlasting happiness. I so testify in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.

Elder Neal A. Maxwell is a member of the Council of the Twelve Apostles of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. A former commissioner of education for the Church. He is the author of numerous and well-known books and articles .

Notes

1999 ﻿
