Andrew C. Skinner, Robert L. Millet, C. S. Lewis, the Man and His Message: An LDS Perspective ( 1999)

3

GOING TO HELL C. S. LEWIS STYLE: His Views on Sin, Temptation, and the Devil

Andrew C. Skinner

IF POPULARITY OF A PARTICULAR VOLUME can be taken as any indicator of what people have thought were the most significant insights offered by Clive Staples Lewis, then perhaps we may say that readers have felt that Lewis was at his best, or at least most engaging, when discussing evil—specifically, sin, temptation, the devil, and hell. Lewis once wrote in a letter to one of his many young admirers and correspondents that his most popular work was The Screwtape Letters.fn This is a book that rings true to actual human experience and, because of that, has enjoyed a long shelf life. It describes the eternal battle for the souls of humans from the point of view of a senior devil named Screwtape, who writes a series of letters to his nephew, Wormwood, a junior devil and tempter. The letters are filled with a sophisticated, cunning, diabolical logic and cynical humor that reveals the aims, goals, and methods the Satanic minions try to employ to capture "converts."

While The Screwtape Letters have been regarded as some of the wittiest and most brilliant pieces of writing in the twentieth century, there are at least three other volumes that also offer keen insights on sin, temptation, hell, and the devil, and that must be considered when describing and analyzing Lewis's conception of these topics. These works include Mere Christianity, The Problem of Pain, and The Great Divorce. Out of all four works come ideas that expand and inform our understanding of God's plan of salvation, help us to make greater sense of our mortal experience, and, as Latter-day Saints, cause us to refine our thinking about our own doctrines and truths of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ.

Let me outline what I think are the fundamental beliefs held by Lewis regarding the nature and significance of temptation, sin, hell, and the devil. These "foundation stones" of the great apologist's thought allow us to see his logical and persuasive mind at work. Lewis's theology subtly communicates the idea that where you start from determines where you end up. On this point I think Lewis may well have agreed with Joseph Smith's statement: "If we start right, it is easy to go right all the time; but if we start wrong, we may go wrong, and it be a hard matter to get right."fn I would categorize along the following lines the foundational beliefs held by C. S. Lewis regarding sin, temptation, and hell:

1.The Significance of Choice, Consequences, and Personal Accountability2.The Nature of Our Fallen World3.The Effects of Pride4.The Nature of the Devil and Hell5.The Diabolical Strategy of Temptation6.The Lure of Subjectivism, Scientism, and Reductionism7.Christ and Temptation

This is not an exhaustive list, but a fundamental one. These aspects of Professor Lewis's Christian worldview are interrelated, and they match up in an interesting way with Latter-day Saint beliefs and doctrines. Studying them reminds me that many good men and women not of my faith conduct their lives by the light of true principles and gives me renewed appreciation for the little couplet that helps dispel my narrowness of mind:

Truth is truth where'ere it's found, On foreign or familiar ground.

CONCEPT 1—CHOICE, CONSEQUENCES, AND PERSONAL ACCOUNTABILITY

C. S. Lewis taught that the eternal destiny of each person resides in his or her own hands. This is a fundamental concept with him. By exercising the right of personal choice, individuals eventually become souls fit for either heaven or hell. We become what we choose to become through many choices, great and small, over time. In Lewis's view heaven or hell is an "either-or" proposition; there is no "marriage" between the two, no in-between status, no middle ground.fn Lewis firmly believed that from God's point of view it is not possible to cultivate within one's soul aspects of both heaven and hell if one desires to obtain heaven.

Lewis illustrates this principle, as well as the closely related affliction from which some of us suffer, in his short but profound little book entitled The Great Divorce. You will remember that Lewis crafts his story in the form of dream-vision, where the narrator, Lewis himself, takes a bus ride from hell to the outskirts of heaven and witnesses a series of vignettes that teach important lessons. At one point along the way the narrator's guide and teacher, George MacDonald, offers this stunning comment in reply to the narrator's question as to whether everyone has a chance to get on the bus (that is to say, whether everyone has the opportunity to obtain heaven): "Everyone who wishes it does. Never fear. There are only two kinds of people in the end: those who say to God, `Thy will be done,' and those to whom God says, in the end, `Thy will be done.' All that are in Hell, choose it. Without that self-choice there could be no Hell. No soul that seriously and constantly desires joy will ever miss it. Those who seek find. To those who knock it is opened."fn

No one who desires to "get on" the bus will miss it—this is an important and appealing idea. Unfortunately, the sad affliction from which some of us suffer, also highlighted by Lewis in The Great Divorce, is tragic indeed because it is so crippling. It is the thing that does prevent us from reaching our final destination or, sometimes, even getting on the bus. Many of us know we don't want hell, but we cannot, or will not, fully commit to heaven. Yet, says Lewis, if we insist on keeping even a little bit of hell (or worldliness, perhaps), "we shall not see heaven: if we accept heaven we shall not be able to retain even the smallest and most intimate souvenirs of hell."fn In other words, we will not be able to keep even our favorite little sin, pet peeve, pettiness, selfishness, or self-pity if we are fully and completely committed to obtaining heaven.

Take, for example, one of the last vignettes depicted in The Great Divorce, where a self-pitying ghost named Frank appears as a dwarf who leads around, by a chain, a projection of his sinful self called a Tragedian. Frank has made the journey from hell to the outskirts of heaven not in order to obtain heaven, but for the purpose of gaining pity for his wretched condition. In the end, Frank chooses self-pity over heaven, and thus his real self, his better self, continues to shrink until nothing is left except the projection of his sin, the Tragedian, which then vanishes back to hell. Clearly, for Lewis, if one does not fully and completely choose heaven, whatever else is chosen in the end will bring no lasting joy. By choosing what he has, Frank has perverted his true self and thus become the very sin he has continued to embrace.fn

Contrast Frank with another of the ghosts at the outskirts of heaven. This is the man whose plaguing sin is lust. In a wonderful use of symbolic imagery, Lewis describes this sin as a red lizard (could this be the embodiment of Satan himself who is described in Rev. 12 as a red dragon?). This red lizard sits on the shoulder of the man as a kind of alter ego, always ready to prod his host. An angel meets the man and desires of him, indeed coaxes the man, to give the angel permission to slay the lizard. In spite of the fear that such an act may mean the very death of the man himself (lust has become so intertwined with the man), the man finally consents. In a painful process, the man has chosen to give up that which is keeping him from heaven and real happiness (not the counterfeit happiness promoted by the lizard). Miraculously, the lizard is transformed into a beautiful white stallion (horses always symbolize victory in the scriptures), which the man then rides into heaven.fn

Here one detects shades of the Apostle Paul, who taught that we are transformed when the old man or woman of sin dies and Christ lives in us (see Gal. 2; Rom. 6). However, the point is that the man with the lizard had chosen to be helped. In fact, everyone who had taken the bus ride had chosen it. Others bailed out of the experience while waiting in line at the bus stop in hell. But choice was the operant function. It makes no difference what weaknesses we mortals possess. If we choose God our weaknesses can and will be turned into strengths.

In sum, we may get a clear picture of what Lewis believed to be the fundamental relationship between the principle of choice and the options of heaven or hell, happiness or misery, by quoting from his book, The Problem of Pain: "Heaven offers nothing that a mercenary soul can desire. It is safe to tell the pure in heart that they shall see God, for only the pure in heart want to."fn Conversely, hell is also self-chosen: "I willingly believe," says Lewis, "that the damned are, in one sense, successful, rebels to the end; that the doors of hell are locked on the inside."fn

CONCEPT 2—THE NATURE OF OUR FALLEN WORLD

One of the dangers of implementing a system where freedom of choice is upheld is that some will choose evil. "God created things which had free will," says Lewis. "That means [you have] creatures which can go either wrong or right." "You make a thing voluntary and then half the people do not do it."fn Lewis goes on to say that God may not have wanted them to choose incorrectly, but that is what is possible, that is what God's will has made possible.fn Thus, freedom of choice can lead to bad choices and sinful behavior, which results in our present circumstance—a fallen world. Owing to the Fall our world is, to put it colloquially, messed up. Again, in The Problem of Pain, Lewis states:

According to that doctrine [the Fall], man is now a horror to God and to himself and a creature ill-adapted to the universe not because God made him so but because he has made himself so by abuse of his free will. . . . He made all things good and for the sake of their goodness; that one of the good things He made, namely, the free will of rational creatures, by its very nature included the possibility of evil; and that creatures, availing themselves of this possibility, have become evil.fn

In other words, "the natural man [fallen man] is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam" (Mosiah 3:19).

Lewis emphasized that the Fall came as a result of rebellion. "Fallen man," states Lewis, "is not simply an imperfect creature who needs improvement: he is a rebel who must lay down his arms."fn That which unregenrate or natural man is rebelling against is not simply an intangible, amorphous thing called goodness or rightness. When humans commit sin they are rebelling against their creator, which, as Lewis implies, is a doubly stupid and injurious thing to do. Not only is the sinner hurt by the sin, but says Lewis, "A creature revolting against a creator is [a creature] revolting against the source of his own powers—including even his power to revolt. . . . It is like the scent of a flower trying to destroy the flower."fn Hence, for Lewis, "The Fall is simply and solely Disobedience—doing what you have been told not to do."fn

Lewis points out that no one escapes the effects of the Fall. We are all in a hole, he says; "We are all fallen creatures and all very hard to live with." However, there is good news. The hole we are in is not a permanent situation, not irreparable. As one scholar notes, one of Lewis's works of science fiction, entitled Out of the Silent Planet, introduces a very helpful word to describe our fallen condition. The word is bent. When the good scientist, Ransom, attempts to describe the dangerous motives of other space travelers to the inhabitants of the planet Malachandra, he uses the word bent. This is so apt a term because it suggests the possibility of correction or redemption. Something that is bent is only distorted rather than being completely broken.fn That possibility of correction, we could even say transformation, resides in Christ and requires repentance. Through Christ, who pays our penalty, all may find a way out of the "hole" described by Lewis. Latter-day Saints put the doctrine this way: "We believe that through the atonement of Christ all mankind may be saved by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the gospel" (A of F 1:3).

Lewis believed that the effects of our fallen condition were so pervasive and invasive that it would be dangerous even for us to travel in space. Were we to stumble upon an "unfallen" race, assuming that were possible, we would carry our spiritual contagion to that other world. However, this is not to say that Lewis believed in the total depravity of man. Rather, it makes the need for a Savior greater. In his Problem of Pain, Lewis stated, "This chapter will have been misunderstood if anyone describes it as a reinstatement of the doctrines of Total Depravity. I disbelieve that doctrine, partly on the logical ground that if our depravity were total we should not know ourselves to be depraved, and partly because experience shows us much goodness in human nature. Nor am I recommending universal gloom."fn

Lewis allows not only for moral improvement in humans but also for increased self-knowledge as a result of that moral progress: "When a man is getting better he understands more and more clearly the evil that is still left in him. When a man is getting worse, he understands his own badness less and less. A moderately bad man knows he is not very good: a thoroughly bad man thinks he is all right. . . . Good people know about both good and evil: bad people do not know about either."fn

I like this statement very much for two reasons. One is a corollary teaching given by the Prophet Joseph Smith: "We consider that God has created man with a mind capable of instruction, and a faculty which may be enlarged in proportion to the heed and diligence given to the light communicated from heaven to the intellect; and that the nearer man approaches perfection, the clearer are his views, and the greater his enjoyments, till he has overcome the evils of his life and lost every desire for sin."fn

A second reason why I resonate to Lewis's statement is that such explanations about our capability to be sensitive to the Spirit of God, which is what I think Lewis is talking about, is also reflected in the teachings of scriptural prophets like the Apostle Paul, who said in his first recorded letter to the Corinthians: "For what man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is him? even so the things of God knoweth no man, but the spirit of God. . . . But he that is spiritual judgeth all things, yet he himself is judged of no man" (2:11, 15).

CONCEPT 3—THE SIGNIFICANCE OF PRIDE

In Lewis's scheme the Fall is directly tied to the sin of pride. "The Fall is simply and solely disobedience . . . and it results from Pride—from being too big for your boots, forgetting your place, thinking that you are God."fn Here one cannot help but think of that passage in what Latter-day Saints call the Pearl of Great Price, the book of Moses 4: 1-4, which lays out the problem in unique detail as it recounts the hubris of Satan when he sought to dethrone God.

And I, the Lord God, spake unto Moses, saying: That Satan, whom thou hast commanded in the name of mine Only Begotten, is the same which was from the beginning, and he came before me, saying—Behold, here am I, send me, I will be thy son, and I will redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost, and surely I will do it; wherefore give me thine honor.

But, behold, my Beloved Son, which was my Beloved and Chosen from the beginning, said unto me—Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever.

Wherefore, because that Satan rebelled against me, and sought to destroy the agency of man, which I, the Lord God, had given him, and also, that I should give unto him mine own power; by the power of mine Only Begotten, I caused that he should be cast down;

And he became Satan, yea, even the devil, the father of all lies, to deceive and to blind men, and to lead them captive at his will, even as many as would not hearken unto my voice.

Satan is the epitome of pride, and it is this fact that is at the core of what Lewis is trying to tell us: "it was through Pride that the devil became the devil."fn Lewis has also pointed out that "the devil is a liar," just as the above passage in the book of Moses has stated. Thus the ugly truth is made plain: pride and dishonesty go together because those who possess pride are not being honest about their true standing before God and their fellowmen. As Terry Glaspey says in summarizing the views of Lewis: "Pride, at its root, is self-centeredness. It is the desire that everything and everyone revolve around our own perceived needs and wants, the refusal to see things through the eyes of others. Pride is . . . a purely spiritual sin, birthed in Hell itself. It is the sin that made Satan who he is, for he refused to bow to God's rightful authority as Creator. When we are proud, we cut ourselves off from God and from others."fn

The effects of pride are unbounded and far-reaching. Said Lewis: "It is pride which has been the chief cause of misery in every nation and every family since the world began. Other vices may sometimes bring people together: you may find good fellowship and jokes and friendliness among drunken people and unchaste people. But pride always means enmity—it is enmity. And not only enmity between man and man, but enmity to God."fn

Pride is a topic on which Lewis has offered some of his most brilliant insight and exposition. He believed it was the source of all other sins, "the essential vice, the utmost evil."fn "Pride leads to every other vice," he wrote in Mere Christianity.fn

The worst thing about pride is that it keeps one from God; "it is the complete anti-God state of mind," said Lewis.fn Continuing with his words: "As long as you are proud you cannot know God. A proud man is always looking down on things and people: and, of course, as long as you are looking down, you cannot see something that is above you."fn As Lewis pointed out in a section of dialogue he crafted as occurring between the protagonist in The Great Divorce and the protagonist's guide, those who chose hell over God try to justify their actions precisely because they cannot get rid of the primal sin—pride. Here is that portion of dialogue:

"Milton was right," said my Teacher. "The choice of every lost soul can be expressed in the words `Better to reign in Hell than serve in Heaven.' There is always something they prefer to joy—that is, to reality. Ye see it easily enough in a spoiled child that would sooner miss its play and its supper than say it was sorry and be friends. Ye call it the Sulks. But in adult life it has a hundred fine names—Achilles' wrath and Coriolanus' grandeur, Revenge and Injured Merit and Self-Respect and Tragic Greatness and Proper Pride."fn

The truth of the matter is that there is nothing proper about pride in any form it takes, because it keeps us from God.

With pride, the devil has a constant, unrelenting, powerful built-in tool through which he tries to ensnare us and make us his own. To wit, even though we may accept Christ and profess to turn away from evil, we then become susceptible to self-righteousness, which in Lewis's view was one of the worst manifestations of the greatest sin. "A man is never so proud as when striking an attitude of humility."fn Thus, as Lewis said in one of his letters, pride is truly the "perpetual nagging temptation."fn The only way to diminish pride is to constantly hammer away at the competitive spirit: "Once the element of competition has gone, pride has gone."fn

Had we the time, we could list a dozen scriptures in the Book of Mormon on the disastrous effects of pride. We could talk about the essential ingredients of a Zion society, each of which is a manifestation of the exact opposite of pride, and is, rather, the total immersion of self in a sense of community, each individual person seeking the interest and welfare of his or her family members, friends, neighbors, and—yes—even seeking the interest of strangers and foreigners.

CONCEPT 4—THE NATURE OF THE DEVIL AND HELL

Pride naturally leads us to talk about the nature of the devil and hell since, as we have already noted, "it was through Pride that the devil became the devil."fn Lewis believed unequivocally in the devil, and in devils. "I believe in angels, and I believe that some of these, by the abuse of their free will, have become enemies to God and, as a corollary, to us. These we may call devils. . . . Their nature is depraved."fn The logical extension of that view is that they are different from humans who do not possess a thoroughly depraved nature and are redeemable. Lewis also believed that Satan, the leader or dictator of these devils, was the opposite, not of God, but of Michael. We may compare this notion with revealed truth found in D&C 29:36-38. "And it came to pass that Adam, being tempted of the devil—for, behold, the devil was before Adam, for he rebelled against me, saying, Give me thine honor, which is my power; and also a third part of the hosts of heaven turned he away from me because of their agency; and they were thrust down, and thus came the devil and his angels; And, behold, there is a place prepared for them . . . which place is hell."

Lewis's ideas compare with this revelation in an interesting way, especially when we remember that Lewis also believed that Satan's fall was due to rebellion brought about by pride. In fact, it is again pride that Lewis believed is the essential characteristic, even atmosphere, that permeates hell. "We must picture Hell as a state where everyone is perpetually concerned about his own dignity and advancement, where everyone has a grievance, and where everyone lives the deadly serious passions of envy, self-importance, and resentment."fn

Further playing on the theme of pride, Lewis sees the realm of the devils as "official society held together entirely by fear and greed. . . . For of course `Dog eat dog' is the principle of the whole organization. Everyone wishes everyone else's discrediting, demotion, and ruin."fn Here again we see the competitive spirit in full force, working its destruction. Perhaps that is why the devils are called, in LDS parlance, "sons of perdition" (D&C 76:32)—from the Latin root perditus, meaning "ruin" or "destruction." Devils are motivated by what Lewis calls "spiritual cannibalism"fn—a "passion to dominate, almost to digest, one's fellow."fn But it is a passion which is never satisfied. By reading C. S. Lewis the profundity of father Lehi's words in the Book of Mormon are made ever so much greater: "And because he [the devil] had fallen from heaven, and had become miserable forever, he sought also the misery of all mankind. . . . For he seeketh that all men might be miserable like unto himself" (2 Ne. 2:18, 27).

Thus, hell, the abode of the devils, is based on hatred. For, as Lewis observes, "A being which can still love is not yet a devil."fn Lewis is well known as a master of metaphor, and he uses this gift to describe glimpses of hell that we see displayed far too often in "respectable" persons. "Over all this their good manners, their expressions of grave respect, their `tributes' to one another's invaluable services form a thin crust. Every now and then it gets punctured, and the scalding lava of their hatred spurts out."fn

Logically, we would have expected hell and hatred to go together in Lewis's scheme of things. We have already seen how pride is the foundation of hell; and pride, as Lewis defined it for us, is purely and simply enmity, or hatred, toward God! The biblical writer James provided another equation which seems to apply here: "Know ye not that the friendship of the world is enmity with God?" (James 4:4). Sometimes the modern world and hell seem awfully close together.

CONCEPT 5—THE STRATEGY OF TEMPTATION

While Latter-day Saints would likely have an interesting discussion with Lewis on the differences and similarities between various understandings of heaven and hell versus kingdoms of glory and outer darkness, there is much in Lewis's writings about the devil and how he works that is magnificent. Lewis stated that when it comes to devils there are two equal and opposite errors into which the human race can fall. "One is to disbelieve in their existence. The other is to believe, [but] to feel an excessive and unhealthy interest in them."fn However, Lewis takes very seriously the idea that we are engaged in a struggle of cosmic proportions between the forces of good and the forces of evil. In The Screwtape Letters Lewis uses his knowledge of human nature to lay out a series of strategies that the devils use to tempt people, thwart the forces of good, manipulate human souls to diabolical ends, and "convert" the human family to ranks of the underworld. I highlight some of the arresting strategies articulated by Screwtape, the undersecretary of the Department of Temptation:

The sins of the flesh are bad, but they are the least bad of all sins. All the worst pleasures are purely spiritual: the pleasure of putting other people in the wrong, of bossing and patronising and spoiling sport, and back-biting; the pleasures of power, of hatred. For there are two things inside me, competing with the human self which I must try to become. They are the Animal self, and the Diabolical self. The Diabolical self is the worst of the two. That is why a cold, self-righteous prig who goes regularly to church may be far nearer to hell than a prostitute.fn

Now, this idea must be used by us to encourage once again the conception of a "historical Jesus" to be found by clearing away later "accretions and perversions" and then to be contrasted with the whole Christian tradition. In the last generation we promoted the construction of such a "historical Jesus" on liberal and humanitarian lines; we are now putting forward a new "historical Jesus" on Marxian, catastrophic, and revolutionary lines. The advantages of these constructions, which we intend to change every thirty years or so, are manifold. . . . The documents say what they say and cannot be added to; each new "historical Jesus" therefore has to be got out of them by suppression at one point and exaggeration at another, and by that sort of guessing (brilliant is the adjective we teach humans to apply to it) on which no one would risk ten shillings in ordinary life.fn

There have been men before now who got so interested in proving the existence of God that they came to care nothing for God Himself . . . as if the good Lord had nothing to do but exist! There have been some who were so occupied in spreading Christianity that they never gave a thought to Christ. Man! Ye see it in smaller matters. Did ye never know a lover of books that with all his first editions and signed copies had lost the power to read them? Or an organizer of charities that had lost all love for the poor? It is the subtlest of all the snares.fn

And the list goes on and on. However, I think one sees a quintessential pattern begin to emerge. In short, Satan's aim is to promote excess, exaggeration, and extremes in all things. We see this again and again in The Screwtape Letters. As Screwtape so aptly puts it, "All extremes except extreme devotion to the Enemy are to be encouraged."fn Indeed, one of the greatest temptations we all face in almost every activity we undertake is intemperance.fn By way of illustration Screwtape outlines the following strategy. "Now, just as we pick out and exaggerate the pleasure of eating to produce gluttony, so we pick out this natural pleasantness of change and twist it into a demand for absolute novelty."fn

In yet two more letters we read the following comments from Screwtape: "Some ages are lukewarm and complacent, and then it is our business to soothe yet faster asleep. Other ages, of which the present is one, are unbalanced and prone to faction, and it is our business to inflame them."fn "It all depends on whether your man is of the desponding type who can be tempted to despair, or of the wishful-thinking type who can be assured that all is well."fn

For Latter-day Saints the connection here with 2 Ne. 28:20-21 is immediate: "For behold, at that day shall he rage in the hearts of the children of men, and stir them up to anger against that which is good. And others will he pacify, and lull them away into carnal security, that they will say: All is well in Zion; yea, Zion prospereth, all is well—and thus the devil cheateth their souls, and leadeth them away carefully down to hell."

Against this backdrop, we note Lewis's firm (and insightful) belief that the devil will never tempt humans to commit a major sin when a minor one will do the job. As Screwtape further instructs his nephew: "Murder is no better than cards if cards can do the trick. Indeed, the safest road to Hell is the gradual one—the gentle slope, soft underfoot, without sudden turnings, without milestones, without signposts."fn

CONCEPT 6—THE LURE OF SUBJECTIVISM, SCIENTISM, AND REDUCTIONISM

As I read Lewis it seems to me that he assumes that the modern trends of subjectivism, scientism, and reductionism are an outgrowth of pride—the confidence of humans in their own abilities to understand everything and manipulate everything to their own ends and desires. Lewis saw subjectivism as the first great danger to modern civilization.fn Subjective reasoning and its results diminish our ability to find the real truth and, hence, to know God. As Lewis argued so forcefully, it is folly for humans to believe that we know what's best for us (especially when we're under the influence of the temporary prince of this world—the Prince of Darkness). It is folly for the creations to think that they have no creator who knows more than they do—that humans can decide truth on the basis of personal and selfish preferences.

Lewis says that in former times we humans believed that what was truly significant, what really counted, was not the result of our own whims but that which was in harmony with the reality of God's plan and purposes. Without ultimate objective truth, living in a situation where moral and religious values are based only on what we prefer and not what God has established, we would have no moorings. We are subject to the devil without protection; we are liable to be cast about with every wind of doctrine, to be held hostage by the decisions of oligarchies.

To the critic who has argued that modern social science has proven that ethics and values are culturally determined, in his work entitled The Abolition of Man Lewis has responded by demonstrating the universality of basic human ethical values. These things point to God in Lewis's mind.fn

If subjectivism was the first great danger to modern civilization because it can rob us of our spiritual heritage, then scientism is the second great danger in Lewis's view. Lewis is not opposed to true science, but to the misuse of science that ends in reductionist thinking—the tendency to posit as reality only that which we can quantify or explain on the basis of what we see, touch, taste, or smell. Says Lewis: "You cannot go on `explaining away' for ever: you will find that you have explained explanation itself away. You cannot go on `seeing through' things forever. The whole point of seeing through something is to see something through it."fn

CONCEPT 7—CHRIST AND TEMPTATION

C. S. Lewis's faith was built on the reality that God became man in the person of Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus was not a great moral teacher. This is not an option Jesus left open to us. In one of the most well-known passages from Mere Christianity, Lewis says there are really only three possibilities:

I am trying here to prevent anyone saying the really foolish thing that people often say about Him: "I'm ready to accept Jesus as a great moral teacher, but I don't accept His claim to be God." That is the one thing we must not say. A man who was merely a man and said the sort of things Jesus said would not be a great moral teacher. He would either be a lunatic—on a level with the man who says he is a poached egg—or else he would be the Devil of Hell. You must make your choice. Either this man was, and is, the Son of God: or else a madman or something worse. You can shut Him up for a fool, you can spit at Him and kill Him as a demon; or you can fall at His feet and call Him lord and God. But let us not come with any patronising nonsense about His being a great human teacher. He has not left that open to us. He did not intend to.fn

Thus, the intention of Jesus was not to point people to His teachings, but rather to point people to Himself as God and Savior. Our commission is not so much to believe in Him as to trust Him completely. We can trust Him because He lived a perfect life and knows how hard life can be. Here we may be tempted to say that Jesus cannot know what it's like because He was perfect. However, as Lewis explains, it is precisely because Jesus was perfect, and thus never succumbed to temptation, that He was and is the only being who fully understands and appreciates the challenging nature of temptation. While this may seem a paradox, it makes perfect sense after Lewis explains it to us in an intellectually expanding and spiritually inspiring passage from Mere Christianity:

No man knows how bad he is till he has tried very hard to be good. A silly idea is current that good people do not know what temptation means. This is an obvious lie. Only those who try to resist temptation know how strong it is. After all, you find out the strength of the German army by fighting against it, not by giving in. You find out the strength of a wind by trying to walk against it, not by lying down. A man who gives in to temptation after five minutes simply does not know what it would have been like an hour later. That is why bad people, in one sense, know very little about badness. They have always lived a sheltered life by always giving in. We never find out the strength of the evil impulse inside us until we try to fight it; and Christ, because He was the only man who never yielded to temptation, is also the only man who knows to the full what temptation really means—the only complete realist.fn

This is Lewis at his best, providing practical help for the constant challenge of life, while at the same time putting Christ at the center of the discussion. Because of Lewis's insightful logic, we can more fully appreciate the profundity and real significance of Paul's statements in the book of Hebrews about the nature of the Savior we worship. He teaches us that Christ's own perfect life in the face of every kind of temptation in mortality is ultimately turned to our good, and ministers to our weak and fallen condition. "Wherefore in all things it behooved him to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful high priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people. For in that he himself hath suffered being tempted, he is able to succour them that are tempted" (2:17-18). "Seeing then that we have a great high priest, that is passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession. For we have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin" (4:14-15).

CONCLUSION

It seems to me that Lewis's intent in all of his writing, in all of his explication, was to aid the Christian in his or her daily living by pointing them to God's love and redemptive power and warning them of Satan's pitfalls. For this, good people everywhere ought to be grateful. Though the battle with Satan and his minions is a deadly serious one, and at times may seem hopeless, Lewis tells us we need not despair. In one of his letters, Lewis proffers one of his greatest statements of hope. "No amount of falls will really undo us if we keep on picking ourselves up each time. We shall of course be very muddy and tattered children by the time we reach home. But the bathrooms are already, the towels put out, the clean clothes in the airing cupboard. The only fatal thing is to loose ones temper and give it up. It is when we notice the dirt that God is most present in us: it is the very sign of His presence."fn

Lewis was a keen observer of the human condition and an astute social critic. From the standpoint of LDS doctrine we have good reason to trust many of his insights.

It is something of a marvel that Professor Lewis had both the desire and the ability to appeal to persons from all walks of life, not simply the well-to-do, the high-born, those from one confessional background or another, or those who claim to be educated—especially not those who attend the university. In this setting today (at Brigham Young University) it seems appropriate to point out that when it comes to understanding evil (sin, temptation, and the devil) no university training is required to be an expert. In fact, I think Lewis would agree with a passage from the Book of Mormon that explicitly and unequivocally states that those who have the most to worry about when it comes to salvation are the proud who are rich and the proud who are learned (see 2 Ne. 9:42). Let us try to follow the lead of all truly great disciples of the Savior, men and women the very likes of C. S. Lewis, by becoming learned through our humility.

Andrew C. Skinner is chair of the Department of Ancient Scripture at Brigham Young University. He holds graduate degrees from the Iliff School of Theology, Harvard University, and the University of Denver, and is the author of numerous publications.

Notes

1999 ﻿
