Andrew C. Skinner, Robert L. Millet, C. S. Lewis, the Man and His Message: An LDS Perspective ( 1999)

4

C. S. LEWIS: Self Love and Salvation

Daniel K Judd

THROUGHOUT HISTORY THE LORD has entrusted men and women from a variety of religious backgrounds and diverse political and philosophical perspectives to accomplish His work. In a statement issued by the First Presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in 1978 we read: "The great religious leaders of the world such as Mohammed, Confucius, and the Reformers, as well as philosophers including Socrates, Plato, and others, received a portion of God's light. Moral truths were given to them by God to enlighten whole nations and to bring a higher level of understanding to individuals. . . . We believe that God has given and will give to all peoples sufficient knowledge to help them on their way to eternal salvation."fn

In the Old Testament we read of the inspired leadership of Cyrus, King of Persia, who was not privileged to hold priesthood keys yet was directed by the Lord to assist the captive Jews in both returning to Jerusalem and rebuilding the holy temple. In the book of 2 Chronicles it states: "That the word of the Lord spoken by the mouth of Jeremiah might be accomplished, the Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus, king of Persia, that he made a proclamation throughout all his kingdom, and put it also in writing, saying. . . . All the kingdoms of the earth hath the Lord God of heaven given me; and he hath charged me to build him an house in Jerusalem" (36:22-23).

While the restoration of the Jews to Israel and the rebuilding of the temple was accomplished under the Lord's direction and through His authorized servants, the unendowed Cyrus was also an important part of the Lord's plan.fn Even during our day—"the dispensation of the fulness of times" (D&C 112:30)—when the Lord has established His Church upon the earth in its fulness, the Lord continues to work through those who are not covenant members of the kingdom. Elder Orson F. Whitney of the Quorum of the Twelve stated that "perhaps the Lord needs such men on the outside of His Church to help it along."fn

Many of us who are Latter-day Saints bear testimony that "salvation in the world to come is dependent upon accepting the gospel of Jesus Christ as taught in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints,"fn but we also know that the world has been greatly blessed by the lives of great men and women outside of the Church as well. One of the purposes of this volume (and the symposium that preceded it) is to honor just such an individual: Clive Staples Lewis. While the writings of C. S. Lewis have found acceptance and gained reputation among a wide variety of Christians, his popularity has not been gained by teaching "some new thing" (Acts 17:21) his success has come in making the "unknown God" (Acts 17:23) known to people like you and me. And as we can observe in Elder Maxwell's essay in this volume, C. S. Lewis, like Cyrus of old, is assisting the prophets of our day in liberating modern Israel from spiritual Babylon.

GIVE UP YOURSELF, AND YOU WILL FIND YOUR SELF

While Professor Lewis's writings contain a multitude of ideas that are expressive of Christian theology in general and Latter-day Saint doctrine in particular, one of the central themes of his writing is concerned with the place of "Self" in relation to God. In an age when "Self" has displaced God as the object of our devotion, Lewis's writings on "Self" have served as a powerful and articulate second witness of the Lord's admonition to place the will of God before our own. The Savior taught: "If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me. For whosoever will save his life shall lose it: but whosoever will lose his life for my sake, the same shall save it" (Luke 9:23-24; emphasis added). C. S. Lewis concludes Mere Christianity with the following admonition:

Give up your self, and you will find your real self. Lose your life and you will save it. Submit to death, death of your ambitions and favourite wishes every day and death of your whole body in the end: submit with every fibre of your being, and you will find eternal life. Keep back nothing. Nothing that you have not given away will ever be really yours. Nothing in you that has not died will ever be raised from the dead. Look for yourself, and you will find in the long run only hatred, loneliness, despair, rage, ruin, and decay. But look for Christ and you will find Him, and with Him everything else thrown in.fn

THREE KINDS OF MEN

In an article entitled "Three Kinds of Men," first published in London's Sunday Times, C. S. Lewis described how many of us, while acknowledging the importance of our duty to serve God, equate our service to Him much like the paying of our taxes, for we hope that "what is left over will be enough for [us] to live on."fn In other words, while recognizing the importance of the "will of God, the categorical imperative, or the good of society"fn we want to serve God, the church, the community, or our families only as much as we absolutely have to—hoping there will be some time left for ourselves. While recognizing that those persons who are attempting to balance their needs with the will of God are at least attempting to be more virtuous than "those who live simply for their own sake and pleasure,"fn Professor Lewis's "third kind of man" is a person whose life is, without exception, centered on Christ: "These people have got rid of the tiresome business of adjusting the rival claims of Self and God by the simple expedient of rejecting the claims of Self altogether. The old egoistic will has been turned round, reconditioned, and made into a new thing. The will of Christ no longer limits theirs; it is theirs. All their time, in belonging to Him, belongs also to them, for they are His."fn

Those familiar with Latter-day Saint theology will recognize Lewis's "three kinds of men" (selfish, conflicted, and selfless) as being roughly compatible with the descriptions of the inhabitants of the "three degrees of glory" whose lifestyles are described in D&C 76 of the Doctrine and Covenants. While Lewis's descriptions of the "three kinds of men" have to do with the moral conditions of mortal man and not his condition in the life to come, he argues for the superiority of a threefold judgment rather than seeing them only in the more traditional judgment of heaven or hell: "And because there are three classes, any merely twofold division of the world into good and bad is disastrous. It overlooks the fact that the members of the second class (to which most of us belong) are always and necessarily unhappy. The tax which moral conscience levies on our desires does not in fact leave us enough to live on. As long as we are in this class we must either feel guilt because we have not paid the tax or penury [impoverished] because we have."fn

C. S. Lewis teaches us that the only way through this apparent dilemma of guilt and exhaustion is to stop seeing life in terms of "Time for my Self" and "Time for God," but to allow God's will to become our own: "To become new men means losing what we now call `ourselves.' Out of ourselves, into Christ, we must go. His will is to become ours and we are to think His thoughts, to `have the mind of Christ' [1 Cor. 2:16]. . . . The more we get what we now call `ourselves' out of the way and let Him take us over, the more truly ourselves we become."fn

While Lewis does provide some commentary on how one goes about making God's will one's own, it was his observation and experience that the obstacles, challenges, and disappointments of life are designed as invitations to help us comprehend the inadequacies of self and discover—sometimes in desperation—our dependence upon God: "The price of Christ is something, in a way, much easier than moral effort—it is to want Him. It is true that the wanting itself would be beyond our power but for one fact. The world is so built that, to help us desert our own satisfactions, they desert us. War and trouble and finally old age take from us one by one all those things that the natural Self hoped for at its setting out."fn

BECOMING WHO WE REALLY ARE

While "losing one's Self" is a central theme of C. S. Lewis's writings, he is not calling for an annihilation of self. In fact, he reasons that giving ourselves to God is the only way we can come to discover who we really are: "Our real selves are all waiting for us in Him. The more I resist Him and try to live on my own, the more I become dominated by my own heredity and upbringing and natural desires. . . . It is when I turn to Christ, when I give myself up to His Personality, that I first begin to have a real personality of my own."fn

THE GREAT SIN

C. S. Lewis's recognition of the legitimacy of a "self" that is grounded in Christ also comes with a warning: "The moment you have a self at all, there is a possibility of putting yourself first—wanting to be the centre—wanting to be God, in fact. That was the sin of Satan: and that was the sin he taught the human race."fn Perhaps the most meaningful counsel given in all of his writings is contained in Lewis's warnings about pride: "The essential vice, the utmost evil, is Pride. Unchastity, anger, greed, drunkenness, and all that, are mere fleabites in comparison: it was through Pride that the devil became the devil: Pride leads to every other vice: it is the complete anti-God state of mind."fn

On 30 January 1930 Lewis wrote to his friend Arthur Greeves and told him that though he felt he was being supported in overcoming anger and immorality, he was alarmed concerning his own pride. Lewis wrote:

I have found out ludicrous and terrible things about my own character. Sitting by, watching the rising thoughts to break their necks as they pop up, one learns to know the sort of thoughts that do come. And, will you believe it, one out of every three is a thought of self-admiration: when everything else fails, having had its neck broken, up comes the thought, `what an admirable fellow I am to have broken their necks!' I catch myself posturing before the mirror, so to speak, all day long. I pretend I am carefully thinking out what to say to the next pupil (for his good, of course) and then suddenly realize I am really thinking how frightfully clever I'm going to be and how he will admire me. . . when you force yourself to stop it, you admire yourself for doing that. It's like fighting the hydra. . . . There seems to be no end to it. Depth under depth of self-love and self-admiration. . . Pride. . . is the mother of all sins, and the original sin of Lucifer.fn

Latter-day Saints will remember President Ezra Taft Benson's landmark address entitled, "Beware of Pride," wherein our dear prophet quoted C. S. Lewis in warning the membership of the Church concerning "the sin of pride."fn Though President Benson and Professor Lewis both described the manifestation of pride where we look "down on things and people,"fn President Benson articulated another: "Pride is a sin that can readily be seen in others but is rarely admitted in ourselves. Most of us consider pride to be a sin of those on the top, such as the rich and the learned, looking down at the rest of us (see 2 Ne. 9:42). There is, however, a far more common ailment among us—and that is pride from the bottom looking up."fn

Lewis alluded to the bidirectional nature of pride when he taught that Satan always delivers heresy in pairs: "He always sends errors into the world in pairs—pairs of opposites. And he always encourages us to spend a lot of time thinking which is the worse. You see why, of course? He relies on your extra dislike of the one error to draw you gradually into the opposite one."fn

Elder Dallin H. Oaks shares this challenging insight on "pride from the bottom looking up" in his life:

A few months after my calling to the Council of the Twelve, I expressed my feelings of inadequacy to one of the senior members of my quorum. He responded with this mild reproof and challenging insight: "I suppose your feelings are understandable. But you should work for a condition where you will not be pre-occupied with yourself and your own feelings and can give your entire concern to others, to the work of the Lord in all the world."

Whenever we focus on ourselves, even in our service to others, we fall short of the example of our Savior, who gave himself as a total and unqualified sacrifice for all mankind. Those who seek to follow his example must lose themselves in their service to others.fn

Pride from the bottom looking up and the top looking down. Lewis taught that if we think ourselves not guilty of pride "it means [we] are very conceited indeed."fn Lewis further taught: "The real test of being in the presence of God is that you either forget about yourself altogether or see yourself as a small, dirty object. It is better to forget about yourself altogether."fn

BE YE THEREFORE PERFECT

Professor Lewis's writings underscore the doctrine that God can do more with our lives than we can, but that in our giving up of self, with our grandiosity and/or our despair, our submission must be complete:

Christ says "Give me All. I don't want so much of your time and so much of your money and so much of your work: I want You. I have not come to torment your natural self, but to kill it. No half-measures are any good. I don't want to cut off a branch here and a branch there, I want to have the whole tree down. I don't want to drill the tooth, or crown it, or stop it, but to have it out. Hand over the whole natural self, all the desires which you think innocent as well as the ones you think wicked—the whole outfit. I will give you a new self instead. In fact, I will give you Myself: my own will shall become yours."fn

Again, Lewis's words are echoed by President Ezra Taft Benson: "Men and women who turn their lives over to God will discover that He can make a lot more out of their lives than they can. He will deepen their joys, expand their vision, quicken their minds, strengthen their muscles, lift their spirits, multiply their blessings, increase their opportunities, comfort their souls, raise up friends, and pour out peace. Whoever will lose his life in the service of God will find eternal life (see Matt. 10:39)." fn

Not only does turning our agency over to God and living our lives "in Christ" (see 2 Cor. 1:21; Moro. 10:32-33) help us in living a more abundant life, but as President Benson taught, doing so is the essential key to eternal salvation as well. C. S. Lewis articulates a doctrine that is taught in both the Bible and the Book of Mormon, that salvation is not a product of the goodness of self, but is completely based upon the righteousness of the Redeemer, even Christ the Lord. The Prophet Lehi taught his son Jacob: "Wherefore, thy soul shall be blessed, and thou shalt dwell safely with thy brother, Nephi; and thy days shall be spent in the service of thy God. Wherefore, I know that thou art redeemed, because of the righteousness of thy Redeemer; for thou hast beheld that in the fulness of time he cometh to bring salvation unto men" (2 Ne. 2:3; emphasis added).

Perhaps C. S. Lewis's best example of mankind's fallen nature and our inability to save ourselves is found in his classic illustration of "rats in the cellar:"

When I come to my evening prayers and try to reckon up the sins of the day, nine times out of ten the most obvious one is some sin against charity; I have sulked or snapped or sneered or snubbed or stormed. And the excuse that immediately springs to my mind is that the provocation was so sudden and unexpected: I was caught off my guard, I had not time to collect myself. . . . Surely what a man does when he is taken off his guard is the best evidence for what sort of man he is? Surely what pops out before the man has time to put on a disguise is the truth? If there are rats in the cellar you are most likely to see them if you go in very suddenly. But the suddenness does not create the rats: it only prevents them from hiding. In the same way the suddenness of the provocation does not make me an ill-tempered man: it only shows me what an ill-tempered man I am. . . . Now that cellar is out of reach of my conscious will. I can to some extent control my acts: I have no direct control over my temperament. And if (as I said before) what we are matters even more than what we do—if indeed, what we do matters chiefly as evidence of what we are—then it follows that the change which I most need to undergo is a change that my own direct, voluntary efforts cannot bring about. . . . But I cannot, by direct moral effort, give myself new motives. After the first few steps in the Christian life we realise that everything which really needs to be done in our souls can be done only by God.fn

This statement has had more influence on me and my own personal conversion to Christianity than anything else C. S. Lewis ever expressed.

As a young missionary I once felt wearied by those of other faiths who continually wanted to discuss the grace of Christ. Invariably, these individuals would want to discuss the Apostle Paul's teachings concerning grace found in the books of Ephesians and Romans; while my companions and I would counter their arguments by stressing the importance of works taught in the general epistle of James. We even had a name for our born-again Christian opponents—Gracers. Though some of these people had a distorted view of the doctrine of grace and believed that salvation would be theirs even if they were living lives full of sin, I have come to believe that many of them had a much more godly view of grace than did I. It was the writings of C. S. Lewis that first inspired me to more carefully read the Book of Mormon and come to a better understanding that my salvation is found, "in the righteousness of the Redeemer" (2 Ne. 2:3).

C. S. Lewis commented on the works-versus-grace debate in the following: "Christians have often disputed as to whether what leads the Christian home is good actions, or Faith in Christ. I have no right really to speak on such a difficult question, but it does seem to me like asking which blade in a pair of scissors is most necessary. A serious moral effort is the only thing that will bring you to the point where you throw up the sponge. Faith in Christ is the only thing to save you from despair at that point: and out of that Faith in Him good actions must inevitably come."fn

As the Apostle Paul recorded, "For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God hath before ordained that we should walk in them" (Eph. 2:10). As we live in Christ and allow Him to work within us we will eventually become like Him. Lewis clearly taught that this process of sanctification will eventually lead us to becoming like God:

The command Be ye perfect is not idealistic gas. Nor is it a command to do the impossible. He is going to make us into creatures that can obey that command. He said (in the Bible) that we were "gods" and He is going to make good His words. If we let Him—for we can prevent Him, if we choose—He will make the feeblest and filthiest of us into a god or goddess, dazzling, radiant, immortal creature, pulsating all through with such energy and joy and wisdom and love as we cannot now imagine, a bright stainless mirror which reflects back to God perfectly (though, of course, on a smaller scale) His own boundless power and delight and goodness. The process will be long and in parts very painful; but that is what we are in for. Nothing less. He meant what He said.fn

How blessed we are that C. S. Lewis sought to understand, to live, and to teach what the Savior taught: "If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me. For whosoever will save his life shall lose it: but whosoever will lose his life for my sake, the same shall save it" (Luke 9:23-24). While Professor Lewis believed that "self-renunciation is thought to be, and indeed is near the core of Christian ethics,"fn he understood that what was at the very core was Christ: "The New Testament has lots to say about self-denial, but not about self-denial as an end in itself. We are told to deny ourselves and to take up our crosses in order that we may follow Christ."fn

Daniel K Judd is associate professor of Ancient Scripture at Brigham Young University. He received his Ph.D. from BYU in counseling psychology, and is the author or editor of several publications, including Religion, Mental Health, and the Latter-day Saints.

Notes

1999 ﻿
