Andrew C. Skinner, Robert L. Millet, C. S. Lewis, the Man and His Message: An LDS Perspective ( 1999)

5

C. S. LEWIS ON FAMILY AND SELF-DECEPTION

Terrance D. Olson

THE DOCTRINE OF SELF-DECEPTION is both illustrated and assumed in many scriptural incidents and is illustrated implicitly in the works of C. S. Lewis. I will identify two examples from Lewis's work where certain kinds of human troubles qualify as incidents of self-deception. I will analyze these incidents with scriptural comments on the meaning of self-deception. My purpose is to show the harmony between Lewis's work and the features of self-deception described in scriptural examples. The examples I present from Lewis and the scriptures also imply how destructive self-deceptions are to family relationships and verily to our eternal salvation. I also will summarize how to escape self-deception and the destructive consequences that attend it.

Specifically, I will address four issues: what it means to be self-deceived, how those who are self-deceived experience life, how self-deception is presented in the scriptures, and the impact of self-deception on family relationships.

WHAT IT MEANS TO BE SELF-DECEIVED

In the seventh volume of C. S. Lewis's Chronicles of Narnia, the heroine, Lucy, is on her way to meet Aslan, the Lion (the Savior figure in the allegory), because the forces of evil have been conquered. But she is concerned about the predicament of a band of Dwarfs. During the last battle, the Dwarfs had been only for themselves. Lucy convinces her friends to come and see the Dwarfs. She finds them on a beautiful day in the midst of sunshine, but in a very odd condition. As Lucy and her group approach, they see that the Dwarfs are sitting in a very close circle with their eyes closed tight. They take no notice of Lucy's approach until she and King Tirian are quite near. Then, in the words of Lewis, "the Dwarfs all cocked their heads as if they couldn't see anyone but were listening hard and trying to guess by the sound what was happening.

" `Look out!' said one of them in a surly voice. `Mind where you're going. Don't walk into our faces!' " When asked if they are blind, the Dwarfs respond, " `Ain't we all blind in the dark!. . . . How in the name of Humbug can I see what ain't there? And how can I see you any more than you can see me in this pitch darkness?' "fn

It turns out that the Dwarfs think they are in a pitch-black, smelly stable. Lucy tries to get them to open their eyes. They insist they are not blind, but just in the dark, and that Lucy's entreaties to get them to see they are in the midst of flowers and trees on a bright day are just attempts to trick them and make fools out of them. Even an offered flower is rejected as filthy stable litter.

Then, in a bright flash, Aslan appears. After the Lion greets and praises his loyal subjects, Lucy approaches him:

" `Aslan,' said Lucy through her tears, `could you—will you—do something for these poor Dwarfs?'

" `Dearest,' said, Aslan, `I will show you both what I can, and what I cannot, do.' He came close to the Dwarfs and gave a long growl: low, but it set all the air shaking. But the Dwarfs said to one another, `Hear that? That's the gang at the other end of the Stable. Trying to frighten us. They do it with a machine of some kind. Don't take any notice. They won't take us in again!'

"Aslan raised his head and shook his mane. Instantly a glorious feast appeared on the Dwarfs' knees: pies and tongues and pigeons and trifles and ices. . . . But it wasn't much use. They began eating and drinking greedily enough, but it was clear that they couldn't taste it properly. They thought they were eating and drinking only the sort of things you might find in a Stable.

". . . But very soon every Dwarf began suspecting that every other Dwarf had found something nicer than he had, and they started grabbing and snatching, and went on to quarreling, till in a few minutes there was a free fight and all the good food was smeared on their faces and clothes or trodden under foot."

At the end of it all, the Dwarfs comforted each other with this telling testimony: "Well, at any rate there's no Humbug here. We haven't let anyone take us in. The Dwarfs are for the Dwarfs."

And what is Aslan's response to all this? He says, "You see, . . . They will not let us help them. They have chosen cunning instead of belief. Their prison is only in their own minds, yet they are in that prison; and so afraid of being taken in that they cannot be taken out."fn

HOW THOSE WHO ARE SELF-DECEIVED EXPERIENCE LIFE

The significant meaning of the Dwarfs' condition includes two truths. First, they are absolutely in the dark and absolutely deceived about where they are—about reality itself. Second, their blindness is of their own making. They are not imprisoned by anything other than their refusal to see; their refusal to open their eyes. Attempts to offer them knowledge, facts, evidence are dismissed. Attempts to entreat them with love are discounted and perverted in meaning. This is what it means to be self-deceived, according to C. S. Lewis.

Have you ever had a friend who seeks help from you with a problem and then dismisses your suggestions as unrealistic? As he explains the problem to you, you see a simple and obvious solution and offer it. The friend looks at you as if you are from another planet (perhaps even Narnia), and says, "Haven't you been listening to me? That won't work because. . ." You then retreat, briefly, but another idea comes to mind which you think is a viable solution and so you make that suggestion. By now the friend regards you incredulously and, shaking his or her head, mutters, "You just don't understand what I am up against or how deep the problem goes." At this point perhaps you retreat, with a faint realization that your friend is more interested in being trapped in a problem than in acting on simple starting points or solutions to that problem. His behavior is one symptom of being self-deceived about the meaning of a situation, circumstance or experience he is in the midst of. It is as if he has been mentored by the Dwarfs.

HOW SELF-DECEPTION IS PRESENTED IN THE SCRIPTURES

The most explicit scriptural presentation of the idea of self-deception is in 1 Jn. 1. John begins by bearing witness of the Father and the Son and invites all to fellowship with the Lord. Then John pleads for obedience to the gospel, with an explanation of what disobedience produces. Verses four through ten are as follows:

And these things write we unto you, that your joy may be full.

This then is the message which we have heard of him, and declare unto you, that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all.

If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth:

But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin.

If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us.

If we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

If we say that we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us.

This is a remarkable passage in that it describes the condition of sinners when claiming they are sinless. When people are walking in darkness, the truth is not in them; they do not the truth (emphasis mine). The only escape from this condition is to walk in the light, to follow the Savior. The doctrine here seems to be that in our disobedience we suffer a self-inflicted blindness to the truths we are rejecting. It is an illustration of the admonition, "What doth it profit a man if a gift is bestowed upon him and he receive not the gift?" (D&C 88:33). In fact, such a man doesn't rejoice in the gift nor does he have any appreciation for the giver of the gift. When that gift is salvation, and the giver of the gift is the Savior, then he who rejects the gift indeed walks in darkness.

C. S. Lewis illustrates the doctrine of self-deception with the situation of the Dwarfs. They refuse to receive the gift, even when it is offered by the ultimate gift-giver. They are blind and don't know that they are. They have produced their own blindness and don't know they are the cause of their lack of vision. They are so self-deceived that they don't even believe the problem is that they are blind to the truth. The truth, in short, is not in them. They behave and live exactly as those do who "do not the truth." In this self-inflicted condition, they cannot find the truth, no matter how "deeply" they might try to look to find it. They only see the truth falsely.

This scriptural view of self-deception so well illustrated by Lewis challenges a popular notion of what is going on with someone who is "in sin." We often hear it said of someone who is engaged in wrongdoing, "deep down, he knows what is right." According to the doctrine of self-deception, no he doesn't. According to John, if we profess Christ while resisting the light of Christ, "the truth is not in us" (1 Jn. 1:8). We are not "doing" the truth (v. 6). If we were doing the truth, or if the truth were in us, we would not be deceived. This is evidently because it is precisely the truth, the light and knowledge we have, which we, in our self-deception, are refusing to acknowledge.

James supports this interpretation in his call to us to "receive with meekness the engrafted word, which is able to save [our] souls" (James 1:21). He then issues a warning and explains the consequences of ignoring it: "But be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves. For if any be a hearer of the word, and not a doer, he is like unto a man beholding his natural face in a glass: for he beholdeth himself, and goeth his way, and straightway forgetteth what manner of man he was. . . . If any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but deceiveth his own heart, this man's religion is vain" (vv. 22-26).

A classic mortal example of being self-deceived (as John describes it) is Korihor, that Book of Mormon walker in darkness who ridiculed the Savior and the Atonement; who rejected the greatest gift-giver and the greatest gift. Korihor's condition was not just as a deceiver of the people. He was a self-deceiver. That is, he believed the lies he had been taught by Satan. He believed that the dark way offered by Satan was the way, because the truth was no longer in him. It is one thing to deceive another and supposedly know the truth. It is a more morally desperate situation to come to believe the lies you are living. As Terry Warner points out, there is a difference between telling a lie and living a lie. To live a lie is to be self-deceived.fn Korihor lived the lie he taught. He was "sincere" in his belief, but his belief was a lie; his sincerity was a self-deception.

Alma asks Korihor a question and then answers it himself. Alma testifies to Korihor about the reality of God and Christ: "But, behold, I have all things as a testimony that these things are true; and ye also have all things as a testimony unto you that they are true: and will ye deny them? Believest thou that these things are true?

"Behold, I know that thou believest, but thou art possessed with a lying spirit, and ye have put off the Spirit of God that it may have no place in you; but the devil has power over you, and he doth carry you about, working devices that he may destroy the children of God" (Alma 30:41-42).

Alma's question and answer teach an important doctrine about how we can become self-deceived. When we are possessed of a lying spirit, or that is to say when we have put off the Spirit of God, that it has no place in us, we become subject to the devil. We do help bring upon ourselves our belief in the lies. That is why our condition in sin is self-deception and not just bad perception or lack of knowledge. It is the knowledge we already have but are refusing to honor that leaves us in darkness, without truth in us, with no place for the Spirit of God in us, and where we do not the truth. If this were not the case, we could not be held accountable for our willful disobedience. In self-deception we are blind to the truth, but being self-deceived is produced in the first place by refusing to receive the greatest of all gifts from the greatest gift-giver.

After having been struck dumb in response to his insistence on a sign, Korihor writes to the chief judge, "I know that nothing save it were the power of God could bring this upon me;" then he says something that seems to contradict Alma's earlier testimony about the truth not being in Korihor. Korihor says, "And I always knew that there was a God" (Alma 30:52). But he follows this, regarding the lies Satan taught him, with the admission that "I taught them because they were pleasing unto the carnal mind; and I taught them, even until I had much success, insomuch that I verily believed that they were true; and for this cause I withstood the truth, even until I have brought this great curse upon me" (Alma 30:53). So, significantly, Korihor could not see nor admit the truth of his false motives until after he had given up those motives. That is, while the truth was not in him, he could not "see the truth." And the reason why he became blind to the truth was, in his own words, because, with a desire to please the carnal mind, he "withstood the truth." This is an echo of the Dwarfs who squint their eyes tightly against the light so readily available and of the warnings of James and John regarding one's own heart and walking in darkness. This is an illustration of the meaning and condition of those who are self-deceived that is consistent with the biblical scriptures and the Lewis example presented thus far.

THE IMPACT OF SELF-DECEPTION ON FAMILY RELATIONSHIPS

Lewis illustrates this theme of self-deception extensively in his work, and nowhere does he more explicitly show the implications of self-deception on family relationships than in The Great Divorce. In that book Lewis uses the device of a bus ride from hell to heaven to illustrate how people take with them, to new surroundings, who they are. On this trip to heaven—sort of a holiday for the damnedfn—Lewis boards the bus as unaware as everyone else of its destination. After some initial observations and wandering, Lewis ends up being escorted by a spirit resident. These spirit escorts are solid, in contrast to the bus visitors, who are virtually transparent ghosts. (Incidentally, Lewis's escort is George MacDonald, complete with Scottish accent.) In a series of illustrative chapters, Lewis describes the various predicaments of the ghosts. What they have in common is no sensibility of where they are or of the fact that what they are clinging to regarding their pleasures, or their identities, or their reputations, is all foolishness in the face of what heaven can offer. It seems that the fate of the ghosts is in their own hands, yet they know it not. They take the temporary world they have lived in, which is actually hell, and make it reality. To do that is to eclipse the only true reality: heaven. The examples Lewis presents are prototypes of the condition of the Dwarfs in Narnia and of the scriptural descriptions of self-deception offered in James, John, and Alma. Typically, these deceptions include an inordinate concern for self and of being wrapped up in self-preservation.

For example, a woman is incredulous to discover that her deceased husband, Robert, is in heaven. She presumes that the solid spirit escorting her is going to have her see him, though such an idea has not been proposed in any way by her escort. After a diatribe of complaints of how pitiful and selfish Robert was on earth, the ghost, who has been conducting a "dialogue of one," asking and answering her own questions and then offering commentary after commentary on the pitifulness of her husband, abruptly announces: "I believe I have changed my mind. I'll make them a fair offer. . . . I will not meet him, if it means just meeting him and no more. But if I'm given a free hand I'll take charge of him again. I will take up my burden once more. But I must have a free hand. . . . He's not fit to be on his own. Put me in charge of him. He wants firm handling. . . . I was only beginning [with him on earth]. . . . There's lots, lots, lots of things I still want to do with him. . . . I'm so miserable. I must have someone to—to do things to."fn

At the heart of self-deception then is a view of others that renders them as things to be done unto. As more than one author has pointed out, we go astray when we begin to love things and use people instead of love people and use things. To love someone is to give up trying to use that person. To be united in a marriage relationship or to offer children wisdom and example requires love. It requires the self-forgetful love demonstrated by the Savior and called for by the prophets, and illustrated in simple ways by C. S. Lewis.

Self-deception seems to be characterized by self-absorption, self-concern, self-pity, self-aggrandizement, self-centeredness. It is the pursuit of self as a substitute for bowing to the truth about ourselves that seems a constant feature of self-deception. And it is with this perverted focus on something called self that we blind ourselves to the solution to our troubles.

Such oblivion to the way things really are may look like personality, or even just mistaken perception. But it is more likely to be symptoms of blindness born of resistance to the light. It is more likely to be the concoctions of a spirit whose way of being in the world is to resist the giving and receiving of love. When we misrepresent the way "things really are," we are ruining relationships. It is likely a condition of the spirit, a self-deceptive condition produced by one's refusal to love others as ourselves. At least that description would be consistent with Lewis's presentation of a group of people living in ways that put them in hell, and, we assume, accountably so.

What do we bring to our loved ones when we are self-deceived? Blindness, as that of the Dwarfs; resentment, as that of Korihor; self-centeredness, as that of the ghost demanding the return of her husband for more tinkering that only she can provide; and alienation and resentment over how we are treated, and feelings of not being appreciated, and even a sense of cynicism or despair. To be self-deceived is to be miserable. In the words of the philosopher Berkeley, "We raise the dust and then complain we can not see."

Whether we are Dwarfs who squint against the light, or spouses who busily carry out distorted missions with others, or are among those who qualify for the criticisms and warnings of James and John about doing not the truth, how are we to escape the blindness of self-deception? If it involves being blind to the truth and being blind to the fact that we are the source of our blindness—if, in other words, the truth is not in us—how are we to find it, or find our way to it?

Features of Being Self-Deceived

• Being blind to the truth

• Being the source of that blindness

• Being blind to being the source of that blindness

• Deceiving one's own heart

• The truth is not in us

A STARTING POINT FOR ESCAPING SELF-DECEPTION

In The Great Divorce, Lewis offers hope in the form of losing self, that we may find ourselves. That includes giving up the idea that we have reputations, images, or embarrassments to nurture. It includes committing ourselves to the well-being of the people we love, rather than using them for our selfish purposes. One ghost, who is horrified at his own nakedness, is self-deceived about things eternal. The ghost sobs, "I wish I'd never been born, . . . What are we born for?" The answer offered by the spirit is "For infinite happiness,. . . you can step out into it at any moment."fn The ghost's response is classic self-deception. "But . . ." and then, "I can't, I just can't."fn These refusals are followed by rationalizations and excuses and justifications so typical of those who are self-deceived.

There is no question that without faith, without honoring whatever light we have been given, we do not see the infinite happiness, the simple possibilities, the realities of what life is like when we live in the truth, in the light, as compared to what life is like for us when we cling to the dark. But if we take the call of James and John seriously, and if we see the call of the solid spirits in The Great Divorce, we can escape self-deception if we will: confess our sins (see 1 Jn. 1:9), receive the word in meekness (see James 1:21), be doers of the word (see James 1:22), walk in the light (see 1 Jn. 1:7), and obey the commandments (see 1 Jn. 2:3). Specifically, John affirms that while our self-deception is an expression of walking in darkness—virtually in hell—alternatively, when "we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin" (1 Jn. 1:7).

Escaping Self-Deception

• Confess our sins

• Receive the word in meekness

• Be doers of that word

• Walk in the light

• Obey the commandments

Thus, escaping self-deception, we would truly be opening our eyes; we would abandon being manipulative of spouses; we would become self-forgetful; we would quit fighting against God and would receive in our hearts the assurance that the reality of the light is preferable to the burdens of darkness. It is the doctrine of James, John, and Alma; is illustrated in Narnia, in The Great Divorce, and in our own everyday experience. With so many witnesses, scripturally and practically, we are left without excuse. And what a blessing it is that we have the ability to give up our excuses, our blindness, and our self-deceptions!

Terrance D. Olson is a professor of Family Science in the School of Family Studies at Brigham Young University. He received his Ph.D. from Florida State University, and is the author of several important publications on the family.

Notes

1999 ﻿
