Andrew C. Skinner, Robert L. Millet, C. S. Lewis, the Man and His Message: An LDS Perspective ( 1999)

6

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF TEMPTATION IN PERELANDRA AND PARADISE LOST: What Lewis Learned from Milton

John S. Tanner

DURING THE LATE 1930s AND EARLY '40s C. S. Lewis composed a space trilogy set on Mars, Venus, and Earth, respectively. In the middle novel, Perelandra, he imagines a new myth of the Fall, only this time there is no Fall. Instead, through their obedience, Lewis's primal pair achieve for themselves and their posterity a more glorious, exalted mode of life than the fallen existence occasioned by "Man's first disobedience, and the fruit / Of that forbidden tree, whose mortal taste / Brought death into the world, and all our woe."fn Perelandra thus works out an unfulfilled possibility hinted in Paradise Lost, which glimpses of what might have happened had our first parents been obedient. "If ye be found obedient, and retain / Unalterably firm his [God's] love entire,"fn an angel tells Milton's Adam and Eve:

Your bodies may at last turn all to spirit, Improv'd by tract of time, and wing'd ascend Ethereal, as we, or may at choice Here [i.e., in Eden] or in Heav'nly Paradises dwell.fn

Similarly Tor, Lewis's Adam-figure, explains that, having not fallen, he and his regal consort, Tinidril, will "fill this world with our children," "know this world to the centre," "make the nobler beasts so wise that they will . . . speak," and understand the "Deep Heaven" until, at last, "our bodies will be changed, but not all changed. We shall be as the eldila [angels], but not all as eldila. And so will all our sons and daughters."fn

Perelandra is an ingenious novel. Its most arresting feature lies in the subtle way it re-imagines the Temptation. Lewis's Eve-figure is a magnificent green lady who lives on floating islands on the planet Venus, a beautifully fluid world called Perelandra. Lewis devotes most of the novel to the Lady's temptation, tracing her growth from a condition of immediacy to self-reflectiveness. Her maturation is modulated through an intricate series of psychological stages initiated by dialogues with two beings from earth: Ransom, a humanist professor like Lewis; and Weston (later called the Unman), an evil physicist whose body becomes demonically possessed. These figures become the Lady's good and bad angels. Ransom attempts to defend the Lady, the Unman to tempt her. The Lady resists temptation, but is made "older" in the process and is worn down by it. In the end she must be rescued, which Ransom does by destroying the Unman.

The novel imposes a delicate and difficult challenge for Lewis. He must accommodate the Lady's increasing consciousness of evil, which seems to move her ever closer to transgression, without compromising her innocence. This is no easy task, but Lewis carries it off brilliantly. Lewis's achievement may be appreciated by situating his novel in the critical controversy over the way Milton motivates the Fall. Placing Perelandra in the context of this critical crux in Paradise Lost highlights the novel's theological and artistic ingenuity. It also reminds us that in Perelandra Lewis works within a literary and philosophical tradition stretching from early church fathers like Augustine to contemporary Christian philosophers like Paul Ricouer.fn In this paper I will show how Lewis develops sophisticated solutions to the problem of how a sinless being could be tempted and fall without having been created evil—a problem that perplexed not only Milton and Lewis but also Christian thinkers through the ages.

The crux in Milton criticism that illuminates Perelandra is known as the problem of a fall before the Fall. This controversy heated up shortly after Lewis published, in rapid succession, A Preface to Paradise Lost and Perelandra. In the mid-forties, critics began to take Milton to task for the way he makes the Fall seem plausible by inventing a series of preliminary events foreshadowing it—such as when, Narcissuslike, Eve admires her beauty in a pool;fn or when she dreams about eating the forbidden fruit;fn or when she insists on working alone as a way of asserting her independence.fn There was no way for Milton of making the transition from sinlessness to sin perfectly intelligible, according to E. M. W. Tillyard: "Under the terms of the story these two realms must be separated by a definite and dimensionless frontier: there cannot be a no-man's-land between." Therefore Milton "resorts to some faking. . . . He anticipates the fall by attributing to Eve and Adam feelings which, though nominally felt in the state of innocence, are not actually compatible with it."fn Milton's critics charge that to make the transgression seem credible, the poet surreptitiously introduces fallen motives into Adam and Eve before they fall. As A. J. A. Waldock observes in a book aimed largely against Lewis's reading of Milton, "It is obvious that Adam and Eve must already have contracted human weakness before they can start on a course of conduct that leads to their fall: to put it another way, they must already be fallen (technically) before they can begin to fall."fn Such remarks fueled a critical controversy over the poem's account of prelapsarian psychology. For some, the literary task of rendering the Temptation psychologically plausible seemed insuperable. Thus writes Millicent Bell:

The temptation, [is] an event which could not understandably occur before the Fall, an event which must actually be explained by motivations characteristic of men as we find them now—ambition, curiosity, vanity, gluttony or lust. It is a bridge built of the material of fallen human nature, that is, from the substance of only one bank of the chasm, the one nearer us. From the farther bank, the anterior condition of unfallen perfection, the bridge takes nothing at all. For there is nothing in the Paradisal state that can furnish cause for man's lapse from perfection.fn

Indeed? I believe—and have argued at length elsewhere—that the way Milton motivates the Fall largely escapes his critics' censure of faking.fn The same is true, a fortiori, for Lewis, whose intricate account of temptation in Perelandra surely supplies plausible causes which could lead to a lapse but which are compatible with perfection, as well as human "motivations characteristic of men as we find them now" which are precarious but blameless. Indeed, I suspect that it was from Milton that Lewis learned how to think about unfallen motives for evil and indeterminate causes of sin. By this, I do not intend to imply that in Perelandra Lewis deliberately sets out to respond to the critical controversy over a fall before the Fall in Paradise Lost, a skirmish in the Milton controversy that largely postdates the publication of both Perelandra and A Preface to Paradise Lost.fn But I do wish to argue that Lewis's meticulous depiction of the Green Lady's growth is deeply informed by Milton's imagination of Eden. Perelandra both adapts and refines what he learned from Paradise Lost about the psychology of temptation in an innocent mind and, in the process, addresses the very questions that would soon preoccupy Milton criticism.

To support these assertions, let me turn again to the novel and focus on three Miltonic elements in Perelandra: (1) fallen language, (2) the "alongside" or self-reflection, and (3) the "might be." Other commentators have identified many more similarities between Perelandra and Paradise Lost than these, but none has focused in detail on how Milton helped Lewis conceptualize an innocent psychology of temptation, which I regard as the principle Miltonic legacy in the novel, as well as its preeminent literary achievement.fn

How does an innocent being, having no experience of evil, understand the fallen realities expressed in language about evil? This is a dimension of unfallen consciousness that intrigued both Milton and Lewis. It is a problem that is implicit but inconspicuous in Genesis, explicit but unobtrusive in Paradise Lost, and central in Perelandra.

In the Bible, God couples the prohibition with a threat. He warns Adam, "Thou shalt not eat of [the fruit]: for in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die" (Gen. 2:17). But the punishment alludes to a reality beyond Adam's ken. For what can "die" mean to Adam in a garden where there is no death? The dread voice of prohibition introduces an alien word, which presumably communicates the notion of something fearful, without imparting the full understanding of death as a concrete reality. It raises the specter of a fearful future, which momentarily disturbs Adam's and Eve's blissful existence and points to dreadful but unimaginable potentialities. The same could be said of the name of the "tree of the knowledge of good and evil." Deposited in the name is a distinction between good and evil whose full significance awaits the transgression.

Milton highlights these linguistic dilemmas implicit in Genesis by greatly multiplying the number both of the fallen realities brought to the attention of unfallen Adam and Eve and of the voices which warn them. Milton's Adam and Eve hear not only about death but also about a rebellious angel's pride and envy and hate; about a war in heaven; and about their own potential to disobey. And their garden is full of warning voices of God and an angel. All this knowledge, however, remains somehow distant and alien to unfallen mankind. Abstract knowledge of evil remains enveloped by Adam and Eve's existential ignorance of its reality.

Milton makes this point memorably when his Adam attempts to explain the prohibition to Eve. Repeating God's interdiction, Adam tells Eve that they may eat

of all the Trees In Paradise that bear delicious fruit So various, not to taste that only Tree Of Knowledge, planted by the Tree of Life, So near grows Death to Life, whate'er Death is, Some dreadful thing no doubt.fn

Adam's aside, "whate'er death is," speaks volumes. The aside reminds us, as readers, that unfallen beings may wield words of woe which they do not fully grasp. A Milton critic illustrates Adam's predicament as follows: "To understand the full impact of what God has imposed upon Adam, we might render the situation in the following terms: Do not touch the tip of-your left ear with your right forefinger, or else you will squibbledydib. Our response, like Adam's, would appropriately be, `whate'er squibbledydib is, / Some dreadful thing no doubt.'"fn

Similarly, Kierkegaard observes that "death" does not have concrete meaning for Adam, but merely imparts a "notion of the terrifying." Thus unfallen Adam and Eve employ a lexicon that they cannot fully fathom. To be sure, they can speak of death and of a tree whose name figures forth the knowledge of good and evil. Yet, "from the fact that Adam was able to talk [about death and evil], it does not follow in a deeper sense he was able to understand what he said."fn The full significance of these realities are not available to Adam and Eve until after they fall.

Lewis, too, is fascinated by the problem of how an innocent being apprehends the alien reality of evil. Indeed, this is a major motif in Perelandra, much more so than in Paradise Lost. The Green Lady is constantly puzzled by words which refer to concepts outside of her experience. Indeed, one of the charms of the trilogy is watching Ransom, who like Lewis has a gift for metaphor, translate the fallen condition into language that unfallen beings on Mars and Venus can understand. My favorite metaphors are "bent" to describe evil and "old" to describe how the Lady feels every time she gains new understanding.

Ransom must constantly respond to language questions from the Lady such as these: "What is peace?" "What is home?" "What is alone?" and "What is dead?"fn After Ransom explains death the woman says, "I wonder if you were sent here to teach us death."fn Each new word that Ransom explains widens her world and makes the Lady older.

It also, ironically, prepares her for temptation. As soon as Weston (or the Unman) arrives on Perelandra, he exploits the Lady's growing knowledge to fix her mind on the alien possibility of transgression. Weston hammers on strange new words, filling them with half-apprehended content: "some meaning for the words Death and Sorrow—though what kind of meaning Ransom could not even guess—was apparently being created in [the Lady's] mind by mere repetition."fn Thus, like Milton's Adam and Eve, the Green Lady comes to both know yet not fully understand fallen realities. These realities portend strange possibilities, which suffuse Lewis's paradise, like Milton's Eden, with anxiety and seem to move the protagonists ever closer to the brink. As the narrator observes when Ransom skins his knee, "This led him to try to explain to her what was meant by pain, which only made her more anxious to try the experiment."fn

This remark echoes a deep irony about the psychology of temptation that Lewis may have learned from Milton. In Paradise Lost, God sends his archangel Raphael to warn Adam and Eve of their danger. But the more Adam and Eve are warned, the more concrete sin becomes and, consequently, the nearer (rather than further) they seem to danger. Thus Raphael functions much like Ransom: both unwittingly nudge innocent beings away from blissful ignorance by warning them about sin, which becomes an increasingly concrete and alluring possibility the more it is forbidden. This irony may remind LDS readers of Elder Boyd K. Packer's counsel against going into explicit details about what not to do when one teaches the law of chastity. As Elder Packer observes, telling the child not to go into the pantry and put a bean up his nose increases, rather than decreases, the likelihood of such behavior.fn Likewise, by the time Raphael leaves Eden, paradise brims with anxiety. Food, knowledge, love, and freedom have all been singled out as sites of possible danger, whereas before that they were simply aspects of immediate pleasure in Eden. Similarly, by the time the Unman arrives on Perelandra, the Lady is more susceptible to temptation than she was previously, owing, ironically, to the admonition against sin Ransom had given her.

THE ALONGSIDE: "WHAT THERE THOU SEEST, FAIRE CREATURE, IS THYSELF"

When Ransom first meets the Green Lady, she abides in a state of blissful immediacy. Her face is human, but "unearthly, despite the full humanity of every feature."fn Ransom inaugurates her into a more human mode of existence by introducing her to what Lewis calls the "alongside."fn This wonderful metaphor for self-consciousness describes our fundamental capacity for stepping outside ourselves and "looking before and after,"fn which perhaps best defines what separates human from animal consciousness. In their first extended dialogue, Ransom says something that causes the Lady to think in an entirely new way—self-reflectively. "I see that you come from a wise world," says the Lady to Ransom, "if this is wise. I have never done it before—stepping out of life into the Alongside and looking at oneself living as if one were not alive. Do they all do that in your world, Piebald?"fn Ransom thus sets the Lady's foot on the path of self-reflectiveness. It is a path that can lead to much mischief—such as narcissism, hypocrisy, and pride. Yet it is also an enabling condition of freedom. This paradox is developed by both Milton and Lewis.

Milton describes a similar movement from immediacy to self-reflection for Adam and, more ominously, for Eve. Adam's self-reflection is described largely in terms of a growing sense of his own condition and how it compares to the rest of creation. When he awakes from creation he says, "I move and live, / And feel that I am happier than I know."fn Subsequently, he comes to know his blessed condition. At the same time, he also comes to use his capacity for ratiocination to justify disobedience.fn

A growing sense of the "alongside" is an even more conspicuous element in Eve's maturation. In an episode that surely influenced Lewis's characterization of the Green Lady, Milton descibes Eve's first moments of self-consciousness in terms that recall the myth of Narcissus. Eve sees her reflected image in a pool, admires her beauty, and is tempted to prefer her "wat'ry image" over the companionship of Adam.fn This episode recalls the mirror scene in Perelandra in which the Unman exploits the Lady's newfound ability to enjoy the "alongside" to tempt her to vanity. He offers her a mirror, and tempts her to indulge in self-love: "We call this thing a mirror. A man can love himself, and be together with himself. That is what it means to be a man or a woman—to walk alongside oneself as if one were a second person and to delight in one's own beauty. Mirrors are made to teach us this art."fn

The mirror temptation is followed by the temptation to indulge in a "dramatic conception of the self"fn—both episodes enact temptations made possible by our capacity for the "alongside." The Unman knows that if he can encourage theatrical self-regard, he might be able to induce the Lady to think of herself as a tragic figure. This, in turn, could be used to get her to disobey Maledil (God) out of a false sense of self-sacrifice, or out of an inflated view of injured merit. And in fact the Lady begins to indulge in precisely such theatrical self-regard. She begins to relate to her own emotions histrionically; she begins to assume, "however slight," the hint "of a role." Like Eve at the pool, the Green Lady is not fallen, but her characterization is touched by the tincture of self-regard which has the potential of turning into vanity.

To engage "alongside" self-consciousness, whether by means of a mirror or by indulging in role playing, is not per se evil. The Lady is not sinfully vain or hypocritical any more than is Milton's Eve. It is no sin to admire beauty or to be curious about one's appearance. But these are modes of self-reflection that can be exploited for baleful ends. We fear this outcome in Perelandra, and see it fulfilled in Paradise Lost when Milton's Eve at last succumbs to sin. At this moment she acquires the sort of theatrical self that the Unman was trying to induce in the Lady. Eve's first speech after her transgression contains a newly theatrical mode of self-reflection: "But unto Adam, in what sort / Shall I appear?"fn For the first time her self-reflection is about masks and specifically is born of a desire to manipulate Adam's reactions. Similarly, Eve's fallen speeches are highly theatrical; the narrator signaled this by introducing them using the language of stage directions like "prologue," "apology," and "prompt."fn Furthermore, Eve conceives herself and Adam as noble victims caught up in a fateful tragedy—very much the way the Unman wanted the Green Lady to think of herself. In short, fallen Eve becomes a hypocrite—a word that etymologically derives from the notion of an actor's mask. In so presenting Eve, Milton reveals sinful possibilities of "the alongside," possibilities that Lewis recognizes pose a clear danger to the Lady, even though they define an aspect of human consciousness that separates rational beings from the beasts.

THE MIGHT BE: "EVIL INTO THE MIND. . . UNAPPROV'D"

The "alongside" serves as a metaphor for self-reflection. Related to this is the novel's metaphor for freedom: the "might be." Ransom inaugurates the Lady's consciousness of her own freedom by teaching her that she has a choice whether or not to obey Maledil's prohibition not to sleep on fixed land. To which she says: "When will this end? . . . . I have grown so old in these last few hours that all my life before seems only like the stem of a tree, and now I am like the branches shooting out in every direction. They are getting so wide apart that I can hardly bear it. . . . To have learned that I walk from good to good with my own feet."fn

Subsequently, the Unman teaches the Lady to nurture thoughts of her own freedom, for God "has not forbidden you to think about dwelling on the Fixed Land." In fact, he continues, perhaps God has forbidden one thing "so that you may have a Might Be to think about." This expands the Lady's world even wider: "This is more than I ever thought of. The other [i.e., Ransom] . . . has already told me things which made me feel like a tree whose branches were growing wider and wider apart. But this goes beyond all. Stepping out of what is into what might be and talking and making things out there . . . alongside the world. I will ask the King what he thinks of it.fn

As the temptation progresses, the "might be" looms larger and larger in the Lady's imagination, to the point that Lewis says she begins to "fondle the idea of disobedience."fn She is not yet (or ever) fallen, Lewis insists, but certainly she is teetering on the brink, which deeply worries Ransom: "What made him feel sure that the dangerous element was growing [in the Lady] was her progressive disregard of the plain intellectual bones of the problem. It became harder to recall her mind to the data—a command from Maledil. . . . She was still in her innocence. No evil intention had been formed in her mind. But if the will was uncorrupted, half her imagination was already filled with bright, poisonous shapes."fn

Lewis's conception of the "might be" is surely drawn from Milton's portrait of Eve, most notably from her anxiety dream. In a demonically inspired dream, Eve imagines a story of what might be if she violates the taboo.fn It is a thrilling fantasy, but also one of chilling horror to Eve. And the dream leads to something like remorse, as Eve sheds a tear from each eye because she "fear'd to have offended."fn Yet what she feels cannot, technically, be remorse because she has not sinned. Thus Adam assures her that "evil into the mind of God or Man / May come and go, so unapprov'd, and leave / No spot of blame behind."fn This passage draws on the same distinction between the imagination and the will that Lewis exploits above: Even though the Lady's "imagination was already filled with bright, poisonous shapes," she was still innocent because "her will was uncorrupted"; "no evil intention had been formed in her mind."fn

Milton's Eve, like Lewis's Lady, is fascinated by the seductive allure of the taboo—by the "might be." As her tempter says in the dream, the fruit is "Sweet of thyself, but much more sweet thus cropt, / Forbidd'n here."fn Eve experiences the same fascination with the forbidden in the actual temptation. Nonetheless, we also are told that she remains "yet sinless" through it all.fn Likewise, Lewis says of the Green Lady just before Ransom resolves that "this can't go on" and decides to rescue her by force, "Up to this point the Lady had repelled her assailant. She was shaken and weary, and there were some stains perhaps in her imagination, but she had stood."fn

Lewis then remarks that the events had cast Ransom beyond anything he knew from the Bible: "In this respect the story already differed from anything that [Ransom] certainly knew about the mother of our own race. He did not know whether Eve had resisted at all, or if so, for how long." Nor did he know if he should attempt to stop the temptation by force: this, too, "was a problem to which the terrestrial Fall offered no clue."fn Ransom was in the dark about these matters. But Lewis assuredly was not. He knew that the Lady's soul on the brink of her rescue—innocent yet gripped by growing anxiety—closely resembled that of Milton's Eve, just as he knew from Milton something of the psychology of temptation that led the Lady to this predicament. Likewise, Lewis doubtless knew that Milton adumbrated how the story might have been different had Adam and Eve not fallen. He knew these things because he was a student not only of the Bible but of Paradise Lost, having just published a book-length commentary on Milton's great epic retelling of the Fall. Clearly Lewis adapted Milton to compose his own version of the Temptation, which he called Perelandra. He might, however, in tribute to Milton have added a subtitle: "Paradise Not Lost," or "Paradise Retained."fn

John S. Tanner is a professor and chair of the Department of English at Brigham Young University. A former vice president of the university, he is the author of numerous publications, and a well-recognized scholar on the life and thought of John Milton.

Notes

1999 ﻿
