Andrew C. Skinner, Robert L. Millet, C. S. Lewis, the Man and His Message: An LDS Perspective ( 1999)

7

C. S. LEWIS AND THE ROMANTIC DECADE

Paul E. Kerry

I WANT YOU TO FACE CERTAIN questions that Lewis tried to answer in his creative writing up until the publication of The Great Divorce: A Dream (1945). In this story the protagonist has, revealingly, a dream in which he learns that heaven and hell are completely divorced. With this thesis Lewis overcomes Blake's "Marriage of Heaven and Hell" and presents us, and himself (for the protagonist does have a bit of a biography interwoven) with the Kierkegaardian "Either-Or." Indeed, he writes in the preface, "If we insist on keeping Hell (or even earth) we shall not see Heaven: if we accept Heaven, we shall not be able to retain even the smallest and most intimate souvenirs of Hell."fn The main figure in The Great Divorce has a mentor who, like Beatrice in Dante's Divine Comedy or, to a lesser extent, Gretchen in Goethe's Faust, serves to guide him to heaven. This guide is George MacDonald (1824-1905), a Scottish writer who significantly influenced Lewis with his work Phantastes (1858), a book that Lewis asserts baptized his imagination.fn MacDonald was in turn directly indebted to the Early German Romantic poet, Friedrich von Hardenburg, better known as Novalis.fn

The Great Divorce marks the end of Lewis's quest, or, more softly said, his experiment in literature to discover a third option, another way, if not to heaven, at least a bypass of hell. Do not confuse what I am saying with his fantasy literature, his children's literature, or even his sharing the Tolkeinian idea of a "subcreation,"fn or what M. H. Abrams calls a "heterocosm," the other world that literature provides. Indeed, it may be said that Lewis, with Novalis, held that "poetry is creation."fn Even a quick read through Lewis's brilliant and mature essay "An Experiment in Criticism," published in 1961, reveals that Lewis continued to hold literature as a medium to another world, an ability to enter into the world of others.fn Or, as Novalis wrote, "Poetry dissolves alien existence into one's own."fn Interestingly, the glimmers of this approach to Lewis's literary criticism already appear in his essay "The Personal Heresy: A Controversy," jointly authored with Cambridge critic E. M. W. Tillyard and published in 1939.

The third option, the way that lured Lewis in his earliest poetic work, is Romanticism. What did Romanticism mean to C. S. Lewis? In 1933 he published a book that he had dashed off in two weeks while vacationing in Ireland; it was the literary prelude to his autobiographical conversion story that he would detail twenty years later in 1955 in Surprised by Joy: The Shape of My Early Life. This exceptional and compelling personal account, written many years after his conversion, has come to dominate the way many Lewis readers understand Romanticism, that is, a longing which is in itself a kind of joy. Yet the hurriedly scribbled literary account of his conversion, written as it were in the wake of battle—The Pilgrim's Regress—shines a brighter light on Lewis's intellectual preoccupations during the early 1930s than does any other book. Telling is the oft-forgotten subtitle, "An Allegorical Apology for Christianity, Reason and Romanticism." As to allegory, Lewis was keenly interested in it, himself an admirer of Bunyan's famed The Pilgrim's Progress, upon which Lewis modeled his own story. Furthermore, at the time he was writing The Pilgrim's Regress he was in the midst of completing an important academic book on the Middle Ages, The Allegory of Love, published just three years later in 1936. Moreover, in 1938 Lewis would publish the first installment of his semi-allegorical science fiction trilogy, Out of the Silent Planet. It is the decade of the 1930s, then, that may be named "The Romantic Decade."

The intriguing part of the subtitle, "An Allegorical Apology for Christianity, Reason and Romanticism," is the bit about Romanticism. Others felt intrigued—actually confused—so Lewis included a decade later, in the 1944 edition of the book, a preface expressing his apologies for using the term and another twelve pages trying to define exactly what he meant by it. Such difficulty with a concept was a rarity for Lewis, whose later career reflects a tremendous sensitivity and exactness with words and concepts, as evidenced in his Studies in Words (1960), a book published after he had become the Professor of Renaissance and Medieval Literature at Cambridge University.

Making matters more complicated, two years before the explanatory 1944 edition of The Pilgrim's Regress Lewis had written his A Preface to Paradise Lost, in which conventional Romanticism, as it was understood at the time, receives somewhat of a black eye. Lewis writes of romantic primitivismfn and the rebellion and pride of the romantic age,fn and he impugns romantic manipulation of emotions as against true poetic sincerity.fn Nevertheless, he defends certain romantic literary conventions against Eliot's "mud on rubberoid" approach.fn

But the preface to the 1944 edition of The Pilgrim's Regress features Lewis's most extended treatment of what he means by Romanticism. And, in typical Lewis fashion, he begins by telling us what Romanticism does not mean to him:

Rather, for Lewis, Romanticism is what the German Romantics called—and Lewis explicitly uses the German word—Sehnsucht, a special kind of longing. In a 1950 preface to a verse story he wrote in 1926 called "Dymer," Lewis describes it thus: "From at least the age of six romantic longing—Sehnsucht—had played an unusually central part in my experience. Such longing is in itself the very reverse of wishful thinking: it is more like thoughtful wishing."fn As a youth, Lewis read Maeterlinck, Yeats, and Goethe, all poets of the Romantic Age. He knew his Wordsworth and Coleridge (the expositors of English Romanticism since their publication of Lyrical Ballads in 1798) and wrote a poem defending them against modern criticism.fn Lewis also wrote articles rehabilitating Shelley and William Morris as Romantic poets.fn

As stated earlier, Lewis loved and revered George MacDonald, and MacDonald was influenced by Novalis. Novalis was a member of the early German Romantic Movement active in Jena from about 1798 to 1804. He is perhaps most recognized for his development of the Blaue Blume symbol. The Blaue Blume, a precious blue flower that one may see with the eye of imagination yet never attain, occurs in Novalis's novel, Heinrich von Ofterdingen (1802); Lewis actually cites the term Blue Flower in his afterword to the third edition of The Pilgrim's Regress. It is the quintessential symbol of Sehnsucht.

Lewis's Surprised by Joy: The Shape of My Early Life (1955), a very late piece, is well written, and the narrative has but one overarching goal—to show how he came to accept that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. Although Lewis's descriptions of each step he takes towards Christianity and each station he passes through enthrall, the knowledge of What is coming inevitably, inexorably comfort and confirm the reader. Lewis may have been surprised by Joy, but the readers are not, for in this particular human drama, written retrospectively with the sure and skilled hand of an Oxford don, we know the end from the beginning. The delight in reading Surprised by Joy is akin to the challenge of putting a puzzle together after we have the picture of it in completed form on the front cover of the puzzle box. There is a certain security that every piece will fit, that every element no matter how incongruous will dovetail ultimately with the whole. Yet conversion is a very delicate process.

Surprised by Joy, then, ends at the beginning of Lewis's conscious acceptance of the Father and the Son, between 1929 and 1931. I believe we can come to understand the struggles of the conversion of Clive Staples Lewis better by exploring three narrative poems, nearly the first poetic works of Lewis's creative oeuvre, written precisely during this crucial period of Lewis's conversion. Lewis did not publish these poems during his lifetime. Fortunately they escaped the fire, and Walter Hooper, his personal secretary, was able to edit a posthumous edition of the narrative poetry in 1969. One reason why Lewis was reticent to publish these poems is revealed in A Preface to Paradise Lost. There, Lewis declares his belief that narrative poetry was no longer accessible to the modern reader.fn The modern reader, holds Lewis, waits for the immediate impact of a poem, the cute rhyme, or the clever play on words, usually within the first few stanzas. Lewis maintains that narrative poetry spreads its effects in a cumulative way and demands engaged and sustained reading.

A second reason for Lewis's reluctance to publish these works may reside in the fact that they were written during this intense period of spiritual transition and they expose a Lewis who has not yet found the mature, insightful, and encouraging voice of the radio broadcasts that would later bolster the faith of his fellow citizens during the Blitz.fn

Launcelot was written in the 1930s. In a way, this narrative poem is precisely what Lewis rejects in his later definition of Romanticism: it utilizes some rather worn cliches. It also reflects the dark side of Romanticism: King Arthur is weary and aged; the Queen is described as haggard; the knights of the Round Table, returning from an unsuccessful quest to find the grail, are retiring. These are not the halcyon days of Camelot, but the decline and long moan of the Age of Chivalry. We find Launcelot the last and most recently returned knight of the grail quest, narrating to the weeping queen he no longer loves what befell him as he sought the grail. On one occasion, in a hot and humid land, he had discovered a bed of flowers at the foot of a shrine, and there a beautiful damsel called out to him:

`Here, when the Wasted Country is no longer dry, The three best knights of Christendom shall come to lie.' Launcelot remembers often to have heard them named And guesses who is one of them: so half ashamed, He asks her, with his eyes cast down, `What knights are these?' And waits; and then lifts up his eyes again, and sees No lady there: an empty shrine, and on the grass No print of foot, where in grey dew the blackbirds pass. Then came on high a disembodied voice and gave Solitude tongue. `A grave for Bord,' it cried, `A grave for Percivale, a grave for Galahad: but not For the Knight recreant of the Lake, for Launcelot!' (Lines 205-16)fn

Disturbed, but unable to investigate, Launcelot rides further. By and by the weary knight meets a woman riding on a mule, who presents herself as The Queen of Castle Mortal. Launcelot thinks to recognize a glimmer of Morgan the Enchantress in her or perhaps Guinever but he, tired and hungry, cannot tell. She offers him lodgings for the night. They change into soft evening clothing and her servants are sent away; strong blood-red wine flows freely. Eventually, she takes him to a chapel in the manor house in which are hundreds of burning candles whose scent, mingled with the sickly sweet fragrance of flowers, begins to make Launcelot feel dizzy. Suddenly, he comes upon three coffins whose heads pass beneath arches in the wall,

She whispers him, `The three best knights of earth shall lie Here in my house'; [. . .] She laughed aloud—`A coffin for Sir Lamorake, For Tristram; in the third lies Launcelot du Lake.' He crossed himself and questioned her when these should die.

She answered, `They shall all be living when they lie Within these beds; and then—behold what will be done To all, or even to two of them, or even to one, Had I such grace.' She lifts her hand and turns a pin Set on the wall. A bright steel blade drops down within The arches, on the coffin-necks, so razor-keen That scarce a movement of the spicey dust was seen Where the edge sank. (Lines 274-89)fn

Before the poem breaks off, Lewis breaks another rule of his later definition of Romanticism, for the woman reveals to Launcelot, whose head probably feels heavier than ever, that she will do this for "endless love." So the woman suffers romantically for love and turns out to be psychotic, far worse than Werther ever would or could be.

It is weak, but it is one of Lewis's only remaining works from his short-lived but intense phase of early experimenting with Romanticism. Launcelot is supposed to long for the grail, but his vision is not sustained; we do not believe he really wants the grail. From the context, Launcelot appears to wish for a romantic encounter. In other words, he longs for carnal things. The woman, on the other hand, a typical mystery woman out of the romantic literary spare parts garage, longs for love, but in a pathological way. She wants to possess the knights even if it means murdering them. In this poetic fragment Lewis flirts with love, desperate and demented, but this does not inhabit his mature definition of Romanticism. Unrefined elements of Sehnsucht are there, and this raw form is a far cry from Lewis's later mastery of these elements.

The flip side of Romanticism fascinated the poets Tieck and E. T. A. Hoffmann and attracted the younger Lewis, who writes retrospectively of his youth: "I had already been waist-deep in Romanticism; and likely enough, at any moment, to flounder into its darker and more evil forms, slithering down the steep descent that leads from the love of strangeness to that of eccentricity and thence to that of perversity."fn Launcelot was found on the back of some Renaissance literature lecture notes, which probably saved it from Lewis's fireplace.

The next narrative poem we will examine is entitled "The Queen of Drum" and is dated, based on internal evidence, around 1933-34, thus just after Lewis's conversion. It is told in five cantos, or songs, and has five main characters, the Archbishop, the King, the General, the Chancellor, and the Queen.

The poem is motivated by the Queen's inexplicable night wanderings, the topic of debate within the upper echelons of the kingdom during a morning meeting. Arriving unexpectedly during this meeting, she challenges the other four as to whether or not they will acknowledge their own metaphorical or real wanderings by night. She chastises:

`What? Nothing yet? No answer? . . . can it be you do forget? Did the gates shut so quickly? Could you not bear One small grain back to light and upper air? Must I go down like Orpheus and retrace The interdicted ford—out of that place, Step by step, hand in hand, hale up what lies Buried in you, and teach your waking eyes To acknowledge it? I thought we had all known What spends us in the dark, and why we groan To feel the light return and the limbs ache, Even in our slumber fighting not to wake. . . I thought you, being but the husks of men All the drab day, remembered where and when The ripe ear grows—where are the golden hills It waves on, and the granaries it fills. Call it again. Dive for it. Strain your sight, Crack all your sinews, heaving up to light What's under you. Thou sunken wreck, arise!, Sea-gold, sea-gems that fill the hollow eyes Of admirals dead; out of thy smothering caves Where colour is not, up, to where the waves Turn emerald and the edge of ocean-cold Is yielding, and the fish go slashed with gold, Up!, 'gainst thy nature, up!, put on again

Colour and form and be to waking men Things visible. Heave all! Softly . . . it rears Its dripping head. What, Lords? At Last? Your ears Remember now that song, those giant words, Louder than woods that thundered, scattering birds Like leaves along the sky, and whose the throats Louder than cedars there whipt flat oats. . . Birds tumbled . . . the sky dipped. . .' The Queen's voice broke. (Lines 265-97)fn

The Archbishop attempts to reason with the Queen; however, upon her rebuttal, he admits that he too has dreamed and wandered by night and sensed this other world, that is neither heaven nor hell. But, he tells her, such things are not for mortals to know. Meanwhile, the General overthrows the King and Chancellor and locks them in a dungeon, and his thugs beat the Archbishop to death after he refuses to aid the General's putsch. The Queen escapes and runs for her life.

As she flees, she meets the Elf King, who offers her food and directions:

`Keep, keep,' he bade her, `On the midmost moss-way, Seek past the cross-way to the land you long for. Eat, eat,' he gave her of the loaves of faerie. `Eat the brave honey of bees no man enslaveth. Heed not the road upon the right—`twill lead you To heaven's height and the yoke whence I have freed you; Nor seek not to the left, that so you come not Through the world's cleft into that world I name not. Keep, keep the centre! Find the portals That chosen mortals at the world's edge enter. Isles untrampled by the warring legions Of Heaven and Darkness—the unreckoned regions That only as fable in His world appear Who seals man's ear as much as He is able. . . Many are the ancient mansions, Isles His wars defile not, Woods and land unwounding The want thereof did haunt you; Asked for long with anguish, They open now past hoping —All you craved, incarnate Come like dream to Drum-land.' (Lines 199-220)fn

The Queen recognizes, or thinks she does, a spirit in the form of a bearded man wearing a gown, who looks like the martyred Archbishop. He warns:

`Quick. The last chance. Believe not the seducing elf. Daughter, turn back, have pity upon yourself Go not to the unwintering land where they who dwell Pay each tenth year the tenth soul of their tribe to Hell. Hear not the voice that promises, but rather hear His who commands, and fear. We have all cause to fear. Oh draw not down the anger, which is far away And slow to wake. Turn homeward ere the end of day. You would not see if you looked up out of your torment That face—only the fringes of His outer garment Run to it, daughter; kiss that hem.' She answered, `No. If you are with Him pray to Him that He may go, Or pray that He may rend and tear me, But go, go hence and not be near me.' (Lines 255-68)fn

Her decision made, the lengthy narrative poem concludes enigmatically,

She has tasted elven bread And so, the story tells, she passed away Out of the world: but if she dreams to-day In fairy lands, or if she wakes in Hell, (The chance being one in ten) it doesn't tell. (Lines 290-94)fn

Lewis experiments most clearly with the question about another realm, a way between heaven and hell. He writes in Surprised by Joy about an earlier phase in his life when he thought to have found "perhaps," a third way. "Perhaps (oh joy!) there was, after all, `something else'; and (oh reassurance!) perhaps it had nothing to do with Christian Theology."fn Lewis was attracted to the notion of a "world behind, or around, the material world."fn In a poem that appears at the end of The Pilgrim's Regress, the question is put: "Therefore, among the riddles that no man has read, I put thy paradox [. . .] Where is Prince Hamlet when the curtain's down? Where fled Dreams at dawn, or colours when the light is sped?"fn

The final narrative poem we will examine is written in Old English alliterative line. Lewis appears to have left it without a title, so Walter Hooper has called this nameless poem, "The Nameless Isle." Interestingly, it does have an exact date, August 1930. A shipwrecked Sailor awakes to find himself the only survivor of his crew on an uncharted island. After regaining his senses he sees a figure in the moonlit enchanted forest where trees are taller than cathedrals. He guides the reader further:

There stood, breast high, In flowery foam, under the flame of moon, One not far off, nobly fashioned. Her beauty burned in my blood, that, as a fool, Falling before her at her feet I prayed, Dreaming of druery, and with many a dear craving Wooed the woman under the wild forest. She laughed when I told my love-business, Witch-hearted queen. `A worthy thing, Traveller, truly, my troth to plight With the sea villain that smells of tar Horny-handed, and hairy cheeked.' Then I rose wrathfully; would have ravished the witch In her empty isle, under that orb'd splendour. But she laughed louder [. . .] (Lines 99-113)fn

The Queen then calls out to the animals of the forest and nurtures them all.

Her sign was not sent to the sea-wanderer: Others answered. From the arch'd forest Beasts came baying: the bearded ape, The lion, the lamb, the long-sided, Padding panther, and the purring cat, The snake sliding, and the stepping horse, Busy beaver, and the bear jog-trot, The scurrying rat, and the squirrel leaping On the branch above. Those beasts came all. She grudged no grace to those grim ones. [. . .] I saw that she smiled, softly murmuring As if she hushed a child. How long it was These marvels stood, memory holds not —All was gone in a glance. (Lines 119-41)fn

This Queen of the Night is also the Queen of Nature. She is primal as both Ur-mistress of the woods and Ur-mother of the animal kingdom, combining images of threatening Lilith, wanton and proud, and that of nurturing Eve, the mother of all. The Queen informs the Sailor that half her island is in the power of a Wizard who turns living things into marble images. She promises the Sailor the hand of her fair daughter, who has been turned into marble, if he can rescue her. But before the Sailor departs, he is told the history of this Wizard who, like himself, was spat from the sea:

Out of the ocean in an hour of storm, Humble and homeless. At my hearth, kneeling, Sweetly he besought me to save his life, And grant him ground where he might grow his bread. All that he asked for, ill-starred I gave, Pleased with pity, that I have paid dearly, And easily won. But for each acre That my bounty gave to the beggar, soon He stole a second, till as a strong tyrant He holds in his hand one half of the land. My flute he has stolen. (Lines 191-201)fn

So the Wizard, Adamlike, dresses the Garden Isle and maintains dominion over the half of it.

The Nature Queen gives the Sailor a sword and commands him to cut off the Wizard's head. Journeying to the center of the Island in search of the Wizard, the Sailor stumbles upon a golden flute, but finds he cannot play it. He also comes across a Dwarf, who informs him that he is the last survivor of another shipwreck that occurred on the Wizard's side of the Island; all his mates were transformed into marble by the sorcerer. The Dwarf relates that although his companions are more beautiful, of fairer faces and nobler form, even proud and princely, the cost was death. The Dwarf further informs the Sailor that the other half of his shipmates met the witch, the very Queen that the Sailor met, who turned them into animals.

Eventually the Sailor and the Dwarf discover the marble statue of the daughter, and the Sailor is enchanted. The Wizard, who emerges from the high, dry moorlands, appears. The Sailor throws down the flute, which the Dwarf snatches up, and draws his sword. The Wizard announces that he is the rightful ruler of the Island and he claims that the witch has misled the Sailor. Furthermore, he claims that the maiden is truly his daughter and that he designed the flute, which was subsequently stolen by the witch-Queen, who cannot play it. The Wizard invites the sailor to drink of the "chalice of peace" and join the maiden in chaste perfection:

Eager lover, Not even the art of this old master Can wake, as you want, this woman here. Chaste, enchanted, till the change of the world, In beauty she abides. Nor breath, nor death, Touches nor troubles her. You can be turned and made Nearer to her nature; not she to yours Ever. Only your own changing, Boy, can bring you, where your bride waits you, If you are love-learned to so large a deed. You think, being a thrall, that it is thorough death To be made marble and to move no limb. [. . .]

It was your loins told you, And your belly, and your blood, and your blind servants Five, who are unfaithful. Fear had moved them. Death they were in dread of. Death let them have; For their fading and their fall is the first waking, And their night the noon, of a new master, Peace after Pleasure. [. . .] This child that I have changed with the chalice of peace, Was my own daughter. I, pondering much, Gave her the greatest of gifts I knew. Long she was in labour in a land of dread, Tangled in torments. The toils had her, And her wild mother, witch-hearted queen, Delayed her in that lair. Long since it was When the woman was my wife. (Lines 419-67)fn

The Sailor, nearly persuaded to partake of the cup, is prevented by the Dwarf, who begins to play the golden flute. This causes the Wizard to weep; he remembers happier days and the Dwarf's mates are freed from their marble incarceration and yet retain the splendid look of the Wizard's carving. And the Dwarf himself develops a regal mien. The maiden becomes human again as well. The Wizard and the others rush to the other side of the Island, where the music changes the other sailors into men, but with the awesome qualities and strengths of the beasts they once were. The Queen joins with the Wizard-Lord and they sing a song of mutual praise, each extolling the qualities of the other, flying away in ying-yang unison. Lewis's text gives them metaphoric names—the Wizard is called by the Latin "hic" meaning "he" and Queen by "illa" meaning "she." Hence, they represent all of us as we respectively view ourselves as the primal masculine and feminine, as Adam and Eve, King and Queen, Lord and Lady.

She praises his wisdom, valor, light, ability to shape forms and categorize, print, carve, and build. She calls him Tower, Sun, and Heaven. He praises her mothering, laughter, warmth, mildness, sparkling, gardening, and ability to create. He calls her Earth, Moon, and Stars.fn

They thank the Sailor who has joined them in this place, which is neither heaven nor hell, and they create a way for his return to England, a parting of waters, compared in the poem to Israel coming out of Egypt into their own country.fn

Dichotomies such as masculine-feminine, nature-culture, and abstract-concrete, flow throughout the narrative and form the central paradigm of the poem. No matter how self-enclosed we perceive one part of a pair to be, we see that a need for reconciliation exists; that our state is one of incompleteness; that we are wanderers in a strange land, on a Nameless Isle, searching and longing (Sehnsucht) for the way back home.

Novalis wrote: "In the beginning poets and priests were one; it was only in later times that they became separated. The true poet, however, has always remained a priest, just as the true priest has remained a poet. And will not the future restore this former state of affairs?"fn Lewis would certainly not have agreed he was a priest in the strict sacral sense, but he sensed his responsibility as a professor of beliefs, beliefs that had to square with his faith, study, and experience. On one level, this is at the core of Lewis's sense of personal responsibility and mission both as a scholar and a writer, as he writes about how a false understanding of Romanticism deluded him:

But every one of these impressions [about Romanticism] is wrong. The sole merit I claim for [The Pilgrim's Regress] is that it is written by one who has proved them all to be wrong. There is no room for vanity in the claim: I know them to be wrong not by intelligence but by experience, such experience as would not have come my way if my youth had been wiser, more virtuous, and less self-centred than it was. For I have myself been deluded by every one of these false answers in turn, and have contemplated each of them earnestly enough to discover the cheat. To have embraced so many false Florimels is no matter of boasting: it is fools, they say, who learn by experience. But since they do at least learn, let a fool bring his experience into the common stock that wiser men may profit by it.fn

Romanticism, or "spilled religion," a description Lewis accepted, may be a catalyst to or trace of religion, but it is not religion itself: "And I agree that he who has religion ought not to spill it. But does it follow that he who finds it spilled should avert his eyes? How if there is a man to whom those bright drops on the floor are the beginning of a trail which, duly followed, will lead him in the end to taste the cup itself? How if no other trail, humanly speaking, were possible?"fn

So where does Hamlet go after the curtains go down? Could it be that the Prince's wish is fulfilled, that he finds the undiscovered country? A scripture attached to the dedication page of The Pilgrim's Regress reads, "As cold waters to a thirsty soul, so is good news from a far country" (Prov. 25:25). In a sermon entitled "The Weight of Glory" delivered on 8 June 1941 in the Oxford University Church of St. Mary the Virgin—and with the Romantic fires under control at last—Lewis preached:

In speaking of this desire for our own far-off country, which we find in ourselves even now, I feel a certain shyness. [. . .] I am trying to rip open the inconsolable secret in each one of you—the secret which hurts you so much that you take your revenge on it by calling it names like Nostalgia and Romanticism and Adolescence; the secret also which pierces with such sweetness that when, in very intimate conversation, the mention of it becomes imminent, we grow awkward and affect to laugh at ourselves; the secret we cannot hide and cannot tell, though we desire to do both. We cannot tell it because it is a desire for something that has never actually appeared in our experience. We cannot hide it because our experience is constantly suggesting it. [. . .] Our commonest expedient is to call it beauty and behave as if that had settled the matter. Wordsworth's expedient was to identify it with certain moments in his own past. But all this is a cheat. If Wordsworth had gone back to those moments in the past, he would not have found the thing itself, but only the reminder of it; what he remembered would turn out to be itself a remembering. The books or the music in which we thought the beauty was located will betray us if we trust them; it was not in them, it only came through them, and what came through them was longing. These things—the beauty, the memory of our own past—are good images of what we really desire; but if they are mistaken for the thing itself, they turn into dumb idols, breaking the hearts of their worshippers. For they are not the thing itself; they are only the scent of a flower we have not found, the echo of a tune we have not heard, news from a country we have never yet visited.fn

C. S. Lewis died in faith desiring a better country, that is a heavenly; he did not receive the promises, but having seen them afar off he was persuaded of them, and embraced them, and confessed that he was a stranger and pilgrim on the earth. For they that say such things declare plainly that they seek a country and look for a city which hath foundations, whose builder and maker is God (see Heb. 11:10, 13-16).

Paul E. Kerry is assistant professor of History at Brigham Young University. He received his Ph.D. from Oxford University, England (Professor Lewis's alma mater), where he was a member of the C. S. Lewis Society.

This paper was conceived as an address to the Oxford University C. S. Lewis Society. After hearing it, Mr. Walter Hooper, with graciousness and reasoned persistence, recommended its publication. I would like to thank him for his encouragement over the past few years of my modest ideas regarding Lewis's writings.

Notes

1999 ﻿
