Andrew C. Skinner, Robert L. Millet, C. S. Lewis, the Man and His Message: An LDS Perspective ( 1999)

8

GOD'S MEGAPHONE TO A DEAF WORLD: C. S. Lewis's Personal Sojourn to Understanding the Problem of Pain

Brent L. Top

"O LORD, HOW LONG SHALL I CRY, and thou wilt not hear! even cry out unto thee of violence, and thou wilt not save!" the Old Testament prophet Habakkuk lamented (Hab. 1:2). Similarly, the prophet Jeremiah questioned God, "Righteous art thou, O Lord, when I plead with thee: yet let me talk with thee of thy judgments. Wherefore doth the way of the wicked prosper? wherefore are all they happy that deal very treacherously?" (Jer. 12:1). Even today such questions are heard—Why do bad things happen to good people? Why would a perfectly loving and just Father in Heaven allow His children to suffer all manner of tragedies, trials, and tribulations? Why would God create a world seemingly designed for the happiness and progress of man yet enveloped in crime and corruption, pain and poverty, sin and suffering? Great philosophers and theologians have wrestled with the apparent contradictions between the theology of a God of perfect love and beneficence and the reality of a world filled with

Brent L. Top is associate dean of Religious Education and professor of Church History and Doctrine at Brigham Young University. He is the author of numerous books and articles, including Rearing Righteous Youth of Zion. inequities and injustices. Such contradictions often defy the best logic of both philosopher and theologian. Often we are left with more questions than answers.

A few years ago I saw this situation profoundly demonstrated in a religion class I was teaching at Brigham Young University. We were discussing how belief in a perfect, all-loving God can be reconciled with the reality of terrible suffering and injustices inherent in the world. There was much discussion among the students. I was impressed with their well-reasoned and well-articulated answers, as well as their knowledge of the scriptures. Virtually all of the students made comments that reflected their confidence that the gospel of Jesus Christ has the answers to the problem of pain in the world. With every difficult dilemma or tough question that I presented, a student had a gospel answer for or a theological reconciliation of the apparent inequities of life.

After much class discussion, however, one student in the back of the class raised his hand to speak. He was older than most of the students. He had also been noticeably silent during our discussion. His voice cracking with emotion, he taught us all a lesson about questions and answers.

"The things you have been saying are right," he said, choking back the tears. "I have been taught those things from my youth. I have searched the scriptures, served a mission, and been active in the Church all my life. I have a testimony of the truthfulness of the gospel, and I have an understanding of the role of adversity in the plan of salvation, but. . ." At this point the tears began to flow from his eyes. Haltingly he continued: "But it didn't make it easier to gather my three children around me and tell them that their mommy had just died. Even though I too know many of the answers to life's difficult questions, I am still lonely, and I ask over and over again, Why? Why did she have to die? Why am I left alone?" As he spoke, my teary-eyed students were experiencing feelings that most of them had never had before. They were learning about unanswerable questions and unconsoling answers they had never before encountered. "You have the answers," he told his fellow students. "But have you ever had to ask the questions?"

As the bell rang ending the class period, sobered students, who had been so full of gospel answers before and during class, now filed out with more questions than answers.

This father, who mourned the death of his wife and the mother of his young children, personifies the challenge that all of us have faced or will yet face as we encounter the trials and uncertainties of our mortal existence. Even when one possesses a profound trust in God, a firm testimony of the plan of salvation, and an extensive knowledge of the scriptures, when faced with the ironies and inequities of this fallen world, it is easy to cry out, "Why this?" "Why me?" "Why now?" Often within those moments when our personal pain crashes headlong into our professed beliefs and convictions, we may feel guilty for even questioning God. Sometimes we may erroneously view such questioning as a lack of faith or a wavering in our commitment to the gospel.

There is comfort, however, in recognizing that those with the most insight and inspiration as to God's will for mankind are often those who do the most poignant pleading and questioning. Prophets of God like Alma and Amulek, who experienced firsthand unjust persecution, unspeakable suffering, and the inhumanity of the wicked, cried out, "How long shall we suffer these great afflictions, O Lord?" (Alma 14:26). Even Joseph Smith—the prophet-head of this last dispensation, who had gazed upon the expanses of eternity, had received countless revelations, and had communed with and been taught by heavenly beings from the Eternal Presence—even he, in the agony of his own suffering had more questions than answers. "O God, where art thou? And where is the pavilion that covereth thy hiding place? How long shall thy hand be stayed, and thine eye, yea, thy pure eye, behold from the eternal heavens the wrongs of thy people and of thy servants, and thine ear be penetrated with their cries? Yea, O Lord, how long shall they suffer these wrongs and unlawful oppressions, before thine heart shall be softened toward them, and thy bowels be moved with compassion toward them" (D&C 121:1-3).

Not only have prophets, with their own unique spiritual perspectives, struggled through the ages to reconcile the reality of profound suffering and injustice in the world with their profound faith in an all-powerful and all-loving God. Even Jesus, when faced with the incomprehensible agonies of Gethsemane and Golgotha, cried out, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" (Matt. 27:46). Given His divine nature, He knew all the right answers, yet His mortal nature questioned when He was confronted with pain and suffering that surprisingly surpassed His own understanding and expectation. "Imagine, Jehovah, the Creator of this and other worlds, `astonished'!" Elder Neal A. Maxwell declared. "Jesus knew cognitively what He must do, but not experientially. He had never personally known the exquisite and exacting process of an atonement before. Thus, when the agony came in its fulness, it was so much, much worse than even He with his unique intellect ever imagined! No wonder an angel appeared to strengthen him (see Luke 22:43)!" fn

It is from this seemingly contradictory clash between answers and questions—between explanations and experiences—between knowledge we have in our heads and understanding that comes to the heart—that the greatest spiritual growth can occur. Those who have arrived at gospel answers to life's difficult dilemmas merely by study and/or through reason alone will discover that those answers may not impact the soul so profoundly or permanently until forged by personal experiences—experiences that impel one to ask the hard questions of life. From personal "study" in the school of suffering there comes not only better understanding of the answers and the questions but also a preparation of our souls to receive more than mere comprehension. The true source of comfort and comprehension is not found in intellectual answers, but in Him who invites us: "Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls" (Matt. 11:28-29).

C. S. Lewis's rise to spiritual understanding of the problem of pain and the goodness of God came in the same manner—first the head, then the heart. While it may seem backwards to some, Lewis unexpectedly discovered that the rational answers he had long articulated in the defense of God's designs brought him only so far down the path of his spiritual journey. He may have thought he had the right answers when he wrote the book The Problem of Pain in 1940, but those insightful answers may well have seemed quite empty in his own life after the death of his beloved wife, Joy Gresham Lewis, in 1960. From the depths of his broken heart came some of the most poignant questions—some filled with anger toward God, and others showing a vulnerable man desperately clinging to his faith when it seemed there was little reason to believe. From the questions and personal struggles Lewis recorded in the book A Grief Observed, we are able to see how he gained greater understanding of the role of evil and suffering in the world. From his personal loss came questions from the heart that resulted not only in a deeper understanding of the answers he had already found in his head but also in a comfort and peace that came from finding God. From his writings and personal experiences, from his questions as well as his answers, we can be strengthened spiritually and enlarged intellectually in our own efforts to reconcile the problem of pain. As Lewis demonstrates, it is not enough to just find answers. We must find God.

HEAD KNOWLEDGE: HAVING THE "RIGHT ANSWERS"

Prior to his conversion to Christianity C. S. Lewis felt that the strongest evidence for an argument against the existence of God was the existence of so much pain, evil, and injustice in the world. If God was both all-powerful and good, why would he not eliminate such things from the world and protect His children from the awful effects of such suffering? After his conversion Lewis once again encountered the seemingly irreconcilable problem of faith in the goodness of God despite the overwhelming reality of evil and suffering among God's children. This time, with firm faith in the goodness of God and the wisdom of His purposes, Lewis attempted, as an apologist for Christianity, to suggest a reasoned yet faithful explanation. Such a reconciliation of the existence of God despite the reality of evil and suffering in the world is known as theodicy.

Amidst the gathering storm clouds of World War II and the anxiety and worry it brought, C. S. Lewis was asked to write a book as a part of the "Christian Challenge" series of Centenary Press. The purpose of the series was to introduce the tenets of Christianity to people outside the faith. At first Lewis rejected the offer; then he agreed only if he could use a pen name rather than his own, for he felt it would be presumptuous as a non-theologian to write about such a serious philosophical topic. But there was no pen name. C. S. Lewis's theodicy would stand on its own. In 1940 The Problem of Pain rolled off the press and was immediately received with much acclaim. In the preface Lewis modestly stated that he "believed himself to be [merely] restating ancient and orthodox doctrines." Although he may have felt that he wasn't "plowing any new ground" theologically or philosophically with this book, it was his genius for using well-reasoned, clearly articulated arguments, highlighted with brilliant analogies that all could relate to that made The Problem of Pain one of his most popular works. It is also what one scholar characterized as "faith seeking understanding" spoken in plain, everyday language, that makes Lewis so appealing to us today.fn "Any fool can write learned language," Lewis wrote to a literary critic. "The vernacular is the real test. If you can't turn your faith into it, then either you don't understand it, or you don't believe it."fn Lewis firmly believed that people could not really understand a complex philosophical or theological issue until they could understand it in simple language.

For Latter-day Saints in particular, C. S. Lewis has great appeal, but not so much because he teaches us anything new or dramatically different from that which is found in our own theology and scriptures. It is, rather, that he simplifies the complex with common sense and illustrates the philosophical explanations with understandable and relevant metaphors, which in turn helps us to understand our own doctrines and scriptures better. Lewis's response to the "problem of pain" basically falls into two major categories: the free will of mankind and the goodness of God. Each of these explanations finds a complement in the teachings of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and each plays a significant role in helping us to better understand the causes and purposes of evil and suffering in the world.

Free Will

To Latter-day Saints the principle of free will, or what we would call agency, is a fundamental principle of the plan of salvation and for the divine purposes of life itself. "Free independence of mind which heaven has so graciously bestowed upon the human family," the Prophet Joseph Smith declared,["[is] one of [heaven's] choicest gifts [to man]."fn The Book of Mormon—Another Testament of Jesus Christ—further states that "it must needs be that there is an opposition in all things. If not so, righteousness could not be brought to pass, neither wickedness, neither holiness nor misery, neither good nor bad. . . . Wherefore, the Lord God gave unto man that he should act for himself" (2 Ne. 2:11, 16). In another passage, the Book of Mormon prophet Samuel testified that "whosoever perisheth, perisheth unto himself; and whosoever doeth iniquity, doeth it unto himself; for behold, ye are free; ye are permitted to act for yourselves; for behold, God hath given unto you a knowledge and he hath made you free" (Hel. 14:30). In recent times, President David O. McKay declared: "Next to bestowal of life itself, the right to direct our lives is God's greatest gift to man. Freedom of choice is more to be treasured than any possession earth can give. It is inherent in the spirit of man. It is a divine gift to every normal being. . . . It is the impelling source of the soul's progress. . . . Without this divine power to choose, humanity cannot progress."fn

Because of this supreme significance, agency is a protected principle. In order to safeguard the purposes of our mortal probation the Lord will not infringe upon the free exercise of agency. C. S. Lewis also taught this fundamental principle of Christianity not only in his religious apologetic works such as The Great Divorce, The Screwtape Letters, Miracles, God in the Dock, and, of course, The Problem of Pain, but also as a recurring theme in some of his fictional books, such as Perelandra. "Free will is the modus operandi of destiny," he wrote.fn In his classic work, Mere Christianity, he elaborated on this principle.

God created things which had free will. That means creatures which can go either wrong or right. Some people think they can imagine a creature which was free but had no possibility of going wrong; I cannot. If a thing is free to be good it is also free to be bad. And free will is what has made evil possible. Why, then did God give them free will? Because free will, though it makes evil possible, is also the only thing that makes possible any love or goodness or joy worth having. A world of automata—of creatures that worked like machines—would hardly be worth creating. The happiness which God designs for His higher creatures is the happiness of being freely, voluntarily united to Him and to each other in an ecstasy of love and delight compared with which the most rapturous love between a man and a woman on this earth is mere milk and water. And for that they must be free.

Of course God knew what would happen if they used their freedom the wrong way: apparently He thought it worth the risk. . . . If God thinks this state of war in the universe a price worth paying for free will—that is, for making a live world in which creatures can do real good or harm and something of real importance can happen, instead of a toy world which only moves when He pulls the strings—then we may take it is worth paying.fn

While this promotes the progression of humanity, it also carries with it certain "side effects" that may result in suffering and sorrow. Free will is linked to adversity: many times our suffering and sorrows in life come as a result of the use or misuse of agency.

One cannot read the daily newspapers or watch world news on television without being graphically reminded of the crime and corruption and other social injustices that result from human choice. Some question the justice and goodness of God or even His existence. They may ask: "Why does God allow the wicked and the corrupt of the world to victimize the righteous and devout, the innocent and helpless?" The unsettling answer lies in the fact that free will is a divinely guarded principle. God does not cause the evil, but if there is to be agency, he must allow it. C. S. Lewis described this phenomenon in this manner: "Pain is inherent in the very existence of a world where souls can meet. When souls become wicked they will certainly use this possibility to hurt one another; and this, perhaps, accounts for four-fifths of the sufferings of men. It is men, not God, who have produced racks, whips, prisons, slavery, guns, bayonets, and bombs; it is by human avarice or human stupidity, not by the churlishness of nature, that we have poverty and overwork."fn

Lewis's writings on the relationship between free will and the evil and suffering of the world resonate with Latter-day Saints, not only because of their similarities to the doctrinal and scriptural teachings of the Church but also because the early history of the Latter-day Saints is laced with many examples of how trials and tribulations follow the misuse of the divine gift of agency. Members of the Church who had settled in Jackson County, Missouri, became faced with enormous opposition and persecution. Over time many Church members were physically abused—beaten, tarred and feathered, driven from their homes and lands as judges and civic leaders repeatedly refused to administer justice or offer relief. In petitioning the Lord for guidance as to what to do, the Prophet Joseph Smith learned by revelation the reasons why God allowed His Saints to suffer.

Verily I say unto you, my friends, behold, I will give unto you a revelation and commandment, that you may know how to act in the discharge of your duties concerning the salvation and redemption of your brethren, who have been scattered on the land of Zion;

Being driven and smitten by the hand of mine enemies, on whom I will pour out my wrath without measure in mine own time.

For I have suffered them thus far, that they might fill up the measure of their iniquities, that their cup might be full;

And that those who call themselves after my name might be chastened for a little season with a sore and grievous chastisement, because they did not hearken altogether unto the precepts and commandments which I gave unto them. (D&C 103:1-4; emphasis added)

It is clear from this revelation that because the wicked are accountable for their own actions, and their misuse of their agency will ultimately bring about their own condemnation, God allows them to inflict suffering on others. If He were to interfere with every negative action, creating what Lewis described as a "toy world" as opposed to a "real world," He would not only violate the divine gift of agency but also would negate the law of the harvest. We could not "reap" if we were not allowed to "sow" (see Gal. 6:7-8). Similarly, we learn that the suffering and pain that come with the exercise of the will is two-edged—suffering as consequence of the actions of others and suffering that comes by reason of our own actions. "How could we learn about obedience," Elder Neal A. Maxwell insightfully asked, "if we were shielded from the consequences of our disobedience?"fn

As Lewis himself admitted, the free exercise of man's agency cannot explain all the trials and tribulations of our mortal existence. "Free will," Lewis wrote, may account "for four-fifths of the suffering of men. . . . But there remains, nonetheless, much suffering which cannot thus be traced to ourselves."fn While to the unbeliever, it may seem a total contradiction in terms, Lewis contended that many of the trials and tribulations, pains and problems, and suffering and sorrows of life can be attributed to the goodness of God and His perfect love for His children.

The Goodness of God

The age-old questions about how an all-wise and all-loving God can allow bad things to happen to good people seemingly can only be satisfactorily answered if the terms are properly defined. It is a misunderstanding of the phrases "goodness of God," "bad things," and "good people" that leads some to reject either the entire notion of a Supreme Being or any divine "meaning in the madness" of the universe. It is through helping us to better understand the meaning of these terms that Lewis makes perhaps his greatest contribution to theodicy.

First, let us examine the concept of the "goodness of God." While it is true that the scriptures, both ancient and modern, often use terms such as kindness and tenderness as descriptors of God's love and goodness, there is much, much more. And it is in those other traits that we see the goodness of God at work in the tribulations of life. Amidst the profound grief he felt at the death of his wife, Lewis was forced to tackle the seeming contradiction of God's goodness and love for mankind and the terrible pain He allows. "What do people mean when they say 'I am not afraid of God because I know He is good'?" Lewis wrote. "Have they never been to a dentist?"fn Years earlier Lewis had articulated so well with the pen what his heart was now painfully discovering. "By the goodness of God we mean nowadays almost exclusively His lovingkindness; and in this we may be right," Lewis wrote in The Problem of Pain.

And by Love, in this context, most of us mean kindness—the desire to see others than the self happy; not happy in this way or that, but just happy. What would really satisfy us would be a God who said of anything we happened to like doing, "What does it matter so long as they are contented?" We want, in fact, not so much a Father in Heaven as a grandfather in heaven—a senile benevolence who, as they say, "liked to see young people enjoying themselves," and whose plan for the universe was simply that it might be truly said at the end of each day, "a good time was had by all.". . .

Kindness, merely as such, cares not whether its object becomes good or bad, provided only that it escapes suffering. As Scripture points out, it is bastards who are spoiled: the legitimate sons who are to carry on the family tradition are punished. It is for people we care nothing about that we demand happiness on any terms. . . . If God is Love, He is, by definition, something more than mere kindness. And it appears, from all the records, that though He has often rebuked us and condemned us, He has never regarded us with contempt. He has paid us the intolerable compliment of loving us, in the deepest, most tragic, most inexorable sense.fn

As any parent knows, love for one's offspring requires, as Lewis's words profoundly illustrate, much more than "senile benevolence" or kindness at any cost. It requires seeking for that which is best for our children, for that which will bring them happiness and not merely fun, for that which develops character and not merely contentment. Lewis's reference to "bastards who are spoiled" undoubtedly reflects the words of the Apostle Paul. "My son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of him: for whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth. If ye endure chastening, God dealeth with you as with sons; for what son is he whom the father chasteneth not? But if ye be without chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards, and not sons" (Heb. 12:5-8). To Latter-day Saints this concept should be especially relevant, since we believe that God is literally our Heavenly Father, whose goodness and love are manifest as a perfect parent. In our day, the Lord reminded us by revelation through the Prophet Joseph Smith: "Verily, thus saith the Lord unto you whom I love, and whom I love I also chasten that their sins may be forgiven, for with the chastisement I prepare a way for their deliverance in all things out of temptation, and I have loved you. Wherefore, ye must needs be chastened" (D&C 95:1-2).

God's chastening is neither vengeance nor meanness. The root of the word is the same as for the word chaste—pure, clean, spotless, virtuous. The process of chastening may be long and extraordinarily painful at times, but the product of such chastening is a "new creature," one in whom God's image becomes engraven. How can God's love and goodness be manifest in any greater way?

This leads us naturally to an examination of two phrases in the oft-stated question—"Why do bad things happen to good people?" Just as the phrase "goodness of God" is often misunderstood, so are these phrases; and they are in need of definition and scriptural clarification.

We often speak of good people, and without question there are many whose lives exemplify goodness. But even they are not without need for improvement by the chastening of a good God. Latter-day Saints are familiar with doctrinal statements from the Book of Mormon that help clarify the nature of man. King Benjamin declared that "the natural man is an enemy to God" (Mosiah 3:19), and the brother of Jared testified that "because of the fall our natures have become evil continually" (Ether 3:2). Without believing in the "total depravity of mankind," C. S. Lewis clearly believed that human nature was naturally rebellious and, as a result, the suffering and pains of the world are directly related to God's designs to help bring about an alteration in man's evil and rebellious nature, replacing it with the "divine nature" (2 Pet. 1:4). "The human spirit will not even begin to surrender self-will, as long as all seems to be well with it," Lewis wrote. This sentiment certainly complements Nephi's warning regarding "carnal security" (2 Ne. 28:21). There is a natural yet often unrecognized tendency to embrace an "all is well in Zion" (2 Ne. 28:21) attitude, to become less dependent upon the Lord and more secure in self and in the things of the world, when life seems to be going smoothly. To expose the facade of self-suffiency and to break and bridle the rebellious spirit, God uses suffering and pain. "But the redemptive effect of suffering lies chiefly in its tendency to reduce the rebel will," Lewis wrote. God uses pain, as "His megaphone to rouse a deaf world."

No doubt Pain as God's megaphone is a terrible instrument; it may lead to final and unrepented rebellion. But it gives the only opportunity the bad man can have for amendment. It removes the veil; it plants the flag of truth within the fortress of a rebel soul.

If the first and lowest operation of pain shatters the illusion that all is well, the second shatters the illusion that what we have, whether good or bad itself, is our own and enough for us. Everyone has noticed how hard it is to turn our thoughts to God when everything is going well with us. We "have all we want" is a terrible saying when "all" does not include God. We find God an interruption. As St. Augustine says somewhere, "God wants to give us something, but cannot, because our hands are full—there's nowhere for Him to put it." Or as a friend of mine said, "We regard God as an airman regards his parachute; it's there for emergencies but he hopes he never has to use it." Now God, who has made us, knows what we are and that our happiness lies in Him. Yet we will not seek it in Him as long as He leaves us any other resort where it can even plausibly be looked for. While what we call "our own life" remains agreeable we will not surrender it to Him. What then can God do in our interests but to make "our own life" less agreeable to us, and take away the plausible sources of false happiness? It is just here, where God's providence seems at first to be most cruel, that the Divine humility, the stooping down of the Highest, most deserves praise.fn

Not only is the fallen man naturally rebellious but he is also naturally forgetful and shortsighted. For this reason, as Lewis pointed out, God's megaphone of pain not only grabs our attention but also serves as a much-needed memory enhancer. The Book of Mormon prophet Mormon testified of the "unsteadiness of the hearts of the children of men." He wrote:

Yea, we can see that the Lord in his great infinite goodness doth bless and prosper those who put their trust in him.

Yea, and we may see at the very time when he doth prosper his people, yea, in the increase of their fields, their flocks and their herds, and in gold, and in silver, and in all manner of precious things of every kind and art; . . . yea, and in fine doing all things for the welfare and happiness of his people; yea, then is the time that they do harden their hearts, and do forget the Lord their God, and do trample under their feet the Holy One—yea, and this because of their ease, and their exceedingly great prosperity.

And thus we see that except the Lord doth chasten his people with many afflictions, yea, except he doth visit them with death and with terror, and with famine and with all manner of pestilence, they will not remember him. (Hel. 12:1-3; emphasis added; see also Ps. 78:17-35)

Just as we often understate the goodness of God and overstate the "goodness" of the natural man, so do we usually view adversity and affliction as "bad things." In reality, these "bad things"—though the wounds they inflict hurt terribly and heal slowly—are beneficent tokens of divine love from our Father in Heaven. It may be difficult to see any good coming from evil and suffering, but such difficulty in understanding doesn't alter reality. For example, if it were possible for a person who lived several centuries ago to travel in time to our day and witness modern heart surgery—either a bypass procedure or a transplant, that time traveller would undoubtedly be horrified. Not knowing what was actually happening and unable to perceive any positive benefit resulting, he would probably view the surgery as some sort of sadistic torture. It is this higher purpose of suffering—"hurting to heal"—that C. S. Lewis often spoke of and illustrated in his writings. "The more we believe that God hurts only to heal, the less we can believe that there is any use in begging for tenderness," he wrote in A Grief Observed.

A cruel man might be bribed—might grow tired of his vile sport—might have a temporary fit of mercy, as alcoholics have fits of sobriety. But suppose that what you are up against is a surgeon whose intentions are wholly good. The kinder and more conscientious he is, the more inexorably he will go on cutting. If he yielded to your entreaties, if he stopped before the operation was complete, all the pain up to that point would have been useless. But is it credible that such extremities of torture should be necessary for us? Well, take your choice. The tortures occur. If they are unnecessary, then there is no God or a bad one. If there is a good God, then these tortures are necessary. For no moderately good Being could possibly inflict or permit them if they weren't.fn

As Lewis has so eloquently articulated, the very nature of God and His divine plan of salvation for His children requires such "hurting to heal." Each of us is enrolled in the "school of hard knocks." Adversity and suffering are essential elements of the curriculum that provides us with an education for eternity. "We are not necessarily doubting that God will do the best for us," Lewis wrote in a personal letter to a friend, "we are wondering how painful the best will turn out to be."fn Long before C. S. Lewis learned it, the Prophet Joseph Smith was taught this valuable lesson amidst his own anguish. While suffering in Liberty Jail, he poignantly pleaded with the Lord for some degree of understanding and some degree of relief. God's revelation provided comforting assurance to Joseph (and each of us) in one of the most beautiful and scripturally significant statements concerning the redemptive role of suffering.

If thou art called to pass through tribulation; if thou art in perils among false brethren; if thou art in perils among robbers; if thou art in perils by land or by sea;

If thou art accused with all manner of false accusations; if thine enemies fall upon thee;. . .

And if thou shouldst be cast into the pit, or into the hands of murderers, and the sentence of death passed upon thee; if thou be cast into the deep; if the billowing surge conspire against thee; if fierce winds become thine enemy; if the heavens gather blackness, and all the elements combine to hedge up the way; and above all, if the very jaws of hell shall gape open the mouth wide after thee, know thou, my son, that all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good. (D&C 122:5-7; emphasis added)

Isaiah, in a prophecy regarding the ultimate redemption of Israel, used a most interesting phrase regarding the pains and afflictions that Israel would yet endure: "And though the Lord give you the bread of adversity, and the water of affliction, yet shall not [the Lord] be removed into a corner any more, but thine eyes shall see thy teachers" (Isa. 30:20). To the ancients, bread and water were symbols of physical nourishment and sustenance. Perhaps Isaiah was teaching that adversity and affliction are as essential to our spiritual health and well-being as bread and water are to our physical health. Without the "bread of adversity" and the "water of affliction" there is neither spiritual life here nor eternal life hereafter. God's "work and . . . glory [is] to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39), and suffering serves that end. "The job will not be completed in this life," Lewis wrote, "but He means to get us as far as possible before death."

That is why we must not be surprised if we are in for a rough time. When a man turns to Christ and seems to be getting on pretty well (in the sense that some of his bad habits are now corrected), he often feels that it would now be natural if things went fairly smoothly. When troubles come along—illnesses, money troubles, new kinds of temptation—he is disappointed. These things, he feels, might have been necessary to rouse him and make him repent in his bad old days; but why now? Because God is forcing him . . . into situations where he will have to be very much braver, or more patient, or more loving, than he ever dreamed of being before. It seems to us all unnecessary: but that is because we have not yet had the slightest notion of the tremendous thing He means to make of us.

To further illustrate this point, Lewis paraphrased a parable he had heard from his old friend and mentor, the great religious thinker George MacDonald, who compared the way God mercifully utilizes pain and suffering in our lives to a contractor's remodeling of a house.

Imagine yourself as a living house. God comes in to rebuild that house. At first, perhaps, you can understand what He is doing. He is getting the drains right and stopping the leaks in the roof and so on: you knew that those jobs needed doing and so you are not surprised. But presently He starts knocking the house about in a way that hurts abominably and does not make sense. What on earth is He up to? The explanation is that He is building quite a different house from the one you thought of—throwing out a new wing here, putting on an extra floor there, running up towers, making courtyards. You thought you were going to be made into a decent little cottage: but He is building a palace. He intends to come and live in it Himself.fn

Every remodeling job has its accompanying cost and inconvenience. Spiritual remodeling is no different; it has its own cost in pain and sorrow, yet it may also yield a palatial enlargement of our souls, an enhancement of our spirituality, and a remaking of our very being in the image of Him who "descended below all things" (D&C 88:6). Just as Joseph Smith, Job, Jeremiah, and many others throughout history came to fully understand the real meaning and depth of the goodness of God through painful personal experience, so, too, did C. S. Lewis. Despite his impressive intellectual abilities—his logic and his philosophical astuteness, his rational theodicy—even despite his Christian conversion—he (like each of us) could not fully reconcile the "problem of pain" until he came to know the mind and will of God through his own painful experiences. The head can hold the "right answers," but such answers are merely theory until they are engraven upon the heart by an ultimate trial of faith.

HEART UNDERSTANDING: FINDING GOD THROUGH THE TRIAL OF FAITH

"If you are writing a book about pain, then get some actual pain," C. S. Lewis had mused among friends while working on the book The Problem of Pain. He had been concerned about writing on such a serious subject when his own life had been relatively free from suffering. Theodicy without real personal experience, he observed, "does not either, as the cynic would expect, blow the doctrine to bits, nor as a Christian would hope, turn into practice, but remains quite unconnected and irrelevant, just as any other bit of actual life does when you are reading or writing."fn He clearly recognized the limitations of having "right answers" without having asked "hard questions." Lewis also felt inadequate in addressing the problem of pain because he felt no great courage when it came to pain and he certainly did not want to minimize its hurtful nature in his attempts of rational explanation. In The Problem of Pain he wrote:

All arguments in justification of suffering provoke bitter resentment against the author. You would like to know how I behave when I am experiencing pain, not writing books about it. You need not guess, for I will tell you: I am a great coward. . . . If I knew any way of escape I would crawl through sewers to find it. But what is the good of telling you my feelings? You know them already: for they are the same as yours. I am not arguing that pain is not painful. Pain hurts. That is what the word means. I am only trying to show that the old Christian doctrine of being made "perfect through suffering" is not incredible.fn

In the preface to a book of collected essays of his friend Charles Williams, which he had edited, Lewis remembered being reminded by Williams that God had been displeased with Job's friends. The so-called comforters—"the self-appointed advocates on God's side, the people who tried to show that all was well," Williams stated. They are the "sort of people," Williams continued, "who wrote books on the Problem of Pain."fn

However, that situation—the "unconnectedness" or "irrelevance" of a thoughtful theodicy devoid of deep personal pain—dramatically changed with the death of his beloved wife, Joy, on 13 July 1960. "You have made me so happy," she warmly assured Lewis. "I am at peace with God" were her last words. Her death brought with it an ironical turn of the tables. Joy may have found peace with her God at death, but Lewis found anything but peace and comfort.

It was ironic indeed that C. S. Lewis—the internationally acclaimed Christian apologist, whose writings, lectures, and personal letters had done so much to increase faith in God, to bring souls to Christ, and to partake of His comfort—would face a crisis of faith in his own heart and mind. All of his eloquent arguments regarding the problem of pain had not adequately prepared him for his own trials. "Not that I am (I think) in much danger of ceasing to believe in God," he wrote in his personal journal regarding the commingling of thoughts and emotions he experienced after the death of Joy. These personal notes, his self-prescribed treatment for his grief, were later published as A Grief Observed. "The real danger is of coming to believe such dreadful things about [God]. The conclusion I dread is not, `So there's no God after all,' but, `So this is what God's really like. Deceive yourself no longer.'"fn His faith in the existence of God may not have been completely shaken, but his view of the goodness of God—which he had so faithfully defended and eloquently articulated time and time again—seemed battered and bruised. In the depths of his anguish Lewis was tempted to view God as a "Cosmic Sadist" who had "choked every prayer and every hope" with "false diagnoses" and "strange remissions." He wrote, "Time after time when He seemed most gracious He was preparing the next torture."fn

Undoubtedly Lewis was stunned by his own thoughts and feelings after the death of Joy. He may have expected deep sadness and loneliness, but certainly not the anger at God, the loss of reasonable explanations, and the wavering of his faith. He came to understand, however reluctantly, how prophets of God—endowed with great spiritual insight into the purposes of God though they are—could still question God and cry out in agony, "O God, where art thou?" (D&C 121:1). Each of us, to a greater or lesser degree, experience the same sojourn from superficial knowledge to divine wisdom. At first we naively believe we have all the answers, only to have them seemingly shattered in grief and suffering that may seem beyond our ability to endure. Then when our faith is sorely tried we rediscover in our hearts and souls the truthfulness of those "answers" we previously held only in our heads. It is at this point that we may ultimately gain true understanding of the divine purposes of life and recognize that all the while we have been cradled in the merciful arms of God.

The Book of Mormon teaches us that "the Lord seeth fit to chasten his people; yea, he trieth their patience and their faith" (Mosiah 23:21). To Brigham Young, the Lord declared in a revelation in the Doctrine and Covenants: "My people must be tried in all things, that they may be prepared to receive the glory that I have for them" (D&C 136:31). Latter-day Saints understand that one of the fundamental purposes of life is to be tried and tested in order to demonstrate one's faith in and faithfulness to the Lord. Pain, suffering, injustices, persecution, and all kinds of trials are utilized by God to truly test our faith and try our loyalty. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that in order for a person to fulfill the ultimate purpose of the plan of salvation and to have his calling and election made sure, he must be "thoroughly proved," and God must find "that the man is determined to serve Him at all hazards."fn The gospel of Jesus Christ teaches us that above and beyond the natural bumps and bruises we experience as we travel the road of life, there are additional "individualized" troubles and tutorials, "thorns in the flesh" divinely designed to prove each of us personally. "In time each person will receive a `customized challenge' to determine his dedication to God," Elder Neal A. Maxwell stated.fn The exact nature of our "customized challenges" and saving tests of faith will not necessarily be the same, or perhaps not even remotely similar. We can rest assured, however, as the scriptures and prophets have testified, that the plan of salvation requires such trials of faith, but each will be adapted to individual circumstances, capacities, and needs. President George Q. Cannon declared:

If we will be faithful to our God, He will redeem us, no matter what the circumstances may be through which we may be called to pass. We may wade through sorrow. We may have to endure persecution. We may have to meet with death. We may have to endure imprisonment and many other things that our predecessors had to endure. God may test us in this manner.

Every human being that is connected with this work will have to be tested before he can enter into the Celestial Kingdom of our God. He will try us to the uttermost. If we have any spot more tender than another, He will feel after it. He will test all in some way or other.

We have learned that there are plenty of trials and difficulties for all, if they will live faithful, to have their full share and all that are necessary to test them and their faith and their integrity to the fullest extent. Each generation may not have to pass through exactly the same scenes. They are apt to vary as the circumstances which surround each vary; but they will, nevertheless, accomplish the desired end. There is one thing certain, every Latter-day Saint who is faithful to the truth and who lives to the ordinary age of man will have all the opportunities of this kind he or she can desire to gain experience and to have his or her zeal, integrity, courage and devotion to the truth fully exhibited.fn

Over time, C. S. Lewis discovered that he, too, was facing his own "customized challenge"—a test of his faith. Did he really believe all those things he had written and spoken or were they just empty words? His personal feelings and musings, recorded in A Grief Observed, provide us with a unique glimpse of the workings of God in testing the faith of His children.

Where is God? This is one of the most disquieting symptoms. When you are happy, so happy that you have no sense of needing Him, so happy that you are tempted to feel His claims upon you as an interruption, if you remember yourself and turn to Him with gratitude and praise, you will be—or so it feels—welcomed with open arms. But go to Him when your need is desperate, when all other help is vain, and what do you find? A door slammed in your face, and a sound of bolting and double bolting on the inside. After that, silence. You may as well turn away. The longer you wait, the more emphatic the silence will become. There are no lights in the windows. It might be an empty house. Was it ever inhabited? It seemed so once. And that seeming was as strong as this. What can this mean? Why is He so present a commander in our time of prosperity and so very absent a help in time of trouble?. . .

You never know how much you really believe anything until its truth or falsehood becomes a matter of life and death to you. It is easy to say you believe a rope to be strong and sound as long as you are merely using it to cord a box. But suppose you had to hang by that rope over a precipice. Wouldn't you then first discover how much you really trusted it?. . . Only a real risk tests the reality of a belief. . .

Bridge players tell me that there must be some money on the game, "or else people won't take it seriously." Apparently it's like that. Your bid—for God or no God, for a good God or the Cosmic Sadist, for eternal life or nonentity—will not be serious if nothing is staked on it. And you will never discover how serious it was until the stakes are raised horribly high; until you find that you are playing not for counters or for sixpences but for every penny you have in the world. Nothing less will shake a man—or at any rate a man like me—out of his verbal and his merely notional beliefs. He has to be knocked silly before he comes to his senses. . .

But of course one must take the "set to try us" the right way. God has not been trying an experiment upon my faith or love in order to find out their quality. He knew it already. It was I who didn't. In this trial He makes us occupy the dock, the witness box, and the bench all at once. He always knew that my temple was a house of cards. His only way of making me realize the fact was to knock it down.fn

As Lewis shows us, the test of adversity, often accompanied by the feeling of forsakenness, powerfully strips away all false faith and superficial spirituality. Of the soul-saving, faith-strengthening value of tests and trials, the Book of Mormon prophet Moroni declared, "For ye receive no witness until after the trial of your faith" (Ether 12:6). Only when we hang by the thread of our own convictions do we find out what we really believe, to whom we are really loyal, and what spiritual substance really fills our souls. Lewis experienced and powerfully described what each of us, if we remain devoted to the cause of righteousness, will experience in our own lives to some degree or another.

After a long while of stumbling in the dark abyss of his personal grief, Lewis began to notice the light. "After much tribulation come the blessings," the Lord declared in this dispensation (D&C 58:4). Lewis, likewise, began to discern the blessings that can come only after tribulation. He knew in his head long before that suffering and pain were part of the plan whereby God perfects and spiritually reshapes man. Now, however, Lewis obtained an understanding greater than the "right answers" he had had a generation earlier. "You can't see anything properly while your eyes are blurred with tears," he wrote as he began his journey out of the darkness of doubt. "You can't in most things get what you want if you want it too desperately: anyway you can't get the best out of it. . . . And so perhaps with God. I have gradually been coming to feel that the door is no longer shut and bolted. Was it my own frantic need that slammed it in my face? The time when there is nothing at all in your soul except a cry for help may be just the time when God can't give it to you: you are like the drowning man who can't be helped because he clutches and grabs. Perhaps your own reiterated cries deafen you to the voice you hoped to hear."fn

Lewis's theology didn't change through his experience. What he had written two decades earlier in The Problem of Pain was just as profound as ever, but he had changed. From A Grief Observed, we see ourselves to some degree in Lewis's grieving experience. It is this personal attachment that we feel to him that makes his brutally honest observations and self-discovery so relevant to each of us. We learn, at least in our heads, what he learned in his heart—that knowing the right answers to the problem of pain may give insight and perspective, but not necessarily true understanding and comfort. Only God gives that. And we can receive it as we submit and yield to Him, "after [a] trial of [our] faith" (Ether 12:6). Suffering heartaches and tragedies in life, contended Lewis, allowed mankind to share, in some small measure, the sufferings of Jesus. "Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial which is to try you, as though some strange thing happened unto you," the Apostle Peter wrote. "But rejoice inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings; that, when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy" (1 Pet. 4:12-13). As we partake of His sufferings, we can partake of His comfort in our sufferings. Elder Neal A. Maxwell stated:

To those of you who so suffer and who, nevertheless, so endure and so testify by the eloquence of your examples, we salute you in Christ! Please forgive those of us who clumsily try to comfort you. We know from whence your true comfort comes. God's "bosom" is there to be leaned upon. . .

We can confidently cast our cares upon the Lord because, through the agonizing events of Gethsemane and Calvary, atoning Jesus is already familiar with our sins, sicknesses, and sorrows (see 1 Pet. 5:7; 2 Ne. 9:21; Alma 7:11-12). He can carry them now because He has successfully carried them before (see 2 Ne. 9:8)! fn

CONCLUSION

"`Why did this happen to me?' is not a question, but a cry of pain," Rabbi Harold Kushner declared. "There is nothing you can do to change the why, so I urge people to turn around and instead ask, `What do I do now, and where do I find the strength, grace and courage to get over this and go on with my life?' I believe those abilities come primarily from God. . . . He sends us the personal qualities to survive the tragedy."fn From the contributions of C. S. Lewis we are able to gain answers to both questions—"Why?" and "What do I do now?" From his head we get rational answers in The Problem of Pain and other writings that make sense to us and help us to better understand the workings of our God. From his heart—from his personal experience of emerging from darkness to light—we gain not only insight into the painful process but also courage and strength to face it ourselves. Lewis helps us to understand the very essence of our belief. It seems only fitting that this great thinker and Christian apologist must have the truthfulness of his theodicy proven and refined by personal experience. Through his writings we appreciate him as a great Christian apologist, but from the triumph of his own faith in his struggle with the problem of pain he emerges as much more. We honor him as a great Christian. "The central Christian belief," he wrote, "is that Christ's death has somehow put us right with God and given us a fresh start."fn This is as true with the problem of pain as it is with the fall of man. In Him rest all our hopes. John the Revelator beheld:

These are they which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.

Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his temple: and he that sitteth on the throne shall dwell among them.

They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more; neither shall the sun light on them, nor any heat.

For the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of waters: and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes. (Rev. 7:14-17)

Notes

1999 ﻿
