Andrew C. Skinner, Robert L. Millet, C. S. Lewis, the Man and His Message: An LDS Perspective ( 1999)

9

C. S. LEWIS ON THE TRANSFORMATION OF HUMAN NATURE

Robert L. Millet

AS THE PRESENTATIONS AT THIS conference attest, C. S. Lewis has rendered the Christian message a meaningful service. His conversion to Christianity was genuine and deep, and it entailed the acceptance of Jesus Christ as Lord and God. His commitment to the Savior drove and directed his writings and certainly undergirded his daily life. There is so much that could be said in discussing Lewis's thought on the preeminent place of Jesus Christ, but time constraints dictate that I be selective.

MAN'S NEED FOR REDEMPTION

C. S. Lewis was a Christian, and as such he was firm in his proclamation of the good news or glad tidings, the hope to be found in and through Jesus Christ. That hope, of course, is directly related to man's plight as a result of the fall of Adam and Eve. "A recovery of the old sense of sin," Lewis wrote, "is essential to Christianity. . . . And when men attempt to be Christians without this preliminary consciousness of sin, the result is almost bound to be a certain resentment against God as to one who is always making impossible demands and always inexplicably angry."fn He maintained a belief in the Fall and in the fact that "fallen man is not simply an imperfect creature who needs improvement: he is a rebel who must lay down his arms."fn In the language of the angel to King Benjamin, the natural man, meaning the unregenerated man, is an "enemy to God" and will remain so unless and until he puts off the natural man and puts on Christ through the Atonement (Mosiah 3:19). As the Apostle Paul explained, the natural man "receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned" (1 Cor. 2:14). Or, as C. S. Lewis put it, "The real trouble about fallen man is not the strength of his pleasures but the weakness of his reason."fn

At the same time, Lewis did not hold to a traditional Christian view of human depravity. For one thing, Lewis concluded that if people are depraved they cannot even decide between what is good and what is evil. "If God is wiser than we," he stated, "His judgement must differ from ours on many things, and not least on good and evil. What seems to us good may therefore not be good in His eyes, and what seems to us evil may not be evil. On the other hand, if God's moral judgement differs from ours so that our `black' may be His `white,' we can mean nothing by calling Him good." This particular problem would affect our relationship to God, including our obedience to Him. "If He is not (in our sense) `good' we shall obey, if at all, only through fear—and should be equally ready to obey an omnipotent Fiend. The doctrine of Total Depravity—when the consequence is drawn that, since we are totally depraved, our idea of good is worth simply nothing—may thus turn Christianity into a form of devil-worship."fn

As John Tanner has suggested earlier in this volume, Lewis was affected by Milton's notion of a "fortunate fall," that there are things to be gained through redemption from the Fall that could not be enjoyed otherwise, as we teach in the LDS Church (see 2 Ne. 2:25; Moses 5:10-11; 6:48). Elder Orson F. Whitney observed that "The fall had a twofold direction—downward, yet forward. It brought man into the world and set his feet upon progression's highway."fn In Miracles Lewis addressed this matter in a most unusual way, but in a way that is particularly appealing to Latter-day Saints, who believe that the Savior's atonement is indeed infinite and eternal (see D&C 76:22-24, 40-42; Moses 1:30-35). Lewis asked, essentially, What would be the state of things on other worlds that needed no redemption? He emphasized the Atonement as a means of not only righting the wrongs of life but of transforming and conforming us into the image of the New Being Himself. He explained, profoundly, that "God is not merely mending, not simply restoring a status quo. Redeemed humanity is to be something more glorious than unfallen humanity would have been, more glorious than any unfallen race now is. . . .The greater the sin, the greater the mercy: the deeper the death the brighter the re-birth. And this super-added glory will, with true vicariousness, exalt all creatures, and those who have never fallen will thus bless Adam's fall."fn

While Lewis believed in the sovereignty of God, he also believed that men and women have the capacity to choose. Indeed, to choose Christ is to choose to be changed. The following expression, written by Lewis in a letter in 1942, is deeply comforting to the Latter-day Saints while at the same time supportive of our emphasis on the need to "endure to the end": "No amount of falls will really undo us if we keep on picking ourselves up each time. We shall of course be very muddy and tattered children by the time we reach home. But the bathrooms are all ready, the towels put out, and the clean clothes in the airing cupboard. The only fatal thing is to lose one's temper and give it up. It is when we notice the dirt that God is most present in us: it is the very sign of His presence."fn

Our sense of gratitude for the Lord's mercies ought to create a ready acknowledgment of our utter ineptitude without him. "Every faculty you have," Lewis taught, "your power of thinking or of moving your limbs from moment to moment, is given you by God. If you devoted every moment of your whole life exclusively to His service you would not give Him anything that was not in a sense His own already. So that when we talk of a man doing anything for God or giving anything to God, I will tell you what it is really like. It is like a small child going to its father and saying, `Daddy, give me sixpence to buy you a birthday present.' Of course, the father does, and he is pleased with the child's present. It is all very nice and proper, but only an idiot would think that the father is sixpence to the good on the transaction."fn

Does that sound a bit like Benjamin in the Book of Mormon? "I say unto you," the righteous prophet-king declared, "that if ye should serve him who has created you from the beginning, and is preserving you from day to day, by lending you breath, that ye may live and move and do according to your own will, and even supporting you from one moment to another—I say, if ye should serve him with all your whole souls yet ye would be unprofitable servants" (Mosiah 2:21).

INSIDE OUT

C. S. Lewis boldly refused to accept the impotent position of Jesus as merely a great moral teacher. Jesus of Nazareth, he declared, was either a God, a liar, or a madman.fn "Only two views of this man are possible," he noted. "Either he was a raving lunatic of an unusually abominable type, or else He was, and is, precisely what He said. There is no middle way. If the records make the first hypothesis unacceptable, you must submit to the second. And if you do that, all else that is claimed by Christians becomes credible—that this Man, having been killed, was yet alive, and that His death, in some manner incomprehensible to human thought, has effected a real change in our relations to the `awful' and `righteous' Lord, and a change in our favour."fn

I have been stimulated over the years by Lewis's discussions of Christ's suffering and forsakenness in Gethsemane;fn the nature of repentance and how it is that Christ's "advantage" allows him to "pay the debt";fn and his provocative and memorable illustrations of how spiritual rebirth entails more than cosmetic or outward changes in behavior.fn I want to refer to two of those metaphorical marvels. In speaking of the nature of spiritual rebirth, Lewis notes that we begin to become aware of changes taking place within us:

We begin to notice besides our particular sinful acts, our sinfulness; begin to be alarmed not only about what we do, but about what we are. This may sound rather difficult, so I will try to make it clear from my own case. When I come to my evening prayers and try to reckon up the sins of the day, nine times out of ten the most obvious one is some sin against charity; I have sulked or snapped or sneered or snubbed or stormed. And the excuse that immediately springs to my mind is that the provocation was so sudden and unexpected: I was caught off my guard, I had not time to collect myself. Now that may be an extenuating circumstance as regards those particular acts: they would obviously be worse if they had been deliberate and premeditated. On the other hand, surely what a man does when he is taken off his guard is the best evidence for what sort of a man he is? Surely what pops out before the man has time to put on a disguise is the truth? If there are rats in a cellar you are most likely to see them if you go in very suddenly. But the suddenness does not create the rats: it only prevents them from hiding. In the same way the suddenness of the provocation does not make me an ill-tempered man: it only shows me what an ill-tempered man I am. . . . And if . . . what we are matters even more than what we do—if indeed, what we do matters chiefly as evidence of what we are—then it follows that the change which I most need to undergo is a change that my own direct, voluntary efforts cannot bring about. . . . I cannot, by direct moral effort, give myself new motives. After the first few steps in the Christian life we realize that everything which really needs to be done in our souls can be done only by God.fn

The second literary/doctrinal gem begins with a discussion of the refinement of conscience and the putting off of the old self that accompany rebirth. "The terrible thing," Lewis explains, "the almost impossible thing, is to hand over your whole self—all your wishes and precautions—to Christ. But it is far easier than what we are all trying to do instead. For what we are trying to do is to remain what we call `ourselves,' to keep personal happiness as our great aim in life, and yet at the same time be `good.' We are all trying to let our mind and heart go their own way—centered on money or pleasure or ambition—and hoping, in spite of this, to behave honestly and chastely and humbly. And that is exactly what Christ warned us you could not do. As He said, a thistle cannot produce figs. If I am a field that contains nothing but grass-seed, I cannot produce wheat. Cutting the grass may keep it short: but I shall still produce grass and no wheat. If I want to produce wheat, the change must go deeper than the surface. I must be ploughed up and re-sown."fn

In other words, spiritual change is not merely a cosmetic alteration. It was President Ezra Taft Benson who taught: "The Lord works from the inside out. The world works from the outside in. The world would take people out of the slums. Christ takes the slums out of people, and then they take themselves out of the slums. The world would mold men by changing their environment. Christ changes men, who then change their environment. The world would shape human behavior, but Christ can change human nature."fn

GRACE AND WORKS

From my reading of Lewis, I conclude that although there was no question in his mind that salvation was in Christ and that the renovation of men and women's souls was the work of a God, that persons who chose to come unto Christ were expected to be more than grateful and passive observers of the changes taking place within them. "We profanely assume that divine and human action exclude one another like the actions of two fellow-creatures so that `God did this' and `I did this' cannot both be true of the same act except in the sense that each contributed a share." He continued: "In the end we must admit a two-way traffic at the junction. . . . We have nothing that we have not received; but part of what we have received is the power of being something more than receptacles."fn As Lewis stated elsewhere, "Christians have often disputed as to whether what leads the Christian home is good actions, or faith in Christ. I have no right really to speak on such a difficult question, but it does seem to me like asking which blade in a pair of scissors is most necessary. . . . You see, we are now trying to understand, and to separate into water-tight compartments, what exactly God does and what man does when God and man are working together."fn

Latter-day Saints have often been critical of those who stress salvation by grace alone, while we have often-been criticized for a type of works-righteousness because we give work any significance at all. We believe that the gospel is, in fact, a gospel covenant. The Lord agrees to do for us what we could never do for ourselves—to forgive our sins, to lift our burdens, to renew our souls and re-create our nature, to raise us from the dead and qualify us for glory hereafter. Whereupon, we strive to do what we can do: have faith in Christ, repent of our sins, be baptized, love and serve one another, and do all in our power to put off the natural man and deny ourselves of ungodliness. In short, we believe that more is required of men and women than a verbal expression of faith in the Lord, more than a confession with the lips that we have received Christ into our hearts. Without question, the power to save us, to change us, to renew our souls, is in Christ. True faith, however, always manifests itself in faithfulness. Thus, the real question is not whether one is saved by grace or by works but rather, In whom do we trust? On whom do we rely? (See 1 Ne. 10:6; 2 Ne. 2:8; 31:19; Moro. 6:4).

For us, few things would be more sinister than encouraging lip service to God while discouraging obedience and faithful discipleship. On the other hand, surely nothing could be more offensive to God than a smug self-assurance that comes from trusting in one's own works or relying upon one's own strength. What is perhaps the most well-known passage in LDS literature on this delicate matter is found in the Book of Mormon: "For we labor diligently to write, to persuade our children, and also our brethren, to believe in Christ, and to be reconciled to God; for we know that it is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do" (2 Ne. 25:23; see also 10:24; Alma 24:10-11). That is, above and beyond all we can do, we are saved by the grace of Christ; salvation is still the greatest of all the gifts of God (see D&C 6:13; 14:7). Further, the more we learn to trust the Lord and rely upon his merits and mercy, the less anxious we become about life here and hereafter. "Thus, if you have really handed yourself over to Him," Lewis remarked, "it must follow that you are trying to obey Him. But trying in a new way, a less worried way."fn

BEING CHRISTLIKE

Let me turn now to Lewis's teachings regarding our becoming like Christ. He wrote in The Problem of Pain that "We are, not metaphorically but in very truth, a Divine work of art, something that God is making, and therefore something with which He will not be satisfied until it has a certain character. Here again we come up against what I have called the `intolerable compliment.'"fn

From Miracles: "Christ, reascending from his great dive, is bringing up Human Nature with Him. Where He goes, it goes too. It will be made `like him' (Philip. 3:21; 1 Jn. 3:1-2)." Lewis went on to say that eventually those who are redeemed in Christ will have the power to perform miracles, just as Christ did. "Christ's isolation," he continued, "is not that of a prodigy but of a pioneer. He is the first of His kind; He will not be the last."fn

From A Grief Observed: "Sometimes, Lord, one is tempted to say that if you wanted us to behave like the lilies of the field you might have given us an organization more like theirs. But that, I suppose, is just your grand experiment. Or no; not an experiment, for you have no need to find things out. Rather your grand enterprise. To make an organism which is also a spirit; to make that terrible oxymoron, a `spiritual animal.' To take a poor primate, a beast with nerve-endings all over it, a creature with a stomach that wants to be filled, a breeding animal that wants its mate, and say, `Now get on with it. Become a god.'"fn

From The Weight of Glory: "It is a serious thing to live in a society of possible gods and goddesses, to remember that the dullest and most uninteresting person you can talk to may one day be a creature which, if you saw it now, you would be strongly tempted to worship. . . . There are no ordinary people. You have never talked to a mere mortal. Nations, cultures, arts, civilisations—these are mortal, and their life is to ours as the life of a gnat. But it is immortals whom we joke with, work with, marry, snub, and exploit. . . . Next to the Blessed Sacrament itself, your neighbour is the holiest object presented to your senses."fn

And from Mere Christianity: "Century by century God has guided nature up to the point of producing creatures which can (if they will) be taken right out of nature, turned into `gods.'"fn

Being changed in Christ "is not a change from being brainy men to brainier men: it is a change that goes off in a totally different direction—a change from being creatures of God to being sons of God."fn

Now the point in Christianity which gives us the greatest shock is the statement that by attaching ourselves to Christ, we can `become Sons of God.' Aren't we Sons of God already? Surely the fatherhood of God is one of the main Christian ideas? Well, in a certain sense, no doubt we are sons of God already. I mean, God has brought us into existence and loves us and looks after us, and in that way is like a father. But when the Bible talks of our `becoming' Sons of God, obviously it must mean something different. And that brings us up against the very centre of Theology. . .

We don't use the words begetting or begotten much in modern English, but everyone still knows what they mean. To beget is to become the father of: to create is to make. And the difference is this. When you beget, you beget something of the same kind as yourself. A man begets human babies, a beaver begets little beavers and a bird begets eggs which turn into little birds. But when you make, you make something of a different kind from yourself. A bird makes a nest, a beaver builds a dam, a man makes a wireless set. . .

Now that is the first thing to get clear. What God begets is God; just as what man begets is man. What God creates is not God; just as what man makes is not man. That is why men are not Sons of God in the sense that Christ is. They may be like God in certain ways, but they are not things of the same kind. They are more like statues or pictures of God. . .

And that is precisely what Christianity is about. The world is a great sculptor's shop. We are the statues and there is a rumour going round the shop that some of us are some day going to come to life.fn

We are not begotten by God, we are only made by Him: in our natural state we are not sons of God, only (so to speak) statues. . . . Now the whole offer which Christianity makes is this: that we can, if we let God have His way, come to share in the life of Christ. If we do, we shall then be sharing a life which was begotten, not made, which always has existed and always will exist. Christ is the Son of God. We shall love the Father as He does and the Holy Ghost will arise in us. He came to this world and became a man in order to spread to other men the kind of life He has.fn

The command Be ye perfect is not idealistic gas. Nor is it a command to do the impossible. He is going to make us into creatures that can obey that command. He said (in the Bible) that we were `gods' and He is going to make good His words. If we let Him—for we can prevent Him if we choose—He will make the feeblest and filthiest of us into a god or goddess, a dazzling, radiant, immortal creature, pulsating all through with such energy and joy and wisdom and love as we cannot now imagine, a bright stainless mirror which reflects back to God perfectly (though, of course, on a smaller scale) His own boundless power and delight and goodness. The process will be long and in parts very painful; but that is what we are in for. Nothing less. He meant what He said.fn

Latter-day Saints perk up and listen carefully to this kind of discussion. I honestly don't know what Lewis meant fully (and certainly what he understood or intended) by these statements. The doctrine of the deification of man did not originate with Lewis, nor with the Latter-day Saints; it is to be found throughout Christian history. Whether Lewis would have agreed fully with the teachings of such notables as Irenaeus, Clement of Alexandria, Justin Martyr, Athanasius, and Augustine on deification I cannot tell. One of the tenets of our faith is that human spirits were born sons and daughters of God before this life, and if they will be born again now (see John 3:3) they can be empowered and transformed by Jesus Christ, becoming eventually as he is. B. H. Roberts, an early twentieth-century LDS Church leader wrote: "The term `father' carries with it the notion of generation, begetting from one's own person, springing from one's own nature, and partaking of one's own physical and mental qualities and perhaps likeness, but the term `creator' does not necessarily convey that notion, since a created thing may be external to the nature of the being who created it; as, for example, when God created the heaven and the earth. In this case the heaven and the earth did not bear the image of God; nor was it made in his likeness, as the result was when God said, `Let us make man in our image, and after our likeness.' So in relation to man; he begets a son or a daughter by act of generation; he is a father; and also, in a sense, a creator."fn

CONCLUSION

C. S. Lewis was a practical theologian: he felt that men and women should find joy in living their lives today, here and now, and that they should not exist in a type of morbid fixation on happiness hereafter. "The world might stop in ten minutes," he once declared; "meanwhile, we are to go on doing our duty. The great thing is to be found at one's post as a child of God, living each day as though it were our last, but planning as though our world might last a hundred years."fn

Our Father in Heaven, who as Lewis taught is easy to please but hard to satisfy,fn will not allow those who come unto Him to remain as they are. "To ask that God's love should be content with us as we are is to ask that God should cease to be God: because He is what He is, His love must, in the nature of things, be impeded and repelled by certain stains in our present character, and because He already loves us He must labor to make us lovable."fn Jesus came to heal us with His love (see John 3:16; 1 Jn. 4:9; D&C 34:1-3) He came that we might have life and that we might have it more abundantly (see John 10:10). Let me repeat: as C. S. Lewis observed, "that is precisely what Christianity is about. The world is a great sculptor's shop. We are the statues and there is a rumour going round the shop that some of us are some day going to come to life."fn That life, a new life in Christ, opens us to new feelings, new insights, and new perspectives on our existence here and hereafter. It enables us to see things as they really are. Thus Lewis confessed: "I believe in Christianity as I believe that the sun has risen, not only because I see it, but because by it I see everything else."fn

Robert L. Millet is dean of Religious Education and professor of Ancient Scripture at Brigham Young University. He is the author of numerous books and articles, including The Mormon Faith: A New Look at Christianity.

Notes

1999 ﻿
