Andrew C. Skinner, Robert L. Millet, C. S. Lewis, the Man and His Message: An LDS Perspective ( 1999)

10

SUMMING UP THE C. S. LEWIS CONFERENCE

Andrew C. Skinner

HOW DOES ONE SUM UP THE LIFE and thought of a Clive Staples Lewis, or even a brief conference about him—especially in just a few words? The first thing to say is "thank you" to all conferees, both those who spoke and those who listened. It was an interesting and insightful two days. A second thing to say is that our presenters—some of whom are genuine, bona fide experts on Lewis—truly educated us and reminded us of the depth and breadth of the great Christian apologist. The chapters in this volume reflect some of the finest thinking on Lewis. We express our special appreciation to Professor Christopher Mitchell of Wheaton College for an enlightening presentation on Lewis himself, and to Elder Neal A. Maxwell of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, who captivated us by capturing for us the essence of Christian discipleship from Lewis's perspective as well as our own.

It is something of a commentary on the wide-ranging thought of Lewis, as well as his wide-ranging influence, that our conference had thirteen different presentations, by twelve different presenters of three different Christian denominations, and only began to scratch the surface. The very fact that a conference was held to honor an Anglican churchman and Oxford don at Brigham Young University, an LDS Church-sponsored institution, is testimony to the fact that Lewis continues to have one of the broadest readerships of any twentieth century author.

Our purpose in undertaking this conference was to both explore and explain Lewis's thought, and try to understand why he has an LDS readership. Our purpose was not to canonize C. S. Lewis, but to appreciate him. As I hope was demonstrated at the conference, Latter-day Saints endorse the faith Lewis possessed in the Lord Jesus Christ. Many of us have enjoyed, and will continue to appreciate, and even cherish, many of Lewis's insights. But we are not required to agree with everything Lewis has said. I think we are required to take him seriously. For, as the Book of Mormon teaches,

Wherefore, all things which are good cometh of God; and that which is evil cometh of the devil. . .

But, behold, that which is of God inviteth and enticeth to do good continually; wherefore, every thing which inviteth and enticeth to do good, and to love God, and to serve him, is inspired of God. . .

For behold, the Spirit of Christ is given to every man, that he may know good from evil; wherefore, I show unto you the way to judge; for every thing which inviteth to do good, and to persuade to believe in Christ, is sent forth by the power and gift of Christ; wherefore ye may know with a perfect knowledge it is of God. (Moro. 7:12-13, 16)

Surely, this describes the life and work of C. S. Lewis. Jesus as God incarnate was, for Lewis, the key doctrine of the Christian faith.fn It seems to me his whole-souled effort was to point us to the greatness of Christ and the salvific message of hope to be found in the doctrine of Christ. We see this effort reflected in his fiction, his didactic prose, and even in his correspondence. Lewis once received a letter from a woman in America (via the Macmillan Publishing Company) who wrote on behalf of her nine-year-old son because the young lad was concerned that he might be loving Aslan (the Christly lion of the Narnia chronicles) more than Jesus. The woman received a reply to her letter only ten days after Lewis got it, of which the following sentences are instructive: "Tell Laurence from me, with my love. . . . Even if he was loving Aslan more than Jesus (I'll explain in a moment why he can't really be doing this) he would not be an idol-worshipper. . . . But Laurence can't really love Aslan more than Jesus, even if he feels that's what he is doing. For the things he loves Aslan for doing or saying are simply the things Jesus really did and said. So when Laurence thinks he is loving Aslan, he is really loving Jesus: and perhaps loving Him more than he ever did before."fn

As we heard at the conference, part of Lewis's genius was his ability to reduce the complex to the understandable. We admire his ability to act as a formidable advocate and champion of Christ and Christian values, for his ability to provide thoughtful reasons for the hope that is within us. Not only was he the champion of the common man but also he effectively dispelled the idea that Christianity was an intellectually inferior way of thinking. He was able to elucidate the gospel of Jesus Christ as he saw it from both his reading of holy scripture and from his own life experience.

Lewis was a gifted communicator, a magnificent writer. And one of the things that built his prowess and made him a great writer was the fact that he was a great reader. He read constantly, he read widely, and he read with a pencil. Books were his love—good books, especially the classics. Lewis was opposed to reading commentaries and critiques on works before, and especially instead of, the primary works themselves. From the Magdalene College Magazine and Record of Cambridge University we find the following comment in a brief article entitled "In Memoriam: Professor C. S. Lewis":

There seemed to be nothing that he had not read—and everything that he had read seemed to be within his reach, ready to be recalled and put to use. . . . The enthusiasm and relish which C.L.S. brought to his reading, and that not only in fields where he was acknowledged master, were infectious. He did not regard himself as a scholar, but as a man of letters. The backgrounds of academic controversy, research and criticism were kept rigorously in their place. He spent his time reading texts rather than reading about them; and he annotated his own treasured copies with meticulous care—much to the profit of those to whom, with characteristic generosity, he was always willing to lend them. . . . It was this first handedness and deep original acquaintance with all the `great books' of antiquity and the Middle Ages that made the privilege of reading with him a rare one indeed.fn

Even at the end of his life, after Joy had died, after he had given up his post at Cambridge University and he and Warnie were alone at the Kilns, Lewis was busily engaged in reading. What he read was not fluff. He said in a letter toward the end of 1963, in the waning weeks of his life: "Don't think I am not happy. I am re-reading the Iliad and enjoying it more than I have ever done."fn One of the resolves that comes out of a conference like this one is to read, read, read; read more widely and more deeply; read the great works of history and literature. Perhaps, if we want to honor the memory of such men as C. S. Lewis and try to make their gifts our own, we can teach our students and children to love learning, and, of course, read to them.

Interestingly, in his published writings Lewis doesn't talk explicitly about purposeful personal Bible study. But his familiarity with the text, especially the New Testament, is evident in every one of his works. It is well known that he reread from all of the books he enjoyed the most, and biblical books were no exception. We know from personal letters and comments of his biographers that Lewis read the Bible devotionally every day, except when he was ill. He especially enjoyed the Psalms, the Gospels (particularly Mark), and the writings of Paul. In some of his letters he mentioned that he read the Latin Vulgate version of the New Testament, and encouraged his young correspondents to do the same. On one occasion he wrote, "By the way good easy Latin reading to keep one's Latin up with is the New Testament in Latin. Any Roman Catholic bookshop will have one: say you want a copy of the `Vulgate (VULGATE) New Testament.' Acts goes specially well in Latin."fn

While it is true that Lewis read and reread the New Testament in the ancient Greek and Latin languages, those who knew him well have noted that he would read from any version available. He read before evening prayer so as to approach God with an active and spiritually engaged mind. Textual understanding was a fundamental part of him, but reading the scripture was also reinvigorating and energizing to his personal faith. In other words, the great Christian thinker and apologist found vital personal nourishment in the scriptures. As he said, "A man can't be always defending the truth; there must be a time to feed on it."fn

Lewis told us what he thought of the Bible in a chapter entitled "Scripture" in his Reflections on the Psalms . He believed it contained the inspired word of God. And thus he observed, "Those who talk of reading the Bible `as literature' sometimes mean, I think, reading it without attending to the main thing it is about; like reading Burke with no interest in politics, or reading the Aeneid with no interest in Rome."fn

But even more than containing the inspired word of God, for Lewis the Bible carried God's divine message of salvation embodied in Christ. Thus, in one sense the Bible was only the vehicle to Christ. Said Lewis, "It is Christ himself, not the Bible, who is the true word of God. The Bible, read in the right spirit and with the guidance of good teachers, will bring us to Him."fn I hasten to add, parenthetically, that we ought to note the important role Lewis ascribed to good teachers! But the main point for Lewis was the association with Christ, inherent in all the scriptures in one way or another. An example of this conviction is found in Lewis's introduction to his Reflections on the Psalms , where he observed that while not all people may be able to appreciate the book of Psalms for its poetic quality, "Even those Christians who cannot enjoy it will respect it; for Our Lord, soaked in the poetic tradition of His country, delighted to use it."fn

Lewis's books are so vibrant and relevant to Christians trying to live the gospel in the modern world because they are so full of camouflaged or carefully re-crafted and internalized scriptural concepts and tenets. It seems to me that Lewis filled the role of being every person's practical and palatable biblical exegete (though one suspects he would not have liked to accept that designation readily). He teaches us the practical application of a pure biblical Christianity. He elucidated the gospel as he found it laid out in the Bible, and then explained how and why it could and should be lived in modern times. He was a master of analogy and metaphor. And somehow the metaphors in his writing ultimately point us to heaven. As one scholar observed, "Lewis has probably accomplished as much as any modern writer, both in his fiction and in his sermons, to make heaven believable."fn

But perhaps all of this misses the most significant point of all. Lewis's writings are so good because he was so good. He spoke with insight and power because he was able to bring a brilliant, logical mind in harmony with the ideals he was teaching. He practiced what he preached. This is something I would hope we also take away from this conference. Behind the intellectual brilliance is goodness.

Lewis's one-time secretary, Walter Hooper, wrote of his mentor in the introduction to Lewis's book The Weight of Glory the following tribute: "Perhaps it is worth recording that I knew—I just knew—that no matter how long I lived, no matter who else I met, I should never be in the company of such a supremely good human being again. Of all my memories this is the most indelible and is certain to remain so."fn Though there has been some controversy surrounding Hooper, there seems to be absolutely no question that Lewis was a great Christian scholar because he tried to be a good Christian. Again, from the Magdalene College Magazine and Record of Cambridge University we read: "His `mere Christianity' was not an easy affair, the gesture of a clever broadcaster, the fantasy of an imaginative fiction writer, but a demanding life, expressing itself in hidden acts of almost quixotic generosity and kindness. Beneath the gusto and the bravura of his personality lay a deeply willed humility. He taught `Christes lore, . . . But first he followed it himself.'"fn

Those who know something of Lewis's life have perhaps noticed an aspect that goes almost unnoticed but tells us much about his basic attitude toward people. Personally, I continue to be impressed by this one thing. I am speaking here about the hours and hours Lewis spent simply answering correspondence, letters and notes from people living everywhere, and from all different age groups—particularly children. This is not only mind-boggling but truly touching and it bespeaks his genuine Christian attitude and sense of responsibility to minister to human beings. (Trust me on this point—my secretary can barely get me to answer even the most critical e-mail messages.) We have learned how, over the span of one two-week period, Lewis answered over two thousand letters with hand-written responses. One can scarcely conceive of the time and effort that must have taken.

Furthermore, it has been said that Lewis possessed a quick wit and demonstrated a genuine and hearty warmth upon meeting people. He took life seriously because he believed it determined the eternal destiny of one's immortal soul, but, he said, "This does not mean that we are to be perpetually solemn. We must play." Lewis was fun-loving and believed that all things created by God were good in themselves and were to be enjoyed by mortals. These things only became bad through misuse.fn In The Screwtape Letters, Lewis has the senior devil Screwtape saying to his nephew, Wormword: "Never forget that when we are dealing with any pleasure in its healthy and normal and satisfying form, we are, in a sense, on the [God's] ground. I know we have won many a soul through pleasure. All the same it is [God's] invention, not ours. He made the pleasures: all our research so far has not enabled us to produce one. All we can do is to encourage the humans to take the pleasures which our Enemy has produced, at times, or in ways, or in degrees, which He has forbidden."fn

Walter Hooper confirmed that Lewis truly believed that if we did our best to perform whatever God demanded, we should "at least enjoy the good He sends us."fn Of course there was always the risk that people might be tempted to exceed the bounds of moderation or propriety. But that is the nature of this mortal existence. Though life is a test, it should be lived to the fullest. Lewis thought it a tragedy that some individuals were anxious to avoid suffering rather than experience delight.

Several of Lewis's friends and biographers indicate that he had fun with people, though never at their expense. Again, said Walter Hooper, "I have tried to indicate from personal recollections that Dr. Johnson might well have had such a man as C. S. Lewis in mind in suggesting that `the size of a man's understanding might always be justly measured by his mirth.'"fn Hooper illustrated his point with a delightful example.

I see, for instance, from my diary of 7 June 1963 that during a longish visit with Lewis we drank what seemed gallons of tea. After a while I asked to be shown the "bathroom," forgetting that in most homes the bathroom and the toilet are separate rooms. With a kind of mock formality, Lewis showed me to the bathroom, pointed to the tub, flung down a pile of towels, and closed the door behind me. I returned to his sitting-room to say that it was not a bath I wanted but. . . . "Well, sir `choose you this day,'" said Lewis, bursting with laughter as he quoted the prophet Joshua, "that will break you of those silly American euphemisms. And now, where is it you wanted to go?"fn

Lewis possessed a sincere interest in the pursuits of others rather than his own. Even though he could not disguise the formidable range of his learning, nor his towering intellect made obvious through penetrating questions, he cared deeply about people just as Jesus calls each one of us to care. Lewis believed in individual accountability but corporate responsibility—knowing that salvation in Christ could never be anything but a joint venture. Lewis's caring attitude was grounded in far more than just words; he donated book royalties to charity. In a memorial service held for Lewis on 7 December 1963 in the Chapel of Magdalen College, his friend Austin Farrer said of him:

His characteristic attitude to people in general was one of consideration and respect. He did his best for them and he appreciated them. He paid you the compliment of attending to your words. He did not pretend to read your heart. He was endlessly generous. He gave without stint, to all who seemed to care for them, the riches of his mind and the effort of his wit: and where there was need, he gave his money. I will not say what I know about his charities. When he had entered into any relationship his patience and his loyalty were inexhaustible. He really was a Christian—by which I mean, he never thought he had the right to stop.fn

One senses that C. S. Lewis died as he would have wanted—in his long-time home, with his brother, Warnie, near at hand. But I doubt that anyone obsesses over his death, because we know that he continues to live. Judging from his writings, he himself was fixated on the life beyond, and thus his writings point us to that hope made possible by the living Christ.

Andrew C. Skinner is chair of the Department of Ancient Scripture at Brigham Young University. He holds graduate degrees from the Iliff School of Theology, Harvard University, and the University of Denver, and is the author of numerous publications.

Notes

1999 ﻿
