Andrew C. Skinner, Robert L. Millet, C. S. Lewis, the Man and His Message: An LDS Perspective ( 1999)

APPENDIX 1

THE LIFE OF C. S. LEWIS: A Chronology of Events

ANGLICAN CHURCHMAN, PROFESSOR, literary critic, novelist, and theologian, Clive Staples Lewis was born in Belfast, Ireland, on 29 November 1898. Known as "Jack" from his youth, his amazingly productive life as a scholar was shaped by several significant events, chief among them being his formal education in England and his conversion to Christianity.

As a boy Lewis took after his mother and father, and read voraciously—a practice he continued his whole life. He spent many happy hours with his brother and lifelong friend, Warren ("Warnie"). Together as youth they drew pictures, wrote stories, and created the imaginary world of "Boxen." Raised in a Christian home, Lewis turned away from the faith of his forebears (which included a string of clergymen) after the death of his mother. He was devastated by her passing and never became close to his father.

In 1911 Lewis was sent to Cherbourg, a prep school in the town of Malvern. After discovering Norse and Celtic mythology, he began to view Christianity as one of the many, if not inferior, myths of world history. If God existed, he was certainly a comic sadist. Lewis's adolescence was a difficult period for him in some ways, but extremely important in others. In 1914 Lewis went to study with William T. Kirkpatrick (1848-1921), one of the seminal figures in all of Lewis's educational experience. "The Great Knock," as Kirkpatrick was called, helped to train Lewis's brilliant mind and to hone his powers of logic, reason, precision, and persuasion. Under his tutelage Lewis mastered languages and texts (Greek, Latin, French, Italian, and others) while managing to cultivate a romantic, imaginative, poetic side.

In 1917 Lewis entered University College, Oxford, but after one term went off to France to fight in World War I with the Somerset Light Infantry. He was wounded in April 1918 and returned to Oxford in 1919, after his recovery. His brilliance won for him First Class degrees in classics, philosophy, and English. Even while a student, he began his publishing career by producing his first collection of poetry entitled Spirits in Bondage, under the pseudonym of Clive Hamilton (see Appendix 2). Between 1925 and 1954 Lewis was fellow of English language and literature at Magdalen College, Oxford, an academic post that allowed him the scholarly freedom and economic security to produce many of his most significant works. Some of his colleagues criticized him, however, for turning his considerable talents to the defense of Christianity instead of putting his energies wholly into his academic discipline. This criticism was manifest in Oxford's refusal to ever grant him a professorship. Nevertheless, in 1954 Lewis was appointed professor of Medieval and Renaissance literature at Cambridge University, where he remained until his retirement on account of poor health just before his death.

Lewis's conversion to Christianity is described by him without drama or fanfare. His efforts to keep the "Hound of Heaven" at bay gave way slowly but surely. In 1916 he found in a railway station a copy of George MacDonald's Phantastes and read it, at first appreciating its style and divine symbolism, and later referring to it as "holiness." As an Oxford don he began to find his own arguments against God philosophically untenable. Then his friend and colleague, J. R. R. Tolkien, was able to persuade him that the Christian "myth" was different from all others because it was true, the World was made flesh!

Lewis's spiritual pilgrimage, his conversion first to what he called theism and then to full Christianity, is recounted primarily in two places: his semi-autobiographical work of fiction entitled The Pilgrim's Regress (1933) and his actual autobiography, Surprised by Joy (1955). The former discusses those inconsolable longings which all of us have from time to time in this life, longings for and pointers to God (which Lewis calls "Joy"). The later book describes the author's conversion in very philosophical, almost clinical, terms. In Surprised by Joy Lewis pinpoints for us the exact time of his full acceptance of Christianity. It came during a day trip he and his brother made one afternoon to the Whipsnade Zoo, forty miles from Oxford. As Warnie drove the motorcycle, and Jack sat in the sidecar alone with his thoughts as biting wind whipped past, he considered the issue which had finally come to dominate his thoughts. Namely, who was Jesus Christ? Was he truly God incarnate? In a very matter-of-fact tone Lewis said of the experience, "When we set out I did not believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and when we reached the zoo I did."fn

Though Lewis's description of his conversion sounds matter-of-fact, there was nothing matter-of-fact about his commitment to the faith or the richness of his life as a Christian. He had wonderful friends who influenced him greatly. He was part of a group, the "Inklings," that met weekly to talk about life and to read and discuss one another's work. It included his brother Warren (1895-1973), Tolkien (1892-1973), a Merton College English scholar named Hugo Dyson (1896-1975), the novelist Charles Williams (1886-1945), the philosopher Owen Barfield (1898-1998), and others. In their company Lewis refined ideas which later came out in print, some of the most articulate and helpful discussions of Christian principles found anywhere, as well as some of the most carefully reasoned defenses of belief in supernatural Christianity ever penned.

In 1956 Lewis married an American woman who had converted to Christianity from Judaism, and whom he had first met in 1952, Joy Davidman Gresham. With her he found a fulness to life he had not known previously. When she died of cancer in 1960, an immense gap was left in his world, from which he never seems to have recovered. Just three years later he passed away without much notice, primarily because President John F. Kennedy was assassinated the same day. His funeral was attended by only a few close friends. Not even his brother, Warren, made it because his grief was too overwhelming. And yet, even in death Lewis left a message of hope for all he touched. On his tombstone is inscribed a phrase from Shakespeare: "Men must endure their going hence." For C. S. Lewis that "hence" was to a place with God and his beloved Joy.

Following is a list of major events in the life of C. S. Lewis:

1898Born in Belfast, Ireland, to Albert and Florence Hamilton Lewis; younger brother of Warren (born 1895).1905Lewis family moves to a new house called "Little Lea," on the outskirts of Belfast. Many happy hours were spent there.1908Death of Lewis's mother, Flora Hamilton Lewis. Lewis is shipped off to England to attend Wynward School under the direction of a brutal and emotionally unstable headmaster.1911Lewis is sent to prep school (Cherbourg) in Malvern.1914Lewis makes a new acquaintance, Arthur Greeves (1895-1966), with whom he remains close friends his entire life. Lewis begins studying with William T. Kirkpatrick ("the Great Knock") and blossoms intellectually.1916Lewis reads George MacDonald's Phantastes, which he regards as a "great literary experience."1917Lewis begins his university studies at Oxford. After only eight weeks he is enrolled in the Officer's Training Corp where he meets Edward "Paddy" Moore and Moore's mother and sister, Mrs. Janie Moore and Maureen. This begins a close relationship with Mrs. Moore that will last until her death in 1951. In November 1917 Lewis arrives in France with his regiment, the Somerset Light Infantry, to fight on the front lines in WWI.1918Lewis receives serious wounds in the Battle of Arras on April 15. He is sent back to England for a long period of convalescence. Paddy Moore is killed in action, and Lewis

fulfills his commitment to Paddy to look after his mother. Lewis's relationship with his father is strained to the breaking point as Albert refuses to visit his recovering son. They begin a reconciliation at the end of the year.1919Lewis returns to Oxford as his brother, Warren, returns to his army post. Lewis regards himself as an atheist. He decides to pursue an academic career. His first book of poetry is published.1921Lewis wins the Chancellor's English Essay Prize, though he declines to admit the existence of God in his essay on the assigned topic of "Optimism."1922Lewis is awarded a B.A. degree with First Class Honours in classics.1923He is awarded another First Class Honours degree in English.1925Lewis is elected to a fellowship at Magdalen College, Oxford. Up to this point he has been supporting himself, Janie Moore, and her daughter on a meager yearly allowance from his father, Albert.1926Lewis begins to study carefully the four Gospels after a conversation with colleague T. D. Weldon who, though an atheist himself, indicates there is substantial evidence to regard the Gospels as history.1929Lewis becomes a theist, converted to a belief in God though not yet a belief in Christ as the Son of God. He describes the experience as one in which he finally acknowledged the unrelenting approach of Him whom he had so earnestly desired not to meet. Later that year, Lewis visits his father who is taken seriously ill and dies. His father's death actually strengthens Lewis's vague but unfolding belief in a personal immortality.1930Lewis and Janie Moore (along with her daughter) purchase their own home, the Kilns, in Headington Quarry about three miles from the center of Oxford. It is decided that Warren will live with them after his retirement from active duty in the military in 1932.1931During a discussion with friends J. R. R. Tolkien and Hugo

Dyson during the evening of September 19, Lewis has a religious experience and believes he has received a message from God concerning the truth of Christianity. His conversion is completed nine days later during a trip to the Whipsnade Zoo. For the first time since 1914 he takes communion on Christmas Day.1939Lewis's friend Charles Williams moves to Oxford from London and becomes a core member of the Inklings, a private study group that evolved during the 1930s and began meeting every Thursday evening, as well as on Tuesdays just before lunch at a pub named the Eagle and Child. In 1962, when the pub is remodeled, the day meetings move to another pub called the Lamb and Flag. Lewis's association with the men of this informal society becomes a cherished one.1941Lewis is invited to give talks to those serving in the Royal Air Force (WWII has broken out in 1939), a practice he continues throughout the rest of the war. He also agrees to do a series of broadcasts for the BBC, which eventually reach millions of listeners. These addresses, delivered in 1941, 1942, and 1944, were later compiled and published in 1952 as the book Mere Christianity.1942The Oxford Socratic Club is formed as a forum for students to discuss their religious questions. Lewis is invited to become president and university sponsor of the club. It attracts famous and gifted speakers, but declines after Lewis leaves Oxford in 1954.1945Charles Williams dies unexpectedly and Lewis is deeply grieved. As a memorial, Lewis produces a volume of collected eassys in honor of his friend, Essays Presented to Charles Williams (published in 1947), with contributions from some of the literary greats of his age: Dorothy Sayers, J. R. R. Tolkien, Owen Barfield, Gervase Mathew, Warren Lewis, and himself.1947Janie Moore spends much of the year sick in bed. Lewis's relationship with her becomes strained as she becomes more autocratic and demanding. In addition, Warren's

alcoholism becomes worse and he is often admitted to the hospital.1948Lewis debates Elizabeth Anscombe, a Roman Catholic scholar and later professor of philosophy at Cambridge. Opinions differ about who won, but Lewis feels defeated, believing his intellectual proof for the existence of God to be less than stellar. As a result, he not only feels humbled but also revises a new edition of his book Miracles (reissued in 1960), the last of his purely theological works.1950In January Lewis receives the first of many letters from an American woman whom he will eventually marry, Joy Davidman Gresham. In April Janie Moore, age seventy-eight, has to be put in a nursing home.1951Janie Moore dies which, though saddening, allows Lewis a newfound freedom.1952Lewis finally meets Joy Gresham in person; she spends two weeks at the Kilns in the fall and again at Christmas-time.1953Joy Gresham is divorced from her husband, Bill Gresham. She, along with her two sons, moves back to London, England.1954Lewis's admirers at Cambridge persuade the university to create for him a professorship in Medieval and Renaissance studies. He accepts it and moves from Magdalen College, Oxford, to Magdalene College, Cambridge. He decides to continue living at the Kilns on weekends but in Cambridge during the school week.1955Joy and her two boys move to Headington, close to Lewis.1956Lewis decides to marry Joy in a quiet civil ceremony so that she and the boys can remain in England. He insists it is purely a legality. The ceremony in April is kept so quiet that even Warren does not know about it. Later that year Joy is taken ill and diagnosed with cancer. Her illness and suffering make Lewis aware of his love for her.1957Lewis and Joy are married in a religious ceremony. Joy moves to the Kilns and begins experiencing a miraculous remission and recovery.

1959Jack and Joy Lewis spend many happy months together, but after a vacation to Ireland Joy is told that the cancer has returned.1960Lewis and Joy take one last trip together to Greece, a place they have always wanted to see. Joy is in and out of the hospital. She passes away on July 13, and Lewis is overcome with grief. He chronicles his suffering in A Grief Observed, published in 1961.1961Lewis is taken ill and told he needs an operation, but his health is too poor. He is forbidden to return to Cambridge until his condition improves. He refuses to give up smoking (something he has enjoyed since age twelve), claiming it will make him unbearably bad-tempered. He continues to write and produces two manuscripts that will be published posthumously, The Discarded Image (1964) and Letters to Malcolm: Chiefly on Prayer (1964).1962Lewis improves enough to return to Cambridge for a short time. In mid-July he suffers kidney failure and a heart attack, and is believed to be dying. Miraculously, he emerges from a coma immediately after receiving the sacrament of extreme unction (Last Rights), begins to improve, and returns to the Kilns with a nurse.1963A thirty-one-year-old American schoolteacher, Walter Hooper, volunteers to act as Lewis's secretary for a brief period. Lewis sends a letter of resignation to Cambridge University in early August. He attends his last meeting of the Inklings on November 18. On November 22 he dies at the Kilns. The financial estate he leaves behind is found not to be very large because he has given away a good share of his considerable literary earnings.

Note

1999 ﻿
