B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 5 ( 1930)

CHAPTER CXXI

AN EFFORT TO OBTAIN STATEHOOD—ATTITUDE OF THE LATTER-DAY SAINTS IN UTAH TOWARDS THE WAR BETWEEN THE STATES

IN this period there was a very earnest, and I may say a very bold, effort made to secure statehood for Utah, that has been frequently referred to, and not without reason, as evidence of the loyalty of the Latter-day Saints to the government of the United States. It seems to stand out all the more prominently for the reason that running parallel with it in time, an effort was made to induce Utah to secede from the Union, in connection with the southern states that were then taking such action. A proposition was made by two members of congress from the south, to the delegate from Utah, that Utah territory should secede. Utah had her grievances to redress, and "then [1861] was the time to have them redressed." It was pointed out to Utah's delegate "what great support it would give the southern cause if Utah was to rise in rebellion against the government." The delegate replied that Utah indeed "had difficulties with the government; but we calculate," said he, "that they will be righted in the government, or we will endure them." "This has been uniformly our feelings," said Elder John Taylor when relating the above incident. [^1]

2UTAH'S EFFORT TO GET INTO THE UNION—1860-1861

2Writing of a probable movement to bring Utah into the Union when so many of the states were preparing to get out of it, delegate Wm. H. Hooper said—

2"I think three-quarters of the Republicans of the house would vote for our admission; but I may be mistaken. Many say they would gladly 'swap' the Gulf states for Utah. I tell them that we show our loyalty by trying to get in, while others are trying to get out, notwithstanding our grievances, which are far greater than those of any of the seceding states; but that I consider we can redress our grievances better in the Union than out of it; at least we'll give our worthy 'Uncle' an opportunity of engrafting us into his family; and if he doesn't want us, we must then carve out our own future." [^2]

2About a year later, when the subject of statehood was being agitated in the Utah legislature, George A. Smith, a member of the assembly, presented to President Young a draft of an act for the calling of a convention to form a state Constitution. The president approved the measure. "And let the convention," said he, "ask the general government to admit us as a state, and if they don't do it, tell them that we will organize a state government and control [it]. If we do not do something to head [off] this military operation, they will afflict us, [and] the whole country will be a military despotism. * * * We must soon organize a government for ourselves, and take care of ourselves." [^3]

The act calling the convention was vetoed by the then governor of Utah, [^4] John W. Dawson—of whom more later—but the matter was immediately taken up by the citizens outside of the legislature. Mass meetings were called in all the towns and settlements to elect delegates to a constitutional convention according to the apportionment provided in the recently vetoed enactment. The meetings throughout were enthusiastic. The one in Salt Lake City was held in the "Old Tabernacle," at which there were present some three thousand citizens. Edward Hunter, presiding bishop of the church, was the chairman, Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball led in the invocation and benediction. The committee on resolutions and address were D. H. Wells, William H. Hooper, John Taylor, George A. Smith, and Abraham O. Smoot. The address produced by this committee was an able review of the past and the then prevailing conditions, which made up the sum of "Mormon" grievances against the continuance of which there was made earnest and manly protest; and to remove which the solemn demand was again made for the extension to the Utah community the undoubted American right of local self-government. [^5]

3On the 20th of January the delegates to the convention met and organized by choosing D. H. Wells for president, and William Clayton for secretary and a full set of officers. The chief work of the convention was assigned to two committees, one to draft a Constitution to be submitted to the convention; [^6] and a second to draft a Memorial to congress to accompany the presentation of the Constitution. [^7]

THE PROPOSED CONSTITUTION FOR THE "STATE OF DESERET"—ELECTION OF OFFICERS

By the 23rd of January a Constitution was adopted and provisions made for its submission to the vote of the people on the first Monday in March following, at which time also there was to be an election of a governor, lieutenant governor, representative to congress, and members of the general assembly "as provided for in the Constitution." The name of the state was to be "Deseret." The convention near the close of its last session placed in nomination "for the consideration of the electors," the following candidates:

4For governor: Brigham Young.

4For lieutenant governor: Heber C. Kimball.

4For member of congress: John M. Bernhisel. [^8]

4All free, white, male citizens of the United States over twenty-one years of age, and six months residence in the territory constituted the electorate.

4The officially certified returns of the election, with three counties not reported, [^9] shows that the Constitution was adopted by a vote of 9,879; and the state officers nominated by the convention were elected practically by the same vote. It was estimated that the vote of the three remaining counties would bring the aggregate vote for the Constitution and these state officers up to 13,000. [^10]

4There were no votes against the Constitution or the state officers. The members of the legislature were elected in their respective senatorial and representative districts by practically the same number of votes cast in the districts severally for the Constitution.

The Constitution adopted provided that the first meeting of the legislature should be as directed by proclamation of the governor-elect, and subsequent sessions as provided by law. Accordingly, Governor-elect Brigham Young called the legislature of the state to meet on Monday, the 14th day of April, [^11] at which time he delivered his message to the organized assembly. Quoting Hon. W. H. Seward, who said "The Constitution of the United States prescribes only two qualifications for new states; namely, a substantial civil community and a republican government." [^12] Governor Young contended that Utah had both, and was therefore entitled to admission. He pointed out that Utah's admission to the Union would relieve the government of the expense of maintaining the territorial government of Utah. [^13] He approved of the territorial legislative act which the year before had assumed the payment of Utah's quota of the direct national tax (the war tax), "and without question," said the message, "this general assembly [i. e. of the 'State of Deseret'], should they deem further action on that subject necessary, will, with equal patriotism, adopt such measures as will best sustain our government in its financial affairs so far as our apportionment and every constitutional requirement are concerned." "But," he continued, "I object to any action being taken in this or any other matter, except on the ground of right and justice, and in no wise as an evidence of our loyalty, for it has ofttimes been severely tested, and has on every occasion, emerged from the test with unsullied purity. We are not here as aliens from our government, but we are tried and firm supporters of the Constitution, and every constitutional right." [^14]

6The legislature remained in session but four days. They elected Wm. H. Hooper and George Q. Cannon United States senators from the "State of Deseret;" also the following state officers made elective by the general assembly under the Constitution: secretary of state, Daniel H. Wells; treasurer, David O. Calder; auditor of public accounts, William Clayton; attorney-general, Aurelius Miner; chief justice of the supreme court, Elias Smith; two associate justices, Z. Snow and Seth M. Blair. [^15] There were several other legislative enactments which at least manifest great confidence that the long desired state government would be granted. [^16]

Senator-elect Hooper started from Salt Lake City for the national capital in April, under a special escort of mounted men as far east as the north fork of the Platte river. George Q. Cannon, the other senator-elect, was in England at the time of his election, acting in the presidency of the European Mission. He left Liverpool for Washington in the middle of May, having been summoned by cablegram to join his colleague at the national capital, and work for Utah's admission into the Union. Delegate Bernhisel presented the Constitution in the house on the 9th of June, with the accompanying Memorial for admission. The matter was referred to the committee on territories. The following day the Constitution and Memorial were presented in the senate by the vice president; and Senator Latham, of California, moved to print these documents and to admit the senators-elect to the floor of the senate. The matter was referred to the senate committee on territories. Next day Senator Latham offered a resolution to admit Messrs. Hooper and Cannon to the floor of the senate, which was laid over and nothing further came of it. [^17] On the 22nd of December, Hon. James M. Ashley, of Ohio, chairman of the house committee on territories reported enabling acts for the admission of Nebraska, Colorado, Utah and Nevada, but nothing came of it so far as Utah was concerned. [^18] In accordance with the act passed by the general assembly of "Deseret," which elected Senators Hooper and Cannon, that assembly again met at the "Old Council House" in Salt Lake City, and "Governor Young" delivered a message to them, devoted chiefly to the recital of the several steps taken in congress on the application of Utah for admission; and which after receiving, the "general assembly" adjourned sine die. [^19]

7Thus ended the rather heroic effort of Utah to get into the Union when so many of the sovereign states were trying to get out, and keep out.

7It was while these efforts to get into the Union were at their height, that congress not only refused statehood to Utah, but passed the anti-polygamy act, which President Lincoln approved on the 8th of July, 1862.

PER CONTRA DATA CONSIDERED

This effort to get into the Union and the expressed willingness to bear with the other loyal states, her full share of the burdens of maintaining the Union, when its fate hung tremulously in the balance, testifies strongly for the patriotism of the Latter-day Saint community in Utah. Still it must be conceded that there is per contra data that may not be omitted from consideration. It must be remembered that Joseph Smith when a candidate for president of the United States offered a solution to the question of Negro slavery—the purchase of the slaves by the general government, at a fair price, paying for them out of the surplus revenue arising from the sale of public lands [^20]—this from the viewpoint of the saints would have settled the slavery question, and with that settled there would have arisen no question of secession to vex the nation and threaten its dismemberment. Their Prophet's plan had been rejected. In 1832 the Prophet had received a revelation in which was predicted in a most remarkable manner the division between the northern and the southern states, resulting in war, and terminating in the death and misery of many souls. [^21] What should be their attitude towards a conflict thus predicted, as a judgment upon their nation, would naturally present itself to the minds of the Latter-day Saints as constituting a very grave problem. [^22]

8Moreover, they themselves by a combination of circumstances, already considered in these pages, had been virtually expatriated from the United States, the general government the meanwhile manifesting no interest in the maintenance of their rights as citizens, or their fate as human beings. That government had but just concluded a hostile demonstration against them in the "Utah Expedition" affair, to the last manifesting its distrust of them by destroying the munitions of war left over from that "Expedition," rather than to intrust it to a community who stood so much in need of it for efficient equipment against surrounding savage tribes.

Under all these circumstances it is not surprising to find a feeling sometimes vigorously and ill-advisedly expressed, that the war between the states, arising out of the slavery question, was a matter in which the Latter-day Saints need have no particular concern; and as a result the attitude of aloofness from the conflict was assumed, and a satisfaction at their isolation from the scenes of destruction and carnage incident to the great and dreadful war was frequently voiced. [^23]

9"THE WAR TAX" ASSESSED ON UTAH

9This position was manifest in both speech and action. When the territory's apportionment of the direct national tax, amounting to $26,982, to be collected annually, either through officers of the territory's own appointing or through federal officers who might be appointed under the federal act itself, [^24] the legislature assumed the territory's quota of the direct tax, and imposed a territorial tax on all property, of one per cent, two-thirds of which was to be paid in gold and silver coin to meet the requirements of the federal law for payment in coin. But the same legislature also memorialized congress to remit the quota of the direct tax assessed against Utah.

The reason assigned for this action was the great difficulty of raising the tax in coin. "It has been nearly impossible," wrote George A. Smith to Delegate John M. Bernhisel—again by this time Utah's delegate in congress—"to collect taxes in this territory in coin. The inhabitants have an abundance of breadstuffs, stock and other like property, but money as a circulating medium, is, as you are well aware, exceedingly scarce in the territory. The act of congress imposing the direct tax in the territory, could not be collected on any property but the houses worth over $500 each. This would have laid the burden of the whole tax on about two hundred persons. And it is doubtful whether property could be sold for sufficient to cover the tax. The legislature therefore concluded to assess and lay upon all property, taxable by the territory." [^25]

10The consideration of this question by the legislature discovered a remarkable state of things in Utah respecting the status of the citizens of the territory in relation to property, as will appear from the statement of Mr. West, chairman of the special committee having in hand the direct tax matter:

10"The direct tax laid by the United States is a tax laid on real property and the improvements thereon. To this there is the privilege given to each state or territory to assume, assess, and collect the said direct tax in their own way and manner. The tax being laid upon real property and its improvements and buildings and the privilege for the territory to assess and collect the same in their own way and manner, confines our legislative action thereon to assessing and collecting said tax upon the property made taxable by congress. Another and greater difficulty which the committee had to encounter was the well known fact that all the lands, of every description, in this territory, are lands, the Indian title of which is not extinguished. While the paramount title of which lands are in the federal government, and while said act imposing said direct tax specially exempts all lands and property made taxable by said act, belonging to the United States, the territory is left in the anomalous predicament of not having a foot of taxable lands, or free-hold resident within her borders! Thus situated are our citizens, with a direct tax of nearly $27,000 imposed upon them. The tax is laid upon a kind and description of property which does not exist or lay in the territory." [^26]

The tax was not remitted, however, and although it was taxation without representation—or at least without representation worthy of that name—it was collected from the people who paid it without protest or complaint. [^27] That is without protest or complaint beyond the request made by the legislature for the remission of the quota of the direct tax against Utah as above set forth.

UTAH'S ATTITUDE DURING THE CIVIL WAR

The territory sent no volunteers into the Civil War service; the very limited service, its character and specific provision called out to guard the mails, forming no worthwhile exception to the statement. Utah's whole attitude is well described in the following passage from the formal address of Elder John Taylor at the 4th of July celebration in 1861. After tracing historically what he considered the causes leading "to the fall and dismemberment of the nation," he said:

11"It may now be proper to inquire what part shall we take in the present difficulties [the war then raging—the first gun which had been fired early in January, 1861—and this speech is in July, 1861]. We do not wish to dodge any of these questions. We have ever taken a manly, straightforward path, and always expect to do so. In regard to the present strife, it is a warfare among brothers. We have neither inaugurated it, nor assisted in its inauguration; both parties, as already shown, have violated their constitutional obligations. No parties in the United States have suffered more frequently and grievously than we have, the violation of our national compact. We have frequently been mobbed, pillaged and plundered, without redress. We have been hunted like the deer on the mountains, our men have been whipped, banished, imprisoned and put to death without a reason. We have been driven from city to city, from state to state for no just cause or complaint. We have been banished from the pale of what is termed civilization, and forced to make a home in the desert wastes. * * * Shall we join the north to fight against the south? No! Shall we join the south against the north? As emphatically, No! Why? They have both as before shown, brought it upon themselves, and we have had no hand in the matter. Whigs, Democrats, Americans and Republicans have all in turn endeavored to stain their hands in innocent blood, and whatever others may do, we cannot conscientiously help to tear down the fabric we are sworn to uphold. We know no north, no south, no east, no west; we abide strictly and positively by the Constitution, and cannot by the intrigues or sophism of either party, be cajoled into any other attitude." [^28]

This attitude with reference to the great American conflict, is frequently asserted in the writings and in the "Old Tabernacle" speeches of leading church men,—but often in more emphatic terms than are here employed [^29]—until it is forced upon one as representing the habitual and prevailing mental attitude of the community upon the subject of the war between the states, unless there could be a full and complete recognition of Utah's right to community self-government, guaranteed by admission into the sisterhood of states as one of the free, equal and sovereign states of that Union. In other words, the position assumed was, that if they were to share the burdens of the Union, justice demanded that they should have full participation in its benefits.

Footnotes

"Resolved, That uniformly selecting and transporting men from distant states into our territory to fill its offices, presuming as it does that we have no men in our territory fit, capable or worthy to fill them, is a standing insult to the intelligence and patriotism of this community, and devoid alike of good policy and common justice.

Resolved, That we can see no other or better way to avoid the continual recurrence of these political difficulties which have so beset our territorial progress, than to abolish our territorial form of government and trust that congress now in session, will hearken unto our application for admission into the Union, and will grant us speedy and favorable action thereon." (Deseret News of Jan. 8th, 1862, where the address, resolutions and proceedings in full will be found).

An Act relating to the duties of the secretary of state;

An Act in relation to elections;

An Act locating the seat of government of the 'State of Deseret;'

An Act concerning the general assembly;

An act making the laws of the territory of Utah in force in the 'State of Deseret;'

An Act defining the judicial circuits and the places of holding circuit courts;

An Act providing for publishing and distributing the laws enacted by the general assembly;

An Act providing for appeals from the probate and circuit courts;

An Act concerning the supreme court of the 'State of Deseret;'

An Act in relation to circuit judges." (Deseret News, vol. xi, p. 340).

---
Notas:
[^1] It was Secretary Stanton's influence that placed the people of Utah under the military supervision of the California volunteers. (See Linn's Story of the Mormons, p. 544).
[^2] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entries for January, 1862, p. 258. Also Deseret News of January 22nd, 1862.
[^3] Waite's The Mormon Prophet, p. 76.
[^4] Waite's Mormon Prophet, p. 77. The other appointees by Lincoln had been Frank Fuller of New Hampshire, secretary of the territory, and James Duane Doty superintendent of Indian Affairs. John F. Kinney had been reappointed chief justice of Utah by President Buchanan, succeeding Judge D. R. Eckles, and was holding over on that appointment until succeeded by Lincoln's appointment of John Titus of Pennsylvania, in June, 1863.
[^5] Letter of George A. Smith to Hosea Stout, date of July 30th, 1862, copied into History of Brigham Young, Ms., July, 1862; pp. 689-90.
[^6] "The governor tells me," says George A. Smith, in his letter to Hosea Stout, "he hopes we would take as good care of him as he did of that paper (i. e. the title page of the Book of Mormon before mentioned in the letter). "I told him we should certainly do it," continues Historian Smith, with grim humor, "for he had placed it in a box where the rats could get access to it, and we would not do worse than that. He appears to be a pleasant fellow, a thorough-going black-Republican; a dyed-in-the-wool abolitionist; but has some faint glimmerings that 'Mormonism' is to rule the destinies of nations, and that there was a great miracle in the preservation of that title page." (Ibid; see also Deseret News of March 4th, 1863).
[^7] See chapter cxx. Also History of Brigham Young, Ms., Dec., 1861, pp. 529-30.
[^8] Deseret News of 22nd Oct., 1862; also Stenhouse, Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 593.
[^9] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1861, pp. 529-30.
[^10] Discourse of 8th of March, 1863, Journal of Discourses, vol. x, pp. 105-10.
[^11] Rocky Mountain Saints, Stenhouse, p. 603.
[^12] The speech in full will be found in Deseret News of Oct. 22nd, 1862, also an account of the entrance of the command into the city.
[^13] The order establishing Fort Douglas, was called Post Order No. 1, and is dated Oct. 26th, 1862. The proclaimed reserve, as outlined, contained 2,560 acres, more or less, part of which was within the city limits. (History of Brigham Young, Ms., of above date, p. 957). Stenhouse says that "no place could have been chosen more offensive to Brigham. The artillery have a perfect and unobstructed range of Brigham's residence, and, with their muzzles turned in that direction, the prophet felt awfully annoyed." (Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 603). It never occurs to Stenhouse how gratuitous all this was, and how provocative of just indignation among the people that this, their most highly honored citizen, the Pioneer of the city and of the commonwealth, should thus be menaced without reason. As a matter of fact, however, President Young was not so much annoyed as his enemies hoped he was. "In regard to their location," he remarked, in referring to the army at Camp Douglas, "I will say that after all the insult that has been offered, they are in the best place they can be in for doing the least injury. If they were at Camp Floyd or Fort Bridger, they would go unrestrained, but here they cannot do much hurt." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., Oct., 1862, p. 960).
[^14] "The governor proceeded to a semi-dramatic reading of a document, which for length would have done honor to Henry A. Wise"—United States senator. (George A. Smith's letter to Bernhisel, Dec. 15th, 1862, History of Brigham Young, Ms., p. 1059). The governor had taken the pains to invite all the representatives of federal officialdom to be present at the reading of the message, including Colonel Connor and other army officers. (Ibid.)
[^15] Ibid. The governor's message to the legislature will be found complete in Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, chapter xxxiii, pp. 291-305.
[^16] The first action of the senate committee was taken on the 16th of Jan. 1863; and the report of the senate committee was brought in on the 13th of the following month. (See Congressional Globe of those dates, also Waite's Mormon Prophet, pp. 83-4).
[^17] Extracts showing the general trend of the report will be found in Waite Mormon Prophet, pp. 83-4.
[^18] The matter of the territorial laws enlarging the powers of the probate courts of Utah beyond the usual powers of such courts, in order to retain some measure of the rights of local self-government in things judicial, and a justification of that procedure has already been considered in this History, chapter cii.
[^19] See synopsis of the bill sent to Salt Lake City in a letter from Bernhisel, (Deseret News of March 4th, 1863).
[^20] Judge Drake for instance described as a man of "thin, wiry frame, dark hair, and a nervous-bilious temperament," is reported to have said to the committee "Go back to Brigham Young, your master,—that embodiment of sin and shame and disgust,—and tell him that I neither fear him, nor love him, nor hate him; that I did not come here by his permission, and that I will not go away at his desire, or by his directions." (Waite's Mormon Prophet, p. 99). The request for these officers to leave the territory grew out of the fact that Governor Harding had frequently expressed a willingness in the early days of his sojourn in Utah to resign and leave the territory "whenever he learned that his acts and course were not agreeable to the people." The committee, on his refusal to comply with the request to resign and leave the territory reminded him of his repeated declaration, and told him if he was not satisfied that the resolutions of the mass meeting expressed the feelings of the people "he could have the expression of the whole territory." "I am aware of that," he replied, "but that would make no difference." (Report of Messrs. Taylor, Clinton and Pratt, Deseret News of March 4th—Brigham Young's speech—of the 11th of March, 1863. See also letter of George A. Smith to Delegate Bernhisel, History of Brigham Young, Ms., Dec., 1862, pp. 1058-60). This declaration of Governor Harding of willingness to resign and leave the territory should he become obnoxious to the people, invited the action of the people through their committee, and of course the judges were included in that invitation.
[^21] The petition and resolutions of the mass meeting, together with a very elaborate account of the meeting of the 3rd of March, the speech of John Taylor in fell, a lengthy synopsis of Brigham Young's speech, and an account of the action of the committee in waiting upon the three federal officials will be found in Deseret News of the 4th and 11th of March, 1863. The anti-"Mormon" version of these incidents, with many omissions of essential facts, however, will be found in Waite's Mormon Prophet, chapter vi.
[^22] "If we though," said the Deseret News, editorially, referring to this matter, —"If we thought that there was a citizen so far lost to self-respect as to offer an indignity by word or act to such persons [the officers in question], we should certainly commend him to the care of his friends. The people en mass have rendered a legitimate verdict upon the conduct of the men whom the government pays to serve them, and if the said servants are so indigent as to require such unwelcome bread, let them by all means eat it in peace, it is bitter enough. They cannot hire any man to do to them the service they so earnestly seem to desire." (Deseret News, impression of March 11th, 1863).
[^23] The petition in full with the names of all the officers signing it will be found in Waite's Mormon Prophet, pp. 95-7.
[^24] Stenhouse hints at another reason than this concerted action with the judges against the liberties of the people of Utah as being the cause of Harding's removal. There are no castle walls high enough in Utah to conceal even private life, when the saints are after an enemy; and they were not long in discovering that S. S. H. [the governor] was not the proper person to lecture them on the immorality of polygamy. His removal did credit to the government." (Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 609, note).
[^25] Waite's Mormon Prophet, pp. 104-5.
[^26] Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 609.
[^27] Bancroft's History of Utah, p. 621.
[^28] Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 609; and Bancroft's History of Utah.
[^29] So far Utah had been represented in congress by Dr. John M. Bernhisel 1850-1859; by Captain W. H. Hooper 1859-1861; by Dr. John M. Bernhisel again, 1861-1863; Judge Kinney 1863-1865; Captain W. H. Hooper was elected again in 1865 and served four consecutive terms, from 1865 to 1873, when he was followed by Honorable George Q. Cannon.
