B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 5 ( 1930)

13CHAPTER CXXII

13LINCOLN'S FEDERAL APPOINTEES FOR UTAH—THE CALIFORNIA VOLUNTEERS—PRESIDENT LINCOLN'S "THREE WORD POLICY" AS TO "MORMONS"—INDIAN BATTLE ON BEAR RIVER

13UNHAPPILY the federal appointments of civil officers for the territory, the manifest mistrust of the people of Utah by the Lincoln administration—especially of Secretary of War Edwin M. Stanton [^1]—and the development of local political events, all tended to foster the aloofness of the people of Utah in the matter of the war between the states.

GOVERNOR JOHN W. DAWSON—UNFITNESS AND DEPARTURE

The appointment of John W. Dawson, of Indiana, as governor of Utah was most unfortunate. He arrived in Salt Lake City on the 7th of December, three days later he inflicted a long academic message on the legislature in which he strongly implied the disloyalty of the "Mormon" people, and urged the prompt devising of means for the collection of the direct, special, federal tax—the war tax—in order "to vindicate the community of the charge of disloyalty." In a few days he made improper proposals to a respectable woman, was repulsed and exposed in this and some other "gallantries," which drove him into the seclusion of his lodgings, where he was reported as both sick and insane. On the 31st of the same month which witnessed his advent into Salt Lake City, he secretly took his departure, but unfortunately at the mail station at Mountain Dell, a number of lawless men gathered in during the evening; there was some drinking, and Dawson was cruelly beaten and robbed, but he continued his journey eastward.

14The governor wrote his own version of the affair from Bear River station to the Deseret News, which was published in the impression of Jan. 22, 1862. The names of his assailants were Isaac Neibaur, Wood Reynolds, Jason, John M., and Wilford Luce, John Smith, Moroni Clawson, and Lot Huntington. Writs were obtained against these parties. Three of them, Smith, Clawson and Huntington, stole horses and attempted to leave for California; they were followed by the sheriff, but resisted the officer and Lot Huntington was killed. On the way to the prison after reaching Salt Lake City, the other two made an attempt to escape and were killed by the police. The remainder of the party were remanded for trial. [^2] President Lincoln claims to have been imposed upon in the appointment of Dawson. "The senate relieved him from the imposition by refusing to confirm the appointment." [^3]

THE NEW LINCOLN APPOINTMENTS

About a month later the two associate justices of the territorial supreme court, R. P. Flenniken and H. R. Crosby, who had been appointed about the same time as Dawson was appointed, also left the territory, which fact was telegraphed President Lincoln by the remaining federal officers in Utah, who recommended the appointment of successors to the departed officers; and accordingly, on the 3rd of February, Thomas J. Drake, of Michigan, and Charles B. Waite, of Illinois, were appointed associate justices; and two months later, namely on the 21st of March, Stephen S. Harding, of Indiana, was appointed governor to succeed John W. Dawson. [^4]

Harding was acquainted with the Prophet Joseph Smith in New York, 1830; claimed to have been in the printing office when the first impression was taken of the title page of the Book of Mormon. He preserved the sheet, and in 1847 presented it to Robert Campbell, who deposited it in the Church Historian's Office. The governor related that he put the paper in a hair trunk with a great number of other papers to which the rats and mice had access, and they "destroyed every other paper but the Mormon one." [^5] The governor had also occasionally entertained the "Mormon" traveling elders at his home in Indiana, and on his arrival in Salt Lake City—July 7th, 1862—presumed upon an especially friendly reception and treatment because of these antecedent "Mormon" associations. [^6]

ARRIVAL OF THE CALIFORNIA VOLUNTEERS

A matter which intensified the feelings of the people with reference to the federal government was the arrival of the California volunteers under command of Colonel P. Edward Connor. While ostensibly sent to the territory to guard the mail routes and telegraph lines from the Indians in the region of the intermountain west, of which Salt Lake City was the natural and strategic center, still, by the orders to establish a military post in the vicinity of Salt Lake City, it was felt that surveillance of the people of Utah was, in part, the purpose of the general government in sending these United States troops to Utah. Especially so since the people of Utah had been so entirely willing to assume responsibility for the safety of the mail routes, telegraph lines, and to keep the Indians in subjection, as was evidenced by the promptness with which they had responded to the call of the war department for such service in the previous year, and by direct announcement to that effect by Brigham Young, but two chapters back. [^7]

16Connor's force consisted of five companies of the 3rd regiment of infantry, and two companies of the 2nd cavalry; numbering about seven hundred men. The California volunteers had "enlisted to fight traitors," and could not understand why they were sent to Utah. "Why we were sent here," said a correspondent from the force to the San Francisco Bulletin, "is a mystery. It could not be to keep Mormondom in order, for Brigham can thoroughly annihilate us with the 5,000 to 25,000 frontiersmen always at his command." The infantry companies, in a dispatch signed by the colonel commanding, to Major General Halleck, offered to authorize the paymaster of the army to withhold $30,000 then due them, if only the regiment should be ordered to the east rather than to the Utah service. The correspondent of the Bulletin also points out how unnecessary it is to detail them for the mail route service since "Brigham Young offers to protect the entire line with one hundred men." The Bulletin letter is copied into the Desert News of October 15, 1862. President Brigham Young was absent from the city on a tour of the northern settlements at the time of the arrival of Connor's command. [^8]

That the coming of the troops proved an irritant to the community life of Utah is abundantly witnessed alike in speech and conduct of the period on both sides to the controversy which unhappily so persisted in Utah. For while on the one hand the military presence vexed the spirits of the "Mormon" leaders and people, on the other it rendered arrogant and aggressive the civil representatives of the federal authorities—the governor and judges. The entrance of the force into Salt Lake City, and its march to the east bench of the valley (where subsequently Camp Douglas was founded), was unnecessarily spectacular and offensive.

THE ARMY INCIDENT

As showing the resentment of President Young to this affront to the loyalty of the Latter-day Saint community of Utah, and doubtlessly shared by that community, the following remarks may be cited:

17"Lincoln," said President Young, commenting on the order for the California troops to perform service in Utah—"Lincoln has ordered an army from California, for the order has passed over these wires. A senator from California said in Washington a short time since that the 'Mormons' were in their way and must be removed." [^9] Then publicly referring to the presence of the troops at Camp Douglas somewhat later, he said:

17"We told the brethren [i.e. of the Mormon Battalion] to enlist, and they obeyed without a murmur. * * * In this way we have proved our loyalty: we have done everything that has been required of us. Can there anything reasonable and constitutional be asked that we would not perform? No. But if the government of the United States should now ask for a battalion of men to fight on the present battlefields of the nation, while there is a camp of soldiers from abroad (California) located within the corporate limits of this Salt Lake City, I would not ask one man to go. I would see them in hell first." [^10]

On the other hand it may be that Colonel Connor was not altogether blameable for this warlike entrance into a peaceful city. According to a correspondent with the force to the San Francisco Bulletin, a rumor reached the colonel the day before he crossed the Jordan river, that an effort would be made to prevent his crossing, and that his entrance to Salt Lake City would be resisted. These, however, were but wild, street rumors; that fact, however, did not prevent the colonel from avowing his determination to "cross the river Jordan if hell yawned beneath him." The Bulletin letter, filling nearly four columns, detailing Connor's spectacular entrance into Salt Lake City is copied into Desert News of Nov. 12th, 1862. Connor himself, and apparently without a military escort, had come into the city on the 9th of September, to look out a place of permanent encampment, while his command was located in Ruby valley, in northeastern Nevada.

18The evening before entering the city, although there had been given no evidence of resistance to the troops, ammunition was distributed to them, and the next day, October 20, 1862, "with loaded riffles, fixed bayonets, and shotted cannon, Colonel Connor marched the volunteers into Salt Lake City." [^11] The command entered the city from the south, via State street, marched north to First South street, thence turned eastward to the residence of Governor Harding, where a halt was made, the troops drawn up in two lines and a speech made by that gentleman—a speech both of welcome and warning; [^12] after which there were cheers for the governor, for the country, and the "brave old flag." "Thereupon the march through the city was resumed—the bands continuing their floods of music." They were marched to some springs between the mouths of Red Butte and Emigration canons, and there encamped on what has ever since been a government military reservation, about two and a half miles east of Temple Square in Salt Lake City. [^13]

ISSUES PROJECTED BY GOVERNOR HARDING

The opening of the legislature in December, 1862, brought on a crisis between the new governor and the people's representatives. Congress had enacted its anti-polygamy measure in July, and perhaps it was to be expected that the territorial executive would make some allusion to it in his message, which he did. He said he was aware that there was a prevailing opinion that the said act of congress was unconstitutional, and therefore it was recommended by those in high authority that no regard whatever should be paid to the same; but he took that occasion to warn the people of the territory "against such dangerous and disloyal counsels."

The governor also charged the people with what he called their lack of loyalty to the federal government. He had heard no sentiments expressed that would lead him to believe that much sympathy was felt by any considerable number of the citizens of Utah in favor of the government of the United States, then struggling for its very existence; and called upon the legislature to pass such resolutions as would compel him to retract that statement if it were not true. He attacked the whole body of their territorial laws and urged revolutionary changes therein. So insulting did the legislature consider the address, both in its matter and the manner of its delivery, that as they listened in silence to its "semi-dramatic" reading, [^14] they concluded to treat it with silent contempt throughout. No copies were ordered printed; and there appears nothing in the current impression of the Desert News, nor in the record of the legislative assembly, to show that Governor Harding was even so much as present on the day he read his message to the conjoint assembly. "It was written entirely for another longitude," wrote George A. Smith to Delegate Bernhisel, "the neglect here [i.e. to publish it] may enable him to give it a wider circulation elsewhere." [^15] And it did; for when the fact was communicated to congress that the legislature had suppressed the governor's message, it became the subject matter of a senate resolution directing the senate committee on territories to inquire into the causes of such suppression and report thereon. This brought forth a very unfavorable report upon the action of the Utah legislature by the committee, which recommended that one thousand copies of the message of Governor Harding be printed by congress and sent to the governor for distribution, which recommendation was adopted. [^16] The report of the committee influenced by the anti-"Mormon" prejudice that obtained in the east, and uninfluenced by the consideration of any defensive data, or adequate setting forth of the cause of the people of Utah, was more prejudicial to the "Mormon" cause than the message of the governor, whatever "longitude" it was intended for, could possibly have been. [^17]

20A BLOW AT LOCAL SELF-GOVERNMENT

The triumph which came to the governor in this instance encouraged him and the two associate justices of the supreme court, Judges Waite and Drake, to enter into what was nothing less than a conspiracy to overthrow all semblance of what remnant there was of popular government in a territory of the United States. The scheme was hatched in the fertile brain of Judge Waite, who drew a bill amendatory of the organic act, which created Utah a territory in 1850. Its chief provisions are here stated:

21First: It aimed to strike down what had become the courts of the people—the county probate courts—by limiting their jurisdiction to the probating of wills, to issuing letters of administration, and the appointment of guardians. [^18]

21Second: It authorized the marshal to summons any persons within the district in which the court is held, that, he thinks proper as jurors.

21Third: It authorized the governor to appoint and commission all militia officers, including the major general, and remove them at pleasure. It also conferred on the governor authority to appoint the days for training. [^19]

21This measure was forwarded to Washington with the recommendation by Governor Harding and Judges Waite and Drake that it be enacted into law. It was introduced into the upper house of congress by Senator O. H. Browning, of Illinois, and referred to the committee on judiciary.

RESENTMENT OF THE LEGISLATURE AND THE PEOPLE

As soon as these movements were reported from Washington by Delegate Bernhisel, and William H. Hooper, then in Washington, they caused great indignation in Utah, as a result of which a mass meeting was assembled at the "Old Tabernacle" at which the course of the governor and the two judges was fully exposed and denounced as a conspiracy against the liberties of the people and the interests of the territory. Albert Carrington read the correspondence from Washington disclosing the part that Messrs. Harding, Waite, and Drake had taken in introducing the proposed obnoxious legislation; and strong speeches were made by John Taylor and Brigham Young. A series of eight emphatic resolutions were adopted; one required the appointment of a committee to wait upon the offending officials and request them to resign their office and leave the territory; another called for drafting of a petition to the president of the United States asking for the removal of the three officials, and the appointment of "good men in their stead." John Taylor, Jeter Clinton, and Orson Pratt were appointed the committee to make the request for the resignation of the offending officials and their retirement from the territory. The day following the mass meeting the committee called upon these officials and delivered their message, but there was unanimous and emphatic, not to say vehement, [^20] refusal on their part to comply with the request of the people.

22The petition to the president set forth that the governor and associate justices were "endeavoring to create mischief and stir up strife between the people of the territory of Utah and the troops at Camp Douglas; * * * and, of far graver import in our nation's present difficulties, between the people of the aforesaid territory and the government of the United States." [^21]

23This petition was numerously signed, and many other mass meetings were held throughout the territory in support of the steps taken to remove the governor and judges. There were also some mutterings of threats heard on the streets against these conspiring federal officers. These, however, were promptly reproved, [^22] and, never formidable, soon died out.

23THE COUNTER PETITION OF THE MILITARY OFFICERS et al

23A counter petition, approving the course of Governor Harding and the judges was drafted; and, contrary to the rule that the military abstain from interference in civil affairs, was signed by Colonel Connor and all the commissioned officers then stationed at Camp Douglas. "Our respectful opinion is," concluded their petition to the president, "that there is no good and true cause for the removal of his excellency, Governor Harding, and Judges Drake and Waite, from the offices they now hold." [^23]

All this, however, was to no purpose; for while all that was asked for in the petition of the people was not granted, Governor Harding was removed from office in May following, [^24] and James Duane Doty, who for nearly two years had been superintendent of Indian affairs in the territory, was appointed to succeed him. Judges Waite and Drake were not removed from office; but, as stated by a writer favorable to them, the change in the governorship of the territory, together with the fact that the government manifested no disposition to furnish "a military force of at least five thousand men, well armed and equipped," to support them in their endeavors to administer the law in the territory—a demand they had made immediately following the mass meeting in Salt Lake of the 3rd of March—convinced them that "the government was not then prepared to meet the questions which had arisen in such a manner as the dignity and honor of the nation required; and accordingly all effort to further counteract the evil effects of this intolerant theocracy were for the time abandoned." [^25] With the appointment of Doty as governor, and the political subsidence of Judges Drake and Waite, the prospect for affairs settling into normal conditions was much improved.

At the time Doty was appointed to succeed Harding Chief Justice Kinney was succeeded by John Titus of Pennsylvania, and Secretary Frank Fuller, was superceded by Amos Reed, who had come into the territory with Governor Doty from Wisconsin. The dismissals and appointments were compromises. "The government was striving to restore peace in Utah." [^26] "The president endeavored to restore peace by making concessions on both sides." [^27] Harding was appointed to the chief justiceship of Colorado territory; Chief Justice Kinney who had been very offensive to the non "Mormons" of Utah for his alleged subserviency to Brigham Young, was dismissed to satisfy them. Of the newly appointed officers Governor Doty was "a very discreet gentleman;" Mr. Reed, the secretary, "was conservative;" Judge Titus was then unknown, but subsequent acquaintance showed him to be in harmony with Mr. Lincoln's three word policy for the saints of Utah, viz, "Let them alone." [^28] He also adds: "To be left alone was all that the people asked and all that they had struggled for since Utah was first admitted as a territory."

JUDGE KINNEY—NON-"MORMON"—ELECTED TO CONGRESS

The superceded Chief Justice, John F. Kinney, doubtless out of consideration for his fidelity to the interests of the people of Utah, was elected delegate to congress in the fall of 1863, and took his seat in the winter following. Between the time of his nomination and election—and his election was unanimous—he made quite a thorough canvass of the territory, not so much for the purpose of soliciting votes, as becoming acquainted with the needs of the people and of the territory he was to represent in congress. [^29] Judge Kinney arrived in Washington, and was seated as delegate from Utah, at a most opportune time. In the early days of the 38th congress—known as the "War Congress"—Fernando Wood, a representative from New York City—of which two years before he was mayor—made a set speech on "Confiscated Property," and by way of illustration of his theme made incidental reference to what he called the "Mormon Rebellion," in which he alluded to the "Mormons" as "profligate outcasts," who had "always been hostile to the moral and political institutions of the United States." This gave Judge Kinney an opportunity to make a successful defense of his people; and all the more so because his opponent was particularly vulnerable before that congress, being classed as one of the leaders of that group of men who were opposed to the suppression of the "Southern Rebellion" by force—dubbed by their opponents "Copperheads." Wood had introduced himself into the activities of the house of representatives by proposing a resolution declaring the war then raging "inhuman;" in his speech of the 26th of January, in which he made his reference to the "Mormons," he had characterized the war as a "hellish crusade of blood and famine." Also while mayor of New York City, he had telegraphed regrets to Governor Robert Toombs of Georgia that arms in transitu for the state of Georgia had been taken possession of by the police of New York; and also declared that if he had had the power he would have summarily punished the authors of that unjustifiable seizure. This in January, 1861. This put representative Wood at the mercy of the delegate from Utah, who declared that if he had the full privileges of a member of congress, instead of the limited ones of a delegate, he would "introduce a resolution to expel the gentleman from New York as unworthy to occupy a seat upon the floor of congress." The delegate denied the existence of any rebellion in Utah at any time charged the "Utah Expedition"—which he declared had cost the government "forty millions of dollars"—to the designing treason of John B. Floyd, secretary of war in the late Buchanan administration; held that sending the army to Utah at so large an expense, and attended with such destruction of munitions of war, was intended to assist in preparing the way for the "Southern Rebellion."

26"That was all there was of the 'Mormon Rebellion,' as the gentleman called it," said Utah's delegate, "not a rebellion by the 'Mormons,'" not at all, but a military expedition, set on foot and carried into effect in 1858 [beginning in 1857] by John B. Floyd, for the purpose which I have already stated and it has had its effect. It has crippled the north. For the time being it crippled and impoverished the treasury of the United States; and Mr. Floyd and Mr. Buchanan were content, for it cost the government nearly forty million dollars."

26Of the people of Utah he said:

"Sir, the people of Utah have under all their discouragements and embarrassments built up a beautiful city in the midst of the great American desert. They are feeding, and have been for years, the employees of the overland mail. They are furnishing the necessary supplies for the purpose of developing the resources of the rich mineral regions which surround them. They have afforded a safe retreat from the Indians to the wayfarer as he passes on his weary pilgrimage to the other side of the Rocky Mountains, for the purpose of developing the resources of the Pacific coast." [^30]

27All this strong Union sentiment was acceptable to the strongly pro-Union house, and gave Mr. Kinney a prestige which enabled him all the better to serve his constituents and get some measure of relief for them in the way of congressional appropriations. He procured a large number of post offices for remote settlements that had long suffered for the need of them; [^31] he supplemented and carried to successful conclusion the efforts of Delegate Hooper in obtaining a settlement of outstanding claims of the territory for the expenses of the Indian war of 1850. [^32] He secured some arrears due the legislative assembly of the territory for pay and mileage of members amounting to about $20,000. [^33] He also obtained favorable actions by the department of Indian affairs on applications for land warrants for early military service—about two hundred in number. [^34]

Later, viz., March 17th, of the same year, Judge Kinney introduced a bill in the house for the admission of Utah into the Union, and set forth her claims to that right in a very able speech that occupied some two hours in its delivery, [^35] but the judge's effort, like those which had preceded it, was of no avail. [^36] The judge proved himself a very acceptable delegate in congress, but after the expiration of his single term in that office, he took up his residence in Nebraska.

AGITATION RESPECTING AN IMPENDING ARREST OF BRIGHAM YOUNG

As illustrating the nervous strain, and the constant danger that existed of a rupture between the military force at Camp Douglas and the local civil authorities and the people during this period, it should be said that grave apprehension existed that an attempt would be made to arrest Brigham Young by a military force for an alleged recent infringement of the anti-bigamy law, and subject him to unusual judicial procedure. Hence the fragment of a conversation between Colonel Connor and Judge Waite—overheard by "a reliable person"—in which the colonel said: "Colonel, you know your duty" [^37]—was supposed to have reference to a plot to arrest Brigham Young and his two counselors by the military. The fragment of conversation was promptly reported at President Young's office, and within half an hour after a preconcerted signal was displayed from the president's office, [^38] one thousand citizens under arms were on duty; followed half an hour later by another thousand. [^39] No attempt was made to arrest the president. On the part of the watchful saints it was said that the sudden display of force "proved to them [the colonel and the judges] that we were fully prepared for them." [^40] The colonel and the judges disclaimed any intention to arrest Brigham Young. [^41] To prevent the possibility of an arrest by military authority, with all its danger of an armed conflict, a friendly complaint was filed before Chief Justice Kinney, charging Brigham Young with violation of the anti-bigamy law. He was arrested by Mr. Isaac L. Gibbs the United States marshal, without a posse, and promptly appeared before Judge Kinney in chambers at the state house (the "Old Council House"), where he was bound over to await the action of the grand jury at the next term of the United States court for the third district, which included Salt Lake City—Judge Kinney's district. His bail was fixed at two thousand dollars. [^42] By the time the next term of court arrived the excitement had blown over, the grand jury found no indictment against President Young and he was discharged from his recognizance, and this sans reproach to the grand jury. The law had been enacted by a legislative body 2,000 miles distant, in which the community immediately affected had no voice; it was in the nature of foreign legislation to them, enacted by legislators influenced by the clamors of sectarian opponents of the dominant religious community in Utah, and was to be enforced by officers—judges and marshals—appointed by the federal government, and made arrogant by the presence of a military force in sympathy with their crusading methods. Besides, the act charged against Brigham Young as an offense was regarded by the local community as an act of religious privilege, and, under some circumstances, a religious duty. The law itself, besides being obnoxious for the several reasons herein set forth, was regarded quite generally as unconstitutional, being, as was claimed, an unwarrantable infringement upon religious liberty and the free exercise thereof. [^43] Under all these circumstances it could scarcely be expected that a grand jury, necessarily under the territorial law a "Mormon" body, would indict Brigham Young for alleged infringement of the anti-bigamy law; and yet that seems to have been expected of them by anti-"Mormon" writers. [^44]

Another illustration of the feverish excitement that obtained in these troubled months, arose from the night firing of cannon at Camp Douglas. This between ten and eleven o'clock on the 29th of March. It was thought in the city that this firing might be the expected attack of Connor's command upon the city from Camp Douglas and the citizens, especially those who had been detailed as armed guards for the protection of President Young, caught up their arms and made haste to his residence in anticipation of a conflict. As they assembled, however, the strains of martial music could also be heard, and presently it was learned that the booming of cannon and the music of the bands was but the rejoicing of the camp over the news just then received by telegraph message that Colonel Connor had been promoted to the rank of Brigadier General for his victory over the Indians on Bear river on the 29th of January, 1863; and the whole camp had turned out to celebrate the occasion. Such was the tension between camp and city, however, that an incident of this kind could impel hasty and excited preparations for a battle!

CONNOR'S INDIAN CAMPAIGN ON BEAR RIVER

Indian AffairsHCThe brief campaign of Colonel—now General—Connor against the northern Indians on Bear river was a very great service to the people of Utah, and to the immigrants on the northern overland routes to Oregon and California; and for it Connor was fully entitled to the promotion he received. For some time the Bannock and Snake tribes had been the terror of the north and central routes to California, and a menace to the settlements in Cache and other northern valleys of Utah. Two previous expeditions had been sent against them from Connor's command under Major McGarry, but they were not sufficiently decisive in results to correct the marauding and thieving practices of these northern Indians. Connor's campaign against them arose from a reported attack upon two companies of miners en route from the Grasshopper gold mines in Dakota territory to Salt Lake City. William Bevins, a miner in the second party, reported that himself and seven other men were attacked by Indians in Cache valley; one of the party was killed and Bevins and the others lost gold dust, animals, and other property to the amount of two thousand dollars; that another party of ten men, also from the Dakota mines, who had preceded himself and companions into Cache valley by only three days, had been murdered by the Indians. To these statements Bevins made affidavit before Chief Justice Kinney, who issued a warrant for the arrest of three chiefs—Bear Hunter, Sandpitch and Sagwitch. This was delivered to United States Marshal Isaac L. Gibbs with instruction to make the arrests. Meantime a detachment of Connor's command, numbering about three hundred men all told, was being made ready at Camp Douglas to move against these Indians in force, the colonel commanding believing that in these recent attacks upon the two parties of miners he had justification for such procedure, to say nothing of the repeated attacks he believed the same Indians to have made upon California and Oregon immigrant companies through many years. The United States marshal, although there was little prospect of his having any opportunity to arrest the chiefs for whom he held warrants, accompanied the expedition.

Indian AffairsHCColonel Connor's force found the Indians encamped in a ravine leading up from Bear river through an ascending plain towards the mountains, at a point about fifteen or eighteen miles from the town of Franklin, now in Idaho, then in Washington territory. Here in a four hours' fierce engagement, during which the Indians fought most desperately, a decisive victory over the savages was won; from two hundred and fifty to three hundred of them being slain, mainly warriors, Chiefs Bear Hunter and Lehi being among the number. It was reported at the time of the battle that only about fifteen warriors escaped, among whom were Chiefs Pocatello, Sandpitch and Sagwitch, supposed to be in the fight. Some squaws were killed and the rest, one hundred and sixty in number, were amid the burned ruins of their camp to shift for themselves. About a thousand bushels of wheat and a large amount of beef and provisions, together with a large supply of ammunition, was found in the encampment. There were abundant evidences in the camp of immigrant plundering having been indulged by these Indians, such as their possession of modern cooking utensils, looking glasses, combs, brushes, fine rifles and pistols—all which had been taken from the immigrant companies they had attacked and robbed. Now and then wagon covers bearing the names of their unfortunate owners were found stretched upon the poles of tepees. What the victors thought worth bringing to their post they brought with them, and the rest they destroyed, except that they left enough of the provisions and camp furnishings for the preservation of the squaws and children. Among the trophies of war were one hundred and seventy-five ponies that the Indians had tied up to the willows during the fight. All this plunder was afterwards sold at public auction at Camp Douglas.

Indian AffairsHC33The campaign was made at a time when the country was covered by deep snow, and the weather intensely cold. Seventy-nine of the command had their feet frozen, forty-nine were wounded and fourteen killed in the battle. Officers and men acquitted themselves as efficient fighting men, of which the results of the battle are the best evidence; and the two Indian tribes, the Bannocks and Snakes, that for fifteen years had been a terror to the immigrant trains, as well as to the citizens of northern Utah, received a chastisement which it was never afterwards necessary to repeat. [^45] While the terrible slaughter of the savages was regrettable, yet nothing short of Connor's severity, perhaps, could have broken their strength or taught them the necessary lesson of submission to the inevitable—submission to the white man's domination.

Indian AffairsHCThe Indians in this brief campaign learned that war was just what General Sherman declared it to be. They were doubtless living in fancied security in carefully selected winter quarters, when the sudden destruction fell upon them. Cut off from retreat up the ravine towards the mountains by one division of Connor's command, and forced down it to where it debouched upon Bear river, they were met by another division where an enfilading fire so piled up the dead that above forty were found in one heap. Connor reported having counted 224 bodies of dead Indians on the field, how many more were killed he could not say, as his wounded required his immediate attention. [^46] As counted by an eye witness from the town of Franklin who visited the battlefield, the dead numbered 386, "besides many wounded who afterwards died. About ninety of the slain were women and children." [^47]

Indian AffairsHC34Connor reported Chiefs Bear Hunter, Lehi, and Sagwitch as among the dead; the last named, however, was not killed at the Bear river battle, he was reserved for a more inglorious fate a few months later. [^48] Bear Hunter was killed while moulding bullets; he pitched forward into the fire when shot, and perished miserably. [^49] "The morning after be battle, following an intensely cold night, a soldier found a dead squaw lying in the snow with an infant, still alive, which was trying to draw nourishment from its mother's icy breast. The soldiers, in mercy to the babe, killed it!" [^50] Matigan, a crippled Indian, who went to the battlefield with the soldiers as a guide, and was at the scene immediately after the fight, "said that the way the soldiers used the squaws after the battle was shameful." [^51] The number killed, and these outrages following, justify the remark of Bancroft that "had the savages committed this deed it would pass into history as a butchery, or massacre." [^52]

Indian AffairsHC34Connor in his official report did the "Mormons" of northern Utah a great injustice. He said:

Indian AffairsHC35"I should mention here that in my march from this post no assistance was rendered by the Mormons, who seemed indisposed to divulge any information regarding the Indians and charged enormous prices for every article furnished my command." [^53]

Indian AffairsHC35In refutation of this may be cited the Deseret News' sympathetic account of the whole expedition both while forming, [^54] and also in recording its achievements. In the first place it is evident that the "Mormons" did not have any definite knowledge of the location of the Indians. "Of the present condition and number of the Indians, and their locality," said the News, "we have heard various reports; the commander of the troops, however, we anticipate, marches with the expectation that he will come up with the redskins about eighty or ninety miles from here on Bear river, and that with ordinary good luck the volunteers will 'wipe them out,' if the chiefs named in the writ do not deliver themselves up." [^55] Besides a prominent "Mormon," Porter Rockwell, was Connor's chief guide on this expedition.

Indian AffairsHC35The colonel also said in his report that he had "destroyed over seventy lodges and a large quantity of wheat and other provisions which had been furnished by the Mormons." Relative to this, and before the battle on Bear river, and therefore before this charge was made by Colonel Connor, the Deseret News had said:

Indian AffairsHC35"In this connection it may be stated that we have heard of charges against parties trading with the Indians, purchasing from them emigrant plunder, and in return supplying them with 'munitions of war.' We expect that unprincipled persons are to be found on every frontier who would purchase from Dick, Tom, or Harry, if they could get a bargain without regard to the color—white, red or black, of the seller. There is no apology for such illegal traffic, and if our information is correct, the present expedition north is likely to seek some light on this subject. We wish this community rid of all such parties, and if Colonel Connor be successful in reaching that bastard class of humans who play with the lives of the peaceable and law-abiding citizens in this way, we shall be pleased to acknowledge our obligations." [^56]

Indian AffairsHC36As to high prices charged for things, Colonel Connor must have compared the prices of what he bought in the northern settlements of Utah, in that midwinter season, and in the midst of great scarcity, with remembered prices in his California home. As to the sympathetic report of the battle referred to, the Deseret News said:

Indian AffairsHC36"From every statement that we have heard from those who were on the field, we conclude that the volunteers must have met the Indians with a bravery seldom equalled by regulars. Instances of individual daring are so numerous that it would be invidious to give the names of only the few that may have reached our ears; we, therefore, leave their mention for the official report. The wounded now in camp bear on their persons the evidences of close work." [^57]

Indian AffairsHC36And as for no assistance being rendered by the "Mormons," the Deseret News said:

Indian AffairsHC36"We are glad to learn that the citizens of the settlements through which the wounded returned, contributed in every way they could to their comfort." [^58]

Indian AffairsHC36Colonel Connor sent to the bishop of Franklin for ten sleighs on which to move the wounded from the field, and they were furnished. [^59] Martineau in his Military History of Cache County has the following passage:

Indian AffairsHC36"On their return the troops remained all night in Logan, the citizens furnishing them supper and breakfast, some parties, the writer among the number, entertaining ten or fifteen each. The settlers furnished teams and sleighs to assist them in carrying the dead, wounded, and frozen to Camp Douglas. In crossing the mountains between Wellsville and Brigham City the troops experienced great hardships. They toiled and floundered all day through the deep snow, the keen, whirling blasts filling the trail as fast as made, until, worn out, the troops returned to Wellsville. Next day Bishop W. H. Maughan gathered all the men and teams in the place and assisted the troops through the pass to Salt Lake valley." [^60]

Indian AffairsHC37The wounded were brought as far as Farmington in sleighs, and there the snow having mostly disappeared, they were changed from the sleighs to carriages and wagons and conveyed to Camp Douglas. [^61]

Indian AffairsHC37The views of the citizens of northern Utah with reference to the results of this campaign—while they could do no other than deplore the cruelty of it—is well expressed in the following passage from the Military History of Cache Valley:

Indian AffairsHC37"The victory was of immense value to the settlers of Cache county and all the surrounding country. It broke the spirit and power of the Indians and enabled the settlers to occupy new and choice localities hitherto unsafe. * * * It made the flocks and herds and lives of people comparatively safe; for though the survivors were enraged against the people of the county, whom they regarded as in a manner aiding and abetting the troops, they felt themselves too weak to forcibly seek revenge." [^62]

Indian AffairsHC37The peace made inevitable by this battle on Bear river was formally ratified by several treaties with the Indian tribes of the north in the following summer. [^63]

NOTE

JUDGE KINNEY'S APPEAL FOR STATEHOOD

"Following in the wake of Nebraska, Colorado and Nevada, I have had the honor of presenting a bill for an enabling act to authorize the people to form a state government. This I trust will be more fortunate, (i. e. than former efforts to obtain statehood).

Mr Chairman, in forming your new western states it is proposed to jump over Utah and take in Nevada, that is but an off-shoot of Utah, once belonged to her western boundary, has had a territorial existence of only about three years, and has far less population than Utah? It is proposed to take in Nebraska, lying immediately west of the Missouri river, Colorado west of it, and then take in Nevada, and leave out the most valuable and important link in your chain of states to the Pacific? Why, sir, these territories are infants in age and population when compared with Utah. Fourteen years has Utah had a territorial existence, and at no period since her organization has she not had a larger resident population than either Nebraska or Colorado.

38In behalf of near one hundred thousand people I protest against this unjust discrimination. In behalf of those who first * * * gave you to know and understand that there was a great and mighty west, rich in mineral resources, way beyond the Rocky Mountains, I ask for justice and equality. In behalf of those who with their lives in their hands in an Indian country have reclaimed your deserts, prepared the way for your great postal inter-oceanic communication, your telegraph and Pacific railroad, who have contributed more to the settlement of California by reason of the facilities and position of their settlements than all the ships of the Pacific, I ask for justice and equality. In behalf of those who follow with intense interest and anxiety your flag; whose whole heart beats in unison with the Constitution and government, and who, if admitted, will be represented in congress by those who will vie with the foremost in sustaining your nationality, I ask that you do not turn them coldly away, and for the third [fourth] time reject their petition and prayer. We come to you in friendship and love. We offer you our devotion, our industry, our enterprise, our wealth, our humble counsels in the affairs of the nation in this the darkest hour of our country's history. We present to you for a state your deserts reclaimed and fertilized by persevering industry and the sweat of uncomplaining toil. We offer you one hundred thousand people who can * * * with pride point you to their cities, their churches, their schoolhouses, their manufactories, farms, and possessions as evidence of their achievements and the result of their industry. Will you accept the offering? The Constitution invests you with the power; exercise it charitably, deal justly, and decide wisely." [^64]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See Waite's Mormon Prophet, chapter vii; Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, ch. li; and Beadle's Life in Utah, ch. xvii.
[^2] Morris was born at Burwardsley, Chestershire, near the city of Chester, in 1824. He immigrated to Utah in 1853. Before leaving England he was severely burned, the shock of which is said to have affected his mind. At St. Louis, while en route to Utah, he was stricken with a severe illness, which still further affected his mental balance. He lived some time in San Pete and Utah counties, but finally moved into Weber county, where, and in the north of Davis county, he began to find a following, who accepted his extravagant claims as a prophet. (Jenson's Historical Notes, Ms. The facts were supplied to Mr. Jenson by George Morris, brother of Joseph).
[^3] "And I saw an angel come down from heaven, having the key of the bottomless pit, and a great chain in his hand. And he laid hold on the dragon, that old serpent, which is the devil, and Satan, and bound him a thousand years." (Rev. xx:1-2). "Who is that angel," asks Morris in his letter to President Young, "it is your humble servant." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., Sept. 1859, p. 654).
[^4] Morris' letter is copied in extenso into the History of Brigham Young, Ms., entries for Sept., 1859, pp. 653-659.
[^5] Stenhouse charges that Brigham Young made a brief and unbecoming reply, (Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 594). Waite says that Brigham made no reply. (The Mormon Prophet, p. 122).
[^6] Journal of Wilford Woodruff, Ms., entry for 11th Feb., 1861. In addition to mentioning the fact in public meeting that Morris had twice been excommunicated for immorality, Elder Woodruff also adds: "I told Morris that he was not a prophet of God, neither the 7th angel [i. e. of John's Revelation, ch. xx]; that when the 7th angel came to earth he would not spend the first year of his mission with a woman whose husband was crazy, and commit adultery with her." Morris tried to deny this latter charge, but Bishop West of Ogden declared the statement of Elder Woodruff to be true. (Ibid ).
[^7] The minutes are signed by Wilford Woodruff as president of the meeting and by Walter Thompson, clerk. They will be found in full in History of Brigham Young, Ms., Feb., 1861, pp. 58-72.
[^8] Minutes, History of Brigham Young, Ms., Feb., 1861, p. 72.
[^9] John Banks had been a very effective elder in the ministry in England, and for a time was associated in the presidency of the British Mission with Elders Reuben Hedlock (president) and Thomas Ward, 1846-7; but after coming to Utah (1857). he fell into intemperate habits, for persistence in which he had been excommunicated from the church, in November, 1858. Much depressed by this circumstance he appealed to President Young, and was restored to fellowship in the church by rebaptism, on the 18th of November of the above year. (History of Brigham Young, Ms., Nov., 1858, p. 1102).
[^10] Stenhouse, Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 594 and Beadle's Life in Utah, p. 415. Both are sympathetic toward Morris.
[^11] Deseret News of June 18th, 1862.
[^12] These men are falsely said by Waite to be "Mormons" (Mormon Prophet, p. 124); whereas, in fact, they were dissenting Morrisites, and this whole affair up to this point was a matter between Morrisites and Morrisite dissenters. For the rest, it was a matter between the law-defying fanatics and the civil authorities. Even STenhouse declares that when Brigham Young was asked to interfere in the matter, he declined. (Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 595). But Stenhouse says that the Morrisite dissenters "applied to the Mormon courts;" and that "the latter were pleased enough with the opportunity of dealing with the Morrisites." (Ibid). All which is untrue. The application was to the United States court for the third district of Utah, the judge of which was Chief Justice Kinney, appointed by the president of the United States. But this does not prevent Beadle from describing the incident as if it were a battle between "Brighamites" and "Morrisites;" and the sheriff's posse is always referred to as the "Brighamite posse." (Life in Utah, p. 417, et passim ).
[^13] Deseret News of March 12th, 1879. This impression of the News contains the account of the trial of General Burton and his acquittal for the part he took in the Morrisite incident. Burton declares that he at first declined to serve the writs, whereupon the judge sent a second time to him and "somewhat insisted" upon Burton acting in the matter. (Record of Burton Trial, Deseret News, March 5th, 1879).
[^14] Burton explained in open court that he asked for the posse "thinking if an overwhelming force appeared the writs would be served and complied with without bloodshed." (Record of Burton Trial, Deseret News, March 5th, 1879).
[^15] Waite for instance, declares that the original force of the deputy sheriffs was so augmented on the way by these "volunteers" and additional arms "until they approached the settlement of the Morrisites with a force of about one thousand well armed men." (Mormon Prophet, p. 125).
[^16] The document in extenso will be found in Deseret News of April 15th 1863.
[^17] Statement of John G. Chambers, with Colonel Burton's posse, History of Brigham Young, Ms., June, 1862, p. 574; also testimony of Thomas Abbott and of Robert T. Burton, Trial of Burton Deseret News, of March 5th, 1879.
[^18] The testimony at the Burton trial was somewhat conflicting on this point, but the evidence established that some two hours elapsed instead of the 30 minutes between receiving the call to surrender at the fort and the firing of these cannon shots. (See Record of Burton Trial, Deseret News, impressions of Feb. 26th, March 5th and 12th, 1879).
[^19] Stenhouse in his mania for finding cases of "blood atonement" against the church, makes an infamous and utterly unwarranted insinuation respecting this Banks case: "That Elder John Banks was foully dealt with, there seems little room to doubt. He was wounded at the time of Morris' death, but not fatally. The manner of his 'taking off' only is obscure. In the evening he was well enough to sit up and enjoy his pipe. Suddenly he died. Was he poisoned, shot, or 'knifed,' is the only query. Those who could answer will not; the confidential statements of others are conflicting." (Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 600). Years afterwards Jeter Clinton was arrested on a trumped up charge for the alleged killing of Banks, this in July, 1879, but so flimsy was the evidence regarded that United States prosecuting attorney for Utah, Philip T. Van Zile, dismissed the case without allowing it to go to trial. (See Court Record Third District, Fall term of 1879).
[^20] See Deseret News of the 18th and 25th of June, 1862, for the account current of this affair. The News accounts it "the first armed resistance to the laws that has been made in the territory, and trusts that it will be the last."
[^21] The full Court Record of the case will be found in Deseret News of the 26th of February, the 5th and 12th of March, 1879.
[^22] The record of these trials which occupied from the 19th to the 27th of March, 1863, will be found complete in the Deseret News of March 11th, 18th, 25th, and April 1st, 1863.
[^23] The pardon in full will be found in Deseret News of April 1st, 1863; it bears date of 31st of March, 1863. The prisoners were sentenced on the 27th of the same month.
[^24] See Deseret News of April 8th, 1863, for this second document, also editorial on the subject.
[^25] Deseret News of 15th of April. The judge, also, since this was likely to be the last session of court he would hold in Utah, said a word on his experience as a judge in Utah, which will be found in Note end of this chapter.
[^26] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for 24th of June, 1862, p. 594.
[^27] For the presentment of the grand jury see Deseret News of April 15th, 1863. Nothing came of this action of the grand jury, and a year later, another grand jury addressed another presentment to the judge of the same district, then John Titus, chief justice. But with the same result. (See History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for April 9th, 1864, p. 245, et seq.). "Following the municipal law," says Stenhouse, the nuisance "should have been abated." "In the wrath of the moment," he continues, "Brigham Young ordered the mayor of Salt Lake City to 'move Connor and his men out of the city limits;'" but represents that A. O. Smoot, the mayor, so delayed action that by the time his preliminary arrangements were completed, the sober second thought came to President Young, and the costs being counted, the execution of the "order" was not insisted upon. (Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 609). In a footnote Stenhouse represents that the "above order" of Brigham Young's was a matter of conversation between General Connor and himself. And in his text he says: "The good sense of Abraham O. Smoot saved Mormonism." And then comments that if the order had been given and executed, "probably the garrison would have been 'wiped out,' many of the Mormons would have been killed, and in the course of a few months, volunteers would have poured into Utah from California, and there would have been a bloody settlement of that passionate speech." (Ibid). I find no authority in any of our annals for this incident, or elsewhere, outside of the statement of Stenhouse.
[^28] The order bears date of Aug. 6th, 1862, and is published in full in Deseret News of Aug. 20th, 1862.
[^29] See account of transaction in History of Brigham Young, Ms., entries for July, 1864, pp. 537-8; and also pp. 547-8.
[^30] The Union Vedette—(Vedette, a sentinel on horseback stationed at some outpost, or on an elevation to watch an enemy and give notice of danger, Century Dictionary), was published by officers and enlisted men of the California and Nevada territory volunteers. Its first number appeared 30th November, 1863. It was first published as a weekly, but Jan. 5th, 1864, it was triumphantly changed to a daily the first daily paper published in Utah. Its purpose, as declared in its Prospectus, was to afford a medium for the representation of "Gentile" as distinguished from "Mormon" opinion; and for combating "Mormon" misapprehension, and "misrepresentation." It was also intended to foster the mining development of the territory. While its circulation was chiefly confined to Camp Douglas, it also had quite a large circulation among Gentile merchants and dissenting or "apostate Mormons." In less than a year, July 4th, 1864—as a foil to the Vedette the Daily Telegraph was published of which Thos. B. H. Stenhouse was proprietor and editor in chief. Mr. Thos. G. Webber was its business manager, and John Jaques the associate editor. A semi-weekly edition was begun in October following the founding of the daily. These two papers occupied the same relative position as the Valley Tan and the Mountaineer of an earlier date.
[^31] Letter of George A. Smith to Joseph F. Smith, copied into History of Brigham Young, Ms., July, 1864, pp. 553-4.
[^32] The petitions to the governor and to the mayor and city council will be found in History of Brigham Young, Ms., July entries, 1864, pp. 547-505.
[^33] Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 610.
[^34] Ibid.
[^35] The alleged offending communication from Camp Douglas admitted into the editorial columns of the News, advocating the election of John G. Downey, the "'copperhead' candidate for governor of California, appears in the News impression of August 26th, 1863. The appearance of this article in the News was unfortunate for the reason that the laws of California permitted her volunteer troops, though absent from the state, to vote for state officers, hence the California volunteers at Camp Douglas would be concerned in the election, and in any utterance affecting it. Elias Smith had been connected with the News from 1851; and from 9th of March, 1859, to 16th of September, 1863, he had been editor in chief, and he avows responsibility for the editorial matter by whomsoever written. "Some articles," he remarks, "may have been inserted which were not previously duly scanned, but by whomsoever written, no avoidance is pleaded." (Deseret News, of Sept. 23rd, 1863. Mr. Stenhouse rightly declares that "a more prudent, honorable gentleman than Judge Smith was not in 'Mormondom.'" Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 610).
[^36] This is apparent from the fact that in addition to the general press dispatches published in the News, decidedly pro-Union in their spirit, the News also published on the 8th of June the war reports from the "Wilderness Battlefields," by the New York Tribune's special correspondent,—covering an entire page of that impression of the paper—and a sympathetic editorial upon it. And on the same date the following Editorial appeared under the caption—"Richmond to be Taken;" "Great preparations are on foot in the eastern states to honor the taking of the confederate capital. General Grant is not advancing quite so fast as to suit the anxiety, but he is reported to have expressed the satisfaction with the occurrence of that event on the 4th of July proximo—the nation's birthday. Vicksburg, capitulated to him on the last 'Fourth,' and Richmond to do so on the 'Fourth' coming would hoist him to the highest pinnacle of fame. Add to these, the capitulation of Charleston on the 'Fourth' of next year, with it the end of the war, and the nation will grant him anything that he pleases to ask for, and he will have a right to ask it. He is in earnest, and has a better show for finishing this terrible struggle than any and all the generals who have preceded him. He seems to have his own way—and that is something." (Deseret News, vol. xiii, p. 288).
[^37] See letter of Brigham Young to Daniel H. Wells—then in England—under date of July 16th, 1864, History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for July, pp. 557-560; also letter of George A. Smith to Joseph F. Smith, Ibid, pp. 553-4; also entries under date of 10th, 11th and 12th of July, pp. 537-540.
[^38] Deseret News of April 15th, 1863.
[^39] 39. Letter of David O. Calder to George Q. Cannon, dated March 13th, 1863 Millennial Star, vol. xxv, p. 301.
[^40] 40. David O. Calder's letter to Cannon before cited, Millennial Star, vol. xxv p. 301.
[^41] 41. Waite's Mormon Prophet, p. 106. Colonel Connor disclaimed such intention to Bishop John Sharp, to which the latter replied that after the colonel had declared such intention "it would be hard to make men believe he had not." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., March, 1863, p. 288). Stenhouse explains that the "three persons" to be "surprised" had reference to a man who, it was rumored, had married "the Three widows of a wealthy merchant, and who were living within sight of Judge Waite's residence." It was thought that this case might prove an excellent one with which to test the new bigamy law. The difficulty that might arise from Judge Waite—who had been assigned to the southern district—acting within Judge Kinney's who had married the merchant's wives. (Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 607, note). Linn seems to concede that Connor was to arrest Brigham Young, and even represents him as on the march for that purpose when he heard of the president's "friendly" arrest, and of his being taken before Judge Kinney. "Colonel Connor was informed of this [Young's] arrest before he arrived in the city, and retraced his steps, and the citizens dispersed to their homes." (Story of the Mormons, p. 549).
[^42] 42. See Deseret News of March 11th, 1863. Linn puts the bail at $ 5,000 an error. He also declares that Colonel Steptose, who, in the closing month of 1854, had joined in a petition to President Franklin Pierce, praying for the retention of Brigham Young as governor of Utah, claimed the credit of making this suggestion of the "friendly" arrest of Brigham Young in order to place him beyond the reach of the military authorities. (See Linn's Story of the Mormons, p. 549; also Overland Monthly, for Dec., 1896).
[^43] 43. It is important to note that this was the attitude of the church as expressed editorially by the Deseret News: "It is well known that the Latter-day Saints have publicly proclaimed for many years, through their discourses and published volumes, the divine right of polygamy. It rests upon the sacred scriptures for its foundation. As a principle, it is incorporated into, and forms part of our religious faith. Our fathers, in forming the federal Constitution, wisely guarded and protected the religious rights of the citizen. Left free to adopt such faith and mode of worship as the subject might choose, he was secured from all intolerance and interference by law or otherwise." (Deseret News of March 11th, 1863).
[^44] 44. See Stenhouse in Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 605. Waite's Mormon Prophet, p. 106.
[^45] 45. Quite a detailed and sympathetic account of this expedition against the Bannocks and Snake Indians will be found in the Deseret News of the 28th, of January, 1863, and the 4th and 11th of February of the same year.
[^46] 46. Official report to Lieutenant Colonel R. C. Drum, assistant adjutant general, U. S. A., department of the pacific, date of Feb. 6th, 1863, published in Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, pp. 283-286.
[^47] 47. Colonel J. H. Martineau, of the Utah militia, author of A Sketch of the Military History of Cache Valley, quoted by Tullidge, History of Salt Lake City, pp. 289-290.
[^48] 48. In the following July Sagwitch was on his way to a treaty meeting to be held at Brigham City, Utah, July 30th, where Governor Doty and General Connor were to meet the Shoshones for treaty purposes. The chief was taken prisoner in Box Elder canon by a small detachment of Connor's command serving as an escort to a government train. When Governor Doty heard of the capture he sent an express and expressing a hope that no violence would be done the chief. This, however, did not save Sagwitch from violence, for during the following night, and while strongly guarded, he was shot by some unknown person, the ball entering his left breast and passing through the right shoulder. (History of Brigham Young, M., entry for July, 1863, pp. 814-815).
[^49] 49. Martineau's Narrative, Tullidge as before, p. 290.
[^50] 50. Ibid.
[^51] 51. S. Roskelly's letter to Ezra T. Benson and Peter Maughan, date of February 8th, 1863. Copied into History of Brigham Young Ms., entries for Feb., 1863, p. 146. Martineau reports the same kind of outrages, saying that some of the squaws were killed because they would not quietly submit. (Ibid, p. 144).
[^52] 52. History of Utah, pp. 631-2.
[^53] 53. Deseret News of 28th January, 1863.
[^54] 54. Ibid, impressions of Feb. 4th and 11th, 1863.
[^55] 55. Deseret News of Jan. 28th, 1863.
[^56] 56. Deseret News, impression of Jan. 28th, 1863.
[^57] 57. Deseret News impression of Feb. 4th.
[^58] 58. Ibid.
[^59] 59. Letter of Alexander Stalker to Peter Maughan, date of Jan. 30th, 1863—the day after the battle, copied into the History of Brigham Young, Ms., pp. 107-110.
[^60] 60. Quoted by Tullidge, History of Salt Lake City, p. 290.
[^61] 61. Deseret News, Feb. 11th, 1863.
[^62] 62. Martineau quoted by Tullidge, History of Salt Lake City, p. 290.
[^63] 63. One of these peace treaties was made at Brigham City with the Shoshones on the 30th of July, at which Governor Doty and General Connor represented the government, while Pocatello and Sandpitch, with other chiefs represented the recently hostile bands of Indians. (Deseret News, vol. xiii, p. 37). About the same time representatives from the Bannock tribe visited Governor Doty and sued for peace, which later led to a meeting with these Indians in Ruby valley, Nevada, where Governor Doty, and the governor of Nevada met with them and entered into a formal treaty by which peace was secured, and the Indians were granted an annuity of $5,000. This on the first of October. (Deseret News of Oct. 14th, 1863). Later Governor Doty and General Connor met northern tribes of Indians at Soda Springs where a peace treaty negotiated early in the summer by the general at Fort Bridger was ratified. (Ibid).
[^64] 64. Congressional Globe, of 23rd March, 1864; also published in Deseret News of April 27th, 1864.
