B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 5 ( 1930)

39CHAPTER CXXIII

39THE MORRISITE AFFAIR—A PROVOST GUARD FOR SALT LAKE CITY—A THREATENED CONFLICT

39ANOTHER incident of this period—1862-3—and one which most always brings regrets with its recital, is what is known as the Morrisite affair. It could be passed over with brief mention so far as the importance of the incident itself is concerned, if, in the first place, anti-"Mormon" malice had not made of the incident an occasion of rank offending on the part of the Latter-day Saint Church leaders, and who class Morris as a martyr to their hatred of a rival; [^1] and, second, if Governor Harding by pardoning without just reason, a number of the Morrisites, tried and convicted of murder in the second degree, had not linked up this affair with the series of events which constantly kept the Latter-day Saints in a state of irritation against the United States federal officers in the territory.

JOSEPH MORRIS AND HIS VAGARIES

Joseph Morris, the chief figure of the incident, was an ignorant Welshman, who joined the Church of the Latter-day Saints in his native land in 1849; and now, undoubtedly, was become of unsound mind. [^2] Under date of September 1st, 1859, he addressed a long letter to President Brigham Young in which he made many incongruous claims respecting himself, among which was that he was the "seventh angel" sopken of in the Revelation of St. John. [^3]

40In addition to this there is in the letter a lot of jumbled vagaries about the resurrection; about the fullness of the keys of the priesthood having been given to him; that he was "the greatest prophet that ever lived upon the earth with the exception of Jesus." "It is true that I hold the keys of the dispensation of the fullness of times," he said, "Joseph Smith was my forerunner; he did that for me which I could not do for myself." Yet with all this he assumed humility: he was inferior in many things to the brethren of the twelve; he wanted to be united with them "heart and hand." "I am willing to give them any privilege that their hearts desire in righteousness," he continued. "Use your liberty and be of good courage for the Lord will be with you and fight your battles, and prepare yourselves for a speedy Moses," which character, reincarnated, Morris also pretended to be. Morris directed President Young and the twelve to send out no more missionaries into the world; they were admonished to give their whole attention to the deliverance of Israel, and to opening a door for him that he might come up "to the head of the church." "For," he continues, "I long to have the privilege of meeting with you when I can have the opportunity to speak face to face with you, for I never had the opportunity to make known much unto you, as yet. I have only, as it were, hinted to you, but when I come up to the head of the church I will make known to you all things that are necessary to you." [^4]

THE INVESTIGATION OF MORRIS

Other letters followed of like general character. Naturally the course of the unfortunate man was annoying, and Brigham Young could not be expected to have much patience with his vagaries. [^5] Besides the new "prophet" had been twice excommunicated from the church for immorality, since living in Utah, and even at the height of his career was living in illegal relations with the wife of a man who was demented. [^6]

41In the course of a year Morris succeeded in gathering about him a following of several score of people, chiefly located at South Weber settlement, near the mouth of Weber canon. The bishop of this ward, Richard Cook, had become a convert to Morris and many of his people were in sympathy with the claims of the latter as an inspired man. Elders John Taylor and Wilford Woodruff, of the council of the twelve, were sent to make inquiries concerning the status of things and to correct any irregularity that might have arisen in that ward of the church. A public meeting of the members of the ward was held on the 11th of February, 1861, and Bishop Cook was required to state his position with reference to the new "prophet," whereupon he very boldly announced his belief in Morris, and declared Brigham Young to be a failure as president of the church. Fifteen others announced a similar faith, whereupon they were excommunicated from the church by Elders Taylor and Woodruff, and the remaining faithful members of the ward.

The hearing was long and great patience was exercised by the two apostles. Morris himself was sent for and given a hearing though it appears that he was not very forceful in presenting his claims, and he had to be strongly urged before he would make any statement at all. Bishop Cook was commended by Elder Taylor for his frankness in declaring his belief in the order of things set forth in the claims of Morris. An overzealous brother of the name of Watts, opposed to Bishop Cook and everything "Morrisite," made harsh accusations against the bishop, charging him with lying, with not abiding in the council of President Young, and denouncing him as worthy of destruction. "He made some very unwise statements," says the minutes of the meeting, "which were disapproved by Elders Woodruff and Taylor, and Bishop Cook said he was satisfied with their disapproval" [^7] of that which Watts had said. Cook also said that the brethren had "expressed themselves against his 'evils' and 'wrongs' much more moderately than he had expected." In concluding the meeting Elder John Taylor admonished the brethren who had remained faithful in the South Weber ward "to go to work in the fear of God and work righteousness. Treat those well who cannot believe as you do, they have expressed themselves very candidly, you can afford to treat them well. You that profess the principles of Jesus Christ, show it by your works." [^8] All which represents fair and gentle treatment towards the brethren so far lost in error.

42On the 6th of April following this action of the church authorities, Morris and his following effected an organization. Five persons were baptized that day, who, with Morris, constituted six members—the number with which the Church of the Latter-day Saints started thirty-one years before. Morris became the head of the new "church" with Richard Cook, the deposed bishop of South Weber, and John Banks [^9] as counselors.

43The Morrisites held their property in common; and as they also believed in the immediate coming of the Christ, "in power and great glory," when all their needs would be supplied without labor, they neglected the ordinary pursuits of life and gave themselves up to holding meetings and religious ecstasy. [^10] It is said that Morris so abounded with "revelations" that it required three English and three Danish clerks to work daily in order to record the numerous "revelations" received, which in a short time amounted to six volumes, each containing two or three hundred manuscript pages.

43The sect rapidly increased in numbers, and they located at a point called "Kington Fort," afterwards changed to "Morris Fort." They soon numbered over three hundred, and before the breaking up of the community that number was increased to between five and six hundred.

Several times the day was set for the coming of the Christ, but he did not come, and the repeated disappointments tried the faith of the disciples. There was murmuring among them, and some began to desire to withdraw from the community plan of life, insisting upon taking with them all they had "consecrated to the common fund," without reference, according to pro-Morrisite representation, to what they had consumed while members of the community. This was resented by the community and led to seizure of stock, and property by the dissenters, on the one hand, and to reprisals by the Morrisites on the other, in the course of which several of the dissenters were captured and imprisoned at Kington Fort. Finally an affidavit was made before Chief Justice Kinney setting forth that one John Jensen and three others were unlawfully imprisoned by Joseph Morris, Richard Cook, and John Banks, et al. Whereupon his honor issued a writ of habeas corpus commanding that the parties unlawfully detained be brought before him. The writ was duly served by Deputy Marshal J. L. Stoddard, but the mandate was not obeyed, the law and the judge were set at defiance, the writ burned, and the marshal threatened and ordered to leave the fort, at the same time being told that no more writs would be served in their camp, "to prevent which," as Marshal Stoddard reported, "they had at least one hundred armed men. [^11]

44On the 10th of June upon the affidavits of H. O. Hanson and Philo Allen, Chief Justice Kinney issued a second writ of habeas corpus directed to the same parties, demanding the forthcoming of the bodies of John Jenson and William Jones, the other two prisoners, associated with these in the former writ, having made their escape; [^12] also a warrant was issued by the Judge for the arrest of Morris, Cook, Banks et al, on a charge of false imprisonment.

These writs were placed in the hands of Robert T. Burton and Theodore McKean. Henry W. Lawrence, long prominent in "Mormon" church and Utah affairs, was territorial marshal, but was absent from the territory, and the serving of the writs devolved, as matter of civil duty, upon Burton and McKean, his deputies. Robert T. Burton, a prominent member of the Church of the Latter-day Saints, and also of the territorial militia, "with great reluctance assumed the responsibility" of serving the writs and making the arrests, "which he was bound to undertake by his oath and bond of office." [^13]

ACTION OF GOVERNOR FRANK FULLER IN THE MORRIS AFFAIR

Acting governor of the territory, Frank Fuller, being advised that formidable resistance would be made to the serving of the writs called out several companies of the militia to aid the deputy sherriffs as a posse, one hundred and fifty being drawn from the Salt Lake county militia, and one hundred from the militia of Davis county. [^14] Besides these a great many people of their own volition, under the excitement of the occasion, gathered in the vicinity of the expected conflict, and by anti-"Mormon" writers are accounted as and included in the forces of the sheriff. [^15]

Arriving on the south heights that overlook the little valley in which Kington Fort is located, a written message addressed to Messrs. Morris, Banks, Cook, Parsons, and Klemgard, the parties for whom writs were held, was sent into the fort, reciting their former resistance to the officers and laws, announcing that other writs were now issued against them, and a sufficient force furnished by the executive of the territory to enforce the laws. They were therefore called upon to peacefully and quietly surrender themselves and the prisoners they were illegally holding to the processes of the law. An answer was required in thirty minutes after the receipt of the aforesaid notice; if answer was not then made they were warned that forcible measures would be taken to arrest the parties named in the writs. Should they disregard this summons to surrender, and thus put their lives in jeopardy, they were urged to remove their women and children, and all persons peaceably disposed within the fort, were notified to leave, and informed that they could find protection with the posse. [^16] In addition to this notice sent into the fort, a flag of truce carried by Major Egan and Wells Smith approached the fort anticipating that they would be met by a deputation from the Morrisites, but none came.

46In the fort the question was discussed as to whether or not the summons of the posse should be complied with. Morris withdrew to his dwelling, and soon returned to his assembled following with a "revelation" forbidding them to yield to the demands of the posse, promising them deliverance and the destruction of their enemies, while "not one of his faithful people should be destroyed." [^17] The people of the fort assembled, the "revelation" was read, but before it could be discussed a cannon ball crashed into the fort killing two women and wounding a young girl. This produced the utmost confusion, until ex-Bishop Cook advised all to go to their homes and each man protect himself and family as best he could.

THE MORRISITE "BATTLE"

The posse had waited much longer than the half hour that was said would be allowed for compliance with the demand for surrender of prisoners before the first cannon shot was fired. [^18] The first shot was fired by direction of Deputy Sheriff Burton and the gunners were ordered to so elevate their guns that the shot would pass over the fort. The same order was given as to the second shot fired, but from the evidence in the case the ball struck short of the fort in a field, bounded into the fort with the result named.

After firing these shots Deputy Sheriff Burton deployed his men to more effectively close in upon the fort. While making this movement the posse was fired upon from the fort and one man killed. Firing on both sides continued through the day. The second day there was a continuous and heavy rain so that little was done. Towards the close of the third day a division of the posse took possession of a house near the fort, in doing which another man of the posse was killed. Shortly after this a man bearing a white flag came out of the fort; all firing ceased; upon inquiry being made by the bearer of the flag as to what was required, he was answered by Deputy Sheriff Burton that unconditional surrender was required, stacking of the arms, and the surrender of all the men bearing arms. The flagman with this information returned to the fort, and when it was observed that those within were stacking their arms, Burton, followed by twenty or thirty of the posse immediately at hand, some on foot and others (four) mounted, entered the fort. With his warrant in hand Deputy Sheriff Burton informed the excited people that the men for whom he held warrants, and all who had borne arms in the fight would be arrested. Some one asked that Morris be allowed to speak to the people, which request Burton granted with the proviso that he be brief and do not incite the people to further resistance. On this the "prophet" stepped forward, raised his arms excitedly, at the same time shouting, "All who are for me and my God, in life or in death follow me!" There were cries of "I," "I," and some "to arms," "to arms," and a rush was made for the arms. Burton called upon the maddened crowd to "halt," this, several times; the command not being obeyed he shouted "Stop them boys!" addressing his men, whereupon firing began, Burton himself firing at Morris. Morris was instantly killed; Banks fell wounded; two women were killed by the firing to stop the rush to arms, a Mrs. Bowman and a Mrs. Swanee. This stopped the rush, and Burton ordered firing to cease.

48One hundred and forty men were taken to the posse's camp—a number of others had escaped—the women and children of the fort were supplied with food. During the night Banks died. [^19] The next day ninety-four of the prisoners were taken to Salt Lake City, the remainder having been released. The prisoners were brought before Judge Kinney who admitted them to bail, the prisoners being allowed to become sureties for each other. [^20]

GENERAL BURTON'S TRIAL

General Burton after delivering his prisoners to the court was complimented by both Judge Kinney and Acting Governor Frank Fuller, for the able manner in which he had discharged his duty, and with so little loss of life. [^21]

Yet years afterwards General Burton was arraigned before this same district court on a charge of "murder," being accused of killing a Mrs. Bowman, one of the women killed in stopping the rush of the Morrisites for their arms, as detailed in the text above. An indictment was found at the September term of the court, 1870; but the grand jury which framed it was declared illegal by the decision of the United States supreme court in the Englebrecht case, and therefore the indictment was void. Another indictment was presented at the June term, 1876, and General Burton was arrested in August of that year and placed under $20,000 bonds. His trial did not take place until February, 1879. The case was prosecuted by P. T. Van Zile, the United States attorney for Utah, and his deputy attorney, James H. Beatty; and defended by Judge Tilford and Judge Sutherland of Salt Lake City. After a trial which attracted wide attention at the time, General Burton was acquitted by a unanimous verdict of "not guilty" by a jury half "Mormon" half "Gentile." [^22]

TRIAL OF THE MORRISITES

At the following March term of the third district court ninety-six of the accused were indicted by the grand jury for resisting the officer, and ten of them for the murder of Jared Smith—the member of the sheriff's posse who was killed on the first day's attempt upon the Morrisite fort. A long trial followed at which sixty of the accused appeared in court, the rest having left the territory. A fine of one hundred dollars was assessed against each of those tried for resistance to the posse—the lowest penalty allowed by the law. Seven of the ten indicted for murder were found guilty of that crime, in the second degree. Five of the number were sentenced to imprisonment for ten years each, one for twelve, and one for fifteen years.

The trial of the Morrisite prisoners took place in the month of March, [^23] just when popular excitement in Salt Lake City and throughout the territory was at its height over the attempt of Governor Harding and associate justices Drake and Waite to revolutionize the character of the territorial government as already detailed in a preceding chapter. The demand for the resignation of these officials and their retirement from the territory had been made on the 5th of March; and doubtless in retaliation, and to annoy the "Mormon" people, three days after the conviction of the Morrisites found guilty of second degree murder, Governor Harding, without assigning any cause for this action, except in the general terms of "divers good causes me thereto moving," granted to each of them "full and perfect pardon" for the offense of which they stood convicted; "and each of them is hereby forever exonerated, discharged, and absolved from the punishment imposed upon them." [^24] On the same day the governor also issued a pardon to the sixty-six offenders who had been fined in the Morrisite cases for armed resistance to the officers of the law, and discharged them from the "fine, costs, and charges imposed upon them." [^25]

The grand jury of the third judicial district was in its annual session for the adjudication of causes arising under the laws of the United States, at the time Governor Harding granted this pardon to the Morrisites, having begun its session on the 30th of March. "In accordance with a common custom with grand juries after concluding their labors, if there exists anything in the district prominently offensive, to call attention of the court and the people to the fact, by solemn presentment, beg leave," said the grand jury, "to tender this statement, and ask that it be spread upon the records of the court." Then follows a scathing rebuke of the act of the governor in pardoning the Morrisite prisoners. It was an able review of the whole subject that the grand jury presented, leading to the conclusion that courts are of no avail "when their most solemn and deliberate judgments can be thus summarily ignored and set aside;" that Governor Harding was "an officer dangerous to the peace and prosperity of the territory;" and that "the crowning triumph of his inglorious career" was the turning loose upon the community a large number of convicted criminals.

51The report of the grand jury in full is published in Deseret News of April 15th, 1863. Judge Kinney who had issued the warrants for the arrest of the Morrisite leaders, being on the bench at the time the grand jury made its presentment, added to the record of the court the following comments:

51"Gentlemen of the grand jury: The paper just read by the clerk, is one of great responsibility, presenting the governor of this territory as unworthy the confidence and respect of the people. I trust you have fully considered the importance of the step which you as a grand jury have felt called upon, under the oaths of your office, to take. I am well persuaded that in no spirit of malice or undue prejudice have you been induced to call the attention of the court and the people to what you regard as the official misconduct of the executive, but only as the deliberate result of your investigations for the public good. * * * The law and its authority were fully vindicated by the verdicts, but, as you state, the governor has granted an unconditional pardon. What effect this may have upon the minds of evil disposed persons, I know not, but leave the responsibility where it belongs, with the governor, who, in the exercise of a naked power, has seen proper to grant executive clemency. You have now, as you state, concluded your labors and before discharging you I desire to tender to you the commendations of the court for your attention and diligence in the discharge of your duties." [^26]

POST KINGTON MOVEMENTS OF THE MORRISITES

After their pardon a few of the Morrisites who had the means to do so, left the territory; many had found friends and employment among the Latter-day Saints in the Utah settlements, after the collapse of their affairs at Kington Fort; in aid of which natural and desirable ending of the wholly regrettable episode, President Young sent out word among the bishops of the surrounding settlements, "to employ and feed any of them that were disposed to work;" and one of their leading spirits, John Parsons—the one who had read to the assembled Morrisites at Kington Fort the "revelation" of Morris forbidding surrender to the sheriff's posse—went among the scattered groups and read to them this epistle of President Young's to the bishops. He "told his fellow dupes that they had been grandly humbugged, and as for himself he was going to turn in and work, and he advised them all to do the same." [^27] Others of these deluded people, representing the more fanatical and implacable element, found employment at Camp Douglas, where they were patronized by both army officers and the California volunteers—as also by the civil federal officers of the territory—as if they were a persecuted and a much abused people. When General Connor established a military post at Soda Springs, in May, 1863, he offered them free transportation under the protection of the marching detachments from Camp Douglas if they would go to the great bend of Bear river, in the vicinity of Soda Springs, and there found a settlement. In response to this invitation about eighty families of these people, numbering in all more than two hundred souls, moved to Soda Springs and founded a settlement. But very little came of this movement; after a time the followers of Morris began to scatter, and in a few years became absorbed in the general community of the Latter-day Saints.

CAMP DOUGLAS REPORTED A NUISANCE

The same grand jury which protested the action of Governor Harding in pardoning the convicted Morrisites also made a presentment against Camp Douglas as a "common nuisance" to a large section of the inhabitants of Salt Lake City, by befouling the waters of Red Butte Canon Creek hitherto used by the said section of the city for irrigation drinking, and culinary purposes. The number affected was about three thousand people. Part of the proclaimed military service encroached upon the city limits. By establishing its encampment and building its stables and corrals along the course of the aforesaid stream, or diverting its waters, as was done in some instances, to various parts of the encampment through corrals and thence back into the main stream, the water was materially lessened for needful irrigation, and so befouled as to render its use impossible for drinking and culinary purposes. [^28]

A PROVOST GUARD FOR SALT LAKE CITY

A provost guard was established by General Connor in Salt Lake City, in July, 1864. This was doubtless in pursuance of the policy outlined in his military Order No. I, issued at Fort Churchhill, soon after he took command of the military district of Utah and Nevada. "Having been," as he declares, "credibly informed that there were persons within this district who while claiming and receiving protection to life and property from the government, are endeavoring to destroy and defame the principles and institutions of it," he directed that all commanders of posts, camps and detachments, cause to be promptly arrested and closely confined all persons who should be guilty of uttering treasonable sentiments against the government, and confine them until they should have taken the oath of allegiance. For a second offense they were to be confined and reported to Connor's headquarters. "Traitors," said the closing sentence of the order, "shall not utter treasonable sentiments in this district with impunity, but must seek some more genial soil, or receive the punishment they so richly merit." [^29] One can but notice, however, that nearly two years had elapsed after the arrival of Connor's command, before the provost guard was established in Salt Lake City, and throughout that time Connor's Order No. I had been in force. There was no more occasion for establishing that provost guard in July than there had been in any month in the previous two years; and either General Connor had been guilty of gross neglect of duty in failing to establish it sooner, or he must be adjudged guilty of giving unnecessary offense to a people already sorely tried by ultra officiousness on the part of both military officers and civil federal appointees.

The manner of establishing the guard station was as provoking, as the presence of the post (Camp Douglas) itself was unnecessary and insulting. A house belonging to the church opposite the south gates of Temple Square was surreptitiously obtained for the headquarters of the guard. The house had been rented "in behalf of the church" by Bishop John Sharp to Captain Stover for a military storehouse; but soon afterwards Captain Stover was ordered to Camp Douglas with his stores, and General Connor established his provost guard headquarters there, over the protest of Captain Stover. [^30] Captain Hempstead, editor of the Union Vedette, [^31] a bitter anti-"Mormon" paper, published at Camp Floyd, was made provost marshal. The day previous to taking possession of the aforesaid storehouse—July 10th—as the headquarters of the provost guard, the Vedette had said:

"As to the government, let it be distinctly understood that here or elsewhere, Uncle Sam will have what he wants—when he wants it—under all circumstances—from all people under the flag, and that, too, at his own estimate of what is a fair price!"

55And the seizure of this house looked very like the first step in the opening of that policy. There can be no doubt but that the utterance of the Vedette was the "law of war." President Lincoln himself announces it so in his letter to the mass convention at Springfield, Ill., in September, 1864, defending his emancipation proclamation: "Is there, or has there ever been any question that by the law of war the property both of enemies and friends may be taken when needed?" Of course the answer is obvious; but that is the law of war; in force when war is actually in progress, and there was no war existing in Utah to justify the Vedette utterance.

55As if to make the military action more insulting and irritating to the Latter-day Saints, a company of cavalry, part of the provost guard, took possession of the aforesaid house as their headquarters about two o'clock on the afternoon of Sunday, at the time that crowds of people were entering the tabernacle for worship. [^32]

The citizens of Salt Lake City petitioned both Governor Doty and the mayor and city council "to adopt such peaceful measures as shall remove the said body of cavalry (numbering 76) out of the inhabited portions of the city, leaving its inhabitants to pursue uninterruptedly their peaceful, lawful, industrial vocations." These petitions represented the action of Connor in this matter as "an outrage upon the feelings of the citizens;" and that "to submit to such an outrage without protest" would be to degrade themselves "in the eyes of all freemen." [^33] There were no "peaceable measures," however, by which the provost guard could be removed from the city, so it continued at its station for some time, only to demonstrate its uselessness by the few cases that came before it; and these but such as were provoked by the existence of the station, rowdy boys and a few drunken men being the offenders, who, in a spirit of mere bravado, would yell as they passed it, "Hurrah for Jeff Davis!" or some such manifestation of braggadocio. No serious cases came before the provost marshal.

56ANTI-UNION SENTIMENT CHANGED

56The creation of the guard station is said by Stenhouse to have resulted from the "Deseret News, the church organ," being intensely "copperhead," and chronicling the reverses of the Union arms with undisguised pleasure; and that "by way of correction General Connor established a provost guard in the city." [^34] In a footnote he associates with this statement a further one to the effect that some leading men represented to Brigham Young that the course of the News would provoke difficulty with the troops—"and it is true," he adds, "that at one time they seriously entertained the idea of 'gutting out' the printing office—whereupon President Young published 'a card' disclaiming 'personal responsibility for anything in that paper but what carried his own signature;'" and Stenhouse further adds, that the "necessary sacrifice" of somebody for this anti-Union tone of the Deseret News led to the "dismissal" of the editor, Hon. Elias Smith. [^35] The immediate cause of the "dismissal" was the admission of a communication from Camp Douglas advocating the election of John G. Downey, "copperhead" candidate for governor of California.

Stenhouse is very much confused here in his data. In the first place the change in editors of the Deseret News occurred nearly a year before the provost guard was established. Elias Smith's editorship of the News stopped with the impression of the 23rd of September, 1863, when Albert Carrington succeeded him with Stenhouse—who some years before had held a position on the staff of the New York Herald—as associate. Both Smith's valedictory and Carrington's salutation appear in that number. [^36]

57Relative to the disclaimer of responsibility by Brigham Young for the utterances of the Deseret News except for such articles as were signed by himself, that paper carried a standing notice to that effect through part of the year 1863,—from January 28th to June 17th, missing but two or three numbers—but no such disclaimer was carried after the latter date, the idea of no responsibility, except for signed articles, having been, by that time, established by the long standing notice. Neither the change of editors for the News, nor the "card" of disclaimer by Brigham Young could have any connection with the establishment of the provost guard, in July, 1864, since they were events that happened nearly a year before.

57As to that provost guard being founded by way of correcting the "copperhead intensity" of the News, a careful examination of the editorial tone for several months preceding the founding of the provost guard, discloses no such "intensity," or even tendency in the News editorials.

In the summer of 1864 the News was publishing the war reports in a decidedly pro-Union coloring, especially as to the Virginia campaign of Grant's army; and the editorials had taken on a pro-Union tone. [^37] Evidently it was not to correct "copperhead" tendencies in the Deseret News editorials that the provost guard was established in Salt Lake City. It was, judged from all the circumstances, merely a wanton display of military power, that gratified the restless war spirit of the general commanding the California volunteers, who felt power and recked not of consequences.

The founding of the provost guard caused considerable excitement in Salt Lake City. It was thought to be the prelude to the establishment of martial law in the city, on some pretext or other; or the seizure of the public stores—this in view of the announcement in the Union Vedette that "Uncle Sam will have what he wants * * * and that, too, at his own estimate of what is a fair price." President Young was at Provo at the time of this action, word of its occurrence reached him about midnight of Sunday, and the next day he returned to the city accompanied by about two hundred mounted men as a guard, under command of David Evans, for there were those who supposed that the founding of the provost guard in Salt Lake City meant, perhaps, another attempt to arrest President Young by a military force. By the time the city was reached rumor magnified the president's escort of two hundred to five hundred, and later to five thousand. They were quartered in the tithing stores and other buildings then occupying the block immediately east of the Temple Square, where by the time of their arrival a considerable force from various parts of the city and from settlements on the north of it had gathered in to protect the rights of the citizens. Finding that there was no peaceful means by which the provost guard could be removed, except by an appeal to the secretary of war, Edwin M. Stanton,—which it was thought useless to make—the south entrance to the Temple Square was walled up with adobies, and the east and west gates were opened for entrance to the square and to the tabernacle. Soon after this the flurry of excitement subsided. [^38]

NOTE

JUDGE KINNEY'S EXPERIENCE AS A JUDGE IN UTAH: A VINDICATION OF THE LATTER-DAY SAINTS

"It is possible, and highly probable, that this is the last court over which I shall have the honor to preside in your territory. Such are the indications. I have been the chief justice of the supreme court of Utah, and judge of this district most of the time since 1854—having come among you a stranger, but I was treated with kindness, and my authority with consideration and respect.

59Appointed by Mr. Pierce in 1853, and reappointed in 1860 by Mr. Buchanan, and continued in office by Mr. Lincoln, and having held many courts, tried many cases, both civil and criminal, of an important character, I am happy in being able to state that I have found no difficulty in Utah in administering the law, except where its administration has been thwarted by executive interference.

59Let honesty, impartiality and ability be the characteristic qualifications of the judge, and a fearless discharge of duty, and he will be as much respected in this territory, and his decisions as much honored, as in any state or territory in the Union. And to use an odious distinction, attempted to be made between 'Mormons' and 'Gentiles,' I am also happy in being able to state, that while these parties differing so widely as they do in their religious faith, have been suitors in my court, the so-called Gentile has obtained justice from the verdict of a so-called Mormon jury.

59I repeat, gentlemen, that the law is, and can be maintained in this territory, and that there is more vigilance here in arresting and bringing criminals to trial and punishment, than in any country wherever I have resided.

In the discharge of my judicial duties I have endeavored to be actuated by a sense of the responsibility of my position; ever keeping constantly in mind that I was among a civilized and enlightened people, who were entitled to the same consideration from the court, as the people of any other territory; and that the court here as elsewhere, should be free from bias and prejudice." [^39]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Tullidge's Western Galaxy, March, 1888, article, Mines of the West, I. Utah Mines.
[^2] This story is by Stenhouse, who, ignoring or else not knowing the part Ogilvie took in the matter, gives the following account of the initial step of mining history in Utah: "A portion of the horses of the California volunteers had been sent to Bingham canon to graze, and with them a company of men as a guard. A picnic party of officers and their wives from Camp Douglas was improvised, and Bingham was selected, as the troops were there. During the rambles of the party on the mountain sides, this lady, who had a previous acquaintance with minerals in California, picked up a loose piece of ore. The volunteers immediately prospected for the vein and found it, stuck a stake in the ground, made their location, and from that hour Utah has been known to the world as a rich mining country." (Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 713). Bancroft says that Captain Heitz and a party from Camp Douglas—doubtless Stenhouse's picnic party—made the discovery of the argentiferous ore in Bingham, in 1863. (History of Utah, p. 741).
[^3] Tullidge's Western Galaxy for March, 1888, p. 1.
[^4] While Tullidge puts the organization of the West Mountain Mining District as occurring "a day or two after" the Bingham canon picnic incident, (Western Galaxy, p. 1), Bancroft says that the district was organized in December, 1863, (History of Utah, p. 741). Mr. A. S. Kenner, author of Utah As It Is (1904), holds that there was a mining district organized in Utah at an earlier date than this. "As far back as 1858," he writes: "It became known that there were great veins and deposits of lead near the young town of Minersville, in Beaver county. * * * It was deemed advisable to work them to some extent for the purpose of keeping the settlers in that and some other parts of the territory supplied with bullets," etc. Work was begun on a fissure vein, that became known as the "Rollins Lead Mine"; and as work proceeded the "lead" grew harder, which experience taught those who worked the mine could come but from one circumstance—the presence of silver with the lead. There were no available means at hand for separating the metals, however, and the work was not prosecuted to any great extent. Not only was the extraction of ores from the Old Rollins Lead Mine, as it was called, in 1858, the first mining done in Utah by civilized agencies, but the region of country in which it is situated became the first organized mining district in the territory; this was accomplished in 1861, the name "Lincoln" being given it, which name was also subsequently given to the old lead mine. It and the adjoining properties have since been worked systematically and thoroughly by capitalized companies representing other parts of the Union as well as Utah, and in the districts other locations have been made in later years until now (1904), there are fully 100 recorded claims. (Utah As It Is, p. 323; also Bancroft's Utah, p. 746, note 75, where the "Old Rollins Mine" is referred to as the first silver mine in Utah).
[^5] Bancroft's History of Utah, p. 742. "The first shipment of ore from Utah was a carload of copper ore from Bingham canon, hauled to Uintah on the Union Pacific, and forwarded by the Walker Brothers to Baltimore, in June, 1868. In 1864 free gold was discovered in this district by a party of Californians returning from Montana to pass the winter in Salt Lake City. Between 1865 and 1872 the production of gold was estimated at $1,000,000, and up to 1882 the total product was 500,000 tons of ore and 100,000 of bullion, from which was extracted $1,500,000 in gold, $3,800,000 in silver, and $5,000,000 in lead." The output of the precious metals in Utah for 1913 was, gold, $3,581,900; silver, $8,109,450. "Mining of true gold ores on a large scale is on the decline in Utah. In gold yield a steady decrease is noted, due largely to the closing of the Mercur gold mines. This loss has been partly made up, however, by the increase in gold from the copper ores;" [of which copper there was produced in 1913 to the value of $24,884,860]. (Report of V. C. Heikes, United States Geological Survey 1913).
[^6] This in the very first number of the Union Vedette: "The general commanding the district has the strongest evidence that the mountains and canons in the territory of Utah abound in rich veins of gold, silver, copper and other minerals, and for the purpose of opening up the country to a new, hardy, and industrious population, deems it important that prospecting for minerals should not only be untrammelled and unrestricted, but fostered by every proper means. * * * The general also directs that every proper facility be extended to miners and others in developing the country; and that soldiers of the several posts be allowed to prospect for mines, when such course shall not interfere with the due and proper performance of their military duties. Commanders of posts, companies and detachments within the district are enjoined to execute to the fullest extent the spirit and letter of this circular communication."
[^7] Connor's Report to Colonel Drum will be found complete in History of Salt Lake City, Tullidge, pp. 328-330.
[^8] "The mines are thrown open to the hardy and industrious, and it is announced, that they will receive the amplest protection in life, property and rights, against aggression from whatsoever source Indian or white. * * * In giving assurance of entire protection to all who may come hither to prospect for mines, the undersigned wishes at this time most earnestly, and yet firmly, to warn all, whether permanent residents or not of this territory, that should violence be offered, or attempted to be offered to miners, in the pursuit of their lawful occupation, the offender or offenders, one or many, will be tried as public enemies, and punished to the utmost extent of martial law." (Circular issued from Camp Douglas, date of March 1st, 1864, a copy will be found in Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, p. 327).
[^9] See this History, chapter li.
[^10] Discourse at conference in Salt Lake City, Oct. 9th, 1863, Journal of Discourses, vol. x, p. 253. Reference to the temple is of course to the temple in Salt Lake City.
[^11] "I now wish to present a few questions to the congregation, for I think there is no harm in asking questions to elicit information. Do the government officials in Utah, civil and military, give aid and comfort to and foster persons whose design is to interrupt and disturb the peace of this people? and are they protected and encouraged in this ruinous design by the strong arm of military power, to do what they will, if they will only annoy and try to break up the 'Mormon' community? Does the general government, or does it not, sustain this wicked plan? Is there in existence a corruption-fund, out of which government jobbers live and pay their traveling expenses while they are engaged in trying to get men and women to apostatize from the truth, to swell their ranks for damnation? Is this so, or is it not so? Those who understand the political trickeries and the political windings of the nation, can see at once that these are political questions. Who feeds and clothes and defrays the expenses of hundreds of men who are engaged patrolling the mountains and canons all around us in search of gold? Who finds supplies for those who are sent here to protect the two great interests—the mail and telegraph lines across the continent—while they are employed ranging over these mountains in search of gold? And who has paid for the great number of picks, shovels, spades and other mining tools that they have brought with them? Were they really sent here to protect the mail and telegraph lines, or to discover, if possible, rich diggings in our immediate vicinity, with a view to flood the country with just such a population as they desire, to destroy, if possible, the identity of the 'Mormon' community, and every truth and virtue that remains? Who is it that calls us apostates from our government, deserters, traitors, rebels, secessionists? And who have expressed themselves as being unwilling that the 'Mormons' should have in their possession a little powder and lead? * * * Who have said that 'Mormons' should not be permitted to hold in their possession firearms and ammunition? Did a government officer say this, one who was sent here to watch over and protect the interests of the community, without meddling or interfering with the domestic affairs of the people?" (Journal of Discourses, vol. x, pp. 254-5. Discourse was delivered Oct. 9th, 1863).
[^12] See Deseret News editorial of March 2nd, 1864. Relative to the great expense in mining it may be said that blasting powder during the summer of 1864 was $25.00 per keg; twenty-four years later it cost less than one-sixth of that price. The first systematic work done in the Jordan Mine was by commencing a tunnel at a cost of sixty dollars per foot, which twenty-four years later could be done for ten dollars per foot. (See Western Galaxy, The Mines of the West, p. 1). At the Boise mines in the summer of 1863, flour was reported to be worth "$40 per hundred weight; salt, $35 and $40 per hundred weight; onions, $60 per hundred weight; butter, $1 per lb.; beans, $35 per hundred weight; bacon, $60 per hundred weight, and everything else in proportion." (See Boise correspondent of Deseret News, impression of Sept. 23rd, 1863). Prices did not range that high in Utah, but the above affords some index to what would be the cost of living in the mining districts of the west in those early days of the mining industry.
[^13] Discourse of 25th Oct., 1863, in Deseret News of Nov. 18th, 1863.
[^14] Western Galaxy, Mines of the West, March, 1888, p. 2.
[^15] We shall see later on that the provost marshal of Salt Lake City in the summer of 1864, Captain Chas. H. Hempstead, "was Brigham Young's counselor and advocate in 1872; and that General Connor offered to go bail for Brigham Young in the sum of $100,000 when he was on trial (1870) in the court of Chief Justice, James B. McKean." (History of Salt Lake City, Tullidge, p. 330.)
[^16] That such was the policy Lincoln intended to follow—in addition to the evidence before cited—(see this History, chapter cxxii)—is evidence from an assurance that he gave to Thos. B. H. Stenhouse, to that effect, mentioned by Brigham Young in a letter to George Q. Cannon, under date of June 25th, 1863: "Since Harding's departure on the 11th inst., (June) without the least demonstration from any party, and only one individual to bid him good-bye, the transient persons here continue very quiet, and apparently without hope of being able to create any disturbance during the present administration. They certainly will be unable to, if President Lincoln stands by his statement made to Brother Stenhouse on the 6th instant—viz, 'I will let them alone if they will let me alone.' We have ever been anxious to let them alone, further than preaching to them the gospel and doing them good when they would permit us; and if they will cease interfering with us unjustly and unlawfully, as the president has promised, why of course, they will have no pretext nor chance for collision during his rule." (Millennial Star, vol. xxv, p. 508).
[^17] That such was the dual nature of the celebration may be gathered from the resolution adopted by the city council on the 2nd of March: "Whereas, Saturday, the 4th instant, being the day of inauguration of the president of the United States; and, whereas, also, by reason of the many recent victories of the armies of our country; therefore be it Resolved by the city council * * * that we cheerfully join in the public celebration and rejoicings of that day throughout the United States, and we cordially invite the citizens and organizations, military and civil, of the territory, county and city, to unite on that occasion, etc.
[^18] Union Vedette of that period.
[^19] Rocky Mountain Saints, pp. 611-12.
[^20] Ibid, p. 612. "The Vedette and the Telegraph (the latter of which Mr. Stenhouse was the editor) had waged fierce warfare, but peace for the future was resolved upon; and as an evidence of good faith, the general proposed to immediately close the former journal." (Ibid).
[^21] Following is the account of the proceedings published in the Union Vedette: "On Wednesday, pursuant to notice, all business was suspended in Great Salt Lake City, the stores, public and private buildings, were draped in mourning, and long before the hour named—12 M.—throngs of citizens were wending their way to the tabernacle to render the last sad, solemn, and heartfelt tribute to the great departed and deeply mourned dead. The tabernacle was more than crowded, and upwards of three thousand people were present. The vast assemblage was called to order by City Marshall Little, in the name of the mayor, immediately after the entrance of the orators, civil and military functionaries, and a large body of prominent citizens, who occupied the platform. The scene was impressive and solemn, and all seemed to partake of the deep sorrow so eloquently expressed by the speakers on the occasion. The stand was appropriately draped in mourning, and the exercises were opened by an anthem from the choir. Franklin D. Richards delivered an impressive prayer. The address of Elder Amasa M. Lyman was an earnest and eloquent outburst of feeling, and appropriate to the occasion. He spoke for forty-five minutes, and held the vast audience in unbroken silence and wrapt attention.
[^22] See Note end of chapter for this poem.
[^23] Whitman's The Death of Abraham Lincoln.
[^24] Sarah E. Carmichael—" 'Lizzie' Carmichael, as we were affectionately wont to call her—was reared in Utah and of Mormon parents. They were of Scotch descent, and of course emigrated to Utah with the same motive and expectation of finding 'Zion' in these 'chambers of the mountains' that have induced a hundred thousand souls to leave their native lands to cast their lots with this Zion of the western hemisphere." (Tullidge's Western Galaxy May, 1888, p. 335).
[^25] Deseret News of 15th of April. The judge, also, since this was likely to be the last session of court he would hold in Utah, said a word on his experience as a judge in Utah, which will be found in Note end of this chapter.
[^26] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for 24th of June, 1862, p. 594.
[^27] For the presentment of the grand jury see Deseret News of April 15th, 1863. Nothing came of this action of the grand jury, and a year later, another grand jury addressed another presentment to the judge of the same district, then John Titus, chief justice. But with the same result. (See History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for April 9th, 1864, p. 245, et seq.). "Following the municipal law," says Stenhouse, the nuisance "should have been abated." "In the wrath of the moment," he continues, "Brigham Young ordered the mayor of Salt Lake City to 'move Connor and his men out of the city limits;'" but represents that A. O. Smoot, the mayor, so delayed action that by the time his preliminary arrangements were completed, the sober second thought came to President Young, and the costs being counted, the execution of the "order" was not insisted upon. (Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 609). In a footnote Stenhouse represents that the "above order" of Brigham Young's was a matter of conversation between General Connor and himself. And in his text he says: "The good sense of Abraham O. Smoot saved Mormonism." And then comments that if the order had been given and executed, "probably the garrison would have been 'wiped out,' many of the Mormons would have been killed, and in the course of a few months, volunteers would have poured into Utah from California, and there would have been a bloody settlement of that passionate speech." (Ibid). I find no authority in any of our annals for this incident, or elsewhere, outside of the statement of Stenhouse.
[^28] The order bears date of Aug. 6th, 1862, and is published in full in Deseret News of Aug. 20th, 1862.
[^29] See account of transaction in History of Brigham Young, Ms., entries for July, 1864, pp. 537-8; and also pp. 547-8.
[^30] The Union Vedette—(Vedette, a sentinel on horseback stationed at some outpost, or on an elevation to watch an enemy and give notice of danger, Century Dictionary), was published by officers and enlisted men of the California and Nevada territory volunteers. Its first number appeared 30th November, 1863. It was first published as a weekly, but Jan. 5th, 1864, it was triumphantly changed to a daily the first daily paper published in Utah. Its purpose, as declared in its Prospectus, was to afford a medium for the representation of "Gentile" as distinguished from "Mormon" opinion; and for combating "Mormon" misapprehension, and "misrepresentation." It was also intended to foster the mining development of the territory. While its circulation was chiefly confined to Camp Douglas, it also had quite a large circulation among Gentile merchants and dissenting or "apostate Mormons." In less than a year, July 4th, 1864—as a foil to the Vedette the Daily Telegraph was published of which Thos. B. H. Stenhouse was proprietor and editor in chief. Mr. Thos. G. Webber was its business manager, and John Jaques the associate editor. A semi-weekly edition was begun in October following the founding of the daily. These two papers occupied the same relative position as the Valley Tan and the Mountaineer of an earlier date.
[^31] Letter of George A. Smith to Joseph F. Smith, copied into History of Brigham Young, Ms., July, 1864, pp. 553-4.
[^32] The petitions to the governor and to the mayor and city council will be found in History of Brigham Young, Ms., July entries, 1864, pp. 547-505.
[^33] Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 610.
[^34] Ibid.
[^35] The alleged offending communication from Camp Douglas admitted into the editorial columns of the News, advocating the election of John G. Downey, the "'copperhead' candidate for governor of California, appears in the News impression of August 26th, 1863. The appearance of this article in the News was unfortunate for the reason that the laws of California permitted her volunteer troops, though absent from the state, to vote for state officers, hence the California volunteers at Camp Douglas would be concerned in the election, and in any utterance affecting it. Elias Smith had been connected with the News from 1851; and from 9th of March, 1859, to 16th of September, 1863, he had been editor in chief, and he avows responsibility for the editorial matter by whomsoever written. "Some articles," he remarks, "may have been inserted which were not previously duly scanned, but by whomsoever written, no avoidance is pleaded." (Deseret News, of Sept. 23rd, 1863. Mr. Stenhouse rightly declares that "a more prudent, honorable gentleman than Judge Smith was not in 'Mormondom.'" Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 610).
[^36] This is apparent from the fact that in addition to the general press dispatches published in the News, decidedly pro-Union in their spirit, the News also published on the 8th of June the war reports from the "Wilderness Battlefields," by the New York Tribune's special correspondent,—covering an entire page of that impression of the paper—and a sympathetic editorial upon it. And on the same date the following Editorial appeared under the caption—"Richmond to be Taken;" "Great preparations are on foot in the eastern states to honor the taking of the confederate capital. General Grant is not advancing quite so fast as to suit the anxiety, but he is reported to have expressed the satisfaction with the occurrence of that event on the 4th of July proximo—the nation's birthday. Vicksburg, capitulated to him on the last 'Fourth,' and Richmond to do so on the 'Fourth' coming would hoist him to the highest pinnacle of fame. Add to these, the capitulation of Charleston on the 'Fourth' of next year, with it the end of the war, and the nation will grant him anything that he pleases to ask for, and he will have a right to ask it. He is in earnest, and has a better show for finishing this terrible struggle than any and all the generals who have preceded him. He seems to have his own way—and that is something." (Deseret News, vol. xiii, p. 288).
[^37] See letter of Brigham Young to Daniel H. Wells—then in England—under date of July 16th, 1864, History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for July, pp. 557-560; also letter of George A. Smith to Joseph F. Smith, Ibid, pp. 553-4; also entries under date of 10th, 11th and 12th of July, pp. 537-540.
[^38] Deseret News of April 15th, 1863.
[^39] 39. Letter of David O. Calder to George Q. Cannon, dated March 13th, 1863 Millennial Star, vol. xxv, p. 301.
