B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 5 ( 1930)

61CHAPTER CXXIV

61DEVELOPMENT OF MINES IN UTAH—CLOSE OF THE CIVIL WAR PERIOD—INFLUENCE OF THE DEATH OF LINCOLN IN UTAH

61ALMOST from the time of his advent into the territory, General Connor was convinced that there were extensive deposits of the precious minerals in Utah. That conviction found confirmation in the following manner: A man of the name of Ogilvie while logging in Bingham canon found a piece of ore which he sent to General Connor who had it assayed, and found that it contained the precious metals, gold and silver. [^1] A few days later a kind of pleasure or picnic party was organized composed of the officers of Camp Douglas and their wives, and a drive made to Bingham canon. While encamped here one of the ladies of the party found a piece of ore on the mountain side, the soldiers of the party prospected for the vein, found it, and staked off a mining claim. [^2] These two stories if blended no doubt mark the beginning of the history of mining for precious metals in Utah. Ogilvie and parties from Camp Douglas united in working the first gold and silver mining prospect in Utah, called "The Jordan," this in September, 1863.

DISCOVERY OF PRECIOUS METAL ORES IN UTAH

A few days after the Bingham picnic incident General Connor held a miners' meeting at Gardner's mill, on the Jordan, where the "mining laws" or rules drawn up by the general were adopted, and "Bishop Gardner elected recorder." [^3] A mining district was organized and called the "West Mountain Mining District," usually, though quite erroneously called the first mining district of Utah, but which in reality had been preceded by the Lincoln District, organized in 1861, in Beaver county. [^4] Later General Connor personally found silver bearing rock at the head of Little Cottonwood canon, which was the first known discovery of the precious metal in the great Wasatch range. [^5]

MINING INDUSTRY DEVELOPMENT—WITH ANTI-"MORMON" APPENDIX

Naturally General Connor was enthusiastic over the confirmation which these discoveries gave of his conviction of the existence of precious metals in the mountains of Utah, and he hastened to make proclamation of the news to the world, at the same time inviting prospectors and miners to come to Utah to aid in the development of her mineral resources, and gave such orders to the volunteer troops in his military district as would allow them large opportunities for prospecting. [^6] Incidently also (or was it his main purpose?) General Connor made this proposed mining development in Utah contribute to what he evidently regarded as his mission in the territory—viz., the subversion of the "Mormon" church authority "in temporal and civil affairs." Writing to Lieutenant Colonel R. C. Drum, Assistant Adjutant General, United States of America, San Francisco, under date of July 21st, 1864, General Connor said:

"Having had occasion recently to communicate with you by telegraph on the subject of the difficulties which have considerably excited the Mormon community for the past ten days, it is perhaps proper that I should report more fully by letter relative to the real causes which have rendered collision possible.

As set forth in former communications, my policy in this territory has been to invite hither a large Gentile and loyal population, sufficient by peaceful means and through the ballot box to overwhelm the Mormons by mere force of numbers, and thus wrest from the church—disloyal and traitorous to the core—the absolute and tyrannical control of temporal and civil affairs, or at least a population numerous enough to put a check on the Mormon authorities, and give countenance to those who are striving to loosen the bonds with which they have been so long oppressed. With this view I have bent every energy and means of which I was possessed, both personal and official, towards the discovery and development of the mining resources of the territory, using without stint the soldiers of my command, whenever and wherever it could be done without detriment to the public service." [^7]

64Assuming that there would be opposition by the "Mormon" church leaders to this program of mining for the precious metals, General Connor also thought it necessary to offer "Protection" to prospectors and to "warn" those whom he suspected would make opposition to the opening of the mines, not to use violence; and threatened to try as public enemies those who attempted the use of violence in this matter, and to punish them to the utmost extent of martial law. [^8] In this the general went beyond all that was in any way necessary, and assumed the tone and attitude of a military despot, seeking to supplant the civil by the military authority. His whole bearing at this time was one of extreme arrogance, and more likely to provoke than allay the opposition he anticipated.

OPPOSITION OF BRIGHAM YOUNG TO THE MINING INDUSTRY

As already shown in earlier chapters of this History, Brigham Young was opposed to his people rushing to the gold mines of California in 1849, and also in the early years of the decade following. He held that such a course was foreign to their mission, since they had settled in the Great Basin to found a city and a commonwealth to which their coreligionists scattered in all the world, might be gathered and "become a great and a mighty people in the midst of the Rocky Mountains," in fulfillment of the prediction of their first prophet. [^9] President Young was equally and consistently opposed to any policy that would likely result in the Latter-day Saints being overwhelmed by incoming hordes of adventurers and semi-desperadoes of the surrounding western states and territories, attracted by the supposed opportunities for the sudden acquirement of wealth, which the opening of mines of the precious metals would give. And hence whenever reference was made to the existence of the precious metals in the mountains surrounding Salt Lake City—and such reference was common before the Connor days—Brigham Young discouraged the consideration of the subject, pointed out to his people the danger to them as a community that lurked in the opening of the mines at that time; and urged the postponement of such enterprises until a later day, when such dangers as then existed would not menace their community life; to a day when the Latter-day Saints would be sufficiently strong, numerically—notwithstanding the presence of a large non-"Mormon" population following mining or other pursuits—to give the dominant moral and spiritual tone to the community life that would result from and be characteristic of that high purpose that had brought them in the first instance to the Great Basin of the Rocky Mountains. Brigham Young had seen wave after wave of the gold seekers of "'49" and the early "'50's" pass over the mountains and valleys occupied by his people, and they had survived as a community by accepting his counsel "not to follow after them." He had seen the evil effects of contact with the military command of Colonel Steptoe in 1855-6; and the more serious contact of his people with the army of the "Utah Expedition," and the demoralizing effect of the Camp Floyd period; is it any wonder that he and his associates in church leadership were opposed in the early "'60's" to the incoming of an adventurous, reckless, not to say lawless, mining population, such as then occupied the mining camps of the western states and territories? And yet, for all that, there was no justification for supposing that there would be any resort to violence on the part of the "Mormon" church leaders to prevent prospecting for the precious metals or the opening of mines; and General Connor acted unworthy of himself and of his office by assuming the attitude of a petty military despot in the issuance of his circulars on prospecting and mining development in Utah.

At the very time that the first Connor excitement about opening the mines was at its height—September and October, 1863—Brigham Young said:

"If the Lord permits gold mines to be opened here he will overrule it for the good of his saints and the building up of his kingdom. We have a great many friends who are out of this church—who have not embraced the gospel. * * * We have a great many friends, and if the Lord suffers gold to be discovered here, I shall be satisfied that it is for the purpose of embellishing and adorning this temple which we contemplate building, and we may use some of it as a circulating medium." [^10]

And the harshest thing Brigham Young ever said of the Connor mining program was a criticism upon the injustice of the government furnishing the supplies for men engaged in prospecting for mines for their own personal advantage, and at the same time giving to the whole proceeding an anti-"Mormon" bias. This criticism appears in the discourse before quoted. [^11] Apart from this, the opposition to General Connor's mining program was confined to puncturing some of the wildly inflated reports respecting the existence of gold in great abundance in Utah; calling attention to the high cost of living, owing to the scarcity of staple necessaries of life in proportion to the population; and the great expense attending upon mining in Utah. [^12] President Young also urged the members of the church to remain true to the call of common-sense duty, that of building homes, making farms, planting orchards, establishing home manufacture, developing coal and iron mines—proceeding, in a word, along these more certain and substantial lines of founding a commonwealth, as was becoming in a people laying the foundation for a gathering place for tens of thousands of their coreligionists from every nation of the world. This course was represented as being better for Latter-day Saints than joining in the mad rush for the finding of the precious metals and for the questionable good of suddenly acquired riches.

There was evidently great need of holding a steady hand over the members of the church in respect of rushing into mining for the precious metals. President Young in a tabernacle sermon thus describes the effect Connor's first announcement had on some members of the "Mormon" community:

68"It is a fearful deception which all the world labors under, and many of this people, too, who profess to be not of the world, that gold is wealth. On the bare report that gold was discovered over in these west mountains, men left their thrashing machines, and their horses at large to eat up and tramble down and destroy the precious bounties of the earth. They at once sacrificed all at the glittering shrine of the popular idol, declaring they were now going to be rich, and would raise wheat no more. Should this feeling become universal on the discovery of gold mines in our immediate vicinity, nakedness, starvation, utter destitution and annihilation would be the inevitable lot of this people. Instead of its bringing to us wealth and independence, it would weld upon our necks chains of slavery."

68And then alluding to the more substantial process of commonwealth founding, he said:

68"Can you not see that gold and silver rank among the things that we are the least in want of? We want an abundance of wheat and fine flour, of wine and oil, and of every choice fruit that will grow in our climate; we want silk, wool, cotton, flax and other textile substances of which cloth can be made; we want vegetables of various kinds to suit our constitutions and tastes, and the products of flocks and herds; we want the coal and the iron that are concealed in these ancient mountains, the lumber from our sawmills, and the rock from our quarries; these are some of the great staples to which kingdoms owe their existence, continuance, wealth, magnificence, splendor, glory and power; in which gold and silver serve as mere tinsel to give the finishing touch to all this greatness. The collosal wealth of the world is founded upon and sustained by the common staples of life." [^13]

68It was not difficult, of course, for General Connor to induce many of his California friends to join him in his mining schemes in Utah. He erected the first smelting furnace in the territory at Stockton, Tooele county, 1864; this was soon followed by a number of other furnaces of various kinds.

"But the treatment of ores by smelting was a task new to these Californians, and their experience in milling the gold ores of their state was of no service to them in the task. This disadvantage was increased by the fact that charcoal was not abundant, that rates of transportation were excessively high, and both the materials of which the furnaces were built, and those used in the daily operations were very dear. The Californians, unused to the work failed entirely. A good deal of money was spent with no result, excepting the establishment of the fact that the ores were easy to treat. During this time of trial the usual history of new mining fields was repeated, and companies which were organized with high hopes spent large sums and became bankrupt. * * * With the failure to work the mines profitably came the disbanding of the volunteer troops in the latter part of 1865-66." [^14]

69Happily for the views of the "Mormon" church leaders and for the interests of the Latter-day Saints, the mining industry developed gradually, and the discovery of gold was so meager—found chiefly in connection with the less precious but more abundant silver ores—that there was no mad rush of miners to overwhelm numerically the Latter-day Saints in Utah or disturb them in the steady march of their substantial—though slow—progress in empire-founding for a highly religious purpose—the assembling of their coreligionists of all nations—the gathering of a modern Israel to whom God would reveal a fullness of his truth, and through whom he would especially manifest his power to the world.

TRANSFORMATION IN THE ATTITUDE OF GENERAL CONNOR

An identification with the material interests of the territory, perhaps, also, a closer association with the business men of the "Mormon" church, seems finally to have lessened somewhat the former intense bitterness of General Connor towards the "Mormon" church leaders; and those who quote some passages of the general's reports and circulars in the first two years of his residence in Utah, as showing his distrust of the "Mormon" church—"disloyal and traitorous to the core," as he declared it at one time to be; and of the church leaders, whom he proclaimed to be tyrants, spiritual and temporal—will need to consider them in the light of his more conservative attitude in the later years of his residence in Utah. [^15] There are good reasons for believing that this man of restless energy, and of such intense loyalty to his country that he could not tolerate a merely passive loyalty, to say nothing of indifference to, or opposition, even in sentiment, to the United States government in its struggle for existence—this soldier, both by instinct and training, in the early months of 1865, underwent, later, a radical change in his attitude towards the "Mormon" church leaders and people.

THE SECOND INAUGURATION OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN—REJOICING IN UTAH

The war between the states was now (1865) rapidly drawing to a close, everyone was now conscious of that; Lincoln had been triumphantly elected a second time; his "three word policy" towards the "Mormons"—"Let them alone" [^16]—made it clearly manifest that he was not their enemy; and it was mutually resolved upon both by "Gentile" camp and "Mormon" city to celebrate conjointly the forthcoming inauguration of the Great Emancipator, and the recent victories of the Union forces. [^17]

Accordingly in the last days of February leading citizens of Salt Lake and officers of Camp Douglas met and made the necessary arrangements for a conjoint celebration of the event. There was a procession "a mile long" through the principal streets of the city, made up of military and civil officers in carriages and mounted; California volunteers and "Mormon" militia companies of infantry; and citizens on foot and in carriages. Hon. John Titus, chief justice of the territory, was the orator of the day, and Hon. W. H. Hooper made the closing address. A. O. Smoot, "Mormon" mayor of Salt Lake City, and George A. Smith, of the council of the twelve apostles, met on the platform General Connor and Governor Doty. Rev. Norman McLeod, from Camp Douglas, was chaplain of the day. The platform was erected in front of the old city market on First South street; the divisions of the procession were assembled chiefly in front of the platform; the audience gathered "around, and on all sides, completely filling the streets, covering the roofs and hanging out of the windows;" it was "a dense mass of humanity, silent and attentive to the proceedings." [^18] Later in the day a banquet was given at the city hall by the city council to officers from Camp Douglas, Mayor Smoot presiding. The mayor opened the banquet by proposing "the health of President Lincoln, and success to the Union armies." Captain Hempstead responded in a patriotic speech, and proposed the health of the mayor and civil authorities of Salt Lake City. There were other patriotic toasts and responses, and fireworks in the evening. "The day closed," said the Union Vedette's enthusiastic and full report of the proceedings, "after a general and patriotic jubilee, rarely, if ever before, seen in Utah." "General Connor," reported Stenhouse, of the Utah Telegraph, "was greatly moved at the sight of the tradesmen and working people who paraded through the streets, and who cheered most heartily and no doubt honestly—the patriotic, loyal sentiments that were uttered by the speakers. He wanted differences forgotten, and, with gentlemanly frankness, approached the author with extended hand and expressed the joy he felt in witnessing the loyalty of the masses of the people." [^19] He also proposed the discontinuance of the Union Vedette, the anti-"Mormon" paper which had waged fierce war upon the "Mormon" church and it leaders, thinking that the changing conditions in Utah required its abolishment. [^20]

THE NATION'S AND UTAH'S DAY OF SORROW—THE ASSASSINATION OF LINCOLN

This celebration of the second inauguration of Abraham Lincoln was the day of rejoicing in Utah, and throughout the United States. In a little more than one month and a half, came the day of mourning in the United States and in Utah—when the assassination of President Lincoln occurred. And as sorrow unites more closely than joy, the hitherto conflicting elements in Utah were drawn into closer union and sympathy than by the celebration of his second inauguration—viz, by the observance of the great president's obsequies, on the 19th day of April, the day fixed upon by congress for such observance throughout the United States. There was the same coming together of "Mormon" and non-"Mormon"; of military officers and city and church dignitaries; a "Mormon" apostle—Amasa Lyman, and a Christian minister, the Rev. Norman McLeod, delivered fitting eulogies on the character of the illustrious dead, and recounted the mighty achievements of his life. [^21] While it was reserved to a Utah poetess, of "Mormon" parentage, to write a "Dirge on the Funeral of Lincoln" that is not anywhere surpassed in the literature—prose or poetry—that the sad event produced; no, not even Walt Whitman's "O Captain! My Captain." [^22] And thus in Utah, among the Latter-day Saints and the "Gentiles," as elsewhere throughout the nation, was felt the cementing force of the martyred president's death—the unifying effect of a great man's life ending in martyrdom. "Strange (is it not?), that battles, martyrs, agonies, blood, even assassination, should so condense—perhaps only really, lastingly condense—a nationality." "I repeat it," says Whitman—"the grand deaths of the race—the dramatic deaths of every nationality—are its most important inheritance—value—in some respects beyond its literature and art—as the hero is beyond his finest portrait, and the battle itself beyond its choicest song or epic." [^23]

NOTE

SARAH E. CARMICHAEL'S DIRGE: PRESIDENT LINCOLN'S FUNERAL

Toll! Toll! Toll! Toll! All rivers seaward wend. Toll! Toll! Weep for the nation's friend. Every home and hall was shrouded, Every thoroughfare was still; Every brow was darkly clouded, Every heart was faint and chill. Oh! the inky drop of poison In our bitter draught of grief! Oh! the sorrow of a nation Mourning for its murdered chief! Toll! Toll! Toll! Toll! Bound is the reaper's sheaf— Toll! Toll! Toll! Toll! All mortal life is brief. Toll! Toll! Toll! Toll! Weep for the nation's Chief! Bands of mourning draped the homestead, And the sacred house of prayer; Mourning folds lay black and heavy On true bosoms everywhere: Yet there were no teardrops streaming From the deep and solemn eye Of the hour that mutely waited Till the funeral train went by. Oh! there is a woe that crushes All expression with its weight! There is pain that numbs and hushes Feeling's sense, it is so great. Strongest arms were closely folded, Most impassioned lips at rest; Scarcely seemed a heaving motion In the nation's wounded breast: Tears were frozen in their sources, Blushes burned themselves away; Language bled through broken heart-threads, Lips had nothing left to say. Yet there was a marble sorrow In each still face, chiseled deep: Something more than words could utter, Something more than tears could weep. * * * * * Toll! Toll! Toll! Toll! Never again—no more— Comes back to earth the life that goes Hence to the Eden shore! Let him rest! it is not often That his soul hath known repose; Let him rest!—they rest but seldom Whose successes challenge foes. He was weary-worn with watching; His life-crown of power hath pressed Oft on temples sadly aching— He was weary, let him rest. Toll, bells at the Capital! Bells of the land, toll! Sob out your grief with brazen lungs— Toll! Toll! Toll! [^24]

Footnotes

(Signed) "A. O. Smoot,

Mayor."

The address did credit to Mr. Lyman's head and heart. After another anthem from the choir, Rev. Norman McLeod, chaplain of Camp Douglas, was introduced and delivered one of the most impressive and burning eulogiums on the life, character. and public services of President Lincoln which it was ever our pleasure to hear."

---
Notas:
[^1] PRESIDENTS OF THE EUROPEAN MISSION, 1837-1930 Bancroft's History of California, vol. vii, p. 146, note.
[^2] PRESIDENTS OF THE SCANDINAVIAN MISSION This letter was to John L. Smith and is copied into the History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1861, p. 165.
[^3] PRESIDENTS OF THE SWISS AND GERMAN MISSION Letter to the presidency of the European Mission, History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1861, p. 245.
[^4] NETHERLANDS MISSION History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1861, pp. 245 and 404-5.
[^5] CHARLES DICKENS ON LATTER-DAY SAINT EMIGRANTS FROM ENGLAND History of Deseret University, Ms., pp. 1-35 passim, quoted by Bancroft, History of Utah, p. 712, note.
[^6] THE PROPHETIC AND HISTORICAL CONNECTION OF NAPOLEON III. WITH "MORMONISM" A Journey to Great Salt Lake City, M. Jules Remy, 1861, vol. ii, p. 184.
[^7] City of the Saints, p. 420.
[^8] Bancroft's History of Utah, pp. 712-14.
[^9] Millennial Star, vol. xix, pp. 697-699.
[^10] Millennial Star, vol. xx, pp. 152-3.
[^11] Ibid, pp. 153 and 171.
[^12] Millennial Star, vol. xxii, p. 218, and pp. 312-3.
[^13] Elder J. D. Ross left England for America on the 28th of March with a company of saints, numbering 594 souls, of which he was the president. They sailed in the ship Underwriter. Elders Calkin and Budge left England a month and a half later (April 11th, 1860) with a company of 730 saints, 312 being from Scandinavia and 85 from Switzerland. (Millennial Star, vol. xxii, pp. 234 and 331). For complete list of presidents of the European Mission, see Note 1, end of chapter.
[^14] Millennial Star, vol. xxi, p. 71. For complete list of presidencies of the Scandinavian missions see Note 2, end of chapter.
[^15] See Note 3, end of chapter for complete list of Swiss and German Mission presidencies, from the first until the present time, 1930.
[^16] See Millennial Star, vol. xx, p. 701.
[^17] Millennial Star, vol. xxi, p. 81.
[^18] See Note 4, end of chapter.
[^19] Ibid, vol. xxii, pp. 506, 524.
[^20] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry, 7th April, 1860, p. 87.
[^21] See Millennial Star, editorial synopsis of the said council, vol. xxvi, pp. 88-91. The full minutes of this important council will be found at length in Millennial Star, vol. xxvi, pp. 81 to 215.
[^22] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1860, pp. 297-303. The synopsis of President Young's remarks at the bishops' meeting is brought over from Wilford Woodruff's Journal, under date of Sept. 13th, 1860. Woodruff remarks, parenthetically, that in delivering the address President Young in some parts of it "walked the floor and his voice was like the voice of God." Woodruff himself spoke at the meeting and in the course of his remarks said: "I feel to thank God that we are blessed with a leader who has independence of mind sufficient to do the will of God, let him reprove or rebuke whom he may. He asks no odds of any kingdom, nation, people, person or thing who stands in the way of doing his duty. It is a blessing to us to have a leader who has eyes to see for us when we are in danger, and if we had not some one to warn us and reprove us when we do wrong, we would not be safe. President Young is sustained by the power of God, and when he calls upon us to do anything, we ought to do it, and if we withhold, we do so to our hurt." (Woodruff's Journal for 13th of Sept., 1860). Woodruff gives an account of a previous meeting—Sept. 9th—held to consider the same subject, in which President Young even more sharply reproved the elders—sparing none—who had been guilty of this practice. (See Woodruff's Journal, entry for 9th Sept., 1860).
[^23] Deseret News of Sept. 19th, 1860, minutes of the bowery meeting.
[^24] Millennial Star, vol. xx, p. 63.
