B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 5 ( 1930)

96CHAPTER CXXVI

96MISCELLANEOUS EVENTS, 1857-1865: SURVEY OF MISSIONS—IMMIGRATION OF THE SAINTS—END OF A ROMANTIC PERIOD

96THE work in the South African Mission was also continued through this period—1857-1865; though for some time it was conducted by native elders. [^1]

THE SOUTH AFRICAN MISSION

In December, 1861, Elder William Fotheringham and other missionaries from Utah arrived at Cape Town, and took charge of the mission. For about two years and a half they continued their labors, but the field was a difficult one and but little progress could be made. In April, 1864, Elders Fotheringham and Dixon left Africa, the first on the 5th, with a company of nine members on the ship Echo; and the two others on the 10th with a company of eighteen members, on the ship Susan Pardew, both vessels going direct to New York. The work in South Africa was left under the presidency of Miner G. Atwood, from Utah, who continued in the mission about one year, after the departure of his associates, when on the 12th of April, 1865, he left Port Elizabeth with a company of forty-seven members of the church in the brig Mexicano, for New York, [^2] and the work in Africa was left for a number of years to the few remaining resident members of the church. A successful mission now, (1930) and for some years past has been maintained in South Africa.

THE AUSTRALIAN MISSION—NEW ZEALAND AND TASMANIA

The mission in Australia, New Zealand, and Tasmania, was also perpetuated through these troubled years of 1857-1865, and since then, and now, they are fruitful missions. [^3]

SOCIETY ISLANDS MISSION

The Society Islands Mission, which includes the Society, Tuamotu and the Austral Islands, the oldest of the New Dispensation missions in Polynesia—having been opened in 1844—was maintained by native elders and saints during the period here being considered, the Utah elders having been banished from the Islands, in 1852, by the French government. They did not return until 1892, so that for forty years memory and love of the work of the New Dispensation was fostered by the natives of those islands. [^4]

THE HAWAIIAN MISSION

The Hawaiian Mission continued through the period under consideration although for several years maintained and conducted by the native officers and members. Indeed from the time it was founded (1850), until the present (1930), [^5] it has been a very prosperous mission, though it has passed through periods of depression and of peril, the most serious of all being one that occurred in the years 1861-1864, and this through the pride and folly of Walter M. Gibson, usually referred to in our annals as "Captain" Gibson.

THE "CAPTAIN" GIBSON EPISODE

This man arrived in Utah in the fall of 1859, accompanied by his daughter, two sons and several other persons who had joined his party en route from the east. Some time after his arrival he had a number of interviews with President Young, in which he represented that the purpose of his visit to Utah was to induce the "Mormons" to move to New Guinea—also called Papua—in the East Indies. He claimed a disinterested interest in the natives of New Guinea as he believed them to be descendants of the House of Israel, and that the settlement of the Latter-day Saints among them would result in their good. President Young advised Mr. Gibson to investigate the Latter-day work, the restored gospel of Jesus Christ, and if he became satisfied of its truth, the president would have him ordained an elder and send him and a few other elders to the natives of New Guinea, "and he could do them more good that way than in any other." [^6] It did not take the prepossessing stranger long to make up his mind respecting the truth of the New Dispensation, for in mid-January following—1860—he was baptized by Heber C. Kimball and confirmed the same day by President Young. During the summer of 1860 "Captain" Gibson went to the eastern states to attend to some necessary business, where also he preached his new faith and claimed to have "baptized some noted men;" interviewed in their own language the Japanese embassy, and was invited by them to visit Japan. [^7]

98In November of the same year he started for Japan on a mission, although his labors were not restricted to that land. "President Young blessed him," this in a public meeting at the tabernacle, "and said he would go with a commission to all nations upon the earth, and he should go with his good will and blessing." [^8]

Arriving in the Hawaiian Islands at a time when other Utah elders were absent, he had a free hand in the unscrupulous impositions he practiced on the confiding natives. The laws at the time prohibiting the emigration of the natives from the Islands, a gathering place for those who accepted the gospel was established on the Island of Lanai where a native brother of the name of Haalelea owned a considerable tract of land. The church also had purchased a tract of six thousand acres in the district of Palawai, for the use of the native church members. [^9] Using his letters of commendation from the presidency of the church, usually given to missionaries, Gibson assumed the presidency of the Hawaiian Mission and resolved to purchase all the government land on the Island of Lanai. Not having means for this purpose, and despairing of obtaining it by free-will offering, he proceeded to organize a "church," without regard to union with the church whose presidency and headquarters were in Utah, though following its general lines of organization. He brought into existence a quorum of "twelve apostles," "high priests," "seventies," and "bishops." These offices he sold to the natives, charging according to the supposed grade of the office; "and even women received from his hands the honor of priestesses." He sent missionaries to other islands and gathered more natives to Lanai, where he exercised an absolute dominion over them, resulting in his own aggrandizement and enrichment, and in corresponding injustice and impoverishment of the natives. He required that the native saints turn over all their substance, including horses, sheep, goats, poultry, houses, and lands to the "church," which in this case was "Captain" Walter M. Gibson; and in addition they gave their time to the cultivation of the soil, "receiving their food once a day from the hands of the head bishop, under the immediate direction of 'Captain' Gibson, one meal a day being all that was given them when food was scarce." [^10]

In the latter part of December, 1863, some of the native brethren from Lanai, wrote letters to the church authorities at Salt Lake City detailing Gibson's proceedings and inquiring if what he was doing was right. In March, 1864, an apostolic delegation, consisting of Ezra T. Benson and Lorenzo Snow, of the council of the twelve, accompanied by Elders Joseph F. Smith, William W. Cluff, and A. L. Smith—the last three named having previously served as missionaries on the Islands—was sent to investigate Gibson's proceedings. On their arrival at Lanai, Gibson seemed more surprised than pleased with the coming of the delegation from Salt Lake City; and though they labored hard to convert him from his errors, he refused correction, and for that reason and for the protection of the native saints, he was excommunicated from the church at Lahaina, Island of Maui, on the 8th of April, 1864. Upon the return of the two apostles to Utah, Elder Joseph F. Smith was placed in charge of the mission as its president.

THE PRESIDENCY OF JOSEPH F. SMITH IN HAWAII

Elder Joseph F. Smith had rendered great service in settling the affairs of this mission. In his former mission to the islands (1854-1858) he had acquired a perfect knowledge of the language and spoke it with the fluency of a native. Being a man of unusual determination and strong against injustice he confronted Captain Gibson with great power, and exposed to the natives his fraudulent and unwarranted course. He also acted as interpreter for the apostles, and thus rendered more effective their labors in correcting Gibson's irregularities and their ministry among the natives.

An incident usually mentioned in connection with this apostolic mission to Hawaii is the drowning of Elder Lorenzo Snow in Lahaina Harbor, and his restoration to life by the ministration of the brethren. The accident occurred by the capsizing of a boat when trying to land while a heavy surf was running in the harbor. The captain of the vessel, Elders Benson, Snow, Cluff and A. L. Smith were all in the boat when it capsized. Elder Joseph F. Smith had refused to accompany the other brethren in the effort to land, being convinced that it was a most dangerous undertaking. Natives from the shore, who witnessed the disaster, rescued the unfortunate men, but it was 20 minutes before Lorenzo Snow gave any signs of life after being taken from the water. [^11]

101When Elders Benson and Snow reported their action respecting Gibson to President Young, which they did in a public meeting in the "Old Tabernacle," at Salt Lake City, on the 29th of May, 1864, the president himself moved the ratification of their action by the congregation which was carried by unanimous vote.

101President Young explained in taking this action that "the charge against Walter M. Gibson was not for owning property, or for claiming it, for no one cared how much he had, if he only did good with it; but the charge was his persistent refusal to be dictated by the priesthood, and on the motion of the president, the action of Elders Benson and Snow in cutting Gibson off from the church was sustained by the whole congregation." [^12]

Gibson was a typical "soldier of fortune." He was "born of English parents in an American vessel near the coast of England, 16th of Jan, 1822." In early manhood he became acquainted with the Orient as represented above, although many representations of his exploits are to be taken with some reservation. He is described as being prepossessing in appearance, polite and affable in deportment, and interesting in conversation. After his excommunication from the church he was elected to the Hawaiian legislature from the district of Lanai, and while at the capital so ingratiated himself into the good will of King Kalakau that he was made premier minister of the kingdom and minister of finance. He possessed great influence over the king. Indeed it is supposed that it was his efforts to enlarge the prerogatives and powers of the king, that led to the evasions of constitutional limitations, and attempts to overthrow constitutional government, to be accompanied by a return to heathenism, that led to the revolution of 1887, resulting in restricting the king's prerogatives and driving Gibson from the islands into exile. He was at first charged with defrauding the government in his office of minister of finance, but of this he was acquitted. It was believed, however, that he had incited the natives to revolt against the whites in favor of the king, and such was the state of popular sentiment on this point that the premier was glad to make his escape by flight. He arrived an exile in San Francisco on the 6th of August, 1887, broken in health; and a few months later, viz., Jan. 21st, 1888, died of consumption. [^13]

102A few months after these stirring events in connection with the disposal of Gibson, Elder Francis A. Hammond, one of the early missionaries to the island, and acting as agent for the church, purchased the Laie plantation, about thirty-two miles from Honolulu, the capital of the islands. The tract of land purchase consisted of six thousand five hundred acres; and was bought of T. Dougherty. Ever since the purchase of the Laie plantation it has been the headquarters of the mission, and the home of many of the Hawaiian Latter-day Saints.

THE INDIAN TERRITORY MISSION

Indian AffairsHCFrom 1855 to 1860 a mission was maintained in the Indian territory among the Cherokee, Creek, and Choctaw Indians. At the April conference in Salt Lake City, 1855, six elders, viz, Henry W. Miller, Robert C. Petty, Washington N. Cook, William Richey and John A. Richards, were called to this mission; and in the early part of the summer arrived upon the scene of their labors along the borders of the Indian territory, adjoining Arkansas. Two of the number were sent among the Delawares, but meeting with no success they rejoined the rest of their party in the Cherokee nation, at Spavinaw, a settlement on a small stream of the same name. Here they met a small company of brethren from Texas who had been associated with Lyman Wight and his operations in that state, [^14] but becoming dissatisfied with him had started to go to the headquarters of the church in Utah. En route they had come in contact with some of the followers of James J. Strang [^15] who had succeeded in persuading these Texas brethren that all was not right with the church in Utah; and therefore they had halted at Spavinaw where they were found by the missionaries from Utah as aforesaid. Elder Miller in charge of the Indian territory mission soon persuaded the brethren from Texas of the regularity of Brigham Young's leadership of the church, and the brethren to the number of forty or fifty continued their journey westward to Utah in 1856. In 1858 the remaining few of Lyman Wight's followers came from Texas to the same place, Spavinaw; and with them came also "Colonel" Wight's first wife, who had recently received a letter from Sidney Rigdon, bitterly denouncing the leading authorities of the church in Utah. With this second group from Lyman Wight's Texas following the elders from Utah, though they labored with them diligently, were not so successful as with the first.

Indian AffairsHCThe Utah brethren labored among the Cherokee Indians with some prospect of success at first. "Mormonism" being a "new thing" the people came in great numbers to hear it; many believed, and a few were baptized. So promising was the work that Elder Miller applied to the large branch of the church at St. Louis to send elders from there to assist in the work; and in response to the call, Elders James Case, William Bricker, George Higginson, Wm. O. Tavell and Henry Eyring were called to the Indian Territory Mission After the arrival of these brethren (except Tavell who forsook the mission en route to his field of labor), the brethren were divided into pairs and took up a labor among the Cherokee, the Creek, and the Choctaw Indians. The elders labored diligently, but sickness among them, the indifference of the natives, the unsettled status of the white population, combined to make their labors unfruitful. Elder Miller being released to return home in the fall of 1856, Washington N. Cook succeeded him in the presidency of the mission. Brother R. C. Petty's health had failed him in this fever and ague country, and he died February 1st, 1856. Elder Cook, after presiding in the mission about two years, "in which time," says the chronicle here followed, "he won the love and respect of saint and sinner," he died of quick consumption on the 4th of September, 1858.

Indian AffairsHC104Elder Henry Eyring succeeded him in the presidency of the mission, in which position he continued for about a year and a half, when the mission closed by reason of the brethren—excepting Elder Richards, who remained in the Indian territory on his own account—returning home in the latter part of May, 1860.

Indian AffairsHC104The labors of these brethren of the Indian Territory Mission resulted in a number of Lyman Wight's following being guided to the church in Utah, and put an end to their wandering. Four branches of the church were organized by them: one in the Creek nation, one known as the Princes' branch; two in the Cherokee nation, one known as Prior's Creek branch; the other, organized by Henry Eyring, known as the Lehi branch, a Book of Mormon name; another in the Creek nation, also organized by Elder Eyring, and known as the Nephi branch, another Book of Mormon name.

Indian AffairsHCA number of the white population of these branches emigrated to Utah from time to time breaking up some of the branches, and the time finally came when seemingly all the good that could be done for the present had been done among the natives, and the elders, as already stated, returned home. "In taking a retrospective view [of this mission] for five years," says Elder Henry Eyring, the mission's historian, "it is quite evident that the result of those toils, privations and hardships, and the sickness of all and the death of two elders connected with it, is but very small, apparently. But it is to be hoped that in after years, spontaneous fruits may spring up from the exertions of the servants of God among the seed of Jacob." [^16]

ORSON PRATT AND ERASTUS SNOW'S MISSION TO THE EASTERN STATES

Another missionary movement of some importance during this period was the sending of Orson Pratt and Erastus Snow of the council of the apostles to the eastern states, to labor among the eastern branches of the church which for several years had been practically left to themselves. They left Utah in the latter part of September, 1860. [^17] Arriving in the east they began a very active campaign and many of those who previously had a standing in the church, but had fallen away, were awakened to a sense of their position by the preaching of the elders. One of the potent factors in bringing the saints to an awakened interest in the faith was the impending fulfillment of the Prophet Joseph's prediction concerning the forthcoming war, and great preparations were being made for an exodus of the saints in the eastern states for the west. [^18] As the war between the states grew more severe, however, and absorbed the entire interest of public thought and attention, President Young's mind was that all the elders in the United States should be called home "in consequence of the war now raging throughout the land." [^19] These brethren were called home accordingly, returning in the fall of 1861. This put an end to missionary activity in the United States until some time after the close of the war.

A MISSION OPENED IN AUSTRIA

Subsequently, but within the period-scope of events treated in this chapter—Orson Pratt, [^20] with Elder William W. Riter associated with him, endeavored to open a mission in Vienna, Austria. They arrived in the capital of the Austrian Empire about mid-January, 1865, and thereafter labored diligently for seven months in that land. "But in consequence of religious intolerance they were unable to open the door for the proclamation of the gospel in that country." [^21] After returning to England both these Elders continued to labor for some time in the British Mission.

A CHANGE IN IMMIGRATION METHODS

Connected with this survey of the missionary activities of the church should be noted a change in the method of bringing the immigrating saints from the Missouri river westward over the plains. Up to this time the manner of procedure had been to have church agents purchase for the immigrating companies teams and wagons in the east, and thus made it necessary to drive the teams only from Missouri river points to Salt Lake valley. In the Spring of 1860, however, an ox train of twenty-nine wagons under the command of Joseph W. Young, nephew of Brigham Young, and the son of Lorenzo Dow Young, was sent east for merchandise, machinery, etc. The journey was made from Salt Lake valley to Florence, on the Missouri river, and back to Salt Lake City, the same reason. The train arrived in the latter place on the return journey on the 3rd of October, with the cattle that had made the trip both ways in as good condition as some that had made the journey only from the states to the valley. The train was known as the "church train." [^22] It was the first time the experiment had been made, and its success was big with suggestion.

107In the latter part of February, 1861, a circular was issued by the presidency of the church to Bishop Edward Hunter informing him, and through him the bishops throughout the church, that in the ensuing season of immigration it had been determined that two hundred wagons with four yoke of cattle to the wagon should be sent from Salt Lake to the Missouri river to bring in the immigrating saints, as also such merchandise and machinery as could not be dispensed with, and asked the hearty cooperation of the bishops in carrying out this project. The success of the "church train" experiment of the previous year was pointed to as justifying the expectation that such a plan was practicable.

"We are rich in cattle," said the presidency's "but do not abound in money, either at home or abroad; and we desire to so plan and operate as to use our small amount of money and large number of cattle in the best possible manner for accomplishing the best good." Hence this new trans-plains immigration scheme.

108In addition to the four yoke of cattle to the wagon, the plan also included the sending as many loose oxen to Florence as the year's immigration that came independent of church aid might want to purchase for their outfit. Thus supplying for the people of Utah a market for their surplus cattle and saving in the hands of the church members, "from about ten thousand to thirty thousand dollars, which had hitherto been paid out yearly in cash for cattle and wagons." This was a small amount as monetary matters are now viewed in these days of "big business;" but in those days, and to a small, isolated community, marooned from the busy marts of the world's trade and commerce, it was an item of great importance. Moreover, the arrangement afforded the opportunity of shipping eastward such products as the community had to dispose of. These, of course, in the main, were the surplus cattle that could be driven down with the ox trains loose; and the provisions of flour and meat that could be sent for the use of the immigrants, and deposited along the line of travel to be picked up en route when returning. With the east-bound trains for the emigration of 1863, however, was sent 4,300 pounds of Utah-raised cotton for sale. [^23] A good teamster, well supplied with provisions, bedding, etc., was to go with each wagon and team of four yoke of oxen, besides extra men as night herdsmen. The ecclesiastical wards that fitted out these teamsters to go after the poor were to receive credit on their tithing for the supplies furnished. Very full instructions were given in the presidency's circular referred to, and nothing essential to security and efficiency of the trains was overlooked. [^24]

IMMIGRATION UNDER THE NEW PLAN

The first season this new plan went into effect the four companies into which the two hundred church wagons were divided, left Salt Lake City between the 23rd and the 30th of April, carrying with them 150,000 lbs. flour, [^25] and also other provisions for the immigration of that year.

In the second year under the new plan 262 wagons were sent east, with 293 men, 2,880 oxen, and 143,315 lbs. of flour. They were organized into six companies for convenience in traveling. [^26] The third year 384 wagons were sent east, with 488 men, 3,604 oxen, taking 235,969 lbs. of flour. The 384 teams were divided into 10 companies. [^27] In 1864, 170 wagons, 1,717 oxen, and 277 men, with a proportionate amount of provisions went east for the poor. [^28] In 1865 no teams were sent from Utah for the immigration of the poor. The strenuous efforts of the three preceding years had exhausted the ability of the people to carry on this work for the present; and the saints in Europe were accordingly informed in due time that this assistance from the Missouri river westward could not be supplied. The saints were encouraged by letter from President Young, and also by editorial instruction through the Millennial Star that those having means to carry them either to New York, or on through to the usual Missouri river points should make the journey to those points; and those who had the means to make the journey through to Utah should by all means come. Two companies of through-bound immigrants made the journey under the leadership of Miner G. Atwood and Wm. S. Willis, respectively. The latter had to be met by a relief train some three hundred and fifty miles from Salt Lake valley. [^29]

110In 1866 the ox trains sent after the poor were ten in number; they had 10 captains, 456 teamsters, 49 guard men, mounted, 89 horses, 134 mules, 3,042 oxen, and 397 wagons; 62 additional wagons, 50 head of oxen and 61 mules were ordered to be purchased in the states. [^30] A relief train under Arza E. Hinkley was sent out over the line of travel about 450 miles to take food supplies and afford additional help to some of the last companies en route that season who had suffered from Indian raids on their cattle.

110In 1867 no ox trains were sent to the east for the poor, owing in great part to the growing seriousness of what was known as the Black Hawk Indian War, begun in 1865. The immigration of that year, 1867, numbered only about 500, and they were able to come by rail to North Platte, 391 miles west from Omaha, and thence the journey was made by independent ox teams.

The next year, 1868, an extraordinary effort was made by the church in Utah to immigrate the poor saints from Eurpoe and more especially from Great Britain. For this purpose seventy thousand dollars in money was raised, to be expended in payment of fares; and in addition about five hundred teams were sent to the terminus of the Union Pacific railroad, which by this time had reached Laramie City in Wyoming, about four hundred and twenty miles from Salt Lake City. The five hundred teams were divided into ten companies with a captain to each; [^31] the equipment, while as complete as ever, was lessened in proportion to the shortened journey.

111The immigration into Utah from Europe and the United States in 1868 was nearly 4,000 souls; and this was the last season it was necessary to send ox or mule trains eastward to help in the immigration, as on the 8th of March, of the ensuing year, the Union Pacific Railway had reached Ogden, Utah; and put an end to the remarkable system of emigrating the poor of the church membership by ox trains, which had developed to a very high standard of efficiency.

111It should be understood that this system of immigration was undertaken by the church in behalf of the poor of its membership only, and did not represent the total immigration of the saints. Many of these, having sufficient means of their own, came independently of this movement, except that they generally traveled in the company of the "church trains" in order to have the advantage of the leaderships of their experienced captains and the security that came from traveling with them.

BENEVOLENT WORK OF THE CHURCH IMMIGRATION OF THE POOR

When the summary of the "Mormon" church's benevolent achievements shall be made, this great and brave work of bringing tens of thousands of the poor to the lands of the west—bringing the people that needed land, to the land that needed people, must not be overlooked. [^32] In its passing, much that was romantic in Utah "Mormon" life also passed away. True such a method of traveling—"gathering to Zion," the saints called it—had toil and hardships and dangers attendant upon it. There was the weariness, to women and children especially, of the long, daily marches—for all must walk, except in case of sickness, the wagons being heavily loaded with baggage and precious freight. There was the heat of the blazing, summer's sun; the hot winds of the Nebraska plains; the mountain storms, and the chilly nights to which all were exposed. There was the danger of swollen streams, whether to be forded or ferried—which occasionally claimed their toll of victims. [^33] There were sometimes night drives to make in order to reach desirable places of encampment, where there would be the necessary water and grass and fuel. There was night-guard duty as well as the toil and annoyances of each day's drive. There were sometimes scant food supplies, owing to some unlooked for delays in the journey. There was frequent sickness and occasional deaths to cast gloom over the marching companies. There were the lurking bands of savages, the constant fear and danger of their midday and midnight assaults; an occasional looted stage coach, with its murdered and scalped passengers; an occasional burned station with the half-charred and stripped and mutilated victims lying in the smoldering ruins to emphasize these fears and prove them not ungrounded. There were the reported misfortunes of trains in advance and trains in the rear; there were the occasional attacks upon their own train or cattle herds; and sometimes the savages, though waging unequal warfare, brought down their victims in the "Mormon" trains and made off with considerable booty.

ROMANCE

But all the days were not gloomy, and all the experiences were not sad, nor painfully adventurous. Traveling in large companies, in close proximity, captained by men of experience and judgment and courage—these reduced the discomforts of the journey and the dangers of the route through hostile Indian tribes to a minimum. These plains' captains were as fathers to their companies. The toiling teams straining the live-long day under the yoke in heat and dust, and then again in the mountain cold, were the objects of their solicitude; the health and safety of the volunteer teamsters—young men in the main—making the journey not for wages but for free service of fellow men, were carefully guarded; the immigrating poor appealed to them for both guidance and protection, and paid for these with their only currency—devoted obedience to the captains' orders. There were times when the fuel was plentiful and the campfires large and bright, and surrounded by merry groups, for youth was there in these trains, and sometimes beauty, and charm, and there was music and dancing. Despite the fears and cautions and warning of the elder folk, and strict camp regulations, love would have its way, and courtships were carried on in these traveling hosts, to be consummated in holy wedlock at the end of the journey. There was song service and prayers each day, sometimes in the subdivisions of the camp, sometimes by the whole camp in general assembly. The Christian Sabbath was usually observed and there were expositions of the gospel of the Christ, exhortations to righteousness, and to the daily performance of the plain duties en march, and in camp life.

All the characteristics of the earlier Pioneer companies that made the journey over these same plains and mountain highways to the Salt Lake valley, were characteristic of these later companies also. These were not ordinary immigrants. Charles Dickens, it will be remembered, said of one group of eight hundred of the English members of the church, starting from the London docks, that "in their degree they were the pick and flower of England." He confessed that he thought "it would be difficult to find eight hundred people together anywhere else and find so much beauty and so much strength and capacity for work, among them." He notes through the ship captain, too, the genius for organization which had taken a great number of groups of people from widely separate sections of England and Wales, who had never seen one another before, and yet they had not been two hours on board before they had "established their own police, made their own regulations, set their own watches at the hatchways, and before nine o'clock [of the first night on board] the ship was as orderly and quiet as a man-of-war." What was said of that ship load of English and Welsh "Mormon" emigrants might be said of the "Mormon" emigration from Scandinavia, and other European countries. The same genius for organization and the establishment of order was manifested in the companies of these immigrants in their journey over the plains and the mountains.

114Now that the railway had been pushed across the plains into Salt Lake valley, the toiling and moiling, the hardships and the dangers, attendant upon the ox train method of traveling were ended, and one may do no other than to rejoice at it, but with its displacement there went, as I have before said, much of the romance and the strange joy of "gathering to Zion;" much that made for the exercise of Christian virtues and the development of high character among the people. [^34]

The same year that witnessed the ox train method of traveling overland pass away—1868—saw also the sailing vessel pass as a means of ocean travel so far as the great "Mormon" companies were concerned. The last of these companies, numbering four hundred and fifty-seven, British, Swiss, and German saints, came in the sailing ship Constitution, in charge of Elder Harvey Cluff, it was six weeks in transit. Thereafter the journey was made by steam packet, and soon the ocean voyage was made in as many days as it had taken weeks in the sailing vessels. [^35]

NOTES

The above mission, which also includes some smaller islands, was opened in 1851 by John Murdock, who was the first president. He was succeeded in the presidency by the following elders: Charles W. Wandell, June 2, 1852; Augustus Farnham, April, 1853; Absalom P. Dowdle, May, 1856; Andrew J. Stewart, June 7, 1857; Thomas Ford, May 30, 1858; Wm. Broadbent, 1863; Robert Beauchamp, 1867; Wm. Geddes, 1874; Job Welling, October, 1875; Isaac Groo, July 29, 1876; Fred J. May and Thos A. Shreeve, August, 1878; Elijah F. Pearce, Dec. 25>, 1878; George Batt, 1880; Wm. M. Bromley, Jan. 20, 1881; Wm. T. Stewart, July 17, 1883; Wm. Paxman, May 25, 1886; Angus T. Wright, Aug. 12, 1889; John S. Bingham, Oct. 6, 1890; Wm. T. Stewart (second term) Sept. 13, 1891; and William Gardner, Dec. 30>, 1893. (Jenson's Chronology, p. 212).

115In October, 1897, New Zealand was separated from Australia and Tasmania and became a separate mission. Since then the presidents of the Australian Mission have been Elders Andrew Smith, Jun., Jan. 1, 1898; Frederick E. Barker, May 23, 1898; George H. Islaub, Feb. 14, 1900; John B. Matthias, pro tem, June 6, 1900; Andrew Fjeld; James Duck worth; Wm. Armstrong; C. Alvin Orme, Dec. 6>>>>>>>>>>>>>, 1908; Charles H. Hyde, Aug. 28, 1911; Wm. W. Taylor, Nov. 13, 1913; Don C. Rushton, July 16, 1914, to October 26, 1917; Arnold D. Miller, January 4, 1917, to December 16, 1920; Don C. Rushton, October 19, 1920, to September 21, 1924; Charles H. Hyde, June 6, 1924, to December 12, 1928; Clarence H. Tingey, October 11, 1928, still president, 1930.

115The presidents of the New Zealand Mission since its separation from the Australian Mission, 1897, have been Ezra F, Richards, Jan., 1897; John Ephraim Magleby; Charles B. Bartlett; Louis G. Hoagland, Aug. 4, 1905; Rufus K, Hardy, May 14, 1907; George Bombs, May 12, 1909; Orson D. Romney, May 9, 1911; Wm. Gardner, November 5, 1913, to July 31, 1916; James N. Lambert, April 29, 1916, to July 3, 1920; George S. Taylor, November 4, 1920, to August 1, 1923; Angus T. Wright, July 10, 1923, to 1925; J. Howard Jenkins, August 16, 1925, to 1928; John E. Magleby, May 8, 1928, and now (1930) still president.

"This mission, which includes the Society, the Tuamotu and the Austral Islands, and is the oldest Latter-day Saint mission in Polynesia, was opened in 1844. Noah Rogers was the first president. He was succeeded by Addison Pratt in July, 1845, and he in turn by Benjamin F. Grouard, in March, 1847. Addison Pratt, on his return from America, in 1850, presided a second time. After the banishment of the American elders by the French, in 1852, native elders kept up more or less missionary work for forty years. The mission was reopened by two elders from Zion, Joseph W. Damron and Wm. A. Seegmiller, in January, 1892, and Joseph W. Damron presided. He was succeeded by James L. Brown, in June, 1892, who was succeeded by Elder Damron in July, 1893; Frank Cutler succeeded Elder Damron as president, May 11, 1895. Frank Cutler, February 24, 1893, to October 27, 1896; Frank Cutler, July 30, 1907, to 1909 (poor health); William A. Seegmiller, 1909 to 1911; Franklin J. Fullmer, 1911 to 1914; Ernest C. Rossiter, February 16, 1915, to January 1, 1920; Leonidas H. Kennard, 1920 to 1922; Ole B. Peterson, 1922 to May, 1925; Alma G. Burton, May 12, 1926, to June 19, 1929; George William Burbidge, April 14, 1929, still president (1930). (Jenson's Chronology, p. 213).

This interesting mission was founded in December, 1850, and its first president was Hiram Clark, who was succeeded by the following elders: Philip B. Lewis, Aug. 9, 1851; Silas Smith, July, 1855; Henry W. Bigler, pro tem, 1851; native elders, 1858; Walter M. Gibson (without proper appointment), 1861; Ezra T. Benson and and Lorenzo Snow (in temporary charge for reorganization purposes), April, 1864; Joseph F. Smith, April, 1864; Alma L. Smith, Oct., 1864; Geo. Nebeker, July, 1865; Fred A. H. F. Mitchell, 1873; Alma L. Smith (second term), Feb. 2, 1875; Ward E. Pack, June 20, 1876; Simpson M. Molen, March 20, 1878; Harvey H. Cluff, July 8, 1879; Edward Partridge, July 31, 1882; Enoch Farr, March 14, 1885; Wm. King, May 11, 1887; Ward E. Pack (second term), May 9, 1890; and Mathew Noall, Jan. 5, 1892. Samuel E. Woolley November 4, 1895, to July 1, 1919; Elias Wesley Smith, June 15, 1919, to May, 1923; Eugene J. Neff, February 3, 1923, to June 8, 1926; William M. Waddoups, July 4, 1928, and is still president (1930). (Jenson's Chronology, p. 210).

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. Brigham Young's letter to Orson Hyde, Oct. 13th, 1861, on the "Cotton Mission," copied into History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1861, pp. 440-1. In this movement of settlers to the south, Orson Hyde is requested to select 30 or 40 families for the "Cotton Mission." "John Taylor was directed to call 50 families to go on the 'Cotton Mission.'" (History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry 13th Oct. 1861, p. 438).
[^2] 2. "Our company consisted of 48 men, 14 women, 2 children, 23 carriages, 21 horses, 42 mules." (Woodruff's Journal, entry for 15th of May, 1861).
[^3] 3. See Acts of Legislative Assembly of the Territory, 1852, p. 164.
[^4] 4. See entries of Woodruff's Journal between dates of 15th of May and 8th of June, 1861. Also History of Brigham Young, Ms., for same period.
[^5] 5. "Many southern men who had been cotton raisers declared that cotton never could be raised there, and that it was only a hoax to think of it." (George A. Smith's History of the Settling of Southern Utah, copied into the History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1861, pp. 452-7).
[^6] 6. Ibid, p. 455.
[^7] 7. History of Brigham Young Ms., p. 456. Later they found more extensive stock ranges, and especially for the winter season, south and east of the Rio Virgin; and this industry, stock raising, has been the principal source of wealth to the people of that part of Utah, the markets being, as yet, too remote, and too difficult to reach from their rugged, broken country, to admit of any extensive shipment of their matchless fruits and vegetables to advantage.
[^8] 8. "Toquer," in the Indian language of the region signifies "black," and was name of an industrious Indian chief who was found here when the first, "Mormon explorers traveled through this country. "From him this place derived its name." (Correspondent of the Deseret News from "Dixie—J. V. Long, with President young's party, vol. xii, 1862, p. 108). From the same correspondent we learn that the Rio Virgin was called "Pah Roosh," by the Indians: (Ibid). This doubtless is the "Parrusi" of the Catholic Fathers, the name of people inhabiting a region is undoubtedly the Rio Virgin valley, according to the diary of Fathers Dominguez Escalante. Describing the people in the vicinity they say: "From here we went down the river, and on the banks of either side were large settlements peopled, as we supposed, by these Indians, who planted the corn and who, in their own language are called 'Parrusi.'" (See the Journal of Father Escalante, published in extenso in The Catholic Church in Utah, p. 202, cf. p. 254). What is known as the old Spanish trail, an early route between Santa Fe and Los Angeles, passed through the Rio Virgin valley; it was, of course, the passing of the Spaniards through this region, which gave the evidently Catholic names to the streams—Santa Clara, Rio etc.
[^9] 9. The data for the foregoing account Rio Virgin settlements, up to 1861, is from George A. Smith's History of the Settling of Southern Utah, dictated in the Church Historian's Office, to J. V. Long, transcribed copied into History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for Oct. 17th, 1867, pp. 452-7.
[^10] 10. Letter of Brigham Young to Orson Hyde on the "Cotton Mission," Oct. 13th, 1861, copied into History of Brigham Young, Ms., pp. 440-1.
[^11] 11. Ibid. He suggested that the new settlers for the south should include a number of "mechanics, coopers, blacksmiths, carpenters, masons, plasterers, joiners." (Ibid). To these were added "millwrights," with "musicians and singers and farmers to make the settlements thereby efficient." (Letter of George A. Smith to Jacob Hamblin, Ibid, p. 451). "Brothers Pratt and Snow, in partnership, will take out a carding machine, threshing machine, and a sugar mill. Brother W. H. Branch and A. M. Harriman, it is expected, will put up a sawmill somewhere on the Rio Virgin." (Ibid).
[^12] 12. This list of the entire mission will be found in Bleak's History of Utah's Dixie, Ms.
[^13] 13. The new "Clara Ward" was organized on the 22nd of Dec., 1861. (History of Utah's Dixie, Ms., Jas. G. Bleak, p. 99). The Swiss company of immigrants were conveyed to the Santa Clara in fourteen wagons, six of which were provided by the church at Salt Lake City. They excited much curiosity and interest as they passed through the southern settlements "by their singing and good cheer." In all, that season's immigration into the Rio Virgin valley, required more than four hundred wagons to convey it from the northern settlements. (See letter of George A. Smith to John L. Smith, date of Dec. 5th, 1861. History of Brigham Young, Ms., of same date, pp. 519-21). Up to the advent of this 1861 immigration, after more than five years of effort at settlement in "Utah's Dixie," there were but 79 families located there, distributed as follows: Washington, 20 families; Santa Clara Fort, 20; Toquerville, 10; Virgin City, 11; Grafton and Adventure, 6 each; Gunlock, 4; Harrisburg, 2. (Jas. G. Bleak's History of Utah's Dixie, Ms., p. 85).
[^14] 14. Bleak's History of Utah's Dixie, p. 75.
[^15] 15. This was not the origin of the name, however, since the name for the new city had been determined upon even before many of the immigrants of 1861 left Salt Lake City. A petition was drawn up to be sent to Washington, asking that the new city to be founded be provided with a post office. When the petition was submitted to President Young for approval, Elder George A. Smith asked President Young to name the city. "He told Elder Smith he would name it if he would be satisfied; and he [George A. Smith] said he would be. The president then named it. 'St. George.'" (History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry of 28th Oct., 1861, p. 469). The city was named for George A. Smith, of course.
[^16] 16. The city "is not large in extent," wrote Erastus Snow, here and above quoted, "and is laid out in blocks thirty-two rods square, containing each eight lots. There are thirty-six blocks and fractional blocks, one of which is a public square, and in all two hundred and fifty-six lots—eight by sixteen rods in extent—three of which are reserved for school purposes." (Letter to George A. Smith, date of Feb. 10th, 1862, copied into History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1862, p. 332).
[^17] 17. When the time came for laying the corner stones of this building, March 22nd, 1862, the above dimensions were enlarged to 26 by 46 feet, "having a basement story under the platform 12 by 22 feet, and an upper room for purposes of prayer. The cost of the building by the time it was completed was more than six thousand dollars, or double the amount first subscribed. It was named "St. George Hall." (Bleak's Utah's Dixie, Ms., pp. 73-4).
[^18] 18. Report of Irrigation Investigations in Utah, directed by Elwood Mead. p. 211. For a description of the flood see Deseret News of Feb. 12th, 1862.
[^19] 19. Government Report of Irrigation Investigation, conducted by Elwood Mead, pp. 211-212.
[^20] 20. "The destruction caused by it [the then recent flood]", said Erastus Snow in a letter to George A. Smith—Feb. 10th, 1862—"was very extensive, but the industry and perseverance of the people will soon repair and restore what was lost or damaged. They are apparently not discouraged, but feel first rate, and those who went there of late are well pleased with the country and of the prospects before them." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., p. 333).
[^21] 21. See Minutes of the Conference in History of Brigham Young, Ms., entries for March 22nd, 1862, pp. 405-10.
[^22] 22. By act approved Jan. 17th. See Utah Acts of the Legislature, edition of 1866, pp. 166-7.
[^23] 23. Acts of the Utah Legislature, 1852, p. 164.
[^24] 24. For Act of the Legislature see Deseret News of March 9th, 1864.
[^25] 25. Letter of Anson Call to Horace S. Eldredge, president of the Deseret Mercantile Association, dated at Vegas Springs, thirty miles from Call's Landing, copied into History of Brigham Young, entries for Jan. 1865, pp. 21-4. "Call's Landing" is referred to in Major Powell's Report of his explorations of the Colorado as "Callsville;" also in Encyclopedia Britannica. Art. Colorado.
[^26] 26. Letter in Salt Lake Daily Telegraph, 24th March, 1865; copied into History of Brigham Young, Ms., above date, p. 151. "At the mouth of this river (the Colorado) ships of the largest tonnage can find a good and safe harbor," says the chronicle here quoted, "where there is, at the present time, a new store ship, the Victoria, of seven hundred tons burthen, ready to receive and discharge freight." (Ibid, pp. 153-4-5).
[^27] 27. The captain of the steamer Esmeralda, Thomas C. Trueworthy, made a visit to Salt Lake City, in March, 1865, and the Daily Telegraph "announced that he was prepared to enter into arrangements for bringing freight from the mouth of the river (Colorado) to this place [Salt Lake City]. The distance by land carriage from Callsville is about three hundred and ninety miles, over a good, natural road, over which goods can be handled at all seasons." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1865, p. 157).
[^28] 28. See editorial in the Salt Lake Telegraph of 27th November, 1865.
[^29] 29. See Salt Lake Daily Telegraph of that date.
[^30] 30. All now in Lincoln county, Nevada.
[^31] 31. See Elwood Mead's Government Report on Irrigation in Utah, p. 213.
[^32] 32. "Bear Lake, on the northern boundary line [i. e. of Utah] is a beautiful azure sheet of water, twenty-five miles long and six wide. The rugged mountains on the eastern side of the lake are magnificent, and look the very counterpart of the towering peaks of Savoy that environ the blue waters of the Lake of Geneva. No tourist in Europe ever gazed upon a prettier mountain country than that of northern Utah, between Bear Lake and the Pacific railroad." (Stenhouse in Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 672).
[^33] 33. The Utah-Idaho line passes east and west about midway of the lake, being the 42nd degree of north latitude. The other principal settlements of the Bear Lake valley, besides Paris and St. Charles, are, in Idaho: Fishhaven, Bloomington, Liberty, Bern, Sharon, the present considerable railroad town of Montpelier, Georgetown, Bennington, Wardboro, Dingle. In Utah: Garden City and Lake Town. The Bear Lake valley opens into a stretch of the beautiful Bear river valley on the north.
[^34] 34. See Act of Legislature in Deseret News of March 9th, 1864.
[^35] 35. Acts of Legislature, 1868, p. 1.
