B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 5 ( 1930)

146CHAPTER CXXIX

146UTAH INDIAN TREATIES—THE BLACK HAWK WAR—INDIAN TROUBLES OF 1872—THE CORINNE AFFAIR

146THE year 1865 is notable chiefly for several treaties made with the Indians and for the commencement of what is known in Utah annals as the Black Hawk War.

THE UINTAH INDIAN RESERVATION TREATY

Indian AffairsHCOf the treaties the most important was the one negotiated at the Spanish Fork Indian Reservation Farm, in June, 1865, by Colonel O. H. Irish, then superintendent of Indian affairs in the territory; and at which Brigham Young and many other church leaders were present; and in which the "Mormon" leader participated.

146The year previous, 1864, the United States congress had passed enactments providing that the Indian title to agricultural and mineral lands in Utah be extinguished; that the lands be laid open to settlement; that the superintendent of Indian affairs collect as many of the tribes as possible in the Uintah valley, and appropriating for Indian agricultural purposes the sum of $30,000. [^1] Hence the movement for a treaty with the Utah Indians to remove into Uintah valley by Colonel Irish. Uintah valley is in the eastern part of Utah, south of the Uintah range of mountains; "the tract enclosed the whole region drained by the Uintah river and its upper branches, as far as its junction with the Green river." [^2] The proposed reservation is estimated to have contained at least two million acres, much of which was well adapted for agriculture and grazing purpose, which together with its timber lands and water power, make it one of the best sections of Utah.

Indian AffairsHC147The treaty negotiations were held on the 7th, 8th, and 9th of June. The principal chiefs present were Sowiette,—now very old—Kanosh, Tabby, Toquone, Sanpitch, "and eleven other chiefs of lesser note, with a large crowd of Indians, among whom were bands of the Utes, the Pahvantes, (the orthography of this word is various) Timpanogas and Cumumbahs. Dimick B. Huntington and George W. Bean were the interpreters." [^3]

Indian AffairsHC147On the morning of the 7th Colonel Irish presented an abstract of the treaty, which summarized was as follows:

Indian AffairsHC147"The Indians are required to move to Uintah valley within one year from the ratification of the treaty, giving up their title to the Indian lands in Utah territory; they are required to be peaceful, not to go to war with other bands or tribes except in self-defense, not to steal from or molest the whites, to assist in cultivating the lands and to send their children to schools to be established for them. On abiding these conditions, the protection of the United States government will be extended to them. Government will pay them $25,000 annually for the first ten years, $20,000 annually for the next twenty years thereafter. Farms will be made, a grist and lumber mill built, schools established, houses built for the principal chiefs, annuities paid to the chiefs, and other provisions of a beneficial character are guaranteed.

Indian AffairsHC147The Indians are likewise to have the right of hunting, digging roots and gathering berries on all unoccupied lands, to fish in their accustomed places and erect houses for the purpose of curing fish." [^4]

INFLUENCE OF BRIGHAM YOUNG WITH THE INDIANS—HAD "TALKED WITH ONE TONGUE"

Indian AffairsHCThe chiefs appeared reluctant to accept this proposition liberal as it was. Chief Kanosh led in the discussion on the part of the Indians. He modestly suggested that he was but "a boy," but Sowiette was an old man and could speak, he could not. Still he managed very well. He expressed confidence in Colonel Irish, the superintendent of Indian affairs. "He had always talked with one tongue, but the others had talked with two; [^5] they had lied to the Indians; would Colonel Irish always talk one way? Brigham had always talked with one tongue, they knew him, and he had never lied to them, but he had always spoken the truth and been their friend. What did he say about it? They did not want to sell their lands and go away; they wanted to live round the graves of their fathers."

Indian AffairsHC148Sanpitch [^6] followed him and spoke rather bitterly, manifesting a strong opposition to the treaty.

Indian AffairsHC148President Young then talked to the Indians. He must have experienced one of the keenest moments of joy in his life when these chiefs of the red tribes of men declared their confidence in him, and appealed to him in their helplessness for advice. "He recalled his counsel and advice to them in the past," says the meager current account of the event, "and advised them to sign the treaty and accept the provisions guaranteed in it for their benefit." "The effect of his advice," said the Deseret News' correspondent, in narrating these events, "manifested itself in a few moments, most of the chiefs being strongly inclined to act upon it at the time, but [Chief] Tabby counseled waiting a little to calm their minds, so that they might act without any excitement or feeling." [^7] To this the rest agreed, and the signing of the treaty was postponed until the 9th, when fifteen chiefs affixed their "mark" to the document—Chief Sowiette's being the first. This released their claims upon Utah lands excepting the reservation in the Uintah valley. [^8]

Indian AffairsHCPresident Young, in a second talk to the red men, strongly advised them not to punish the innocent for the misdeeds of the guilty; and if any of their own or other bands should commit depredations, then catch the guilty ones and deliver them up to the authorities of the whites for trial. Advice with which they appeared much impressed. [^9] "As a faithful observance of their treaties has ever been a characteristic of the Indians here as elsewhere," said the Deseret News, editorially commenting on this treaty, "we have no doubt of their honorably keeping this, if it is not infringed upon by reckless whites." [^10]

THE PIEDES—THE UTAH SOUTHERN INDIANS

Indian AffairsHCOn September 18th Colonel Irish met with a large number of the Piedes, and several of their chiefs from Washington and Iron counties, on Pinto Creek, southern Utah, near the Mountain Meadows. There was a generous distribution of gifts including cloth, blankets, hoes, spades, etc., also beef and flour. The superintendent appointed Tutsegubit as their head chief; after which the "pow wow" broke up and the bands departed for their homes on the Sevier and the Rio Virgin respectively. [^11]

Indian AffairsHCTHE BLACK HAWK WAR

Indian AffairsHCChief Black Hawk and a number of subchiefs were not present in any of these treaty and peace meetings, but were in open hostility to the whites. What was known as the Black Hawk War had begun on the 9th of April, 1865, under the following circumstances: "A number of Indians under the leadership of the eldest son of the late Chief Arapeen and generally known as 'Jake' rode into Manti, in San Pete county, and evinced rather a boisterous desire to have a 'big talk,' manifesting bad temper and boasting that within the last few days they had killed fifteen head of stock. Angered at these boasts, and also affected by being intoxicated, [^12] a citizen of the name of John Lowery roughly took the Indian 'Jake' by the hair of his head and dragged him from his horse, using threatening language the while, and finally going to his house for a pistol with which to shoot 'Jake.' Before his return the Indians had departed in a great rage." [^13] The following day a party of citizens rode out on the stock range south of Manti to ascertain how far the boasts of the Indians as to stock killing might be true. Near Twelve Mile Creek they ran into an ambush of Indians and one of their number, Peter Ludvigsen, was killed, but the rest—the party numbered nine—escaped by making a hasty retreat. The same day, the successful Indians on Twelve Mile Creek sent word of the beginning of hostilities to a band of Indians camped on the outskirts of Salina, in Sevier county, whereupon they broke camp and hastily moved into Salina canon. Finding two white men in charge of the stock belonging to the citizens of Salina, they killed them, horribly mutilated their bodies, and taking possession of the stock herds, retreated further into the depths of the canon. [^14] They were followed up the canon on the 12th by Colonel Allred of the Utah militia with a company of eighty men. This force was ambushed and driven precipitously from the canon by the Indians, with the loss of two men and several horses killed, [^15] and some arms and forage captured. [^16]

Indian AffairsHCThis was the opening of hostilities between the white settlers and Indians in southern Utah which continued through several years, and was the most disastrous to the white population of all the Utah Indian wars. The chief events of the war,—following those above stated—through the years 1865-6-7, are thus summarized by the historian of the church of that period, George A. Smith:

INCIDENTS OF THE BLACK HAWK WAR

Indian AffairsHC"May 26th the Indians made a descent upon a family named Given, in Thistle valley, twelve miles from Fairview, in San Pete county, and massacred the father, mother, and four children, having the evening previous killed Jens Larsen. On the 29th they also killed David H. Jones.

Indian AffairsHC151In July, Robert Gillespie and Anthony Robinson were killed and several citizens wounded. These Indian massacres, which were generally accompanied by raids on cattle, rendered it necessary for the inhabitants of San Pete, Sevier, Piute, Millard, Iron, Beaver, Kane and Washington counties to guard their stock with mounted, armed men.

Indian AffairsHC151In January, 1866, a band of Indians made a descent upon the Pipe Spring Ranch, in Kane county, killing J. M. Whitmore, the proprietor, and Robert McIntire, and robbing the ranch of cattle and sheep. The ranch of 'Pahreach' was also robbed, and besieged for several months. Peter Shirts barricaded his house, and by strategy and unceasing vigilance, with the aid of his family, managed to evade the blows aimed at him until relieved by Captain James Andrus and a company of mounted volunteers from Grafton.

Indian AffairsHC151April 2nd, Robert Berry and wife, with his brother, Joseph, were waylaid and massacred at Short Creek, Kane county.

Indian AffairsHC151On the 22nd, Albert Lewis was killed, and three persons wounded, near Marysvale, Piute county; and on the 29th, Thomas Jones was killed, and Wm. Avery wounded at Fairview, in San Pete county. On the 10th of June, the Indians made a raid on Round valley, driving away three hundred head of cattle and horses, and killing Father James Ivey and Henry Wright. On the 24th, Charles Brown was killed and Thomas Snarr wounded in Thistle valley; and while recovering the horses and cattle driven off from the Spanish Fork pasture, John Edmiston, of Manti, was killed, and A. Dimick, of Spanish Fork, badly wounded.

Indian AffairsHC151Early in 1867, the continued hostile intentions of the Indians were announced in the massacre of James P. Peterson, his wife and daughter, near Glenwood, Sevier county, who were mutilated in the most horrible manner. The vigilance of the militia of these counties, assisted by detachments from counties as far north as Salt Lake and Davis, so far held the Indians in check, that during the entire year there were only three other citizens killed and three of the militia, viz., [citizens] Lewis Lund, James Meeks, Andrew Johansen; [militia men] Major John W. Vance, Sergeant Heber C. Houtz, and Private John Hay.

Indian AffairsHCIn consequence of these Indian raids and massacres, the counties of Piute and Sevier were entirely abandoned, as well as the settlements of Berrysville, Winsor, Upper and Lower Kanab, Shunesburg, Springdale, and Northup, and many ranches in Kane county; also the settlements of Panguitch, and Fort Sandford, in Iron county." [^17]

Indian AffairsHC152The settlements abandoned because of these Indian troubles numbered in all twenty-seven or eight. In Sevier and Piute counties "six extensive and flourishing settlements;" "four settlements on the borders of San Pete county were broken up;" "fifteen settlements in Iron, Kane, and Washington counties;" "besides two or three small settlements in Wasatch county." [^18]

END OF THE BLACK HAWK WAR

Indian AffairsHCWriters on Utah history quite generally regard the Black Hawk War as closing with the depredations of the year 1867, but hostilities were continued by part of Black Hawk's following, though that chief no longer led them, through the summer of 1868. In April of the last named year Bishop Frederick Olson and a party of settlers en route to reoccupy Richfield, abandoned the previous year, were attacked at Rocky Ford on the Sevier river, between Salina and Richfield, two men were killed and others wounded, and some stock taken. [^19] Several raids on stock herds followed, one at Scipio on May 7th, and another near Ephraim; nor were all the hostile Indians engaged in this war quieted until the treaty of Strawberry valley was negotiated by Colonel F. H. Head, by then superintendent of Indian affairs for the territory, in August, 1868. In the previous summer superintendent of Indian affairs, Colonel Head, succeeded in getting an interview with Chief Black Hawk and obtained his promise to refrain from further hostilities on the whites, and that he would use his influence to have the war entirely stopped, a promise, it is generally believed, he kept, though at the time of making it he expressed his fears that some portion of his following would continue their depredations, which they did through the summer of 1868, as proven by the attacks upon the settlers at Rocky Ford, and the stock raids in San Pete county. With the withdrawal of Black Hawk from the conflict, however, it is doubtless proper to consider the Black Hawk War as ended, especially as the militia from the northern counties returned home, and such service as became necessary to check Indian depredations in 1868 was rendered by the citizens in the vicinity where they occurred, and are not accounted in the official reports of the Black Hawk War. [^20]

TREATIES WITH THE INDIANS

Indian AffairsHCThe treaty with the outstanding chiefs after the retirement of Black Hawk from the conflict in 1867, was an important event. As already stated it was negotiated in Strawberry valley in August, 1868. The Indian chiefs concerned were Augavorum, Tamaritz and Sowahpoint. The first named though young and said to be feminine looking, was the principal chief; "though the second," (Tamaritz) said the Deseret News' account of the treaty meeting, "has been the prime mover in several of the raids made on our settlements, and in the murders of whites which have been before-time accredited to Black Hawk. He was of the party who murdered Major Vance and Sergeant Houtz, and was at other places where whites were killed." [^21]

Indian AffairsHCThe conference with the chiefs occupied "nearly all day." The Indians had many complaints to make against the white settlers and were not easily persuaded to make peace. They told with great deliberation the "killings" in which they had participated. Black Hawk was present, and exerted his influence for peace, and finally all the chiefs concluded to "bury the hatchet"—to be at peace with the whites. A treaty was accordingly drawn up and signed by the chiefs and the officers representing the Indian department of the government. [^22]

Indian AffairsHC154At first not more than fifty or sixty warriors of these renegade Indians had been engaged in the war, [^23] but their several successes at the beginning of hostilities drew to them the disaffected of other tribes than those to which the original renegade belonged, until at the close of activities in 1865, when Black Hawk withdrew for the winter to the Colorado, near the junction of Green river with that stream, he had over a hundred warriors, notwithstanding he had lost about forty men in the several engagements of the year with the settlers. He could furnish all recruits to his ranks with horses, and with plenty of beef from the herds of cattle he had stolen—"strong inducements to Indians," said the Indian superintendent in his report. About one-half of Black Hawk's recruits came from the Navajoes of New Mexico, [^24] and continued desultory depredations in southern Utah, even after the treaty of 1868 with the last outstanding chiefs of Black Hawk's band.

APPEAL FOR FEDERAL ASSISTANCE DENIED

At the outbreak of the war Colonel Irish applied to General Connor at Camp Douglas for "a sufficient force to protect the settlers and to arrest the offending Indians." [^25] This help Connor refused to grant. Colonel F. H. Head who succeeded Colonel Irish as superintendent of Indian affairs, also applied to federal military authorities for assistance, but without avail. "I have, after consultation with Governor Durkee," said Colonel Head in a letter to the commissioner of Indian affairs at Washington, "desired Colonel Potter commanding the United States troops in this district, to send two or three companies of soldiers to that portion of the territory (i. e. the south part) to protect the settlements and repel further attacks. Colonel Potter has telegraphed to General Dodge for instruction in reference to my application." [^26] General Dodge answered: "General Pope telegraphs that the superintendent of Indian affairs will have to depend for the present on the militia to compel the Indians to behave at Salina." [^27] Although this answer came through General Pope, it was General Sherman, then commanding the department of the plains, who ordered the answer to be made. [^28]

155Seeing that they must rely upon themselves a sufficient number of companies of the militia of the territory were ordered out to protect the settlements in the threatened zone, and compel the Indians to sue for peace. In the accomplishment of this purpose the territory was called upon to bear a heavy burden, which it was customary for the federal government to bear since the Indians were wards of the general government, and subject to their jurisdiction. It was the government's place to restrain them from mischief, and to punish them for depredations committed.

OFFICIAL REPORT OF THE BLACK HAWK WAR

The expense of the Black Hawk War as reported from the adjutant general's office of the territorial militia was as follows:

156"Recapitulation of expenses incurred by the territory of Utah, in the suppression of Indian hostilities in said territory in the years 1865, 1866, 1867, estimated:

1561865, 500 men, 3 months service, including supplies_____$ 45,000

1561866, 2,500 men, 6 months service, including supplies___ 695,000

1561867, 1,500 men, 6 months service, including supplies___ 450,000

156 ————

156 Total_______________________________________________________$ 1,190,000

ESTIMATED LOSS IN STOCK

1865, __________________________________________________$ 75,000.00

1561866, _________________________________________________ 60,000.00

1561867, _________________________________________________ 35,000.00

156 ——————-

156 Total_____________________________________________________$ 170,000.00

156Estimated loss by breaking up and vacating about 20 settlements in San Pete, Sevier, Piute, Kane, Summit, Wasatch, and other counties in Utah territory, $175,000. Total, $1,535,000.00.

156KILLED AND WOUNDED DURING THE 3 YEARS WAR

1561865, 25 persons killed and eight wounded.

1561866, 25 persons killed and seven wounded.

1561867, 25 persons killed and three wounded.

156From the best information obtained about seventy-five Indians killed and 5 wounded,

156Adjutant general's office, Salt Lake City, Utah.

156Dec. 25th, 1868." [^29]

In the Utah militia adjutant general's report to the secretary of war, before alluded to, the total expense as per a recapitulation sheet forwarded therewith amounted to $1,121,037.38. The Memorial of the Utah Legislature of 21st of February, 1868, also sent with the Utah adjutant general's report, asked congress to "appropriate $1,500,000 to compensate the citizens for their service, transportation and supplies in suppressing Indian hostilities in the territory of Utah during the years above named"—i. e. 1865-6-7. Compensation for these services has never been granted by congress, although the governor of the territory, Charles Durkee (a non-"Mormon"), certified that the accounts were just; that the service of the militia as per the account rendered was absolutely necessary, and therefore had been approved by him.

157Following-is a copy of the governor's endorsement:

157"Executive Office, Utah Territory,

157Salt Lake City, January 9, 1869.

157I, Charles Durkee, governor of Utah territory, do hereby certify that the military service rendered by the militia of this territory, comprised in the foregoing accounts, was absolutely necessary, and was therefore sanctioned and authorized by me at the time specified, and that the accounts are just.

157(Signed) "CHARLES DURKEE, Governor." [^30]

157The only recognition that the Black Hawk War veterans have ever received is the long-delayed recognition represented in the appropriation by the Utah state legislature of $50,000 in the session of 1912-13. [^31]

MR. BOWLES' MISREPRESENTATION OF MILITIA ACTIVITIES IN UTAH

But what was worse than refusing to compensate the citizens of Utah—which is equivalent to saying the Latter-day Saints of Utah, so overwhelming was the preponderance of their number at the time—was, that after being told they must depend upon the territorial militia to compel the Indians to behave, the mustering of their militia into service for that purpose was interpreted to mean that the "Mormons" were finding "new means to organize and drill the militia of the territory, and to provide them with arms, under the auspices and authority of the Mormon church;" and that "an open conflict with the representatives of the government is apparently braved, even threatened!" Such is Mr. Tullidge's interpretation of the passage quoted from Mr. Samuel Bowles' book, Across the Continent; and if Mr. Bowles does not mean to make such a charge then the passage in his book is meaningless. The passage occurs in his "Supplementary Papers" published in his Across the Continent, 1866, where he states that since the visit of the Colfax party to Salt Lake City in June, 1865, the leaders among the "Mormons" had "repudiated their professions of loyalty to the government;" and in addition to which "new means are taken to organize and drill the militia of the territory, and to provide them with arms, under the auspices and authority of the Mormon church; and an open conflict with the representatives of the government is apparently braved, even threatened." As the only purpose for organizing and drilling the militia in those years was for the purpose of making ready to defend the people in the southern settlements of Utah, that action is seized upon by Mr. Bowles, editor of the Springfield (Mass.) Republican, and member of Mr. Colfax's party in a journey across the continent, and made to mean preparation for resistance to the general government! [^32] A most absurd thing in itself, but especially worthy of notice here because of the prominence of the party with which Mr. Bowles was associated—Mr. Colfax, at the time being speaker of the house of representatives in the American congress, and later vice president of the United States; also because of the subsequent relationship of Mr. Colfax to the anti-"Mormon" agitation of 1869-70, of which more in the proper place.

158INDIAN DISTURBANCES, 1872—COLONEL MORROW

Indian AffairsHCThe close of the Black Hawk War marked the end of Indian troubles in Utah for all time except for a threatened renewal of hostilities by Indians who became dissatisfied with the management of affairs at the Uintah reservation, and deserted it, returning to their old haunts in southern Utah. This in the spring of 1872. In addition to a number of minor offenses they killed two men and wounded a boy during the summer; and on the night of September 1st stole about forty head of horses from Fountain Green, in San Pete county. In his report to the United States Special Indian Agent, George W. Dodge, under date of September 7th, Lieutenant Colonel (afterwards General) Henry A. Morrow, commanding at Fort Douglas, and who with the United States troops had gone to Mt. Pleasant to give protection to the settlers and return the Indians to the reservation—said:

Indian AffairsHC159"These Indians came to the settlements early last spring, and remained in them until I arrived with troops. Their conduct towards the citizens was arrogant, domineering, and dictatorial. Indeed, it assumed finally the air of a conqueror towards a subjugated community. They entered private dwellings at all hours of the day and night, and compelled the women to cook meals for them 'at all hours,' often prescribing the dishes they wished served. In addition to this they were impudent beggars. I am not sure but it would be more proper to say they were impudent robbers, for their demands for food and presents were usually made with weapons in their hands to compel obedience to their exactions. After plundering the people in their homes, they entered upon a systematic course of horse and cattle stealing, which resulted in the loss, to the inhabitants of San Pete alone, of more than 200 head of horses and as many head of cattle. To prevent this, an attempt was made to guard the herds more closely. This was not to be submitted to by the Indians, who killed two of the herders, and wounded several others. This state of things had gone on until one of the highways of travel between San Pete county and the settlements on Utah Lake had to be abandoned, and people went armed to their fields and about their villages. Patrols were established, and when Colonel Hough, of my command, arrived at Mount Pleasant, he found almost a reign of terror among the people, who welcomed his soldiers as deliverers. I think I may say with truthfulness, that there is not another American community in the nation which would have endured half the outrages these people endured, before rising up as one man to drive out the savage invaders at the point of the bayonet. On any principle of self-defense, they would have been justified in doing this.

Indian AffairsHCNow, sir, I have given you a plain statement of facts, and I desire to invite your attention, and through you the attention of the Indian department, to the justice and propriety of making this people some recompense for their losses. This may be done, I believe, from the appropriation made by congress for these tribes. It is only an act of simple justice to the poor people who have suffered so severely that it should be done." [^33]

Indian AffairsHC160To this communication the special Indian agent made a detailed statement of his procedure during the summer of 1872. From that statement it appears that the Indians gave the following reasons for leaving the reservation:

Indian AffairsHC160"1st, to visit their friends, the Mormons, to exchange friendly greetings, and trade with other Indians; to worship the Great Spirit near the resting place of their fathers; and to receive compensation for the use of their lands, now occupied by Mormons and miners.

Indian AffairsHC1602. The Uintah Indians urged still farther that they had no means of subsistence at the agency.

Indian AffairsHC1603. That the agent and his employees treated them harshly, even preventing them from laboring when they asked the privilege.

Indian AffairsHC1604. That the agent did not give them the goods and provisions that the government provided for them.

Indian AffairsHC1605. That the government had not carried out the promises made to them in the Spanish Fork Treaty." [^34]

Indian AffairsHCAt a meeting in Salt Lake City, held in July, at which there were present General B. R. Cowen, assistant secretary of the interior, Hon. John S. Delano, chief clerk of the interior department, J. N. Turney, civil commissioner of Indian affairs, Geo. L. Woods, governor of Utah, Hon. J. B. McKean, chief justice, and others, it was determined that the renegade Indians must be immediately returned to the reservation, "peaceably if possible, otherwise to call upon the military to force them back." To this end a meeting with the hostiles was held, at which, through the interpreter, Judge George Bean, of Provo, the Indians were urged to return to their agencies. "Every argument that I urged to induce them to return to their agencies," said the special agent, "was stoutly resisted, they, stating in addition to the reasons already assigned, that, as the Spanish Fork treaty was never ratified, therefore, the lands of Utah occupied by them before the coming of the white man, were theirs, and that the white man was only occupying the same by their permission. They also urged that they had, the night previous, received a revelation from the Great Spirit, that they might remain away from their agencies two months longer, when the "Voice from the West" would appear to them, and give instructions about their future course." [^35]

Indian AffairsHCA second council meeting was held with the Indians on the 14th and 15th of July, at Fountain Green; and on the 16th one with a large band of Navajoes and Kapotas from the Elk Mountain region beyond the Colorado. At these meetings the Indians were more insolent than ever. So insolent were they that Special Agent Dodge "found it necessary to issue an official order forbidding the citizens furnishing them any supplies whatever, hoping that they would thus be compelled to leave." This course had no such effect. The presence of a military officer with the agent was interpreted to be a declaration of war against them, and they determined to resist all efforts to return them to their agency. [^36] Several chiefs reported that they could no longer control their people, and at this point the matter was turned over to the United States military authority in Utah—to Lieutenant Colonel Morrow. He met with Chiefs Tabiana, Angitizebl, White Hare and others representing the one hundred renegades who had left the reservation, and by firm but kindly words he persuaded them to return. They declared, however, if food were not provided on their arrival they would not stay at the reservation. "The necessary papers were signed by the chiefs and the council broke up with friendly feeling." General Morrow was deserving of great praise for the manner in which he managed this delicate situation without a "war," and he received it from both Special Indian Agent Dodge and the Deseret News. The former said:

Indian AffairsHC162"The promptness on the part of government, and your own decisive and politic course, have brought the Indians to accept the terms of the government without bloodshed. I can but congratulate you, sir, the government, the citizens and myself, on the success of your expedition and negotiations. I beg you to accept my grateful acknowledgment for so cheerfully carrying out that part of the programme belonging to me."

Indian AffairsHC162The Deseret News editorial said:

Indian AffairsHC162"The success which has attended the expedition of General Morrow to San Pete and his conferences with the Indians at Springville and Mount Pleasant is a matter of congratulation to those concerned and of satisfaction to the public. The entertainment of Indians in San Pete and in other counties adjacent has for years been a heavy tax upon the settlers and sometimes upon others who have gone to their assistance. As the government purchases the land from the Indians and the settlers pay the government for the portions respectively occupied by them, upon the government and not upon the hardy adventurous settlers should come the burden of rendering the Indians such support as may be advisable. The settlers have ever acted upon the old maxim that 'it is better to feed than to fight the Indians,' have endeavored not to resort to hostilities when it could be reasonably avoided, and have ever been ready to make and maintain peace with the red man." [^37]

Indian AffairsHC162In addition to the military authorities present at this council there were Elder Orson Hyde, of the council of the twelve apostles, Bishops Seely, Tucker, and Olsen of San Pete settlements, Colonel Allred and a great number of settlers. [^38]

DELEGATION OF UTAH INDIANS SENT TO WASHINGTON

Indian AffairsHCIn addition to returning the Indians to the reservation Colonel Morrow suggested, since he had not power to comply with all the demands of the Indians, that a delegation of the chiefs be sent to Washington, accompanied by the special commissioner, to present their grievances to the president of the United States, a proposition that was cheerfully accepted and acted upon, though some dissatisfaction was apparent over the personnel of the delegation. Colonel Morrow selected as members of the delegation Tabby, Kanosh, Toquoneah, Ankershap, and Douglas—"all known to be men of influence among their people," said the Deseret News, in commenting upon their selection, "well disposed towards the whites, and anxious to preserve peace." For some cause unexplained, however, when the special commissioner departed for the east—Oct. 17th, 1872—he took with him, instead of the five chiefs named by Colonel Morrow, Anterro, Veyeahoo, Tabuner and Wanderrodes. Two of this number were said to be "among the most unruly and dishonest among the Indians in Utah territory, and among the ring leaders and promoters of the late raid." [^39]

Indian AffairsHC163Special Agent Dodge left word for Kanosh to follow his party, accompanied by Mr. Lyman Wood of Springville as interpreter, "but as the agents took along notoriously bad Indians, instead of those appointed by Colonel Morrow," Kanosh declined to leave the territory and returned home. George Bean who had been selected as interpreter for the Indians could not make the journey on account of sickness and the party left without an interpreter. The Indian chiefs had their interview with President Grant; [^40] and whether it was the effect of that interview, or of the impression created upon the minds of the chiefs by the extent of the country and the overwhelming numbers of the white race, which revealed the uselessness of further conflict with the white men, may not be determined, but the Utah Indians never again renewed hostilities.

Indian AffairsHCCONVERSION OF UTAH INDIANS TO THE "MORMON" FAITH

Indian AffairsHCA year or two later, there began a religious awakening among the Indians that resulted in many admissions into the Church of the Latter-day Saints—several thousands of them—by the ceremony of baptism, that, to say the least, was remarkable. On the 2nd of June one hundred Goshute Indians were baptized at Deep Creek in Tooele county by an Indian interpreter, Wm. Lee, and three other elders who assisted him. [^41] Elder Lafayette Ball, of Deep Creek (Ibim-Pah the Indians called it), kept the record of these Indians' baptism in that locality, and it included the names of eight hundred who had been baptized there. It appears the Indians would frequently come in from quite long distances wearied with travel, for the purpose of being "buried in water." And they would sometimes ask the elders to administer to their sick children, who were frequently healed instantly by the power of God. [^42] These baptisms had occurred in the summer and fall of 1874; preparations were made for still further additions in the following spring. [^43] A year later, June, 1875, Bishop Culbert King baptized eighty-five Indians at Kanosh settlement, in Millard county, principally members of the band of which Kanosh was chief. Kanosh spoke on the occasion at length "with much earnestness, exhorting his followers to industry and good works." [^44] Nor was the movement confined to the south alone. On the first of August, 1875, George W. Hill baptized over three hundred Indians in the Malad river, in Box Elder county, and many of their sick were healed by faith, under his administration consisting of the anointing with oil and the imposition of hands after the order of the early Christians. [^45] These were among the remnants of the bands with which Connors' California volunteers had made such havoc in the battle of Bear river. Indian conversions and baptisms continued through a number of years. A correspondent under date of March 20th, 1875, wrote the Salt Lake Herald that on the 19th there had arrived "about two hundred Shebit Indians who came and demanded baptism, the result of some supernatural influence through their prophets and 'medicine men' similar to demonstrations in other parts of the territory. * * * Several persons were appointed to administer and after singing and prayer nearly two hundred of the denizens of the forest were baptized." [^46] But for all these baptisms, the work of developing Christian character and civilized habits in the mountain Indians of the west is a slow and toilsome process, and so far with but few examples of satisfactory success.

Indian AffairsHC165"THE BURGH ON THE BEAR"—CORINNE

Indian AffairsHCOne of the effects of this movement among the Indians was to revive the hue and cry of a "Mormon-Indian" alliance for sanguinary purposes against the non-"Mormon" or Gentile population of the territory. Especially was this the case in relation to the movement in the Malad valley. In an account of the settlements and cities of Utah in 1873, Sten-house writes: "There is but one Gentile commercial city in the territory, Corinne, a very enterprising town situated on the Central Pacific Railroad, about sixty-five miles north of Salt Lake City." [^47] This city had been founded in March, 1869, on the approach of the transcontinental railroads, and being on the railroad near the mouth of Bear river, and but a short distance below the junction of the Malad river with that stream, it was the natural gateway through both the Malad and Bear river valleys for northern points of Idaho, Montana and Oregon. Much was hoped from it in a commercial way as a rival to both Ogden and Salt Lake City. Within two years after it was founded—and when "founded it was built of canvas and board shanties" [^48]—it had an anti-"Mormon" daily paper, the Corinne Daily Journal; and it became a center of bitter anti-"Mormonism." Indeed the first convention of the anti-"Mormon" political party in a territorial contest for delegate to congress was held there, in July, 1870. Such action was the result of a well considered plan on the part of the anti-"Mormon" forces, and designed to gain control of one of the counties of the territory—Boxelder county—and greatly influence the election of the adjoining county of Weber. [^49] In all these things, however, Corinne disappointed its projectors and those who fostered it through many declining years. It failed both as a commercial and as a political center and by 1874-5, the "Burgh on the Bear"—as Corinne was facetiously called by those who ridiculed its pretentions—had so far sunk in decadence that its chances of survival were desperate. [^50] It was this fact, doubtless, that led its citizens to make an effort to make it a military center for the suppression of imaginary Indian troubles arising out of the fact of so many of the Indians applying for baptism into the Church of the Latter-day Saints.

Indian AffairsHCTHE FALSE MALAD VALLEY "INDIAN SCARE"

Indian AffairsHCThis work among the northern Indians in 1874-5, resulted in the selection of farming lands between the Bear and Malad rivers about twenty miles north of Corinne, where it was proposed to settle them and teach them the cultivation of the soil, in harmony with their desires. The season of 1875 being too far advanced to allow of the Indians that year getting out the water for the lands selected, moved down the river about ten miles, to where the water had been taken out by the citizens of Bear River City. Here a temporary camp was made, and the Indians did some hundreds of dollars worth of work in clearing out the ditch, making a new dam, repairing the fences of the citizens, etc. Crops were planted and work continued until August when the harvest was ripening. At this juncture the citizens of Corinne affected a "great fear" that they would be attacked by the Indians, and set out night guards for protection. On the night of August 10th the picket guard on the west fired off their guns and galloped into town with the report that a large body of Indians— mm approaching. Great excitement followed. There was some "screaming and fainting" of women, and men rushed frantically about; but no Indians came. This, however, did not prevent a meeting of citizens being held to consult upon the safety of the city. Boxes of condemned arms belonging to the government and stored in trust at the Corinne railway depot were broken open and distributed among the citizens. The wildest rumors prevailed. "An Indian squaw had warned many persons to leave on account of an impending massacre." "A Mormon girl" who was employed in a Gentile family had received a dispatch "warning her to flee from a threatening danger;" several families of "Jack-Mormons" had "already fled." The Indians and the "Mormons" were in alliance for the destruction of Corinne, since Brigham Young desired the destruction of the town, hoping by that means to advance the interest of the Utah Northern Railroad, then building, and to exterminate the people of Corinne "who had persisted, against his wishes, in building up a rival to Salt Lake City." The Indians for their part in the alliance were to have the entire Malad valley. [^51] The governor of the territory was appealed to for protection against this "Indian outbreak," and troops were sent from Camp Douglas under the command of Major Briant, and Captain Kennington, to give the alleged needed protection. [^52] The whole thing, however, was a baseless fraud. There never was a moment of danger from the Indians gathered in the Malad valley. No Indians left their temporary encampment where they were farming, and working for the citizens of the vicinity. So evidently unnecessary was the appeal for military protection that while the great alarm took place late on the night of the 10th of August, and the appeal for military protection could not be made before that time, yet the Deseret News, of the 14th of August, reported the return of the troops from Corinne, under the caption: "When Johnny Comes Marching Home," saying:

Indian AffairsHC"This morning the troops sent from Camp Douglas to the front of the Corinne scare arrived in this city, after having performed a useless errand. They looked as if they might be thinking that they would prefer that kind of a joke played on them by the 'ringites' to come not oftener than once in a great while. The whole affair has developed, in some of its phases, one of the most palpable farces ever perpetrated among civilized or uncivilized people in any age. The consummate rascality of its instigators, originators and conductors is beneath the contempt of every person who has any right to the appellation of man; but it is not the first evidence by many of their contemptible cupidity."

Indian AffairsHCUnder United States military authority, however, these Indians were ordered to leave the scene of their peaceful industry —Chief Pocatello was among them—and go back to their reservation. There was doubtless some color of justification for ordering the reservation Indians back to their reservation. And yet when these Indians were found pursuing the vocations of peace, "and had frequently expressed the desire to become citizens of the United States, had paid taxes, in fact, at Franklin, Idaho territory, in 1874, the taxes being levied upon their horses, which was the only taxable property they owned, and for which they held the receipts" [^53]—it does seem that a little wresting of the reservation rules to the advantage of the progress of the Indians in acquiring industrial habits and tendency towards civilized methods of life, might have been indulged without establishing dangerous precedents or disrupting the reservation system. But after the departure of the reservation Indians there were several hundred of the Indians in Malad valley who had no reservations to go to; they were local, valley Indians, but they were required nevertheless to leave the lands they had cultivated that season, just the same as the reservation Indians. [^54]

Indian AffairsHCI know of no sadder spectacle in the history of our country's tragical Indian policy than these Malad Indian farmers leaving, without resentment, their harvest-laden fields at the bidding of the military representatives of the nation, and under the counsel of their religious leader, Elder George W. Hill, [^55] who persuaded them it would be best for them to submit to the injustice; "and that it would all come out right in the end." And so indeed it did; for subsequently many of these Indians were gathered into a settlement that was afterwards named Washikee. Suitable elders were appointed to live in their midst and teach them industry and the art of cultivating the soil. The settlement continues to this time (1930), and in fact is one of the ecclesiastical wards of the church, presided over by a bishop, and some of the Indian members are descendants of those that were driven from their fields in 1875, and now own those lands.

Indian AffairsHC170Absurd as this whole Corinne affair was, yet the press in other states took up the hue and cry; and execration of the Latter-day Saints echoed and reechoed through the land. A sample of the spirit in which the matter was discussed is found in the following excerpt from the Sacramento (Cal.) Record Union:

Indian AffairsHC170"So much is certain, that if the Gentiles of Utah are in danger and help is wanted, a call for volunteers in California will be responded to by twenty thousand armed men inside of twenty-four hours; and if these volunteers should go to Utah and find hostilities in operation, we should be sorry to have to answer for the consequences of their indignation. * * * If Corinne is attacked by the Indians, let Brigham Young see to it that Salt Lake does not smoke for the outrage.

Indian AffairsHC170Our volunteers might be rough, and when their passions are up, they would not perhaps be altogether capable of restraint.

Indian AffairsHC170Meanwhile is it not a disgrace to congress that so monstrous an anomaly as this should outrage American civilization?

Indian AffairsHC170It is time that this farce should be terminated. It is time that the Mormons were made to understand that they cannot be permitted to exist in either open or covert hostility to the United States." [^56]

Indian AffairsHCYet the comments were not all as senseless and irrational and threatening as this ebullition from the Record Union. The Omaha Herald, of August the 14th, then edited by Dr. Miller, had the following to say under the caption—

THE CORINNE COLLAPSE

Indian AffairsHC"The Corinne telegrapher surrendered as gracefully as he could yesterday on the Corinne conspiracy. That interesting individual and the gangs of which he is the mouthpiece would do well to go and hang themselves. We deny the whole indictment against the Mormons, and we have no doubt that the Indians are as innocent of hostile intent towards the people of Corinne, or any other white people, as though they were unborn. Exactly what the explanation of the Corinne affair will be when those capable of telling the truth about the Mormons and Indians do this, we do not know, but the collapse of the conspiracy to create armed conflict in Utah was inevitable from the outset. That the army should have been cajoled into giving countenance to the scheme is to be regretted, but we do not believe there is an officer at Camp Douglas with a thimble full of brains who believes that there was the least foundation for the organized scare at Corinne."

Footnotes

Dear Brother, Agreeable to promise I have the honor to hand you the above.

Very respectfully,

(Signed) "JOHN R. WINDER." (Ibid, p. 1486).

---
Notas:
[^1] Bowles' Across the Continent, 1866, p. 84. Mr. Bowles declares the reception of Mr. Colfax and party to have been "excessive." "Mr. Colfax's reception in Utah was excessive if not oppressive. There was an element of rivalry between Mormons and Gentiles in it, adding earnestness and energy to enthusiasm and hospitality." (Ibid, p. 83).
[^2] The members of President Young's party were Heber C. Kimball, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, George A. Smith, F. D. Richards, George Q. Cannon, Hon. John F. Kinney, J. M. Bernhisel, W. H. Hooper, Mayor Smoot, Marshal J. C. Little * * * Wm. Jennings, et al. (Colfax's Journal of his Journey from the Missouri river to California, published in Tullidge's Western Galaxy, 1888, p. 244).
[^3] Governor Doty was from Wisconsin. In the territorial days of that state he had been its delegate in congress and its governor. He came to Utah as superintendent of Indian affairs in 1861; and in 1863 was appointed governor of the territory. "In his intercourse with the citizens, whether privately or in his official capacity, he manifested that openness and affability of approach so characteristic of men accustomed to western life and manners. During his residence in this territory he made many friends, and the intelligence of his sudden death called forth many and sincere expressions and evidences of mourning and regret. * * * The flags throughout the city hung at half mast, draped in black, and with a general cessation of business, expressed the general respect entertained for the memory of our late territorial chief officer." (Deseret News of June 21, 1865).
[^4] The letters of Mr. Bowles from Salt Lake City on "Utah and Mormon Affairs," are a direct and forceful presentation of things from that gentleman's viewpoint; though, of course, the parts of the interviews he presents to his readers, one cannot fail to see, are those parts which give to the brilliant editor the best ground from which to appeal to the prejudices of his eastern readers. Mr. Bowles' locks are all made to fit Mr. Bowles' keys. The things he praises are chiefly the material progress of the people in their pioneering work; and guardedly, the personal appearance and intelligence of some of the chief men whom he met. His concluding paragraph of the letter, in which he takes his leave of Salt Lake City and her people, was intended, perhaps, to be both just and generous: "I have met much to admire, many to respect, worshiped deep before its nature,—found only one thing to condemn. I shall want to come again when the railroad can bring me, and that blot is gone." (Across the Continent, p. 122).
[^5] Mr. Bowles also alludes to the same matter in his introductory letter to Mr. Colfax where he says: "You will see that I give a supplementary chapter to this subject (the Mormons), to let the Mormon leaders strip off for themselves the thin disguise of loyalty and disposition to succumb, which they wore during our visit." (Introductory, p. vi). This in allusion to the excerpts from alleged discourses by the church leaders referred to in the text above, and quoted in the supplementary chapter of Mr. Bowles' book.
[^6] The following is the alleged quotation from Brigham Young's Discourse: "From Brigham Young himself: He said if they undertook to try him in a Gentile court, he would see the government in hell first, and was ready to fight the government the rub. That he had his soldiers and rifles and pistols and ammunition and plenty of it, and cannon too, and would use them. He was on it! The governor of this territory was useless and could do nothing. He (Brigham) was the real governor of this people, and by powers of the Most High he would be governor of this territory forever and ever, and if the Gentiles did not like this they could leave and go to hell! He said that nine-tenths of the people of the territory were southern sympathizers; that the north was wrong, and this people sympathized with the south." Mr. Bowles in his second book, Our New West, published after his second tour with Mr. Colfax—1869—dealing again with "Mormon" affairs says: "A good many Mormon sermons have been reported and published, some by themselves, others by Gentile listeners" (p. 245). It was doubtless some "Gentile listener" who reported the above alleged remarks of Brigham Young, and the other excerpts alluded to, for on reading them one familiar with the ideas and language of the church leaders would be constrained to say, "an enemy hath done this thing." In the Union Vedette of June 21st, 1866, is given the Bowles' quotations from alleged sermons of Elders George A. Smith and Brigham Young, said to have been delivered in Tooele City in August, 1865, "as reported by Mr. James W. Gibson." Both in Brigham Young's History, Ms., for August, pp. 722-737, and in the Deseret News of Aug. 30th, 1865, is an account of a two days' meeting at Tooele—the only meetings held by these men in Tooele in August—and a very full synopsis of all the discourses delivered at those meetings is given both in the History of Brigham Young, Ms., and the Deseret News, but no subject matter is to be found in the account of those meetings that could form a just basis for the ribaldry alleged to be reported by Gibson.
[^7] Across the Continent, Mr. Colfax's speech, pp. 406-9.
[^8] "Brigham Young's preaching today was a very unsatisfactory, disappointing performance. There was every incentive for him to do his best; he had an immense audience spread out under the 'bowery' to the number of five or six thousand; before him was Mr. Colfax, who had asked him to preach upon 'the distinctive Mormon doctrines;' around him were all his elders and bishops, in unusual numbers; and he was fresh from the exciting discussion of yesterday on the subject of polygamy. But his address lacked logic, lacked effect, lacked wholly magnetism or impressiveness. * * * Brigham Young may be a shrewd business man, an able organizer of labor, a bold, brave person in dealing with the practicalities of life,—he must, indeed, be all of these, for we see the evidences all around this city and country; but he is in no sense an impressive or effective preacher, judged by all standards that I have been accustomed to." (Across the Continent, pp. 118-120). Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, states of the incident that "It was the talk of the following week, among some of his friends, that the president, on the Sunday, had treated Speaker Colfax and party to the worst sermon he had ever preached," (p. 352).
[^9] Vol. xi, pp. 119-128.
[^10] Deseret News of June 21st, 1865. Also Mr. Colfax's Journal, entry for June 18th, 1865, Western Galaxy, Tullidge, p. 249. A curious disagreement respecting the manner of the delivery of the speech occurs in the accounts of it by Mr. Bowles, on the one side, and the Deseret News on the other. Mr. Bowles says that Mr. Colfax "spoke it without notes, and with much freedom and fervor to an audience unused to so effective and eloquent a style" (Across the Continent, pp. 120-121). The Deseret News said: "The orator said it was his custom to speak extemporaneously, but his relations with our late lamented president had been so close that he had not dared to speak of him except from the manuscript which he read." (Deseret News of June 21st, 1865).
[^11] Colfax Journal, Western Galaxy, p. 247.
[^12] Across the Continent, p. 11; also Colfax Journal, Western Galaxy, p. 248.
[^13] Colfax's Journal, Western Galaxy, p. 248. "I told him [Brigham Young], while their ecclesiastical system was the strongest I knew, polygamy was the weak point in it, setting the whole world against them." Bowles represents President Young as saying that plural marriage "was not an essential practice of the church, but only a privilege and a duty, under special command of God; that he knew it had been abused; that people had entered into polygamy who ought not to have done so, and against his protestation and advice. At the same time he defended the practice as having Biblical authority, and as having, with proper limits, a sound moral philosophical reason and propriety." (Across the Continent, p. 111).
[^14] "The discussion, thus opened, grew general and sharp though ever good-natured." (Across the Continent, p. 111).
[^15] "The conversation impressed me with the belief that they see their system cannot stand; and that they have contemplated the possibility of sometime or other stopping the practice by a new revelation" (Colfax's Journal, Western Galaxy, p. 248). "Not only what Mr. Young said, but his whole manner left with us the impression that if public opinion and the government united vigorously, but at the same time discreetly to press the question, there would be found some way to acquiesce in the demand, and change the practice of the present fathers of the church." (Across the Continent, p. 113).
[^16] See Official Declaration, Doctrine and Covenants, following sec. cxxxvi, current (1922) edition.
[^17] A copy of the Colfax letter with the petition to President Johnson is preserved in History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1865, pp. 419-421.
[^18] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1865, pp. 510, 511.
[^19] See Stenhouse in Rocky Mountain Saints, pp. 614-5.
[^20] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1865, p. 511.
[^21] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1865, pp. 228-232.
[^22] Ibid, p. 231; also Deseret News of April 12th, 1865.
[^23] They were to be 22 feet long, 8 inches in diameter at the butt, and 5 inches at the top, to be set 70 yards apart, and four feet in the ground.
[^24] The circular appears in extenso in Deseret News of Nov. 9th, 1865.
[^25] Deseret News of Nov. 9th, 1865.
[^26] Deseret News of Oct. 17th, 1866. Elder Horton D. Haight was the captain of the "wire train."
[^27] Laws of Utah, 1867, chapter xxix.
[^28] This was the "National Hotel," east of "Godbe's Corner," on First South street.
[^29] The above narrative is condensed from a letter of President Brigham Young, to his son, Brigham Young, Jun., then presiding in the European Mission, under date of April 9th, 1866, and by far the most circumstantial account given of the affair. Copied into History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1866, pp. 328-332; also from the reports and editorials of the Deseret News of the 5th and 12th of April, 1866, and the Union Vedette of the same period.
[^30] Deseret News of April 5th, 1866.
[^31] See Bancroft's History of Utah, p. 626, and Stenhouse in Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 616. The Union Vedette anti-"Mormon" paper places the subscription reward at $4,150.
[^32] See Union Vedette of April 4th, 5th and 6th, 1866.
[^33] See Minutes of April Conference in Deseret News of April 12th, and editorial of the same impression. Also editorial comment of News, passim, and Salt Lake Daily Telegraph of that period. The latter journal, edited by Mr. Stenhouse, said: "Mr. Hill has been known for many years in this community as a quite, sober, and kind man, with many friends; * * * and some one, we think, has given him and every absent man evidence that their families are not at the mercy of the wicked." (Telegraph, of April 5th, 1866).
[^34] Salt Lake Daily Telegraph, edited by T. H. B. Stenhouse, impression of 15th of April, 1866.
[^35] Salt Lake Daily Telegraph of 18th of April, 1866. The communication denying Brassfield's marriage was by a Mr. A. H. Greenhalgh, a business partner of the deceased for two years just past, who claims to have known Mr. Brassfield since 1860. His communication was published in the Union Vedette of the 19th of April, 1866.
[^36] Across the Continent, p. 116. Unhappily the experience of most of those who went to camp found betrayal and a life of shame rather than husbands.
[^37] Ibid, p. 130.
[^38] See Union Vedette of April 21st, 1866; also Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 616.
[^39] Deseret News of Jan. 9th, 1867. "A similar dispatch was forwarded by Colonel C. A. Potter, who was ordered to retain troops until the regulars arrived." (Beadle's Life in Utah, 1870, p. 205).
[^40] The telegram sent by Sherman, which was not published in Utah until some months later, was represented as much more threatening than it really was. (See Union Vedette of that period, April and May, 1866).
[^41] For both of President Young's telegrams, see Union Vedette of June 1st, 1866; which copied all the above telegrams from the Missouri Republican of May 14th, 1866. Brigham Young's use of the phrase in referring to Brassfield's act—"seduced a 'Mormon's' wife"—is justified by his belief in the charge against Brassfield already being a married man when going through the marriage ceremony with Mrs. Hill, referred to in the text a few pages back. The editor of the Union Vedette claimed that Lieutenant Colonel W. Willard Smith, among the signers of the telegram indorsing President Young's statements, ordered his name removed by telegraph message; but for what reason is not very clearly defined.
[^42] See Congressional Globe of that date.
[^43] General Babcock's Report, so far as it relates to the "Mormons" will be found in Deseret News of Feb. 20th, 1867, as well as in the Congressional Globe of 3rd of January, 1867.
[^44] Deseret News, July 4th, 1875.
[^45] St. James, v:14-15; and Deseret News, Aug. 11, 1875, p. 444: also Millennial Star, vol. xxxvii, p. 582.
[^46] Copied into the Millennial Star, vol. xxxvii, p. 247.
[^47] Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 674. Corinne was named for the daughter of General J. A. Williamson, one of the early settlers of the place.
[^48] Deseret News, correspondent "Saxey," impression of April 7th, 1869. The correspondent also said ironically: "The town of Corinne * * * is fast becoming civilized, several men having been killed there already; the last one was found in the river with four bullet holes through him and his head badly mangled."
[^49] History of Salt Lake City, Tullidge, 1886, p. 491.
[^50] Ten years after Stenhouse's reference to Corinne as "a very enterprising town," as quoted in the text above, Phil Robinson, the noted war correspondent of the London Telegraph, and at the time special correspondent for the New York World, writing up Utah, said of Corinne: "And so to Corinne, ghastly Corinnel A Gentile failure on the very skirts of Mormon success. It had once a great carrying-trade, for being at the terminus of the Utah Railway, Montana depended upon it for its supplies, and bitterly had Montana cause to regret it, for the Corinne freight-carriers (I wish I could remember their expressive slang name) seemed to think that railway enterprise must always terminate at Corinne, and so they carried just what they chose, at the price they chose, and when they chose. But the railway ran past them one fine day, and so now there is Corinne stranded high and dry, as discreditable a settlement as ever men put together without any plan. Treeless and roadless, the scattered hamlet of crazy looking shanties stands half the year in drifting dust and half the year in sticky mud, and the Mormons point the finger of scorn at the place the Gentiles used to boast of." (Sinners and Saints, Roberts Brothers, Boston, 1883, pp. 269-70).
[^51] Deseret News, by special correspondent, who visited Corinne in the midst of the "scare," under date of August 12th, see Deseret News of Aug. 18th, 1875, p. 453.
[^52] Deseret News of Aug. 18, p. 453, et passim for the month of August. This prompt action on the part of the governor and military authorities was in marked contrast to the action of the military authorities when the non-"Mormon" Indian agent made application for a United States military force to suppress Indian uprisings in the southern part of Utah, and give protection to the sorely beset "Mormon" settlers.
[^53] See signed statement of George W. Hill in Deseret News of Sept. 1st, 1875.
[^54] See the signed statement of Elder George W. Hill in Deseret News of Sept. 1st, 1875, p. 485. "The major (Briant) delivered his message which was to the effect that all the Indians must leave the farm and go to their reservations before noon the next day, or he would be compelled to drive them therefrom by force." "I told the major," writes Hill, "that all the Indians who belonged to reservations had already gone, and that the Indians who were on the farm now were resident Indians, had no reservation to go to, as they never belonged to any." Nevertheless the orders had to be obeyed. "This was about three o'clock in the afternoon," says Mr. Hill. "Immediately afterwards I called the Indians together, told them that it would all come out right and advised them to return to their former haunts. By sunset not an Indian could be found in the camp—all had scattered out to wander from place to place as in former years, leaving their crops, for which they had toiled so industriously, and on which they depended for their winter food, neither cut nor garnered. (Ibid). Mr. Hill charges that the next day a man styling himself "States Marshal," with three or four others from Corinne, rode into the Indian camp and stole everything to which they took a fancy. (Ibid).
[^55] "This season the Indians put in about one hundred acres of wheat, twenty-five of corn, five and a half to six of potatoes, three to four of melons, peas, beets, and other vegetables, which, at the time of the commencement of the excitement, were just ready for harvest. In fact the Indians were in the fields with two reapers and had just commenced harvesting when the first news of trouble reached us." (Signed statement of Mr. George W. Hill, Deseret News of Sept. 1st, 1875).
[^56] From the Record Union, copied into the Deseret News of Aug. 18th, 1875.
