B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 5 ( 1930)

172CHAPTER CXXX

172THE COLFAX PARTY IN UTAH—THE BRASSFIELD HOMICIDE— GENERAL BABCOCK'S REPORT ON CONDITIONS IN UTAH

172RETURNING to the year 1865 from which the narrative started that deals with the very last scene of Indian hostilities in Utah, the first visit of Schuyler Colfax and party should be considered.

THE VISIT OF MR. COLFAX, SPEAKER OF THE NATIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Mr. Colfax, a member of the United States house of representatives from Indiana since 1855, and for two years past speaker of the house, was a national character of large influence. He was accompanied by Lieutenant Governor Bross of Illinois; Mr. Albert D. Richardson of the New York Tribune, and Mr. Samuel Bowles, editor of the Springfield (Mass.) Republican. They arrived in Salt Lake City on the 11th of June—Sunday morning. There was a halt at Camp Douglas "to salute the flag;" a parade through the camp, headed by the post band. Leaving the camp the committee appointed by the city council met the party east of the city, took them from their dust-begrimed stage coach to open carriages. The whole party became the guests of the municipality at the chief hotel of the city, the "Salt Lake House." There were band serenades, a special performance at the theater, an excursion to, and a bath in, the Salt Lake. [^1]

MR. BOWLES ON LOCAL ETIQUETTE

Mr. Bowles makes much of the local etiquette of "calling." He states that it became a question as to whether the "distinguished resident and the distinguished visitor would meet;" since in "Mormon" etiquette, "President Young is called upon;" by Washington fashion "the speaker is called upon, and does not call." It appears that Mr. Colfax took a stand for the Washington custom, "and gave notice that he would not call;" whereupon President Young (acting with good sense), yielded the little question, if such a question existed, beyond what had imperceptibly become a local custom, and "called," accompanied by a large number of the church leaders. [^2] "It was not one of Emerson's prescribed ten minute calls," says Mr. Bowles, "but a generous, pleasant, gossiping sitting of two hours long." Later there was a "return call" by the speaker and his company upon President Young, at the latter's office, where the "call" was longer and equally "chatty and free." There were social entertainments for the party at the home of former delegate, Wm. H. Hooper, and at the elegant home of Mr. Wm. Jennings. During the eight days of the visit of the Colfax party, James Duane Doty, the governor of the territory, died and was buried with processional honors. Speaker Colfax and Lieutenant Governor Bross of Illinois, were included among the pall-bearers, and Rev. Norman McLeod, chaplain at Camp Douglas, conducted the funeral services at the governor's residence. Interment took place in Camp Douglas cemetery. [^3]

IMPORTANT FEATURES OF COLFAX PARTY'S VISIT

The chief interest of the Colfax party's visit to Utah centered in the speeches of Mr. Colfax and the interviews of the party with President Young and his associates among the church leaders; also the importance of the visit grew out of the subsequent policy adopted towards the Church of the Latter-day Saints, when Mr. Colfax became vice president of the United States, in 1869. Also it might be said that the visit was important because of the book it helped to produce from the trenchant pen of Mr. Bowles. Of the thirty-two letters which make up his book, Across the Continent, six are devoted to Utah, to the Latter-day Saints, to their social affairs, and their religious faith; also one of his Supplementary Papers—of which there are eight—and Mr. Colfax's speech to the people of Salt Lake City from his hotel veranda. [^4]

174In his Supplementary Paper on the "Mormons," Mr. Bowles does the church leaders a great injustice by inserting alleged excerpts from discourses which I am sure were never delivered by them. He opens this paper by saying:

174"Since our visit in June, [1865, and this Supplementary Paper was written before the close of the same year] the leaders among the Mormons have repudiated their professions of loyalty to the government, denied any disposition to yield the issue of polygamy and began to preach anew, and more vigorously than ever, disrespect and defiance to the authority of the national government." [^5]

175Then follows the alleged excerpts attributed to Heber C. Kimball, George A. Smith and Brigham Young. Unfortunately Mr. Bowles gives no citation to the source from which the excerpts are supposed to have been taken, nor date of their deliverance, nor who reported them. Diligent search through all the published discourses of the three gentlemen quoted during the period specified, fails to discover the paragraphs given by Mr. Bowles or anything like them. One can only conclude that he was imposed upon by those who supplied him with these passages after his departure. It is conceded that there was some extremes of speech at times on the part of church leaders, when laboring under a sense of outraged justice practiced upon themselves or the community, but it never took the form given in the Bowles alleged excerpts. [^6]

175MR. COLFAX'S SPEECH TO THE LATTER-DAY SAINTS

The speech of Mr. Colfax from his hotel veranda to the people assembled in the street dealt with two questions: (1) what the people had a right to expect from the government; (2) what the government had a right to demand of the people. Briefly what the people had a right to expect of the government was protection, postal and telegraphic communication, with improved means of commerce and trade with other parts of the republic, better highway and railway facilities. What the government had a right to demand of the people was "allegiance to the Constitution, obedience to the laws, and devotion to the Union." [^7] The soundness of the doctrine may not be questioned, but it should be so far modified as to take cognizance of the fact that there remains with the people the right to question the constitutionality of legislative enactments, and contest them in the courts to the extent of their ability and power. Unquestioned acceptance and abject obedience to every enactment of congress is not the test of allegiance to the Constitution, nor the criterion of true Americanism. There remains the question, which is the proper law-making power in the case, the local legislature of the community, or the national congress? If the congress has assumed to enact a statute obnoxious to the local community, they are certainly within their right when they question and contest the constitutionality of the obnoxious law, both on the ground that it was not legislation that right-fully fell within the purview of the national congress to enact, and because it infringed the rights of conscience, and limited religious liberty. The Latter-day Saints at the time of Mr. Colfax's visit were questioning the constitutionality of the "anti-bigamy acts of congress" on both these accounts; and it was this attitude of the community, involving if not resistance to the law, at least the ignoring of it, that Mr. Colfax criticized; but that attitude gave him no right to question the loyalty of the community, assuming it, for they were acting clearly within their rights as American citizens. The victory of the American people of the northern states in their disobedience of, and their resistance to, the fugitive slave law, even when upheld by the decisions of the supreme court of the United States, was too recent to allow Mr. Colfax's "obedience-to-law" test of allegiance to pass unmodified. Many historical illustrations will suggest themselves. It is sufficient here to say that the whole progress and maintenance of liberty has been largely a matter of resistance to tyrannical and unconstitutional law; and such resistance, even if, for the sake of the argument, it be admitted that it was mistaken, is not incompatible with truest patriotism.

PRESIDENT YOUNG'S SPEECH FOR THE COLFAX PARTY

Mr. Colfax urged President Young during the interview had in the latter's office, and after a very frank discussion on many subjects, to speak the following Sunday on "the distinctive Mormon doctrines." This he did on the aforesaid afternoon, but apparently with no great success; for neither formal exposition, nor argumentative discourse was Brigham Young's forte. This is the opinion expressed in Mr. Bowles' book; [^8] and it was conceded by his associates that President Young did not speak with his usual force or clearness. The discourse is published in the Journal of Discourses. [^9]

In the evening of the same day Mr. Colfax at the invitation of both the church and city authorities gave his Chicago "Eulogy on the Life and Principles of Lincoln." That speech ranks high among the great speeches of American statesmen, and delighted the Great Salt Lake audience—from five to seven thousand—who listened to it with wrapt attention, and gave the distinguished speaker a hearty vote of thanks "for the able oration," at its close. [^10]

The two interviews between Speaker Colfax and his party and President Young and his associates were very frank, the marriage institution of the church, or at least that part of it relating to plurality of wives, was the chief topic of interest. President Young having asked Mr. Colfax what the government and people of the United States proposed to do with the question of polygamy, now that the question of slavery was settled, the latter answered frankly that he thought it about time that another revelation was had abolishing it. This was pleasantly said and "all present smiled," writes Mr. Colfax in his journal. [^11] Mr. Colfax also added that "as the people of Missouri and Maryland, without waiting for the action of the general government against slavery, themselves believing it to be wrong and an impediment to their prosperity, had taken measures to abolish it; so he hoped that the people of the Mormon church would see that polygamy was a hindrance and not a help, and move for its abandonment." [^12] President Young asked if polygamy were given up by the church, would they not be required to give up other features of the religion, the Book of Mormon, etc. "We all said, 'no,'" writes Mr. Colfax, "they had a right to worship God as they pleased." [^13] This was the opening merely of a protracted discussion of this question in which Mr. Bross, Mr. Bowles, President Young, Albert Carrington, then editor of the Deseret News, and others participated with great freedom and earnestness, but in good nature. [^14] According to the testimony of both Mr. Colfax and Mr. Bowles, they received the impression from these interviews that "polygamy," as they styled the plural wife system of the church, might be abandoned, at least as a practice. [^15] All which, in view of what took place under President Woodruff's "Manifesto" of 1890, discontinuing the practice of plural marriage, makes all this of great interest here. [^16]

COLONEL O. H. IRISH NOMINATED FOR GOVERNOR BY BOTH GENTILES AND "MORMONS"

On the eve of the departure of the Colfax party from Salt Lake City—they left on the 19th of June—a petition was drawn up to the president of the United States, Andrew Johnson, asking that Colonel O. H. Irish, the very efficient superintendent of Indian affairs of the territory, be appointed governor of Utah to succeed the late Governor Duane Doty. This petition was signed by about two hundred and fifty leading "Mormon" citizens of Salt Lake City, and presented to Mr. Colfax for his endorsement, with a request that he interest himself in obtaining the appointment of Colonel Irish. A second petition "signed by all the Gentile business men of Salt Lake City," also asking for the appointment of Colonel Irish, was handed to Mr. Colfax, and with the same request that he use his influence to secure the appointment. This the speaker of the house of representatives refused to do beyond forwarding the two petitions, and saying, "without intermeddling in the delicate question," that he "could cheerfully vouch for Colonel Irish's ability, prudence and devotion to the interests of the government." [^17] This petition, like so many others of the people of Utah on the appointment of Utah officials, was not granted.

PROSPECT FOR STATEHOOD DISCUSSED—GLOOM

About two weeks after the departure of the Colfax party the Hon. James M. Ashley, of Ohio, member of congress and chairman of the committee on territories, arrived in Salt Lake City. In view of the desire of Utah to enter the Union the good will of the chairman of the committee on territories was an important matter, and a free discussion was had with him "upon the probable future relations between the government and the Mormons." In an interview between George A. Smith, president of the council of the Utah legislature, and John Taylor, speaker of the house, Mr. Ashley presented a rather gloomy prospect for Utah and her Latter-day Saint population. He represented that the religious feeling in the United States was more intensified against the church "than it had ever been before: * * * the religious element now ruled the country—the clergy had it their own way, and they were determined that the laws of the United States should be enforced; * * * the onset might come at any time, and it would be terrible; * * * the army would be the refuse of Sherman's and other corps." He made charges against the conduct of Sherman's army that marched through Georgia which were appalling; charges of wholesale rape and arson, and added: "That's what they intend to carry out here." [^18]

181At a meeting with Brigham Young, at the residence of Captain W. H. Hooper, the interview was not so gloomy. It began by President Young's greeting: "Well, Mr. Ashley, are you also going to recommend us to get a new revelation to abolish polygamy, or what are you going to do with us?" The chairman of the committee on territories frankly declared he did not know what would be done with the "Mormons," and illustrated by a story the difficulties of the government in enforcing the anti-bigamy law so long as the grand juries, who must make the indictments, and the petit juries, who must try the cases, would be drawn from the local community that believed the said anti-bigamy law to be unconstitutional. [^19]

181President Young—doubtless having in mind what had been said to Messrs. Smith and Taylor the day before rather than anything that arose in the present interview—told Mr. Ashley that he did not expect a war would be brought on between the Latter-day Saints and the United States; that any army might come, but bye and bye it would go away again; "that the Lord had been the trust of his people heretofore, and he still would be;" and illustrated the fact by a recital of the experiences in connection with Buchanan's "Utah Expedition" and its failure. [^20]

181THE SPIRIT OF THE CONFERENCE OF APRIL, 1865

The April conference of 1865 was memorable for the strong stand taken in reference to the general moral obligations of the saints. "Merchants, lawyers, doctors, and speculators of every kind have been reproved and warned, with more than ordinary energy and plainness," said President Young in a letter to his son, Brigham Young, Jun., presiding over the European Mission. Then he continued:

182"The condition of many of the classes required something more than kind entreaties and soft speeches; * * * these have been tried in vain, and the time had come for something stronger to be used. * * * In the teachings of this conference, there have been evidences afforded to the world of the divinity of this work, [i. e. 'Mormonism'] which must be irresistible to the honest mind. Had such reproofs been given in the midst of any other people, as they have been given in the midst of the saints, the community would have been split in pieces. No Gentile community in the world would bear them. But here all is calm and peaceful, and all, so far as we know, feel to appreciate the reproofs, and are thankful to the Lord that he has bestowed his holy priesthood upon man, by which he is enabled to warn and teach his fellow man. * * * We are now beholding a spectacle of moral power exercised by the priesthood of the living God, such as the world has not witnessed since the days of the apostles. Here are men, called suddenly, at a moment's warning, to take missions to the nations of the earth to preach the gospel, cheerfully accepting that call, and stepping forward, not only without murmuring, but joyfully, to respond to it, and closing up their business, and preparing to take leave of their families for years, to preach in strange lands, the messages of salvation, which is despised by so many. * * * Glory be to God for the restoration of his Spirit and power again to the earth, through which all these mighty works are wrought." [^21]

182A resolution was presented to the conference and carried unanimously, "that the city council of Salt Lake City, and other cities throughout the territory abolish all liquor saloons, or places where liquor is sold, as fast as circumstances will permit, by ceasing to grant licenses for such purposes." [^22]

CONSTRUCTION OF LOCAL TELEGRAPH LINES

Following the close of the general conference a special meeting was called, at which more missionaries were appointed and a resolution taken to build a local telegraph line to extend from St. George, in Washington county, to St. Charles, in Bear Lake valley, then the two extreme settlements of the Latter-day Saints north and south. This action was followed in November by a circular letter from President Young calling upon the bishops and presiding elders in the church to assist in the erection of this telegraph line. They were instructed to proceed with the work of securing and setting up the poles; [^23] to gather up subscriptions for the purchase of the wire and insulators, which must be shipped from the east to Missouri river points, and thence by ox teams to Salt Lake City. It was estimated that these materials would weigh upwards of fifty-five tons. Settlements expecting to have telegraph stations were urged to select one or two young men and send them to Salt Lake City to learn the art of telegraphy. A special school would be opened to give this instruction and training. [^24]

183These details in relation to the construction of a telegraph line would not be justified in a history of this character but for the uniqueness of the circumstance—a church is building a telegraph line for an extent of over three hundred and fifty miles, and chiefly through a wilderness, and through the greater extent of which an Indian war was then raging. It must be of some interest to mankind to know something of the manner in which so unusual a thing, by such an unusual agency was done—it illustrates the "Mormon way" of doing a thing which was recognized as a great public necessity. This necessity is recognized and set forth in the following passage from Brigham Young's circular:

"Scarcely a week passes that we do not feel the want of such a line. Occurrences frequently happen in distant settlements which require to be known immediately in other parts of the territory, and in many instances public and private interests suffer through not being able to transmit such news by any quicker channel than the ordinary mails. We are rapidly spreading abroad, and our settlements extend to a great distance on every hand. We now require to be united by bonds which will bring us into more speedy and close communication with one another; the center should be in a position to communicate at any moment with the extremities, however remote; and the extremities be able, with ease and speed, to make their wants and circumstances known to the center. Instead of depending altogether upon the tardy operation of the mails for the transmission of information, we should bring into requisition every improvement which our age affords, to facilitate our intercourse and to render our intercommunication more easy. These requirements the telegraph will supply, and it is well adapted to our position and the progress of the age in which we live." [^25]

184This from a leader who is generally supposed to have sought isolation for his people, and who relied upon their ignorance for the perpetuation of his "priestly dominion" over them, is rather enlightened and advanced progressivism.

184The wire and insulators were brought into Salt Lake City by sixty-five wagons drawn by ox teams, arriving on the 15th of October, 1866. [^26] By December 1st the line was established between Salt Lake City and Ogden; by the 8th it was opened on the north to Logan; by the 28th, it had reached Manti in the south; by the 15th of January following, the line was opened to St. George, with a branch line running into San Pete county; five hundred miles of line had been erected by this time. On the 18th of January, 1867, the Deseret Telegraph Company was incorporated by act of the Utah legislature; [^27] and on the 21st of March the company was organized, with Brigham Young as president.

184In the closing month of 1869 the line was opened to Franklin, Idaho. Two years later it reached Paris, in Bear Lake valley, and the same year lateral lines were extended to Coalville in Summit county, northeasterly from Salt Lake City, and Pioche, Nevada, southwesterly. Thus the enterprise went beyond the original design.

HOMICIDES: THE BRASSFIELD KILLING

During the year 1866 two homicides occurred in Salt Lake City which not only disturbed the local community but attracted the attention of the whole country, and talk was revived in some quarters, for a time, of another military interference in the affairs of the territory. These were the Brassfield and Robinson homicides.

185Squire Newton Brassfield was a "Gentile" who came from Austin, Nevada, to Salt Lake City. He made the acquaintance of, and soon married, a Mrs. Mary Emma Hill, (March 27), plural wife of Elder Archibald N. Hill, then absent on a mission in England. No steps were taken to secure a divorce for Mrs. Hill, Mr. Brassfield or his advisers holding, doubtless, that her marriage to Hill had no legal status. There was an attempt made on the part of the newly wedded pair to remove the goods from the residence of Mr. Hill, occupied by the woman; legal resistance through the police was made to this act by the friends of the absent husband; there were threats of violence and the drawing of a pistol upon the officers by Brassfield; the offender was arrested and a charge made against him both for larceny and for assault with intent to kill; on these charges he was released by giving bail. Then followed the effort of Mrs. Brassfield by writ of habeas corpus procedure to secure custody of the children by the former husband, and while this case was pending in court, Brassfield, when about to enter his hotel [^28] in company with Captain J. K. Hosmer, United States marshal, some person stepped out of an alleyway, shot him and ran off, pursued and fired at by a policeman in the vicinity, but the slayer escaped without being recognized. About forty-five minutes after he was shot, Brassfield died. [^29]

The act of violence produced a sensation in Salt Lake City. Judge Elias Smith of the Salt Lake county probate court—which then had criminal as well as civil jurisdiction, and was then in session—called the grand jury into court and gave them a special charge "to use all diligence and take every necessary step to bring the offenders" in this and some other recent cases of street violence to the bar of justice, "that the majesty of the law might be enforced." [^30] The Gentile population raised a subscription reward of $4,500 for the arrest of the slayer of Brassfield, [^31] but neither this nor the efforts of the grand jury elicited any information. The quality of this act was variously viewed by the community. By the non-"Mormons" generally who, of course, had no regard for the sanctity of the plural marriages allowed by the Latter-day Saint Church, Brassfield was justified in marrying Mrs. Hill; indeed it was regarded as a meritorious act; [^32] and his taking off characterized as a case of "Mormon blood atonement." On the part of the Latter-day Saint community, who held plural marriages to be as sacred as monogamic marriages, the act of Brassfield was of the same quality as if he had invaded a monogamic home and taken from it the wife of an absent and undivorced husband. This is clear from the remarks of President Young during the general conference of the church which opened four days after the shooting of Brassfield, and the editorial comment of the Deseret News. [^33] Brassfield was also accused by a Provo correspondent of the Salt Lake Daily Telegraph with already being a married man when he went through the ceremony of marriage with Mrs. Hill; that he had a wife in Kansas; and that Mrs. Hill was not the first woman he had caused to leave her husband. [^34]

186The following is important evidence in the case:

187"Provo City, April 12th, 1866.

187Editor Telegraph:

187Dear Sir:—There seems to be considerable excitement over the Brassfield case. For the satisfaction of those who were not acquainted with Brassfield before he came to Utah, I will say to them that Mrs. Hill was not the first woman he caused to leave her husband. Brassfield was a married man and has a wife in Kansas, whom he has been away from several years.

187I was acquainted with Brassfield before he came to Utah, and told him before and after he came here how men were expected to conduct themselves while here, and cautioned him particularly not to tamper with any man's wife or daughter while he was here, for if he did the probability was he would get into trouble.

187Yours, etc., (Signed) "W. D. R."

187The business partner of Brassfield denied this statement in a communication to the Telegraph; but the editor of that paper in acknowledging the request for the publication of the denial, stated that "from the assurance in a private note" accompanying its Provo correspondent's published communication, asserting that proof was on hand "if required" as to Brassfield's status, said—"We cannot reasonably abate our confidence in the statement of our Provo correspondent." [^35] The community could not fail to be as divided with reference to this charge and the denial of it—and by the same line of cleavage—membership or non-membership in the "Mormon" church—as in relation to the quality of the act of Brassfield's marriage. But if the charge of bigamy against Brassfield was true, then his act of marriage with Mrs. Hill was all the more reprehensible and was seduction under the false pretension of marriage. Brigham Young undoubtedly accepted the information that had come from Provo as true, and therefore in a somewhat noted dispatch to General Sherman—noted later—so characterized Brassfield's conduct.

188It added to the aggravation of the case that it was but one of a number of similar cases; and had been suggested as a regular policy in order to break up the "Mormon" plural marriage system. Mr. Bowles of the late Colfax party had suggested that the soldiers at Camp Douglas illustrated the way in which "polygamy will fade away." "Two companies," he writes, "who went home to California last fall [1864], took about twenty-five wives with them, recruited from the Mormon flocks. There are now some fifty or more women in the camp who have fled [?] thither from town for protection, or been seduced away from unhappy homes and fractional husbands; and all or nearly all find new husbands among the soldiers." [^36] "Our bachelor stage-driver out of Salt Lake," said Mr. Bowles later, "who said he expected to have a revelation soon to take one of the extra wives of a Mormon saint, is a representative of the coming man. Let the Mormons look out for him." [^37]

The Brassfield incident, as already stated, attracted wide attention outside of Utah and especially in government circles. Orders had been given to disband the remaining volunteers at Camp Douglas, but upon the report of the Brassfield homicide reaching the east, and the rumors of subsequent excitement "threatening an outbreak," the order was countermanded until regular troops could relieve them; "the government at the same time, by telegraph dispatches, assuring the people [i. e. the Gentiles] that they would be protected in their lives and property to the full extent of its power." [^38] Sensational telegraphic reports were sent east over the affair, and an hysterical effort made to create anti-"Mormon" sentiment with an appeal for military protection for non-"Mormon" federal appointees, and Gentiles generally, as is witnessed by the following telegram sent to General P. E. Connor, then in New York. Associate Justice McCurdy, it will be seen, had performed the Brassfield-Hill nuptials:

189"Great Salt Lake City, April 8, 1866.

189Brigadier General P. E. Connor, Metropolitan Hotel, New York: I married S. N. Brassfield to a Mormon woman, on the 28th ultimo. Brassfield was assassinated on the night of the 6th instant. I have been denounced and threatened publicly. Government officials here have telegraphed to the secretary of war to retain troops here until others are sent to relieve them. Call on secretary of war, learn his conclusions and answer; I feel unsafe in person and property without protection.

189SOLOMON P. MCCURDY,

189Associate Justice Supreme Court, U. T." [^39]

TELEGRAMS BETWEEN GENERAL W. T. SHERMAN AND BRIGHAM YOUNG

General Sherman, on the 10th of April, sent the following dispatch:

189"A telegram comes to me from responsible officers that four men styled 'Gentiles,' have been murdered by Mormons, and that there is apprehension of further danger from this class. By 'Gentiles' I understand American citizens not of your religious belief. I am bound to give protection to all citizens, regardless of religious faith, and shall do so. These murderers must be punished, and if your people resort to measures of intimidation those must cease. All of our people must have equal rights within the limits of our national domain. I know little or nothing of the causes of local trouble in Utah, but it is well for you to know that our country is now full of tried and experienced soldiers who would be pleased at a fair opportunity to avenge any wrongs you may commit against any of our citizens, even in that remote region. I will soon have regular troops in Utah, and on the road leading there, when I hope we will receive reports on which to base accurate opinions, and I send you this message, not as a threat, but as a caution that a sensible man should heed. [Signed] "W. T. Sherman."

189Major General Commanding Department." [^40]

189To this Brigham Young sent the following reply:

189"Great Salt Lake City, April 11, 1866.

189Major General W. T. Sherman, St. Louis:

Sir:—Your telegram of yesterday is at hand, and contents duly considered. The reports that have reached you are not reliable, satisfactory evidence of which I will telegraph you as soon as the testimony of reliable gentlemen, not 'Mormons,' can be had, say within twenty-

190B. Young."

190And the next day this was sent:

190"Great Salt Lake City, April 12, 1866.

190Sir:—I am under many obligations to you for your kindness in telegraphing me respecting reports which have reached [you] from this place, as it affords me the opportunity of stating facts.

190As nigh as we can learn there have been telegrams sent from here to the east which have not been reliable. Your telegram gives us some idea of their purport. There have been no such assassinations as alluded to in your dispatch. On March 17th a soldier shot a gentleman named Mayfield, and a Mr. Brassfield came home and seduced a 'Mormon's' wife, and was shot on the street by some unknown person; but neither I nor the community at large knew any more about it than an inhabitant of St. Louis. Citizens who are not of our faith do not suffer from intimidation here. In no other communities could men pursue the course many do here without experiencing the vengeance of a vigilance committee. The outrageous slanders they have circulated against us would have provoked such an outbreak elsewhere.

190There are a few speculators here who are anxious to make it appear that American citizens' lives are in danger through religious fanaticism, hoping thereby to have troops sent here to make money out of contracts. Gentiles lives are as safe here as 'Mormons,' and acts of violence occur more rarely in this city than any other of its size in any of the new states or territories. B. Young."

CITIZENS OF UTAH TO GENERAL SHERMAN

"Major General Sherman:

190Sir:—We the undersigned residents of Great Salt Lake City, and not members of the Mormon church, have read the above telegram of Mr. Young, and freely certify that we fully believe that citizens of every class, who simply attend to their own business, are as free from intimidation and as fully respected in their rights in this city as in any part of the United States.

190[Signed] "W. Willard Smith, lieutenant colonel 6th U. S. V., commanding Camp Douglas; Captain E. J. Bennett, C. S. Vols.; N. S. Ransohoof & Co., merchants; Ellis & Bro., merchants; J. B. Kimball, merchant; Bodenburg & Kahn, merchants; Walker Bros., merchants; F. H. Head, superintendent Indian affairs; Nounnan, Orr & Co., bankers; J. H. Jones, merchant; J. G. Hughes, representative of Holiday & Halsey, bankers; J. W. Calder, late captain N. C. Vols.; M. G. Lewis, ex-assistant adjutant general U. S. Vol.; Stebbins & Co., merchants."

GENERAL SHERMAN TO BRIGHAM YOUNG

"Brigham Young:

191Sir:—Your dispatch is received and I am much gratified at its substance and spirit.

191[Signed] "W. T. Sherman."

191Major General Commanding Department." [^41]

191It was some time before the ill feeling occasioned by this unfortunate circumstance—the killing of Brassfield—died out; and it has always been relied upon as "stock-in-trade" by anti-"Mormon" writers.

In addition to his telegraphic correspondence with Brigham Young, General Sherman further manifested his interest in Utah affairs about this time, by requiring Brevet Brigadier General O. D. Babcock, already appointed to make an inspection of the military posts of the west, to make a stay of several weeks in Salt Lake valley in order to fully acquaint himself "with the threatened difficult question between the United States government and the sect of people known as Mormons;" suggesting to him "the propriety of talking freely and plainly with these people, and particularly with the leader, President Young." These instructions and suggestions were admirably carried out by General Babcock, and a very intelligent report made from his observations. He found things both to praise and to censure; but the report was just, from his viewpoint, and on the whole favorable to the Latter-day Saint community. The report was submitted to the war department on October 5th, 1866; portions of which were laid before congress on the 3rd of January, 1867, by Secretary Stanton. [^42] General Babcock's report gives a summary of the movements of the "Mormons" until their settlement in Salt Lake valley. He represented the people as chiefly engaged in agriculture and stock raising:

192"The cultivation of this country was necessary to the development of the gold mines in Idaho and Montana, for this new country was supplied with flour by the Mormons. * * * I saw a less number of idle people in Utah territory than in any locality I ever visited. That these people were exasperated by the conduct of General Connor, and many officers in his command, there is no doubt. A more quiet or peaceful community I never passed four weeks with. * * * Along through Utah and Idaho the settlers were quite numerous and very thrifty. Mormon industry and success commend these people to the kind consideration of the general government. Public opinion could be relied upon to cure the institution [polygamy] to which they cling with such fanatical faith, and save our country all the elements of good citizenship they possess; while a coercive policy would be disastrous. Whenever called upon to aid in suppressing the Indians they have responded promptly, and I believe have rendered very efficient service. Brigham Young has three hundred men this season [summer of 1866] protecting the settlers of the southern portion of the territory, from a band of bad Indians, under a chief by the name of Black Hawk; these men are furnished without complaining. They receive no compensation from the United States. If other territories would exhibit similar dispositions, many of the Indian troubles would disappear."

192Per Contra: "In the earlier days, when the people were more isolated, some of them, perhaps to the knowledge of the church, committed very grave crimes;—among the worst the 'Mountain Meadows Massacre.' Their militia instead of being under the control of the governor is under the authority of the church, or Brigham Young. During the rebellion I have no doubt but these people had but little sympathy with the government, which they looked upon as their persecutor. * * * The Mormons were never called upon for a quota of troops. Had they been I believe they would have been filled with as much promptness as any call that was made. * * * This discussion is given to afford you an idea of the people with whom you are to treat in this territory." [^43]

WHY GENERAL SHERMAN'S INTRUSION INTO CIVIC AFFAIRS

One may not leave this incident of the intrusion of military authority into the civic affairs of Utah without asking by what legal authority it was done. How comes it that General Sherman, the lieutenant general and the head of the United States army, assumes dictatorially to take President Brigham Young to task for a crime from which he is supposed in some way to have had a connection of responsibility? One is tempted to ask when did military authority in Utah displace civil authority? What has become of the national civil authority through the president of the United States, the civil executive of the territory, the governor, the federal territorial judges, and all the civil machinery local and general of the territory? Who is General Sherman that he should assume to threaten the head of a church, otherwise a common citizen of the territory, and of the country? And with him threaten a community with military discipline if not terror? For notwithstanding the general's disclaimer that what he said in his telegram was not sent "as a threat," but "as a caution," it was a threat, nevertheless. Else why this: "These murderers must be punished, and if your people resort to measures of intimidation, those must cease. * * * I will soon have regular troops in Utah, and on the road leading there, when I hope we will receive reports on which to base accurate opinions."

193The general's position is wholly untenable and unwarranted. Utah was not under military dictation, or martial law, and Sherman was not on another "march to the sea." Evidently the worthy general forgot himself. His action in this instance was as surprising as it was unwarranted, under the United States' political system.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Deseret News, weekly, editorial of Oct. 7th, where American Fork is memtioned as having started on the cooperative plan. At Lehi a cooperative store was opened on the 23rd of July, 1868, under the name of the "Lehi Union Exchange." The shares of stock were $25. The institution had but $357.50 worth of goods to begin with, but procured fresh supplies as fast as they were needed. At the end of December a dividend was declared amounting to $28.55 to each share of $25.00. They bought the whole of their goods of Salt Lake merchants, sold them at Salt Lake retail prices, and cleared over 100 per centum. Naturally the number of shareholders rapidly increased after that showing. (Deseret News, weekly, Jan. 27, 1869). "Now is the time to act," said the News editorial of October 7th, "as the inhabitants of American Fork have acted, and as the people of other places are doing, cooperate, sell shares so low that all who earnestly desire can become shareholders, and let the entire people be merchants on the cooperative principles;" and the movement was accelerated. It was not difficult to convince the people of Utah of the value and advantage of the cooperative principle in community mercantile ventures, for many of them were familiar with its success in northern England, where it took its rise in 1844, among the flannel-weavers of Rochdale, and the founding of their "Equitable Pioneers' Cooperative Store;" whence the movement spread over all England in the course of a few years. (An interesting account of the movement is given in McCarthy's History of Our Own Times, American edition, vol. iv, pp. 145-153).
[^2] From the Historian's Office Journal, copied into History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1868, p. 1178.
[^3] Deseret News, weekly, of Oct. 14th, 1868, contains the names and assignments of the speakers complete.
[^4] Deseret News, weekly, of Oct. 21st, 1868. The committee were F. D. Richards, Aurelius Miner, Henry W. Naisbitt and Joseph Woodmansee.
[^5] For the above and much more pertaining to this interesting and for many years successful cooperative effort, see Biography and Autobiography of Lorenzo Snow by his sister, Eliza R. Snow, chapters xxxviii to xlii, inclusive, and chapter lx, p. 451.
[^6] The likelihood—for a time—of Provo becoming the headquarters of the central institution is discussed at length by Whitney, in his History of Utah, vol. ii, ch. xiii. He represents the possibility of Provo becoming the headquarters of the cooperative movement being used by Brigham Young as a spur to the inactive organization in Salt Lake City, and to suppress a rising opposition on the part of some "Mormon" merchants, who saw in the new movement a likelihood of their losing some of the personal advantages and opportunities they then possessed.
[^7] See Deseret News, daily, March 1st, 1869.
[^8] Deseret News, daily, April 21st, 1869.
[^9] Deseret News, April 21st, 1869.
[^10] Compiled Laws of Utah, 1870, pp. 136-140.
[^11] See the circular issued by Z. C. M. I., July 10th, 1875, in Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, pp. 728-732.
[^12] Sermon of Oct. 8th, 1868, Journal of Discourses, vol. xii, p. 286. Orson Pratt, who seldom took radical views on such subjects, declared with reference to Gentile merchants that "as an individual, unless men repent and keep the commandments of God, he would not trade with them to the extent of one dime." (See Minutes of the October Conference, Deseret News of Oct. 14th, 1868).
[^13] This was done mainly by teaching the people through all the agencies at the command of the church; by public teaching from the pulpit; by private instruction in the homes of the saints by the ward teachers, who are standing officers in the church to render a teaching service; by warning those inclined to act independently, and to trade where they pleased, notwithstanding the crisis then pending, that they could not hope to retain fellowship with the Latter-day Saints if they persisted in that course; and lastly, by requiring "Mormon" retail merchants who had not actually entered into the cooperative movement, to agree to purchase their goods at the wholesale "Mormon" cooperative store, and erect a sign over their own stores bearing the words "Holiness to the Lord," in token of their acceptance of the principle of cooperation and of their sympathy with the movement of exclusiveness of trade with each other among the Latter-day Saints. (See Journal of Discourses for this period, passim; also Deseret News editorials, for the same period, passim; and for the latter item Deseret News Correspondent "Z" in impression of Dec. 15>, 1869, semi-weekly, editorial, Ibid, of Dec. 29th, 1869; and Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 625).
[^14] Our New West, Bowles, 1869, pp. 260-1. It will be observed that this appears in a book published in 1869, while the discrimination inaugurated against non-"Mormons" by Brigham Young, and referred to in the text, took place in the closing months of 1868; but these views voiced in Our New West in 1869, had been the burden of the press in the United States and in proposed anti-"Mormon" congressional legislation for a number of years before that time. Mr. Bowles himself had said something akin to them in his book describing his first visit to Salt Lake City with Mr. Colfax, in 1865. (See Across the Continent, pp. 108-9).
[^15] A digest of Wade's bill, and a number of its most mischievous sections complete will be found in Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, ch. xlii. And the measure complete will be found in the Congressional Record of July 12th, 1866. Benjamin Franklin Wade, familiarly known as "Ben Wade," was United States senator from Ohio, 1851-1869. He was an anti-slavery leader, and acting vice president under President Andrew Johnson.
[^16] Aaron H. Cragin, of New Hampshire, chairman of the senate committee territories.
[^17] A complete copy of the bill will be found in Deseret News of Jan. 8th, 1868. Commenting editorially on the bill, the News said: "The forty-one sections into which his bill is divided, might have been spared had he [the author of it] stated his object in plain English. Had he stated what he thinks—no American citizen who is a 'Mormon' has any rights—he is not a free man, but is a slave, to be tried, convicted, fined, imprisoned, at the will of his masters—to be made to pay taxes, but to have those funds spent by his masters in persecuting and torturing him and enriching them for the service—to wear the form of man, but to have none of the privileges of manhood—to have no right to believe the Bible, practice its precepts, follow its examples, or to worship its God. These are the sentiments and objects of this bill. They might have been stated more pointedly in a few words than in so many columns." (Deseret News of Jan. 8th, 1868).
[^18] Matt., xii:30.
[^19] Mark, ix:40.
[^20] It has sometimes been said that the Cullom bill was even worse than the Cragin bill. This statement must have been made without comparing the two bills. Cullom's bill did not abolish indictment, and trial by juries, and substitute information by the prosecuting attorney instead of indictment; nor a trial before a judge, instead of a jury trial; nor did it require the trustee-in-trust of the "Mormon" church to make an annual financial report to the governor of the territory as did Senator Cragin's bill; nor prohibit ministers of the "Mormon" faith from performing marriage ceremonies. It was because the Cullom bill was less drastic than the Cragin, that it was accepted by the senate committee on territories in place of the latter, rather than because of its increased severity against the community at which it was aimed.
[^21] The sections of the bill that deal with the carving up of Utah are quoted in Deseret News, weekly, of Feb. 3rd, 1869; and the bill entire is described by its author in Congressional Globe for Jan. 14th, 1869, p. 363.
[^22] The New York Times correspondence is dated at Washington, Jan. 25, 1869.
[^23] Our New West, 1869, p. 264.
[^24] See remarks in Congressional Globe of Jan. 14, 1869, pp. 363, 364. The discussion which took place when the bill was introduced and put upon its passage is quoted in part, in the Deseret News of 3rd February, 1869.
[^25] The speech appears in Congressional Globe of February, 1869, also in the Deseret News, extra, of April 7th, 1869. As a counter plan to that of Mr. Ashley, Utah's delegate, Mr. Hooper, suggested the following: "Abandoning all appeal to the cowardly, who are seldom generous, I. turn to the courageous, who are strong in the conviction of their own moral power, and tell them that if 'Mormonism' is a fatal heresy they owe it to its own deluded disciples to neglect none of the legitimate means of argument and practice for their conversion. If 'Mormonism' is an error there is no community on the face of the globe, and no class of people, so vitally interested in its repudiation as the majority of the people of Utah, who are its victims. Rather than curtail the proportions of the territory and cut off its settlements from contact with the railroad, you should seek to enlarge its area, encourage its population by all classes of good citizens, giving the amplest protection of law by substituting for its present organization [the territorial form of government] a more ample, complete, and sovereign form of government, leaving the issue with God and the inevitable forces of nature." (Deseret News, vol. xviii, p. 105).
[^26] Such action is noted as taking place in Springville, Utah county. (Deseret News of 19th of January, 1870). Also in the 15th ward, Salt Lake City, on the 6th of January, 1870. Indeed it was this latter meeting which suggested the general mass meeting held in the tabernacle described in the text. (See News of Jan. 12th, 1863). Linn is in error in saying this woman's mass meeting occurred in March after the passage of the Cullom bill in the house.
[^27] The names of the resolutions committee were Mrs. M. T. Smoot, M. N. Hyde, Isabella Horne, May Leaver, Priscilla Staines, Rachel R. Grant, all presidents of Female Relief Societies in various wards in Salt Lake City.
[^28] Minutes of Woman's Mass Indignation Meeting, Deseret News of Jan. 19th, 1870, where the proceedings in full are recorded.
[^29] Ibid.
[^30] Ibid.
[^31] Ibid. Among other speakers at the mass meeting were Bathsheba W. Smith, Mrs. Warren Smith, one of the heroines of the Haun's Mill Massacre in Missouri; Mrs. Wilmarth East, Mrs. McMinn, Mrs. H. T. King, Mrs. Eleanor M. Pratt.
[^32] Deseret News summary of evidence given by Messrs. F. H. Head and Alexander Majors, impression of 23rd March, 1870.
[^33] Deseret News, of April 6, 1870, p. 104.
[^34] Eleventh and Twelfth Resolutions, Deseret News, April 6th, 1870. The American Bible Society had been sending Bibles into Utah for some time, in the hope, doubtless, that the Bible would convert the "Mormons" from the "error of their ways!" It was a bit of indulged irony that drew the eighth resolution: "Resolved, That, while we thank the American Bible Society for sending us the Word of God, we think it a strange inconsistency for a Christian nation, which has received its Bible from inspired men who were polygamists, to send that Bible to us, and ther proscribe and disfranchise us for following the precepts thereof, and the practices of its inspired prophets."
[^35] Salt Lake Daily Telegraph of 18th of April, 1866. The communication denying Brassfield's marriage was by a Mr. A. H. Greenhalgh, a business partner of the deceased for two years just past, who claims to have known Mr. Brassfield since 1860. His communication was published in the Union Vedette of the 19th of April, 1866.
[^36] Across the Continent, p. 116. Unhappily the experience of most of those who went to camp found betrayal and a life of shame rather than husbands.
[^37] Ibid, p. 130.
[^38] See Union Vedette of April 21st, 1866; also Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 616.
[^39] Deseret News of Jan. 9th, 1867. "A similar dispatch was forwarded by Colonel C. A. Potter, who was ordered to retain troops until the regulars arrived." (Beadle's Life in Utah, 1870, p. 205).
[^40] The telegram sent by Sherman, which was not published in Utah until some months later, was represented as much more threatening than it really was. (See Union Vedette of that period, April and May, 1866).
[^41] For both of President Young's telegrams, see Union Vedette of June 1st, 1866; which copied all the above telegrams from the Missouri Republican of May 14th, 1866. Brigham Young's use of the phrase in referring to Brassfield's act—"seduced a 'Mormon's' wife"—is justified by his belief in the charge against Brassfield already being a married man when going through the marriage ceremony with Mrs. Hill, referred to in the text a few pages back. The editor of the Union Vedette claimed that Lieutenant Colonel W. Willard Smith, among the signers of the telegram indorsing President Young's statements, ordered his name removed by telegraph message; but for what reason is not very clearly defined.
[^42] See Congressional Globe of that date.
[^43] General Babcock's Report, so far as it relates to the "Mormons" will be found in Deseret News of Feb. 20th, 1867, as well as in the Congressional Globe of 3rd of January, 1867.
