B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 5 ( 1930)

216CHAPTER CXXXII

216THE COOPERATIVE MERCANTILE SYSTEM—PROPOSED EXCLUSIVENESS OF "MORMON" TRADE—ATTEMPTED ANTI-"MORMON" NATIONAL LEGISLATION—ACTION OF "MORMON" WOMEN IN RELATION THERETO

216THE change of policy among the Latter-day Saints of Utah with reference to trade and merchandising, treated in the preceding chapter, naturally led in many quarters to the adoption of the cooperative method of trade. Individuals were without the necessary capital to enter the new field proposed by the church leaders, and if their salutary advice to the bishops and leading elders was to be carried out, it must be by many persons with small means uniting in some cooperative plan. Encouragement was given to such necessity; and by midsummer of 1868 several cooperative institutions were under way, notably at American Fork and Lehi, in Utah county, and in other places. [^1]

GROWTH OF THE COOPERATIVE PLAN OF MERCHANDISING

In the fall of 1868, the question of establishing a central wholesale and retail store in Salt Lake City was agitated. A meeting was held on the 9th of October,—the day following the close of the general semi-annual conference—by a council of the leading men of the church, "and it was decided to take immediate steps to establish a cooperative mercantile business, wholesale and retail, to supply the wants of the people of the territory. Over $70,000 was subscribed in the council." [^2] Other meetings followed within the next few days, and the leading elders were sent into the various wards of Salt Lake City, and adjacent settlements to present the subject for the acceptance of the people. [^3] On the 15th a meeting was held in the City Hall, at which about one hundred were present. Brigham Young was chosen president and W. H. Hooper vice president of "Zion's Cooperative Association." George A. Smith, George Q. Cannon, Horace S. Eldredge, H. W. Lawrence, and Wm. Jennings were chosen the board of directors; and a committee was appointed to draft a constitution and by-laws for the association. [^4]

217Notwithstanding this central organization, however, the movement dragged somewhat in its development. Indeed the movement for cooperative stores seemed much more popular in other parts of Utah than in the capital of the territory—the headquarters of the church.

ZCMI, the United Order, and other Economic PoliciesHCTHE COOPERATIVE INDUSTRIAL EXPERIMENT AT BRIGHAM CITY

ZCMI, the United Order, and other Economic PoliciesHCAt Brigham City, Boxelder county, a cooperative movement had begun in 1864, which was rapidly achieving success under the direction of Elder Lorenzo Snow of the council of the twelve apostles; and was destined to carry community cooperative industry to its highest achievement in Utah.

ZCMI, the United Order, and other Economic PoliciesHCThe history of this cooperative industrial experiment, under the title of the "Brigham City Mercantile & Manufacturing Association" is gven by Lorenzo Snow in a letter to Bishop Lunt, of Cedar City, Oct., 1876. The writer states that the association began operations in Brigham City over twelve years before [1864], recites some of their experiences, and gives the status of the institution at the date of his letter. In addition to a company store they founded a woolen mill, tannery, hat factory, lumber mills, a dairy, beginning with sixty cows, which were finally increased to five hundred head; sheep and cattle herds; horticulture and agricultural departments, also a carpenter and mason's department. At the height of its development, the association comprised between thirty and forty industrial branches, with a superintendent over each. A series of misfortunes, not due to the system, however, brought the experiment to its close a few years after the date of the above letter. These misfortunes were the burning down of the woolen mill, at a loss of $30,000; the "scrip" which they issued as a medium of exchange within the association was illegally taxed as "currency," and pending an appeal to the supreme court of the United States the amount, $10,200, had to be borrowed and paid. Six years later the supreme court decided against the collector, but the decision came too late to be of benefit to the association beyond restoring the amount it had borrowed. There was also an illegal raid upon a sawmill encampment in Idaho, on the pretext of levying "stumpage tax," resulting in a direct loss of from $6,000 to $8,000, besides the indirect loss of the contract with the Utah Northern Railway and the breaking up of the lumber mills. These losses, together with several destructive years of grasshoppers and drought, and the panic year of 1873, proved too much for the "Cooperative Association," and it finally went out of existence. [^5]

ZCMI, the United Order, and other Economic PoliciesHCTHE PROVO MOVEMENT

ZCMI, the United Order, and other Economic PoliciesHCAt Provo the movement forged ahead quite rapidly and for a time promised to become the headquarters of the general movement. [^6] Brigham Young gave encouragement to the Provo organization, effected early in 1869, by becoming a stockholder, and also by suggesting that the Provo institution purchase directly from the east rather than from Salt Lake merchants. This action had the desired effect, the Salt Lake merchants bestirred themselves; and on March 1st, 1869, a wholesale branch of the Zion's Cooperative Mercantile Institution was opened in the Eagle Emporium Building, rented of Mr. Jennings. [^7] Another wholesale branch was opened a few days later in the old "Constitution Building," previously occupied by the Eldredge and Clawson firm of merchants. About a month later, April 21st, a retail branch was opened in a building previously occupied by Messrs. Ransohoff and Company. [^8] H. B. Clawson became the general superintendent of the concern. Thus what finally became the great central cooperative mercantile institution of Utah was launched upon its career. The Provo cooperative store became a branch of this central institution at Salt Lake City; and branch houses were organized in Ogden, Logan and elsewhere.

ZCMI, the United Order, and other Economic PoliciesHC219Commenting upon the establishment of this central cooperative institution which was so largely of the nature of a business revolution, the Deseret News said:

ZCMI, the United Order, and other Economic PoliciesHC"We have never witnessed in peaceful times among us a more willing, unselfish and magnanimous spirit, than has been exhibited by many of our merchants in aiding in the establishment of this cooperative institution. They have been ready and desirous to do all that could be asked of them. What might be looked upon as their own personal interests, viewed from the standpoint generally occupied by men, have not been considered; but when it was fully decided that it was wisdom to establish this institution, they arranged their own business in such a manner that it would not interfere in the least with the successful carrying out of the proposed plan. This change, to those who do not understand the principles in which the Latter-day Saints believe, and upon which they act, must, to say the least, have been surprising. To see men in the full tide of success perfectly willing to invest largely in the cooperative institution, to change their business, or even retire from it altogether, and rent their buildings, and to do all in their power to make a plan a success, which, according to the ideas that prevail in the world, if successful, must inevitably result in injury to their business, is something so remarkable that it can not escape comment. It is only another proof, however, added to the many which the world have already received, of the devotion of the Latter-day Saints to principle." [^9]

ZCMI, the United Order, and other Economic PoliciesHCTHE CENTRAL COOPERATIVE MERCANTILE INSTITUTION FOUNDED

ZCMI, the United Order, and other Economic PoliciesHCThe Zion's Cooperative Institution began its operations, under a constitution and by-laws which announced its purpose, but it was not incorporated as a company until the year following—March 1st, 1869. Indeed there was no law under which such a company could incorporate until the passage of the general incorporation act by the legislature approved February 18th, 1870. [^10] In its first circular, including the proposed constitution under which it would act, the preamble announced that the parties forming the institution were "convinced of the impolicy of leaving the trade and commerce of the territory to be conducted by strangers;" and therefore had resolved "to unite in a system of cooperation for the transaction of their own business." In its advertisement in the Deseret News it was announced that the object of the concern was "the consolidation of the mercantile interests of this territory [Utah] and the distribution of general merchandise to the people at a small margin of profit." In the body of the first constitution (sec. 20 and 21) it provided that—

ZCMI, the United Order, and other Economic PoliciesHC220"No person or persons shall be eligible for membership, except they be of good moral character and have paid their tithing according to the rules of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

ZCMI, the United Order, and other Economic PoliciesHC220The directors of this institution shall tithe its net profits prior to any declaration of dividend, according to the rules of the church mentioned in the preceding section."

ZCMI, the United Order, and other Economic PoliciesHC221These sections made the proposed institution a strictly "Mormon" concern, and provided for the collection of tithes "at their source." When the institution was incorporated these sections were not included either in the constitution or by-laws. Also a change was made from "perpetual succession" to a period of twenty-five years (renewed at the expiration thereof—1895—to 50 years).

ZCMI, the United Order, and other Economic PoliciesHC221Of course the central principle of the movement—including the local institutions as part of the scheme—was to enable the people to become in effect their own merchants, and share in the profits of the business by a wide distribution of the shares of stock among the people; and thus tend to discourage the concentration of wealth in the hands of a comparatively few individuals, a thing everywhere recognized as undesirable. If this cooperative movement failed in the full realization of all the hopes built upon the plan, it did, in part, realize them; and conferred indirect benefits upon the community that have been of great value, among which may be named the stoppage—especially in the early years of its existence—of exorbitant profits from merchandising, by which the industry of the people was so heavily taxed; and second by stopping the old practice of increasing the price of an article because it was scarce. Zion's Cooperative Mercantile Institution could boast at the end of its first twenty-five years of existence that it had always "declined to be a party to making a corner upon any article of merchandise, because of the limited supply in the market," [^11] "and, of course, by such a concern refusing to become a party to this practice, others could not successfully indulge in it.

ZCMI, the United Order, and other Economic PoliciesHCAnother public benefit has been the encouragement it has always given to the general principle of cooperative endeavor in all branches of industrial activity. In 1876 the institution erected its own great buildings on main street, where it is at present—1930—quartered with both its wholesale and retail establishments. As a business "it has proved to be as successful as its most sanguine friends anticipated."

ZCMI, the United Order, and other Economic PoliciesHCCOOPERATIVE BRANCH ORGANIZATIONS

ZCMI, the United Order, and other Economic PoliciesHCTaking the central organization for their pattern, smaller cooperative institutions sprang up in many of the wards in Salt Lake City and throughout the settlements of Utah. Indeed it was part of the general scheme that they should do so, since only in that way could the cooperative principle be so extended as to become of the greatest advantage to the people; only in that way could the people really become their own merchants and share the profits of the trade. But it was in these smaller institutions that the limitations of the system and its element of weakness first made its appearance—born of the instability of individuals. It was not difficult to induce individuals to invest in the local cooperative concerns. Those having a little means on hand readily saw the advantage of it, and took shares, and for a time these institutions were really "cooperative stores." But soon the necessities, real or imagined, of the holders of the stock led some of them to part with it, to meet some unlooked for emergency; sometimes there was dissatisfaction with the management, and it was easy to evade trouble or be rid of unpleasantness by selling off one's stock. There were always those who recognized the cooperative store as a good thing and were ready to buy, especially at a discount of the real value of the stock, so that gradually the stock drifted into fewer, and ever fewer hands, until the cooperative feature disappeared, being displaced by a joint stock concern or "corporation" instead of a "cooperation." In time the forces that had been at work in the wider circle operated in the narrower one of the persons comprising the corporation. Those immediately interested in the management of the local concern, and who devoted their whole time to it became the ones most intensely interested in the business; and by sheer force of that interest, in time, came to regard the business as personal, and proceeded by the purchase of stock intermittently offered for sale, until the movement ended very generally in the "cooperative store" becoming in fact a personal business, run by those having natural capacity for, and inclination to such activities. Where the local "coop stores" have survived in name, they exist only as corporations or joint stock concerns. It is in that form also that the parent institution, "Z. C. M. I.," of Salt Lake City, has survived, though its stock is upon the market and may be purchased by all who choose to invest. Its high value, however, and its stability, make it desirable to retain as a permanent holding, and hence but little movement in its stock, and therefore only infrequent changes in the personnel of its stockholders.

ZCMI, the United Order, and other Economic PoliciesHCA GENERAL "BOYCOTT" ON GENTILES INAUGURATED

ZCMI, the United Order, and other Economic PoliciesHCConnected with this mercantile cooperative movement was an extension of the effort to restrict Latter-day Saint trading to those of their own confraternity. In the boycott of 1865-6, a distinction had been made between non-"Mormon" merchants who were hostile to the Latter-day Saints and had joined forces with the anti-"Mormon" political agitators, usually called "regenerators," and those who held aloof from these manifestations of unfriendliness toward the Latter-day Saints. But at the October conference of 1868 this distinction was no longer adhered to; a boycott was urged against all non-"Mormons." "How tight are you going to draw the reins?" was the self-asked question of Brigham Young in his discourse of October the 8th. And he answered it: "I want to tell my brethren, my friends, and my enemies, that we are going to draw the reins so tight as not to let a Latter-day Saint trade with an outsider;" [^12] meaning by that a non-"Mormon." And steps were taken to make the resolution that the Latter-day Saints be a self-sustaining people effective. [^13]

ZCMI, the United Order, and other Economic PoliciesHCUnder normal conditions of society in an American commonwealth, it would be difficult to justify a determined boycott against one class of the community based upon non-membership in a given religious society; but conditions in Utah at that time were not normal. The transcontinental railroad was approaching both from the east and the west and would soon form a junction in Utah. The advent of the railroad it was loudly boasted would overthrow "Mormon" domination, Brigham Young would be dethroned. "Thousands of Gentiles would come in where only tens had come before." The mines would be opened and there would be a power of numbers and of influence that would be overwhelming to Brigham Young and "Mormonism." It was not quite certain what "precise form" the "revolution" would take, or "where the entering wedge" would be placed that would "split this rotten trunk to pieces," but it was confidently boasted that it would be done. Moreover, the general government would be expected to take a part in the revolution. "It must come here with authority and power to protect citizens who are not Mormons, and will not be subservient to them," said one who was influential in those days on western questions—Mr. Bowles of the Springfield (Mass.) Republican—"who will try titles to property with them; who will claim the right to marry their superfluous wives; who will set up rival churches and schools and papers, and all the other enginery of freedom and revolution." "The work might be slow, sapping the strength of the church by the processes of education, discussion, and law;" "or it may come," said our influential one, "suddenly and sharply in a violent collision between the new settlers and the old, with the government taking the side of the former as the side of its long-neglected, long-outraged laws. But come it must and will. To doubt would be to question progress, to deny civilization, to outrage God." [^14]

225There was to be a veritable crusade with the advent of the railroad, and the "old settlers," who had pioneered the way to the Great Basin and redeemed the land from its stirility and conferred upon it its values; the community that had founded a commonwealth in the wilderness between Missouri frontiers and the Pacific slope of the Sierra, that for years had been the half-way house of the nation's western migration, were to be overwhelmed—treated without consideration; with not only the new population arrayed against them, but with the influence of the general government also thrown upon the scales on the side that would be to their disadvantage.

HOSTILE SCHEMES—THE WADE BILL

HCIn this connection it should be noted that a number of hostile schemes during several previous years, and also at the time of this cooperative movement with its attendant exclusion of Gentile merchants from "Mormon patronage," had been discussed in congress, and some of them were then pending before that body. Among these was what was known as the Wade bill introduced in the senate in June, 1866, which aimed at nothing short of complete destruction of local self-government in Utah. The militia of the territory, hitherto created and regulated by territorial legislative enactments, and its officers elected under provisions of law, was to be made the creature of the president-appointed governor of the territory, to be organized and disciplined in such manner and at such times as he should direct; while all the officers of the militia were to be selected and appointed, as well as commissioned, by him. A revolution no less destructive of local government was proposed in the judiciary. The United States marshal was to select the juries, grand and petit; the probate judges in all the counties were to be appointed by the governor. Officers in the "Mormon" church were to be prohibited from solemnizing marriages; the sections of the territorial law exempting the real and personal property of the church from taxation was to be annulled, excepting only that there was to be exempted $20,000 worth of property from taxation; also the provisions which gave the church authority to make rules and regulations in relation to fellowship in the church were repealed, and the trustee-in-trust, under penalty of fine and imprisonment, was required to make a full report, on oath, every year, to the governor of the territory accounting for "all church properties, moneys in bank, notes, deposits with the church," etc. [^15]

ZCMI, the United Order, and other Economic PoliciesHCThe bill did not become a law, but it proclaimed the dangers that menaced the liberties of the Latter-day Saint community in Utah. Nor did those dangers cease with the failure of the Wade bill to become a law. Following it came the Cragin bill, introduced by the senator whose name it bears, [^16] on the 13th of December, 1867. It was a more vicious measure than the Wade bill, in that in addition to retaining all the bad features of the former it frankly proposed to abolish trial by jury in cases arising under the act of 1862 (the anti-bigamy law), "and of this act," and authorized prosecution on information by the prosecuting attorney, instead of by indictment of a grand jury. [^17] Such was the state of public opinion throughout the United States respecting "Mormonism," such the hope for its submergence by the advent of the railroad, such the measures introduced into congress in aid of the destruction of the "Mormon" influence and the "Mormon" community, when the "no trade intercourse with Gentile merchants" was promulgated by the church authorities. And in view of all the circumstances under which it was inaugurated, was it matter for astonishment? There could be no question as to which side the non-"Mormon" influence would veer when the onslaught of the hoped-for incoming masses should be made, however non-committal or friendly they might appear previous to that time. In the midst of all this din of preparation for the coming conflict, resident non-"Mormons" made no protest against the proposed injustice. It could scarcely be expected that the Latter-day Saints would be silent and make no effort to resist the destruction of their community life, so confidently expected and desired by their opponents. What more natural than that they should determine that if they must be broken as a community they would not be found so spiritless as to give financial aid to those who would assist in their undoing. They could at least take a position in business affairs that would exhibit the solidarity of the church membership, and serve notice upon those who were coming to overslaugh them, that if any considerable number of them were merchants they must bring their patrons with them for they would find none among Latter-day Saints. By a policy of no trade intercourse with non-"Mormons" made effective, the Latter-day Saints could preserve themselves, no matter what the influx of new population might be; and, besides, their trade, now being of sufficient volume to be eagerly sought for in the east, could be made to create a friendly influence that would make itself felt at the source of proposed restrictive legislation, in congress, since that body held that it possessed the right to legislate for the territories in all cases whatsoever. It was a time to lay emphasis upon that part of the truth uttered by the Christ—"He that is not with me is against me; and he that gathereth not with me scattereth abroad;" [^18] and not the other part of the truth which holds that "he that is not against us, is on our part." [^19] It was a time of war—a struggle for community existence, and as a measure of self-preservation until the danger was past, and normal conditions restored, "the no trade intercourse" policy with Gentiles was naturally to be expected, and was justifiable, and was brave, and wise.

To close up the account of the proposed anti-"Mormon" legislation through the years 1866-1870, it should be said that the Cragin bill did not receive consideration at the session of 1867-8; and was brought forward a second time by its author, but with some amendments, on the 21st of December, 1869. About the same time Shelby M. Cullom, then a representative from the state of Illinois, introduced a bill in the lower house of congress that bore his name. The Cullom bill was less drastic than the Cragin bill, [^20] but was still vicious and oppressive in some of its provisions. After passing the house it was accepted by the senate committee on territories in place of the Cragin bill, but to the credit of congress, at that time, be it said, the bill did not become a law. It was claimed that these several measures were framed in Utah by some of the federal officeholders and the political adventurers and lawyers who had drifted into the territory; and that they were merely accepted and presented to congress by the senators and representatives whose names they severally bore; and from the advantages that would accrue to this class in Utah if the proposed legislation had been enacted into law, the supposition was very reasonable, and amounted to moral certainty.

DISMEMBERMENT OF UTAH—ASHLEY BILL

In addition to these measures a scheme was introduced by Mr. James M. Ashley, a representative from Ohio, in January, 1869, for the dismemberment of Utah territory. It proposed to give a strip of Utah's territory on the west, about two degrees in width—118 miles wide—to Nevada, which state had already been created out of Utah's original domain as fixed by the boundaries of the organic act of 1850. It proposed giving a like strip from the east side of Utah through part of its extent north and south to Colorado; and another subdivision on the northeast to the then forming territory of Wyoming. Utah shorn of these slices of her territory, would then have been a narrow strip of territory through part of what is now the central division of the state of Utah, for some distance two degrees wide, and for the remainder one degree in width, as follows: That part of the territory lying north of a line near Farmington, in Davis county, including Morgan, Weber, Cache, and Rich counties, would have been included in Wyoming; from about Farmington southward, as far as Levan, in Juab county, it would have been two degrees wide; and thence to the present southern boundary of the state, it would have been one degree or about fifty-nine miles wide, which would have included Scipio, Fillmore, Beaver, Parowan, within the strip, but would have consigned Cedar, Washington, St. George, and other Utah Dixie settlements to Nevada; [^21] and the most of San Pete county would have become part of Colorado. A Washington correspondent of the New York Times in analyzing the Ashley bill pointed out that about 25,000 of Utah's population would go to the new territory of Wyoming, and 10,000 to Nevada. With reference to the population assigned to Nevada the Times correspondent said that Utah was free from debt, but by this arrangement 10,000 citizens of Utah would be called upon to assist in paying the large state debt of Nevada "which they had no hand in contracting." [^22] This dismemberment the Times correspondent characterizes as "flagrant injustice," but announces that it is likely to defeat the purpose intended—breaking up the political power of the "Mormon" community—since it would result in giving them the balance of power in Nevada, Wyoming and Colorado, as well as the control of the strip of territory remaining as "Utah." Such also is the conclusion of Mr. Bowles, editor of the Springfield (Mass.) Republican, who said: "The idea of dividing the territory up among the adjoining territories is not practicable now [1869]; under it, the Mormons, instead of being divided and conquered, would divide and conquer; for with their number and discipline, they could out-vote and out-manage three territories." [^23]

"I drew the bill originally," said Mr. Ashley, "to blot out the territory, but the committee thought it best to let that part of it remain where the great body of the Mormons were until such time as the population of the adjacent territories and state would be able to take care of them, and not be over-borne by the consolidated vote of that oligarchy." He further explained that the purpose of the bill was to make statehood impossible for a territory where "Mormons" were the dominant population. [^24]

Utah's delegate to congress discussed the question in the house on the 25th of February in a very able speech that is worthy to be classed among the permanent documents of Utah's history. [^25] The bill, as it deserved, failed of enactment into law.

Conflict over PolygamyHC"MORMON" WOMEN UPHOLD PLURAL MARRIAGE

Conflict over PolygamyHCWhile the several bills relating to plural marriage were pending in congress, an incident occurred in Salt Lake City and many other places in Utah, that ought to go far towards correcting a very general misapprehension respecting the plural marriage system in the Church of the Latter-day Saints, viz., that plural marriage existed against the desire and will of the women of that church. Early in January, 1870, action was taken in the regular sessions of several of the Female Relief Societies [^26] protesting against the passage of the Cragin and Cullom bills. Finally a great mass meeting of the women of the church was held in mid-January, in the tabernacle, which, despite inclement weather, was attended by several thousand women,—estimated at from five to six thousand,—including practically all the leading women of the church. Mrs. Sarah M. Kimball, president of the Relief Society of the 15th ward, was elected president of the meeting. A committee on resolutions was appointed, [^27] which reported in mid-progress of the meeting.

Conflict over PolygamyHC232The point in the resolutions important now, is in the following:

Conflict over PolygamyHC232Resolved: "That we, the ladies of Salt Lake City, in mass meeting assembled, do manifest our indignation and protest against the bill before congress, known as the Cullom bill, also the one known as the Cragin bill, and all similar bills, expressions and manifestos."

Conflict over PolygamyHC232Resolved: "That we acknowledge the institutions of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints as the only reliable safeguard of female virtue and innocence. * * * We are and shall be united with our brethren in sustaining them against each and every encroachment." [^28]

Conflict over PolygamyHC232The spirit of the meeting was well represented in the following excerpt from the speech of Mrs. Levi Riter:

Conflict over PolygamyHC"We have not met here, my beloved sisters, as women of other states and territories meet, to complain of the wrongs and abuses inflicted upon us by our husbands, fathers and sons; but we are happy and proud to state that we have no such afflictions and abuses to complain of. Neither do we ask for the right of franchise; nor do we ask for more law, more liberty, or more rights and freedom from our husbands and brothers; for there is no spot on this wide earth where kindness and affection are more bestowed upon women, and her rights so sacredly defended, as in Utah. We are here to express our love for each other, and to exhibit to the world our devotion to God, our Eternal Father, and to show our willingness to comply with the requirements of the gospel,—and the law of celestial marriage is one of its requirements that we are resolved to honor, teach and practice, which may God grant us the strength to do" (a hearty "amen!" from the audience). [^29]

Conflict over PolygamyHC233Mrs. Phoebe Woodruff said:

Conflict over PolygamyHC233"Shall we as wives and mothers sit still and see our husbands, and sons, whom we know are [but] obeying the highest behest of heaven, suffer for their religion without exerting ourselves to the extent of our power for their deliverance? No! verily, no! God has revealed unto us the law of the patriarchal order of marriage, and commanded us to obey it. We are sealed to our husbands for time and eternity, that we may dwell with them and our children in the world to come, which guarantees unto us the greatest blessing for which we are created. If the rulers of our nation will so far depart from the spirit and the letter of our glorious Constitution as to deprive our prophets, apostles and elders of citizenship, and imprison them for obeying this law, let them grant us this our last request, to make their prisons large enough to hold their wives, for where they go we will go also."

Conflict over PolygamyHC233Mrs. Eliza R. Snow, general president of the Female Relief Societies of the church, in the course of her speech, a well sustained effort, said:

Conflict over PolygamyHC233"When our husbands and sons—our fathers and brothers are threatened being either restrained in their obedience to the commands of God, or incarcerated year after year in the dreary confines of a prison, will it be thought presumptuous for us to speak? Are not our interests one with our brethren? Ladies, this subject as deeply interests us as them. In the kingdom of God, woman has no interests separate from those of man—all are mutual.

Conflict over PolygamyHC233Our enemies pretend that in Utah, woman is held in a state of vassalage—that she does not act from choice, but by coercion—that we would even prefer life elsewhere, were it possible for us to make our escape. What nonsense! We all know that if we wished, we could leave at any time—either to go singly or we could rise en masse, and there is no power here that could or would ever wish to prevent us. * * * The history of this people, with a very little reflection, would instruct 'outsiders' on this point. It would show at once that the part which woman has acted in it, could never have been performed against her will. Amid the many distressing scenes through which we have passed, the privations and hardships consequent on our expulsion from state to state, and our location in an isolated, barren wilderness, the women in this church have performed and suffered what could never have been borne and accomplished by slaves.

Conflict over PolygamyHCWere we the stupid, degraded, heart-broken beings that we have been represented to be, silence might better become us; but, as women of God—women filling high and responsible positions—performing sacred duties—women who stand not as dictators, but as counselors to their husbands, and who, in purest, noblest sense of refined womanhood, being truly their helpmates—we not only speak because we have the right, but justice and humanity demand that we should. * * * Like the loving Josephine, whose firm and gentle influence both animated and soothed the heart of Napoleon, we will encourage and assist the servants of God in establishing righteousness; but, unlike Josephine, never will political inducements, threats or persecutions prevail on us to relinquish our matrimonial ties—they were performed by the authority of the holy priesthood, the efficiency of which extends into eternity." [^30]

Conflict over PolygamyHC234Harriet Cook Young said:

Conflict over PolygamyHC234"It is as coworkers in the great mission of universal reform, not only in our own behalf, but also, by precept and example, to aid in the emancipation of our sex generally, that we accept in our heart of hearts, what we know to be a divine commandment; and here, and now, boldly and publicly we do assert our right, not only to believe in this holy commandment, but to practice what we believe.

Conflict over PolygamyHC234While these are our views, every attempt to force that obnoxious measure [then pending in congress] upon us, must of necessity, be an attempt to coerce us in our religious and moral convictions, against which, did we not most solemnly protest, we would be unworthy the name of 'American women.'" [^31]

Conflict over PolygamyHC234WOMAN'S INSTINCT TO SELF-SACRIFICE

Conflict over PolygamyHCIf it shall be asked, as it was asked in one of the sessions of the house committee on territories when the Cullom bill was being considered, how a woman could be brought to believe in and accept polygamy as a proper status; and "how long does it take woman to change her entire nature in that respect;" the best answer that can possibly be given is the one that was given by Mr. Alexander Majors,—not a "Mormon"—to whom the question was addressed when before the said committee to testify on Utah affairs. As to how long it would take to so change a woman's nature in that respect, he answered that he had never made the calculation. But he referred them to the sisters of charity of the Catholic church, and what they did for the sake of their religion—gave up their homes, society, and what are considered the pleasures of life, and confined themselves to gloomy retreats, except when they emerge to contribute to the needy or to wait upon the sick; the women of Utah, he said, as a general rule, are just as intelligent as these; their religious impulses are just as high, and their convictions just as sincere. "They do not embrace polygamy because they choose it, but because it is their duty and will result in a higher felicity to them in the world to come." [^32] Mr. Majors was asked on the same occasion what he would do if the inhabitants of Utah should claim admission into the Union as a state. "I would admit them," he promptly answered. "With polygamy?" was next asked. "Yes, sir," he promptly answered, "with polygamy. I would let a hundred thousand polygamists come in contact with forty millions of people claiming at least to possess a higher civilization. They are paying their taxes; they are behaving themselves in all respects, except as regards polygamy, as well as any other community within our boundary."

Conflict over PolygamyHCDELEGATE HOOPER'S DEFENSE OF PLURAL MARRIAGE

Conflict over PolygamyHCMr. Hooper, Utah's delegate, made a very able speech against the passage of the bill, which was afterwards published in pamphlet form, under the title "A Plea for Religious Liberty," it was a very able speech, well sustained throughout. Replying to Mr. Cullom, who had said that "polygamy was denounced by every state and territory of the United States," he said:

Conflict over PolygamyHC"Polygamy is not denounced by every state and territory, and the gentleman will search in vain for the statute or criminal code of either defining its existence or punishment. The gentleman confounds a religious belief with a criminal act. He is thinking of bigamy when he denounces polygamy, and in the confusion that follows, blindly strikes out against an unknown enemy. Will he permit me to call his attention to the distinction? Bigamy means the wrong done a woman by imposing upon her the forms of matrimony while another wife lives, rendering such second marriage null and void. The reputation and happiness of a too confiding woman is thus forever blasted by the fraudulent acts of her supposed husband, and he is deservedly punished for his crime. Polygamy, on the contrary, is the act of marrying more than one woman, under a belief that a man has the right, lawfully and religiously, so to do, and with the knoweldge and consent of both the wives."

Conflict over PolygamyHC236Mr. Hooper quoted high authorities, and very many of them, maintaining Bible sanction for the rightfulness of a plurality of wives; and summarized his whole presentation of the subject as follows:

Conflict over PolygamyHC236"Mr. Speaker, those who have been so kind and indulgent as to follow me thus far will have observed that I have aimed, as best I might, to show—

Conflict over PolygamyHC2361. That under our Constitution we are entitled to be protected in the full and free enjoyment of our religious faith.

Conflict over PolygamyHC2362. That our views of the marriage relation are an essential portion of our religious faith.

Conflict over PolygamyHC2363. That in considering the cognizance of the marriage relation as within the province of church regulations, we are practically in accord with all other Christian denominations.

Conflict over PolygamyHC2364. That in our views of the marriage relation, as a part of our religious belief, we are entitled to immunity from persecution under the Constitution, if such views are sincerely held; that if such views are erroneous, their eradication must be by argument and not by force.

Conflict over PolygamyHC2365. That of our sincerity we have both by words, and works, and sufferings, given for nearly forty years, abundant proof.

Conflict over PolygamyHC2366. That the bill, in practically abolishing trial by jury, as well as in many other respects, is unconstitutional, uncalled for and in direct opposition to that toleration in religious belief which is characteristic of the nation and age.

Conflict over PolygamyHC236It is not permitted, Mr. Speaker, that any one man should sit as the judge of any other as regards his religious belief. This is a matter which rests solely between each individual and his God. The responsibility cannot be shifted or divided. It is a matter outside the domain of legislative action." [^33]

Conflict over PolygamyHCWhen the news reached Salt Lake City that the Cullom bill had passed the house of representatives, on the 23rd of March, a great mass meeting convened to petition the United States senate not to pass the bill. Daniel H. Wells, mayor of Salt Lake City, was elected president of the meeting, and there were seven vice presidents, all prominent men of Salt Lake City. Four secretaries were chosen, and two shorthand reporters recorded the proceedings. This as evidence that the meeting was an important event.

Conflict over PolygamyHC237The remonstrance was ably drawn, covering nearly five columns of the Deseret News and closed with a series of twelve resolutions, firmly insisting in a variety of forms that revelation which gave them their marriage system, as well as the system so given, was an essential part of their religion, and closed by—

Conflict over PolygamyHC237"That we tender to God, our Father in heaven, our most sincere and hearty thanks for his great blessings and kindness to our fathers in inspiring them to establish the Constitution of the United States on the basis of civil and religious liberty, and that he put it into their hearts to make that instrument the supreme law, which should not in any emergency be transcended, and by which all should be bound.

Conflict over PolygamyHC237That forty millions of enlightened American citizens, with half a million of priests, philanthropists and editors, ought to be able to control, without the aid of legislative enactment, an institution which they call objectionable and immoral, through the influence of religion, the power of the press, and moral suasion, against one hundred and fifty thousand people who consider it a divine institution." [^34]

Conflict over PolygamyHCAs already stated neither the Cragin nor Cullom bill was enacted into law. How far the women's protest, the general remonstrance of the Latter-day Saints of Salt Lake City in mass meeting assembled, the really great speech of Utah's delegate, Mr. Hooper, the declaration of the "no trade intercourse" with Gentile merchants announced by the church leaders—how far these singly or combined exerted an influence to bring about the defeat of these bills, may not now be determined; but these several actions represent an intelligent and legal resistance to measures destructive of both civil and religious liberty, as conceived by the Latter-day Saints, and gives them during that period a place in history that challenges both respect and admiration. It is probable, however, that the advent of the transcontinental railroad, which was expected to do so much for the overwhelming of the Latter-day Saints, and their religion, and church, exerted quite as much influence as any other one factor in defeating the anti-"Mormon" legislation introduced into congress at the period, since those great financial interests represented by individuals and by companies, which brought the railroad into existence, required peace along its line for the growth of that trade and commerce, to which they looked for the remuneration that would reward them for all their toil and all their risks in the gigantic undertaking.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Fortunately a volume has been written upon The Women of Mormondom, by Mr. Edward Tullidge, which notwithstanding that author's predeliction to the intensely dramatic, rather than to the historical style of writing, is a valuable contribution to "Mormon" literature. The keynote of the volume is the vindication of the really high character of "Mormon" womanhood by the consideration of their lives and labors, their suffering and service in the founding of the New Dispensation of the gospel of the Christ. The volume consists of over five hundred and fifty pages. It was published in 1877, New York. Following is the dashing preface, which reflects the spirit of the book:
[^2] "The Murrays like the Kimballs, were of Scotch descent, and came to America during the 'Seven Years' War.' As a race they were gentle, kind-hearted, intelligent and refined. Through many of them ran a vein of poetry. Vilate herself wrote tender and beautiful verses." (Life of Heber C. Kimball, O. F. Whitney, 1888, p. 25).
[^3] Life of Heber C. Kimball, O. F. Whitney, p. 485.
[^4] Deseret News of Dec. 14>, 1868; also Life of John Taylor, chapter iii et passim.
[^5] See chapter xc, footnote 7, this History; also biographical sketch of Daniel Spencer in Jenson's L. D. S. Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. i, pp. 286-9; and in Whitney's History of Utah, vol. iv, pp. 87-90. President Young said of him at the funeral services—"He has been faithful in this holy war [having reference to Elder Spencer's labors in the New Dispensation]. He instructed all with whom he met in the way of life. He never gave counsel, but what marked the way to life everlasting." (Deseret News of Dec. 16th, 1868, p. 353).
[^6] See account of in Deseret News, weekly, of Sept. 8th, 1869.
[^7] Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 630.
[^8] The Godbeite Movement, Tullidge's Quarterly Magazine, Oct., 1880, pp. 15, 16, et seq.
[^9] Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 631.
[^10] Ibid, p. 232.
[^11] "We claim the right of respectfully but freely discussing all measures upon which we are called to act," said the written and signed statement of Godbe and Harrison at the trial for their fellowship. "And if we are cut off from the church for asserting this right, while our standing is still dear to us, we will suffer it to be taken from us sooner than resign the liberties of thought," etc., etc. (The Godbeite Movement, Tullidge's Quarterly Magazine for October, 1880, p. 25).
[^12] Ibid, p. 40.
[^13] Ibid, p. 16.
[^14] Rocky Mountain Saints, pp. 632-633.
[^15] "Not a word was ever said against Brigham or the faith; no fault was found with any one or anything, but week after week the whole strength of four vigorous pens was let loose upon the ignorance and superstitions of the age. Brigham had instilled into the minds of the saints that the world was degenerating to an end, provided by lightning speed; Kelsey, without ever squinting at the prophet, wrote the story of the past, and showed 'How the World had Grown;' Tullidge resuscitated 'Great Characters of the World,' and without once alluding to Brother Brigham. It upon a philosophical faith; and Godbe exhibited the possibility of honest error. With such minds at work, and with such a field for labor, and innumerable subjects handle, the writers had only to study caution and prudence. * * * Some very pungent articles had been published in the Magazine, that had awakened attention, and some measure they had foreshadowed a purpose on the part of the writers to judge the teachings and measures of Brigham Young as they would those of any other man; but of the true nature of the 'movement' they were inaugurating, nothing had been fairly stated. The writers at first only aimed to provoke the people to thinking." Rocky Mountain Saints, pp. 633, 637).
[^16] Tullidge's Quarterly Magazine, October, 1880.
[^17] On this particular point the Deseret News editorially made the following sensible remarks in the nature of a warning to home manufacturers: "By the completion of the railroad we are going to be brought into competition with our neighbors east and west in all branches of production and manufacture. In view of this our mechanics must arrange matters in such a manner that they can command the trade of the territory. If their methods of labor and manufacturing are slow and expensive, they must avail themselves of machinery, and the various aids which men in their branches of business use in the east and west; for if they do not produce as good an article at as low a price, as it can be brought here from other places, they will be likely to find the market stocked from abroad and their wares will go begging. We have men among us, though they are not numerous, who, if they can make twenty-five cents by bringing an article from abroad do not hesitate to send for it in preference to purchasing a home manufactured article of the same quality. To control this market, therefore, those who manufacture and produce, must do so at rates so favorable that nothing in their line produced or manufactured elsewhere can find sale here except at a loss. The tariff on freight brought from the east or west answers as good a purpose as a protective duty, and we will be highly culpable if we do not take the necessary steps to supply ourselves from our own productions and manufactures to the extent of our power." (Deseret News of March 3rd, 1869).
[^18] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry of July 4th, 1869, p. 598. The subject is referred to in the brief minutes of the School in the same record at p. 638, where reference is made to the report of the committee appointed being read; again at p. 823. The School of the Prophets was a select gathering of the brethren of the priesthood, meeting regularly through these years to be taught in the doctrine of the gospel and in the policies of the church. Admission was by card and the sessions confidential. Here questions of practical affairs as well as of theological importance were freely discussed and instruction and council given according to the wisdom of the assembly or the presidents thereof. Hence the action named in the text above with reference to the question of wages and trade and manufactures being brought before that body.
[^19] Tullidge's Quarterly Magazine, Oct., 1880, p. 18.
[^20] After several sessions devoted to the subject, including discussion of the resolution submitted by the committee to the School, it seems to have been determined not to attempt to settle the rate of wages by convention, but to leave it to the adjustment of natural trade forces. (See the citation in note 17 this chapter; also Tullidge's Quarterly Magazine as above, pp. 18-22.) Tullidge's charges that George Q. Cannon, then editor of the Deseret News threatened that Chinese labor would be brought into Utah if the "working men did not come to terms." Mr. Cannon in several editorials discussed the question of Chinese labor in California, and rather in a tone that sympathized with the Orientals; but at no point did the editorials amount to a threat to Utah workmen. I presume the passage Tullidge had in mind would be the following: "There is probably no people on the continent who are likely to be less disturbed or affected by the introduction or non-introduction of this element than the people of Utah. If the people act with the union and wisdom which have heretofore characterized their movements, they are and will be safe from all disturbance. There is no class, American, European or Asiatic, the influx of which can harm them. If they act wisely, and in accordance with the counsel which is given, they can sustain themselves and be as independent as any community in the world. It is the union of the people which has produced the remarkable results that are everywhere apparent in this territory, and that concert of action, carried out and maintained in all the details of labor, will give us continued supremacy." (Deseret News of July 14th, 1869. See also Deseret News editorials of May 26th and June 30th, same year).
[^21] See Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, p. 401. The Utah Magazine was a weekly periodical, the literary successor of the Peep O' Day, the latter being an experiment by Harrison and Tullidge to make literature a profession in Utah; but meeting with insuperable difficulties,—among which were a limited community from which to draw subscribers; and the high cost of paper, sixty cents per lb., and sometimes not to be had at that price—it failed. Then came the Utah Magazine in January, 1868, started for the same purpose; it was to be a magazine of general literature, with Wm. S. Godbe as its patron, Eli B. Kelsey as business manager, E. L. T. Harrison as editor. It was started with the approval of President Young, though he expressed himself doubtful of its success as a financial venture. The Deseret News on receiving the first number said that it was an enterprise worthy of commendation and support; and further of its character—"The Utah Magazine, in its first number, presents a very attractive appearance, more so than could have been expected considering the difficulties the editor had to encounter in procuring type, etc. The articles—original and selected—are excellent; and the paper may claim to be a valuable addition to the literature of our territory." (Deseret News, weekly, Jan. 22nd, 1869). When the Utah Magazine was enlarged and assured of prolonged life the News not knowing, of course, the secret intention of its proprietors to make it a periodical with a mission, and that mission anti-"Mormon" in spirit, but still regarding it as an honest effort in the direction of general literature—again made favorable mention of it in its new and enlarged form. (See Deseret News of May 5th, weekly, 1869). The magazine in all ran through two series and three volumes, when it was succeeded by the Mormon Tribune.
[^22] "At the very time when this organization was formed [i. e. Z. C. M. I], which began its career 1st of March, 1869, the 'new movement' had already been resolved upon so that though Henry W. Lawrence put $30,000 into the Z. C. M. I., and became one of its directors, he was, to so express the historical complexity, a 'new movement leader.'" So writes Tullidge; and as if in apology for this "historical complexity," he adds: "The force of circumstances in those times compelled us all to wait for the development of events which depended upon the action of President Young himself." (See Tullidge's Quarterly Magazine, Oct., 1880, p. 17; also p. 42. Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, p. 401). And hence we have both men and a magazine posing in one capacity and acting another; all which will make it very difficult for Mr. Tullidge, one of the historians of the movement, to maintain his proposition that there was "no conspiracy in the dark against Brigham Young;" but a "social revolution was forced upon these 'reformers,' 'by coming events.'" (Tullidge's Quarterly Magazine, p. 18).
[^23] The Godbeite Movement, Tullidge's Quarterly Magazine, Oct., 1880, pp. 15, 16. Godbe's "possibility of honest error," became a catch phrase during and after the trial of these men for their fellowship, "We inquired," says Harrison in a note on the trial, published by Tullidge, "Whether it was not possible for us to honestly differ from the presiding priesthood, and were answered that such a thing was impossible. 'We might as well ask whether we could honestly differ from the Almighty.' Against this excess of authority we solemnly protested." (Ibid, p. 32). This answer to the dissenters was alleged to have been made by George Q. Cannon; it is therefore proper that his version of that matter be given. "A friend . . . wished to know whether we had said that we considered an honest difference of opinion between a member of the church and the authorities of the church was apostasy, as he said, we had been credited with having made a statement to this effect. We replied that we had not stated that an honest difference of opinion between a member of the church and the authorities constituted apostasy; for we could conceive of a man honestly differing in opinion from the authorities of the church and yet not be an apostate; but we could not conceive of a man publishing those differences of opinion, and seeking by arguments, sophistry and special pleading to enforce them upon the people to produce division and strife, and to place the acts and counsels of the authorities of the church, if possible, in a wrong light, and not be an apostate; for such conduct was apostasy as we understood the term. We further said that while a man might honestly differ in opinion from the authorities through a want of understanding, he had to be exceedingly careful how he acted in relation to such differences, or the adversary would take advantage of him and he would soon become imbued with the spirit of apostasy, and be found fighting against God and the authority which He had placed here to govern his church." (Deseret News editorial, George Q. Cannon, editor, impression of Nov. 3rd, 1869).
[^24] The publication of this article gave very great satisfaction to the Gentile population of course. Anything that gave evidence of a break in the unity of the saints was applauded by them. "You boys have struck the blow in the right place," observed Mr. J. R. Walker. "The agitation for the opening of the mines was the 'right place' for Utah's social redemption," continues Mr. Tullidge's account, "therefore had we struck there first before proclaiming any spiritual or religious movement." (The Godbeite Movement, Tullidge's Quarterly Magazine, Oct., 1880, p. 28).
[^25] Ibid, p. 28, where the formal notification of the action from the secretary will be found.
[^26] Those who surrendered their tickets were William S. Godbe, Elias L. T. Harrison, Henry W. Lawrence, Fred T. Perris, Edward W. Tullidge, and John Tullidge. (Godbeite Movement, Tullidge's Quarterly Magazine, p. 31).
[^27] Tullidge's Quarterly Magazine, Oct., 1880, pp. 31, 32. The protest of Godbe and Harrison also appears in the same Tullidge article, pp. 34, 35.
[^28] Deseret News of Nov. 3rd, 1869. The article was signed by Brigham Young, George A. Smith, Daniel H. Wells, Orson Pratt, Wilford Woodruff, George Q. Cannon, Joseph F. Smith.
[^29] All these ideas and announcements through "manifestos," "platforms," creedal declarations, etc., will be found in History of the Godbeite Movement in Tullidge's Quarterly Magazine, Oct., 1880.
[^30] Ninety-Three, Sidney Library edition, p. 267.
[^31] In the aforesaid discourse, after affirming the innocence of the spirits of men in their pre-earth existence, Elder Lyman asked the question—"But was it decreed, then, that Jesus should die to save men who were thus pure and holy? No: it did not form any part of the purpose of God that he should die. . . . 'Why' says one. 'I supposed that it was predetermined before the world was that Jesus must die, and that naught but his blood could bring God's children back to the home from whence they had simply gone abroad for a time.' Is it said so in the scriptures? No! . . . But did not this gospel have associated, as a necessary prerequisite for man's salvation the death of Jesus? No; for if so, he failed to tell the people the true nature of the gospel he preached, and his mission among men, and the means by which eternal life was to be gained." (Millennial Star, vol. xxiv, p. 213. The discourse entire fills pp. 209-217).
[^32] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1867, pp. 59, 60.
[^33] Ibid, p. 60.
[^34] Impression of Jan. 30th, 1867. The opening paragraph is instructive and comprehensive: "I have sinned a grievous sin in teaching a doctrine which makes the death and the atonement of Jesus Christ of no force, thus sapping the foundation of the Christian religion. The above mentioned doctrine is found in a discourse which I preached on the 'Nature of the Mission of Jesus,' on the 16th of March, 1862, in Dundee, Scotland, and which was published in the Millennial Star, No. 14, volume xxiv. The above preaching was done without submitting it to, or seeking the counsel of those who bear the priesthood, with whom I am associated. In this I committed a great wrong, for which I most humbly crave and ask their forgiveness, as I do also of all the saints who have heard my teaching on this subject. . . . (Signed) 'A. M. Lyman.'" (Deseret News of Jan. 30th, 1867). The church publications in Europe were asked to copy this confession).
