B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 5 ( 1930)

253CHAPTER CXXXIV

253DEATHS—TYPES OF LATTER-DAY SAINT WOMEN—"GODBEITE," OR, "NEW MOVEMENT"—DEFECTIONS

253THE several years immediately preceding the advent of the railroad into Utah, witnessed the passing of a number of prominent officers and members from the service of the church, some by death, and others by the more regrettable circumstance of apostasy.

WOMEN TYPES OF THE NEW DISPENSATION

Of those who passed from the service by death were two noted women, Vilate Kimball, wife of Heber C. Kimball, and Leonora Taylor, wife of Elder John Taylor. Both these sisters had been leading spirits in the earlier days of the church, in Kirtland and Missouri; also in Nauvoo and in the pioneering days of Utah. Both were types of the early womanhood of the church: noble-minded, high-spirited, intelligent, courageous, independent, cheerful, but profoundly religious and capable of great self-sacrifice under the sense of religious duty; all which is demonstrated in the lives of these two, and practically in the lives of all the early "Women of Mormondom." Never was greater mistake made than when it has been supposed that the women of the church were weak, and ignorant, and spiritless. Such religious movements as that which the world knows as "Mormonism," involving as it has done self-sacrifice, patient, heroic service, through trying years—through whole lifetimes, in fact—cannot be maintained on the womanhood side of it but by high-spirited, virtuous women. [^1] Such were the community of women of which these two were but types. Vilate Kimball was the type of American born women of the church; the other, Leonora Taylor, the type of the foreign born.

VILATE KIMBALL

Vilate Kimball died on the 22nd of October, 1867. She was the daughter and youngest child of Roswell and Susannah Murray, [^2] born on the first of June, 1806, in Florida, Montgomery county, in the eastern part of New York state. She was married to Heber C. Kimball in her seventeenth year, and through the long, toilsome years that lie between that event and her death—including the trying days of Kirtland, Ohio, Far West, Missouri, Nauvoo, Winter Quarters, and the settlement of Salt Lake valley, is a record of patient endurance, of cheerful faithfulness, that gives its own proof of intelligent conception of duty, of a highly noble character sustained by holy faith and trust in God, that marks off this woman and those of which she is but a type, as objects of admiration—daughters of America of whom America may well be proud. At her death Brigham Young, who had known her through forty troubled, adventurous years, assured her family and friends "that her life had been as honorable as any woman who had ever lived," and "if any person had found fault with her, it was more than he knew." [^3] She was noted for great kindness of heart; for patience, justice, and mercy, in the patriarchal family of her husband, and was the friend and confidant of his other wives and their children. At the funeral service of this woman nearly all the prominent church leaders and their families were present; and her grief-stricken husband made the melancholy prediction that he would not long survive her.

LEONORA TAYLOR

Leonora Taylor was the daughter of Captain George Cannon, grandfather of the George Q. Cannon who is frequently mentioned in these pages. She was born October 6th, 1796, at the town of Peel in the Isle of Man. From early youth she evinced a strongly religious nature, and in her actions sought divine guidance. It was the conviction received through prayer that "it was the will of God" that she should make the voyage to America, that led her, against the advice of many friends, to accept the position of companion to the wife of Mr. Mason, the private secretary of Lord Aylmer, governor general of Canada. The residence of the Masons was at Toronto, and here, in his capacity of class leader in the Methodist church, she met John Taylor. His first proposal of marriage she rejected, but afterwards in a dream, seeing herself associated with him in his life-work, she became convinced that he would be her husband, and when a second time he proposed she accepted him. Leonora had enjoyed exceptional advantages in life. Her parents dying while she was quite young, the old family estate at Peel was rented to strangers, but she became an inmate of Governor Smelt's family, residing in Castle Ruthen, Castletown, Isle of Man, where she frequently met with many distinguished people from England. She was refined both by nature and education, gentle and ladylike in manner, intelligent, gifted with rare conversational powers, and, withal, beautiful in person as in mind. These graces, however, were for her intimate acquaintances and friends. In mixed companies she had but little to say, unless especially drawn out, for she was of a retiring, and diffident disposition. She died of pneumonia on the 9th of December, 1868. "Thus passed away from our midst," said the chronicle of her death, "a virtuous, faithful wife, a kind and affectionate mother, a steadfast friend, and a faithful saint." [^4] Of woman, and of womanliness, what can be said more?

256Neither Leonora Taylor nor Vilate Kimball were prominent in public life. The quiet social circle of intimate friends, and preeminently in the home circle, as confidants and counselors of their husbands; as the mothers of their children and the leading spirits of their households were they distinguished; these were the spheres of their activities, the scenes of their triumphs; and therefore are they the more typical of "Mormon" womanhood, in general, than their sisters, who of necessity,—and worthily and honorably,—have engaged in public service, through the women's auxiliary organizations of the church; for primarily and largely, though not exclusively, the social and domestic circles are recognized in the church as the natural sphere of woman's chief activities.

DEATH OF HEBER C. KIMBALL

Among the prominent men passing in the period was Heber C. Kimball, first counselor to Brigham Young in the first presidency. He died on the 22nd of June, 1868—eight months to the day from the death of his wife, Vilate. His death was superinduced by a severe fall from his carriage, which accidentally in the night was driven into a ditch, violently throwing its occupant to the ground. "This accident, though he partly recovered from its effects," says his biographer, "was the immediate forerunner of his fatal sickness." He has already been frequently mentioned in these pages, and appears as the personal friend of Joseph Smith, the Prophet, and of Brigham Young; also as counselor and associate Pioneer with Brigham Young in the journey from Nauvoo to the Salt Lake valley; and as the first apostle to open the door of the gospel in a foreign land in the New Dispensation—the founder of the British Mission. It was a great work he accomplished in life, a noble life that he led. He was as stalwart in spirit as in body, a faithful, earnest, disciple of the New Dispensation, of the kind of disciple whose intensity of faith and zeal are so necessary, especially in the commencement of great movements, in the founding of new systems, or the bringing forth of new dispensations out of the old and eternal things.

DEMISE OF DANIEL SPENCER

Following the death of Heber C. Kimball came that of a man no less remarkable, Daniel Spencer, president of the Salt Lake stake of Zion, his presidency running through the years from 1849 to the day of his death, which occurred on the 8th of December, 1869. The continuance in that presidency was interrupted by a mission to England from 1852 to 1856, during which time he acted as counselor in the European Mission. He resumed his office in the Salt Lake stake on returning to Utah. Of him I have already spoken in these pages in connection with the early judiciary history of the "State of Deseret" and the territory of Utah; and how his ecclesiastical court, the high council of the Salt Lake stake of Zion, was sometimes preferred by passing California emigrants to the civil courts; and of the substantial justice that characterized his decisions. He was a man of a high sense of honor, as irreproachable in character as in conduct. Daniel Spencer was of Revolutionary ancestry. His father enlisted early in the struggle for American freedom and continued in the service to the close, being among those in Washington's body guard who witnessed the surrender of Lord Cornwallis at Yorktown. [^5] In education, in refinement of nature and conduct, in character, and in service achievement, the Spencers were a family of which any movement, political or religious, might well be proud; and of that family Daniel Spencer was a princely representative.

EZRA T. BENSON

On the 3rd of September, 1869, Ezra T. Benson, one of the quorum of the twelve apostles since the summer of 1846, died very suddenly of something like heart failure. [^6] He, too, came of a Massachusetts family. His labors from the days of Nauvoo until the time of his death identified him with the general incidents that mark off the pioneering period of the church, his last great work being the fulfillment of the contract for constructing the Central Pacific Railroad grade from Humbolt Wells, Nevada, to the junction of that road with the Union Pacific, a contract he executed in partnership with Lorin Farr and Chauncy W. West. This man also was an earnest, faithful disciple, though his zeal found expression in physical pioneering activities rather than in works of scholarship and doctrinal exposition.

258It is to be observed that in the obituaries and the remarks at the obsequies of these Pioneers in the New Dispensation, notice is taken of the fact that inroads were rapidly being made on the band of men and women who knew and were associated with the Prophet Joseph Smith, in the early days of the church. Inroads which by now (1930) have removed every man and woman who ever saw the Prophet, as well as those who worked with him in the New Dispensation.

APOSTATIC INROADS—THE GROUP

Those who were lost to the church in this period through apostasy were a coterie of rather able, and some of them brilliant men; W. S. Godbe, E. L. T. Harrison, Eli B. Kelsey, Henry W. Lawrence, Edward W. Tullidge, T. H. B. Stenhouse, W. H. Sherman. All these men were prominent in the community life of Utah. Messrs. Godbe and Lawrence were prosperous merchants of Salt Lake City, and both active in church service, Godbe as a president in the council of one of the quorums of seventy, a body of the priesthood, it will be remembered, devoted especially to the propaganda activities of the church; Mr. Lawrence was a bishop's counselor, Messrs. Harrison, Kelsey, Stenhouse and Tullidge were all members of the seventy's organization, and were men of more than average literary ability. Also they were men against whom no charge of irregularity of life or immorality was made. It was, so far as their trial and excommunication was concerned, purely a matter of being recalcitrant to the authority and policy of the church. Really and truly, so far as the prime movers were concerned, Messrs. Godbe and Harrison—and some of the others—it was a matter of having lost faith in the mission and authority of the church, despite all pretensions to the contrary, that led to their recalcitrance and its consequences. There are two historians of this "God-beite movement"—if "movement" it may be called—Edward W. Tullidge and T. H. B. Stenhouse. According to the latter, who is the more reliable in accuracy of statement, the "movement," had its origin in the following facts:

ORIGIN OF THE "GODBEITE MOVEMENT"

In the summer of 1868 Mr. Godbe in his capacity of merchant made his annual visit to the east to purchase his supply of merchandise accompanied by his friend Mr. E. L. T. Harrison. The latter was an architect by profession, but had been engaged for some time in a literary venture in partnership with Mr. Tullidge, publishing the Utah Magazine, which venture, owing to the very limited community in which it was published, was fast hastening to a disastrous ending; and the visit to the east, on the part of Mr. Harrison, as in the nature of a vacation from the care and worry of publishing the magazine. En route for the east the two friends had time for reflection and the opportunity to compare their conclusions:

260"Both of them had struggled to preserve their faith in Mormonism, but the contents of the Book of Mormon, critically viewed, was a terrible test of credulity, and many of the revelations of 'The Lord' savored too much of Joseph Smith, and abounded with contradictions, and were very human at that. As for Brigham, 'he was a hopeless case; many of his measures were utterly devoid of even commercial sense, and far less were they clothed with divine wisdom. In all his ways, he [Brigham] was destitute of the magnanimity of a great soul, and was intensely selfish.' To their developed intellects now, Mormonism seemed crude jargon of sense and nonsense, honesty and fraud, devotion and cant, hopeless poverty to the many, overflowing wealth to the favored feww—a religion as unlike their conceptions of the teachings of Christ, darkness is to light." [^7]

This statement of facts Mr. Tullidge carefully omits where he quotes Mr. Stenhouse's account of the inception of the "movement," and he nowhere states it in his own idealized account of that "movement." [^8] It is a very serious omission because the mental attitude of these two leaders in the inception of their work determines the quality of the whole movement. They were far advanced in apostasy from the faith when making this eastward journey. Mr. Stenhouse represents that they were conscious of this condition: "They discovered, clearly enough," he writes, "that they were—in the language of the orthodox—'on the road to opstasy,' yet in their feelings they did not want to leave Mormonism, or Utah." There followed a great mental struggle. On arriving in New York, and being comfortably located in their hotel, they resolved to seek a solution to their perplexity in prayer. While praying "a voice spoke to them, and made some communication upon the subject which most interested them." After this first experience Mr. Harrison formulated a series of questions, and in the evening by appointment, "a band of spirits came to them, and held converse with them as friends would speak with friends. One by one the questions prepared by Mr. Harrison were read, and Mr. Godbe and Mr. Harrison, with pencil and paper took down the answers as they heard them given by the spirits." "This is their statement," says Stenhouse, "and they firmly believe it" [^9]—the account was published while the gentlemen were still living.

261"SPIRITISM" ON "MORMONISM"

261"With these 'communications' was given much information about Mormonism, how it originated, and how Joseph Smith had, by reason of his surroundings, his lack of education, the traditions of past ages, and the current ideas of christendom, turned his 'mediumistic' experience into the church-kingdom-building scheme that is known in Utah. What was true about Mormonism, they were told, should be preserved, and what was false should be rejected." [^10]

With this, known as the revised conception of "Mormonism" by these gentlemen, the student of this "movement" will be able to rightly assess the value of such claims as they subsequently made about "their standing in the church being dear to them;" [^11] and also of Mr. Godbe's signed statement, wherein he says: "With regard to apostasy," [with which he was charged] "I know myself to be wholly innocent; the truth of which, God in the early future will make fully apparent." [^12] Also the student in the light of these facts will be able rightly to estimate the value of Mr. Tullidge's statement that the "Godbeite movement was a revival of the Messianic and Millennial spirit among the Mormon people, who were chosen to open the dispensation forty years before, but who had come so very nearly losing it altogether." [^13]

EFFORTS LEVELED AT THE "SUPREMACY" OF BRIGHAM YOUNG

Returning to Utah the New York experiences of Messrs. Godbe and Harrison were detailed to their particular friends, Kelsey, Lawrence, Tullidge et al. "Believing that Brigham," continues Stenhouse's account of the movement at this point, "had set out to build up a dynasty of his own, and that he, like David, the king of Israel, looked upon the people as his heritage, these four elders (Godbe, Harrison, Kelsey and Tullidge) resolved to sap the foundations of his throne, and place before the people the best intelligence they could command to enable them to realize their true position." [^14] This mention in confidence they conveyed to Henry W. Lawrence, who "gave valuable material support" to the movement. The Utah Magazine, which before this was fast hastening to an inglorious close, was given a new lease of life and pressed into service. The plan was to have articles appear in this magazine from time to time which in an insidious way would indirectly attack the policies of President Young, in the hope that a popular sentiment might be created against, and overthrow them, and with them destroy the domination influence of the president himself. [^15] While this scheme was developing several of those engaged in it were called upon missions, namely, Mr. Harrison, to England; Mr. Kelsey, to the eastern states; and Mr. Sherman elsewhere. [^16] This, doubtless, in the hope that renewal of the missionary spirit would stay the spirit of apostasy which began to be manifested in the writings of these brethren in the Utah Magazine; but the missions were declined.

ZCMI, the United Order, and other Economic PoliciesHCPOLICIES OF BRIGHAM YOUNG ASSAILED

ZCMI, the United Order, and other Economic PoliciesHCThe opposition of this coterie touched the policies of President Young and of the church at several points. The approaching railroad would bring goods from the east at greatly reduced prices as compared with goods manufactured in Utah. If the home manufacturers were to be maintained, then the cost of production must be lowered, both by improved methods of production, [^17] and especially at the point of wages. Accordingly, at the School of the Prophets, held in Salt Lake City on the 4th of July, 1869, a committeeman from each of the trades was elected to submit to the trades the proposition of reducing the wages of mechanics, that Utah might be able to compete with the manufactures of the states." [^18] This effort to lower wages was seized upon by the Godbeite writers in which they posed as the champions of the wage earners, and resented what they alleged to be an attempt "to fix the rates of wages" by the "men who paid the wages and not the men who received the wages," [^19] ignoring altogether the fact, quoted above, that it was a committee composed of one member from each of the trades to which the subject was referred by the School of the Prophets for consideration. [^20]

Publishing in UtahZCMI, the United Order, and other Economic PoliciesHCTHE "UTAH MAGAZINE" AND ITS POLICY

Publishing in UtahZCMI, the United Order, and other Economic PoliciesHCAlthough the Utah Magazine had for some time "vigorously and enthusiastically sustained the cooperative movement," during the absence of Harrison and Godbe in the east, yet its support was soon withdrawn from this as from the other policies of the church. [^21] Henry W. Lawrence, who was early informed in confidence, of this "new movement," gave to his friend Godbe valuable material support, and became an important factor in the plans of the movement. He resigned as a director and withdrew his capital ($30,000) from Z. C. M. I. [^22] It was planned for one of the writers of the magazine—Mr. Tullidge—to resuscitate the "Great Characters" of the world; "and without once alluding to Brother Brigham, the contrast was to be to his disadvantage." In like surreptitious manner the doctrine of obedience to the church as taught by Brigham Young was assailed; Harrison dwelt upon what he and his conferrers regarded as a philosophical faith, but which neither in premises nor conclusions was "Mormonism;" "and Godbe exhibited the possibility of honest error." [^23] Finally the magazine, in an article on the "True Development of the Territory," came out in bold opposition to President Young's policy of mining for the precious metals in Utah; the policy that discouraged development of such mines, lest it should attract to the territory the floating, adventurous, half desperate, and somewhat lawless population of the west, then roaming from mining camp to mining camp in pursuit of large and sudden wealth. It mattered not that the argument advanced by the magazine was economically sound, viz., that Utah's greatest natural resource, in which she could best compete with other states in the race of material progress, was by the development of her stores of mineral wealth. The question from Brigham Young's standpoint, and that of the other church leaders associated with him, was not one of material prosperity, but one of community preservation—the preservation of the Latter-day Saints as the dominating factor in the territory until they should be so established as a people that they could not be removed, or overslaughed by the influx of a population of different ideals, and aspirations—a population, in this instance, whose God was gold, not Jehovah; whose aim was large and sudden wealth—not the founding of a city or of a commonwealth whose builder and maker is God. The aim—one may say the life aim—of Brigham Young was to see the Latter-day Saints become "a great and a mighty people in the midst of the Rocky Mountains"—in other words, to fulfill the prediction of Joseph Smith on that head. Clearly it was not for these men—self-styled and self-appointed reformers—to undertake to change a policy deemed so vital to the community's interest on their own initiative, so long as they professed allegiance to the church.

Publishing in UtahHCECCLESIASTICAL TRAILS FOR APOSTASY

Publishing in UtahHCIt was evident by the publication of this article on the "True Development of the Territory," [^24] that the point of rupture between this group of malcontents and the church had been reached. They were all members of the School of the Prophets. Of late they had been neglectful in attendance upon its sessions; and on the 16th of October, 1869, the course they had been pursuing was considered and they were disfellowshipped from the church until they appeared and gave satisfactory reasons for their irregular attendance upon the School. [^25]

Publishing in UtahHCAt the next session of the School of the Prophets not only irregularity of attendance upon the School's sessions but the whole attitude of these "reformers" as expressed in recent articles of the Utah Magazine was discussed; and became of defiant adherence to the policy of systematic opposition of the recent Utah Magazine articles, those who persisted in that adherence were required to give up their tickets of admission to the school. [^26] while Godbe and Harrison were cited before the high council of the Salt Lake stake of Zion for trial upon the charge of apostasy. Before the high council the fact of apostasy was too apparent to require long discussion. Indeed the proceedings scarcely took the form of an examination and trial. The men arraigned took occasion to read a series of resolutions which were both a protest to the administration of President Young, and an outline of a proposed reform program, what Tullidge characterizes as declaring "a rival mission" to that of Brigham Young, and concedes that there was nothing "for the high council to do but to excommunicate these men of a rival mission." [^27] The high council voted for their excommunication, and because Eli B. Kelsey voted against the high council's action, and because at every point he had shown himself in complete sympathy with these dissenters, his name was included with theirs in the act of excommunication. Very soon afterwards Henry W. Lawrence, T. H. B. Stenhouse, William H. Sherman, and Edward W. Tullidge, were added to the list of the excommunicated dissenters. In addition to this act of excommunication the Utah Magazine was condemned as "a periodical that in its spirit and teachings is opposed to the work of God. Instead of building up Zion, and uniting the people, its teaching would destroy Zion and divide the people; * * * therefore we say to our brethren and sisters in every place, the Utah Magazine is not a periodical suitable for circulation among or perusal by them, and should not be sustained by them." [^28]

268"THE CHURCH OF ZION"—A RIVAL MISSION

After this the opposition of the dissenters was more pronounced. Public meetings were regularly held on Sundays, and a rival church, with a ministry, and a restated faith, was to be promulgated. "A great and divine movement was at hand; the church would find its second birth and commence a new era in her career." The name of the new church was to be styled "The Church of Zion;" the ordinances and principles were to remain "in tact as at present;" no priesthood or standing in the church would elevate the possessor, or obtain for him any distinction in the sight of God; all was to be very democratic, very just, very charitable, very saintly, and very easy. The burdens of tithing lightened and made to fall chiefly upon the rich; and the practice of plural marriage, not to be abandoned, was to be placed upon "the highest grounds." Who the head of the church would be in this "new era," Messrs. Godbe and Harrison claimed not to have the prerogative to say, further than to announce that God would "produce the proper man in due time;" and that he would be neither of them. [^29] The proper man, however, did not appear; the "movement never materialized into an organization." In a short time the fires of enthusiasm for reform began to burn less fiercely, to smolder, and finally to die out. The "reformers" turned each to some secular pursuit, and the church was permitted to pursue the even tenor of its way, unhampered by the unfriendly activities of this coterie of more or less brilliant men. The Godbeite movement reminds one of that class of reform movements which Victor Hugo describes as beginning "by attacking the republic" and ending with "robbing a diligence," [^30] so anti-climax was its ending.

DEFECTION OF AMASA M. LYMAN

Soon after the inauguration of the "new movement" it was joined by Amasa M. Lyman, formerly one of the twelve apostles, although he did not figure very largely in it. Elder Lyman, while on his mission in Europe with Charles C. Rich and George Q. Cannon delivered a discourse in Dundee, Scotland, on the 16th of March, 1862, which virtually denied the necessity of, and the fact of, the "Atonement of Jesus Christ." [^31] No satisfactory explanation appears why this matter was allowed to pass apparently unnoticed until the 21st of January, 1867. But it was not until then that Elder Lyman was brought before the council of the twelve for his heresy. "The quorum of the twelve" says the account of the meeting, "were horrified at the idea that one of the twelve apostles should teach such a doctrine." When interrogated upon the subject Elder Lyman avowed that such had been his views—that is, that men were not saved through any atonement made in the death of the Christ. Each of the quorum then spoke against the views of Elder Lyman. Elder Woodruff said, "that he felt shocked at the idea that one of the twelve apostles should get so far into the dark as to deny the blood of Christ, and say that it was not necessary for the salvation of man and teach this as a true doctrine, while it was in opposition to all the doctrine taught by every prophet and apostle, and saint from the days of Adam until today. The Bible, Book of Mormon and Doctrine and Covenants teach, from beginning to end, that Christ shed his blood for the salvation of man, and that there is no other name given under heaven whereby man can be saved. And I can tell Brother Lyman that his doctrine will send him to perdition if he continues in it, and so it will any man; and furthermore, such a doctrine would send this church and kingdom to pieces, like an earthquake. There never was and never will be, a saint on the earth that believes in that doctrine, it is the worst heresy man can preach." [^32]

271After the twelve were through speaking Elder Lyman was very much humbled "and asked forgiveness." The council repaired to President Young's office, where the matter was presented to him. The president sustained the views of the twelve and emphasized them, "and required Brother Lyman to publish his confession and make it as public as he had his false doctrine." [^33] To this he evidently consented for a most humble acknowledgment of his error was published in the Deseret News! [^34] Unhappily, however, Elder Lyman did not adhere to his confession of error, but in a few months reaffirmed his conviction of the accuracy of the principle of his Dundee discourse against the necessity of, and the fact of, the atonement; and as a result of this course, after an investigation by three of the apostles, [^35] Elder Lyman was excommunicated from the church by action of the twelve apostles in a council meeting at St. George, May 6th, 1867; [^36] which action was ratified by the general conference of the church on the 8th of October following. [^37]

Footnotes

"Long enough, O Women of America, have your Mormon sisters been blasphemed!

From the day that they, in the name of the fear of the Lord their God, undertook to 'build up Zion,' they have been persecuted for righteousness sake: 'A people scattered and peeled from the beginning.'

The record of their lives is now sent unto you, that you may have the opportunity to judge in the spirit of righteousness. So shall you be judged by him whom they have honored, whose glory they have sought, and whose name they have magnified."

The theology of the book, especially of chapters xviii, xix and xx, cannot be accepted as orthodox, nor representative of "Mormon" thought or dogma, but the historical facts of the volume, give the women of the Church of the Latter-day Saints the vindication they were entitled to before the world.

---
Notas:
[^1] THE CREDIT MOBILIER OF AMERICA See Rocky Mountain Saints, pp. 628-9; Bancroft's History of Utah, pp. 644-46; True L. D. S. Herald, vol. xvi, pp. 84-86, Alex. H. Smith's letter describing the interview; Ibid, pp. 129-131. David Smith's account of the same.
[^2] SCHUYLER COLFAX'S DECLINE IN POPULARITY AND HIS CONNECTION WITH CREDIT MOBILIER OF AMERICA Waite's The Mormon Prophet, pp. 128-129. That the "emigration" east-ward might not lack dramatic interest, Waite also states that "General Connor deemed it necessary and advisable to send a strong escort with them as far as Green river, about 145 miles." (Ibid). Judge Waite opened his house for these "elders" of the "Reorganized Church" to preach in whenever they wished. (Letter from Edmund C. Briggs in the True L. D. S. Herald, vol. iv, pp. 89, 90. Copied into History of the Church, i. e. "Josephite," history, vol. iii, pp. 330-2.) Bowles also says these converts "left Utah in 1864-5 under government protection, for fear of massacre by the instruments of Young." (Our New West, p. 268).
[^3] The Godbeite leaders charged that Brigham Young was himself planning to establish a dynasty of his own house, to hold the presiding offices in the church, and Stenhouse declares that the Godbeites seized upon the contention of the Smith brothers on the subject of heredity, to "tell Brigham Young what the people felt respecting his dynasty project;" and quotes the following from a Utah Magazine editorial: "If we know the true feeling of our brethren, it is that they never intend Joseph Smith's nor any other man's son to preside over them, simply because of their sonship. The principle of heirship has cursed the world for ages, and with our brethren we expect to fight it till, with every other relic of tyranny, it is trodden under foot." (Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 635).
[^4] The Godbeite Movement, Tullidge's Quarterly Magazine, Oct., 1880, p. 51.
[^5] Bancroft's History of Utah, pp. 645-6.
[^6] Mr. Colfax resents somewhat bitterly—while overstating both the nature and the volume of opposition made to the Smith brothers in Utah—the refusal of President Young to open the tabernacle and the "Mormon" meeting houses to the propagandists of the 'Reorganized Church.'" (See The Mormon Question, a discussion between Vice President Schuyler Coxfax and Elder John Taylor, Deseret News print—1870—p. 14.) Elder Taylor's answer to this resentment was: "We do not invite men of almost all persuasions to preach to us in our tabernacles, but we are not so latitudinarian in our principles as to furnish meeting houses for all; we never considered this a part of the program." (Ibid, p. 23.)
[^7] "They were men almost without force of character, of lamb-like placidity, and of hopelessly mediocre ability; not shrewd enough to contend with their opponents, and not violent enough to arouse the populace. They accomplished little for the 'Reorganized Church.'" (Bancroft's History of Utah, p. 646.)
[^8] Deseret News of 15th and 16th of June, 1869.
[^9] Deseret News of June 30th, 1869.
[^10] See Tullidge's Quarterly Magazine, July, 1881, pp. 661-2.
[^11] Deseret News, weekly, of July 14th, 1869.
[^12] "We thank you for your congratulations," said President Young, "and duly appreciate the high estimate which you hold of our labors. It is true we are the Pioneers of this western civilization, and that we have to some extent assisted in the development of the resources of the great west. It is true that we have graded over 300 miles of the great Pacific railroad, an enterprise for which, by the way, we memorialized congress in 1852; but this is of the past. Our labors are before the world, they speak for themselves. Our aim is to press onward, diligently to perform the part allotted to us in the great drama of life, and, having ever in view the glory of God and our country, the rights of man and social independence, strive for the maintenance of those glorious principles which compose our federal constitution." (Deseret News, weekly, of July 14th, 1869, p. 270).
[^13] For all this see the following references: Story of the Mormons, p. 556 and note; History of Utah, vol. ii, pp. 324-5; Linn's Story of the Mormons, pp. 556, 570-1 and Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, pp. 547-8; Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, pp. 396-397.
[^14] The Alta California, published a purported interview of a sensational character between President Young and Senator Trumbull in which the former is quoted as saying: "If the government send had men here we shall just politely conduct them on a little trip to the boundary line of the territory and bid them go, never to return." Trumbull is represented as advising that he consult President Grant before taking such decided steps. President Young had said something akin to the above in a discourse at the April conference previous. Referring to the bad class of federal officers that had been sent to the territory he remarked: "I think hereafter that we will take such men up gently and carry them out of the territory and tell them not to come back again." But he also said in the very next sentence: "But we have gentlemen here as officers, men whom we respect and who respect us. But in some instances they have sent us thieves, liars, whoremongers, adulterers and swindlers. You may think this hard talk. I do not like to be under the necessity of using such language, but it is nevertheless true. Yet it is not often these things are mentioned. . . . Some may say that is coming out against the government. No it is not, it is against wicked administrators." (The discourse is published in Deseret News of June 9th, 1869).
[^15] Chicago press dispatch of July 12th, copied into Deseret News and accompanied by News editorial comment, weekly, impression of July 14th, 1869.
[^16] "Senator Trumbull—Mr. Young, may I say to the president that you intend to observe the laws under the Constitution?
[^17] Deseret News account of the arrival of the party, Oct. 6th, weekly; also Minutes of City Council Meeting of Oct. 1st. Ibid, p. 415.
[^18] Stenhouse assigns this as the reason for Colfax refusing the city's hospitality. (Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 638); so also Linn, (Story of the Mormons, p. 556). Referring to the subject in the course of his speech from the veranda of the Townsend House, the vice president said: "One thing I must allude to, personal to myself. The papers have published a discourse delivered last April by your highest ecclesiastical authority, which stated that the president and vice president of the United States were both gamblers and drunkards. (Voices in the crowd, 'He did not say so'). I had not heard before that it was denied; but I am glad to hear the denial now. Whether denied or not, however, I did not intend to answer railing with railing, nor personal attack with invective. I only wished to state publicly in this city, where the charge is said to have been made, that it was utterly untrue as to President Grant; and as to myself, that I never gambled to the value of a farthing, and have been a total abstinence man all the years of my manhood." (The Mormon Question, a discussion between John Taylor and Schuyler Colfax, Deseret News print, 1870, pp. 4, 5). This discourse was alleged to have been preached in April. The only discourse of President Young's delivered in April—or during the year—that in any way refers to the government or its officers is one preached on the 8th of April during the annual conference of 1869, and published in the Deseret News of June 9th. In that discourse, after pointing out the fact that the Lord must be the refuge of the saints, the president said: "What will the world do for us? What will our government do for us? Why, after settling this country for twenty years, they have at last deigned to extend to Utah the benefit of land laws,—preemption rights, homestead advantages. Whom have they sent here as our officers? As a general thing, such men as Drake and his associates. * * * What would the government do for us? Judging from the past, if we were to ask them for bread, they would give us a stone, for a fish they would give us a serpent; ask for an egg and they would send us a scorpion. This has been too much the case. The government is just as good as ever existed; but the administrators of the government have in many instances, been the most contemptible men that ever disgraced God's footstool. Some may say this is coming out against the government. No, it is not, it is against wicked administrators."
[^19] The Mormon Question, Taylor-Colfax Discussion, p. 7.
[^20] That these men overestimated their influence in the "Mormon" community is apparent in this: Mr. Stenhouse in an interview with Mr. Colfax pleaded with him not to have the national administration interfere with Utah affairs since by doing so it would "drive thousands back into the arms of Brigham Young who are ready to rebel against the 'one man power,' represented, as they held, in the person of Brigham Young." (See Godbeite Movement Tullidge's Quarterly Magazine, pp. 55, 56). But when the "schism" came, some three weeks later, the "thousands" that were "ready to rebel" did not materialize; the "new movement" had no perceptible effect upon the masses of the people; the "leaders" of the "movement," were all there was to it, and these in a short time dropped all pretensions as "religious reformers," and soon "manifested a skeptical spirit toward religion of every kind, and directed their energies more completely into channels of business and money making." (Bancroft's History of Utah, p. 650). Yet these men were the protestants against Brigham Young's "materialism," and "church commercialism!"
[^21] Mr. Stenhouse's reply to the sharp inquiry of the vice president was: "For God's sake, Mr. Colfax! Keep the United States off. If the government interferes and sends troops, you will spoil the opportunity, and drive the thousands back into the arms of Brigham Young, who are ready to rebel against the 'one man power.' Leave the Mormon elders alone to solve their own problems. We can do it; the government cannot. If you give us another 'Mormon War,' we shall heal up the breach, go back into full fellowship with the church and stand by the brethren. What else could we do? Our families, friends and life companions are all with the Mormon people. Mr. Colfax, take my word for it, the Mormons will fight the United States, if driven to it in defense of their faith, as conscientious religionists always have fought. The Mormons are naturally a loyal people. They only need to be broken off from the influence of Brigham Young. Depend upon it, Mr. Colfax, the government had better let us alone with this business, simply giving its protection to the 'new movement men.'" (Tullidge's Quarterly Magazine, Oct., 1880, pp. 55-6). This answer by Mr. Sten-house discloses the subject matter of the conversation—a contemplated crusade by the federal government against the Latter-day Saints.
[^22] See Note 1 and 2 end of chapter for brief statement of the "Credit Mobilier of America," and Mr. Colfax's relationship thereto.
[^23] "Just Out: We now have for sale at this office in pamphlet form, a sermon by the Reverend Dr. Newman, pastor of the Metropolitan Methodist Church, Washington (D. C.), and a reply to the same by Elder Orson Pratt, Sen. Price twenty-five cents per copy." (Deseret News, daily, of Aug. 3rd, 1870).
[^24] Deseret News, weekly, of Aug. 10th, 1870, p. 317. The Telegraph had by that time passed into the hands of Dr. Fuller, a non-"Mormon."
[^25] See Deseret News of August 3rd, 1870, editorial in anticipation of Newman's coming, according to reports from the east.
[^26] In justification of the comment I appeal to the correspondence itself, published in full in connection with the published Debate, pp. 1-8.
[^27] Deseret News, weekly, of August 24th, 1870.
[^28] Deseret News editorial account, impression, daily, June 15th.
[^29] See Deseret News, weekly, of Aug. 17th, 1870.
[^30] See the Debate, and also article on Dr. Newman's Marginal Law, by Orson Pratt, published in connection with the Pratt-Newman Debate, pp. 68-71.
[^31] Deseret News of Aug. 24th, 1870; also the published Debate, p. 58; and the Deseret News, daily, of the 17th of Aug., 1870.
[^32] See the speech of Delegate Hooper in congress, the Newman Washington sermon with answer of Elder Orson Pratt; the Pratt-Newman Debate; and more especially Thelyphthora, vol. i, ch. iv, pp. 74 to 300. My citation is to the second edition, 1781, and the part of the work referred to deals more especially with the subject of "Polygamy," the author saying this in defense of the title of his chapter: "Polygamy strictly speaking is of two sorts; either when one woman promiscuously admits of more husbands than one, or when one man is at the same time joined in marriage to more than one woman. The former of these is too abhorrent from nature, reason, and scripture to admit of a single argument in its favor, or ever to deserve a moment's consideration. The author therefore, by the word 'polygamy,' only means the latter, throughout this treatise." (Thelyphthora, vol. i, p. 75, note). It is in this sense also that the word is used in this History. More recent writers, I may say, have added nothing in the way of scholarship or thoroughness of treatment to Madden's argument for Bible sanction of polygamy, in the foregoing work.
[^33] Revelation on Marriage, Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cxxxii:6.
[^34] Revelation on Marriage, Ibid, verses 61-63.
[^35] On this phrase of the subject, the Right Reverend D. S. Tuttle, D. D., LL. D., formerly bishop of Montana, Idaho and Utah; and for seventeen years a resident of Utah and therefore in personal contact with "Mormonism," and now, 1917, bishop of Missouri—had an enlightening passage. He says in a chapter on "Mormonism:"
[^36] "Eugenics, the science of generative or procreative development, the doctrine of progressive development of the human race through improved conditions in the relations of the sexes; and "now recognized as a necessary development of the method into which Darwin has cast the thought of the age." (See Century Dictionary).
[^37] Romania B. Penrose, in a lecture before the Female Relief Society in Salt Lake City, excerpts of which were published in the Woman's Exponent, 1881, copied into Deseret News, weekly, of July 6th, 1881.
