B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 5 ( 1930)

272CHAPTER CXXXV

272UTAH MISSION OF THE "REORGANIZED CHURCH"—VISIT OF VICE PRESIDENT COLFAX TO UTAH—CONTEMPLATED "MORMON" CRUSADE—NOTABLE DEBATES

272IN the midst of the Godbeite movement, treated in the preceding chapter, Alexander H. Smith, and David Hyrum Smith, made their appearance in Salt Lake City as missionaries from the "Reorganized Church of the Latter-day Saints," the headquarters of which was at Plano, Illinois. Alexander was the third son of the Prophet, and David, his posthumous son, having been born on the 18th of November following his father's martyrdom, 27th of June, 1844. They came to urge the claim of their brother, "Young Joseph," as the oldest son of the Prophet was then called, to the presidency of the church, both on account—as they claimed—of the place being his by heredity, and by reason of an alleged ordination to the office by his father previous to the martyrdom. The Smith brothers obtained an interview with President Young in his office, in the presence of a number of leading officers of the church, among whom were a number of the cousins and perhaps other relatives of these young men. The interview was not satisfactory on either side; from no human standpoint, perhaps, could it be expected that it would be, in view of the conflicting claims and interests represented by the parties to it. The use of the Salt Lake City tabernacle for a public meeting that the two young men applied for was refused by President Young, and reference to past events at Nauvoo resulted in some unpleasantness of feeling. [^1]

A FORMER "JOSEPHITE" MISSION IN UTAH

Several years before this, viz., in 1863, two missionaries from the "Reorganized Church," Edmund C. Briggs and Alexander McCord, visited Utah, and took up a proselyting work in which, it is claimed, they succeeded in bringing into their fold about three hundred members, half of whom, according to Waite, left Utah for the eastern states in the following summer. [^2] It scarcely seems likely that there was any connivance between the Godbeite movement and the advent of this second Utah mission from the "Reorganized Church," and doubtless their appearance at that juncture falls under the head of what men call "mere coincidence." What was lacking in cordiality in President Young's reception of these messengers of a rival organization was of course granted by the dissatisfied elements in the Church of the Latter-day Saints, by apostates, and by the Gentiles. Walker Brothers tendered the use of "Independence Hall," the Gentile forum for everything anti-"Mormon;" and here the young men began their mission. The people naturally had a curiosity to both see and hear the sons of the first Prophet of the New Dispensation, and crowded their first meetings. Elder Joseph F. Smith, recently received into the apostles' quorum, a cousin of Alexander and David Smith's, opposed their propaganda in a brief series of public discussions, in which he readily established the fact that Joseph Smith, the first Prophet of the New Dispensation, was responsible for the introduction of the plural marriage system of the church both in principle and practice—which the representatives of the new organization denied; also he proved the legality of Brigham Young's succession to the presidency under the principles of ecclesiastical government revealed to the church.

The Godbeite party affected through its organ, the Utah Magazine, to act the part of an umpire in the controversy for a time, but were not prepared to accept the principle of heredity advocated by the "Reorganized Church" representatives; [^3] and as nearly all the leaders in that movement were practical polygamists, and declared their intention to maintain that principle, [^4] they could not accept the viewpoint of the Smith brothers upon that subject; and hence there was no ground upon which the two factions could form any practical alliance; and the "Reorganized" agents were soon dropped by the Godbeites.

The effect of the whole movement of the "reorganization" under the Smith brothers, upon the Church of the Latter-day Saints in Utah, from first to last in anti-"Mormon" literature is given an unwarranted importance, as well in the first as in this second mission to Utah. To represent, as Bancroft does, that "at first the followers of Brigham trembled for the supremacy of their leader," [^5] referring to the mission of the Smith brothers in Utah, is ridiculous; there never was any such trembling by anybody, anywhere, at any time. Though given encouragement by the Gentiles of Salt Lake City, by the Godbeites, by the United States officials of Utah, by the Colfax party, who happened to be passing through Utah on their second visit when the Smith brothers were making their utmost efforts at propaganda [^6]—yet not all these circumstances could render their mission formidable. The utter lack of substance in the things for which they contended, coupled with "hopelessly mediocre ability" [^7] in the propagandists, doomed their mission from the first to abject failure in Utah.

INFLUX OF PROMINENT VISITORS TO UTAH DURING THE FIRST SIX MONTHS OF THE RAILROAD'S ADVENT

One expectation with reference to the completion of the transcontinental railroad began early to be realized—the influx of prominent visitors to Salt Lake City and the territory. In mid-June, 1869, came Hon. Benjamin F. Wade, late president of the United States senate, and author of the Wade bill considered in a previous chapter. He was accompanied by his wife. At the same time came General Philip H. Sheridan and several officers of his staff, Generals Boynton, Hopkins, and Rucker; United States Senator Roscoe Conklin, of New York, Mr. Julian, of Indiana, a member of the house committee on territories, and later the author of a bill of one section granting the elective franchise to the women of Utah; Governor Campbell of Wyoming and others. [^8]

Besides those mentioned came, during the first six months after the completion of the railroad—J. E. Caldwell Heyer, editor of the Chicago Journal of Commerce; the Congressional Committee of Ways and Means, en route for the Pacific coast, headed by the chairman, Hon. Samuel Hooper of Massachusetts, visited the city, and were serenaded at their hotel. Hon. W. D. Kelley of Penn. thanked the citizens in behalf of the committee. On the same day arrived Miss Anna Dickinson, a lecturer on woman's rights, education, etc. She was accompanied by her brother, Rev. J. Dickinson. The noted lady lecturer remained long enough—from the 19th to the 23rd of June—to gather data for an anti-"Mormon" lecture which she afterwards delivered, it is said, with great eclat. On the 20th of the same month—Sunday—Rev. Dr. Todd, of Pittsfield, Mass., a Congregational minister, and author of The Serpent in the Doves Nest (a sex theme) and other books, occupied the tabernacle pulpit. Baron Gauldree Boilleau, formerly French consul at New York, envoy extra-ordinary and minister plenipotentiary from the court of France to Peru. A large eastern party of railroad magnates and their wives, accompanied by a number of newspaper writers and editors, among them Horace White, editor of the Chicago Tribune, arrived on the 26th of June. "Ned Buntline," otherwise Colonel E. Z. C. Judson, writer and lecturer. He remained some time in the city, wrote poetry about it (see poem in Deseret News of July 7th), and finally lectured on a local subject—"The Industrial and Social Importance of Total Abstinence from the use of Intoxicating Drinks, as Exemplified by the People Here"—Salt Lake City. Crosby S. Noyer and S. H. Kaufman, editors of the Washington Evening Star; the Wisconsin party, of twenty-seven, state officials, legislators, bankers and editors, chiefly. In August came Dr. G. L. Miller, editor of the Omaha Herald, who ever after was the steadfast friend of Utah and the "Mormon" people. An excursion party of seven led by Rev. E. D. G. Prime, editor of the New York Observer, on a tour round the world, stopped over in Salt Lake City. On the 21st of August came the Congressional Committee on Retrenchment, with a number of invited guests. On the committee from the United States senate were Hon. James W. Potter of New Hampshire; Hon. Carl Schurz, of Mo.; Hon. Allen G. Thurman, of Ohio; from the house of representatives, three members; Senator J. S. Morill, of Vermont, was also of the party. They attended service at the tabernacle on Sunday, and visited President Young at his office the following day. On the last day of the month another senatorial party arrived, Hon. Richards Yates, United States senator from Illinois; Hans W. Pitt Kellogg, and J. S. Harris, United States senators from Louisiana; also with the same party Colonel Cask E. Carr and Judge J. G. Wilson, both of Illinois. A few days later came United States Senator T. W. Lipton and wife, of Nebraska. Early in September the Quincy Excursion Party arrived, among whom were many who had friends and relatives in Salt Lake City; also ex-Lievtenant Governor of Illinois John Wood—1856-60—who was mayor of the city of Quincy at the time the Latter-day Saints were driven en mass from Missouri, and were kindly received by the mayor and citizens of Quincy, at which point the saints were entering Illinois. Throughout all their troubles up to their evacuation of Nauvoo and even afterwards, the saints found a consistent and strong friend in ex-Lieutenant Governor John Wood. The eccentric George Francis Train visited Salt Lake City in September, and delivered several characteristic lectures in the theater. He described the "Mormon" religion as the only one "ever established where the founder thereof had both a father and mother." A party arrived on the 29th of September en route for the orient which included Mr. Rangabe, the acting Greek minister, M. Louis Strauss, consul for Belgium to Japan, M. Emile Mountran, chancellor to the Belgian consulate, "with other gentlemen and ladies from all parts of the world," said the announcement of the News on the arrival of this party.

And so the notables of the earth continued to come to "Zion," even before the branch railroad between Ogden and Salt Lake City was constructed, and still more abundantly did they come in the year following when that road was put into commission; Salt Lake City was on the highway of the nation, and all the notables journeying east or west stopped off to inquire concerning the things of which they had heard. And so it continues to this day—1930—only much more abundantly than in former times.

THE NATION'S SECRETARY OF STATE IN UTAH

In the month of June came Hon. W. H. Seward, late secretary of state during both the Lincoln and Johnson administrations. His party was heartily greeted by a committee from the city council—the mayor being absent—and driven in carriages to the principal points of interest in the city and its suburbs. There were band serenades in front of the hotel at which the party was stopping—the Townsend House—and loud calls from the citizens who had assembled to hear speeches. Mr. Seward responded by brief remarks, but thought the circumstances under which he was traveling forbade him discussing public or political affairs. "They do not forbid me, however," said the ex-secretary of state, "acknowledging the hospitality and kindness which have been shown me by my fellow citizens. That is all I can do, and I do it with a free, kind, and good heart. I thank you for the hospitality you have shown me since I came to your city. I thank you for your attendance tonight, and I pray God that the great marvel which I witness here may result in establishing a good civilization in the heart of the American continent; and be a sign, token, and assurance to mankind in every nation of the earth that it cannot fail, if it be prosecuted by industry and virtue, in advancing the welfare of the whole human race." [^9]

President Young was absent visiting the settlements in Cache valley on the arrival of Mr. Seward, but as that gentleman expressed a very great desire to meet the founder of Utah, Mr. Wm. Jennings, at whose house Mr. Seward was a guest at a dinner, proffered to have President Young in Salt Lake City within three days if the ex-secretary of state would stay so long, a proposition that was readily agreed to. Three days later the two illustrious gentlemen met "at a private dinner and a cozy interview," at the home of Mr. Jennings. "National affairs" rather than "Mormon problems," we are assured, "formed the topic of conversation," the interview lasting through several hours, ending with increased mutual admiration between the great American colonizer and the illustrious American statesman. [^10]

VISIT OF A COMMERCIAL PARTY

Less than a month later came United States Senator Lyman Trumbull, of Illinois, and a large commercial party chiefly from Chicago. There were prominent representatives of the banks, the board of trade, and the different departments of the mercantile and manufacturing interests of Chicago. An interview was had with President Young at his office on the tenth of July, at which there were mutual felicitations and exchanges of courtesies. Colonel James H. Bowen, having in charge the party, acted as master of ceremonies. The purpose of the party, as explained by Colonel Bowen, was "to facilitate commercial relations with localities made tributary by the completion of the Union and Central Pacific Railroad;" and esteeming Utah territory to be one of the important points among such localities, they had stopped over to give greetings and congratulations to President Young and his people, on the completion of the railroad, and the release of his people from their long and profound isolation. They had been "deeply awed and grandly impressed" with the majesty of the scenery of the far-famed Echo and Weber canons, "and filled with wonder at the herculean task accomplished in the building of the railroad through and over such seemingly insurmountable obstacles of nature in so incredibly short space of time. "A considerable share of the credit and honor of this achievement properly belongs to you and your people," said Colonel Bowen in his formal address to President Young when introducing his party,—"who rendered hearty, efficient and timely aid to the company charged with the completion of this gigantic national highway, and we hope you will live long to enjoy the fruits of these beneficial labors." A hearty welcome was extended by President Young to the party, and fitting acknowledgment made of the compliments paid to the "Mormon" people. [^11]

"It is a great advantage to our people," said the Deseret News in its editorial account of this party's visit, "to be seen at home by such a class of men as comprise this party. They are probably as free from prejudice as any men in the nation, and however much they may differ with us religiously, they can perceive that we are no common people, and that we possess qualities which entitle us to respect." [^12] But alas! this same commercial party fell into the hands of the anti-"Mormons" in Salt Lake City, before leaving Utah, and were well surcharged with anti-"Mormon" virus as became abundantly evident from their reports of Utah conditions to the eastern press. Linn says this commercial party "was welcomed and affiliated with the Gentile element." Whitney declares that the party were "wined and dined" by the anti-"Mormon" element of the community at the residence of Joseph R. Walker, where they became imbued with strong anti-"Mormon" sentiments, which through their reports of conditions in Utah had much to do with the agitation of the "Mormon" question in the east that "determined President Grant upon the prosecution of a vigorous, not to say belligerent, policy towards Brigham Young and the "Mormons." Senator Trumbull, however, should be excepted from the number of those affected by this anti"Mormon" virus, as he remained friendly disposed towards the "Mormon" people, and voted against several anti-"Mormon" measures introduced into the senate of the United States, among them the Frelinghuysen bill. Tullidge gives almost a Bacchanalian coloring to this banquet:

281"The two large rooms of Mr. Walker's residence were filled. Over forty persons were present. The munificant host had abundantly supplied his distinguished guests with champagne. Colfax and his friends, on their first visit to our city, fell upon strawberry beds, and discussed social problems with Brigham and the apostles over the dinner table, where the blessing was surely asked and 'peace' and the 'good spirit' invoked. But this meeting was belligerent. Champagns was better suited to its purposes than either strawberries or blessings. The spirit of war invoked rather than the 'Good spirit of peace.' There was, they say, that day, 'The fullest and freest expression that had ever occurred in Utah,' all of course with a strong decided anti-Mormon animus and related to the company that famous conversation between himself and aim. 'Everybody gave vent;' 'war talk ran around;' Senator Trumbull President Young, in which the latter had said in effect that, if the federal officers didn't behave themselves, he would have them ridden out of the city; and from this meeting the report of that conversation between Senator Trumbull and President Young ran throughout the United States; and gave to Vice President Colfax the advantage to push General Grant almost to the verge of actual war against Mormon Utah. Such was the bearing of that gathering held at the house of Mr. J. R. Walker, over Utah affairs, in July, 1869." [^13]

Tullidge was persona gratia to the non-"Mormons" at that period, being connected with the Godbeite movement, and able to speak as by the card on the incident. One report to which the Deseret News took strong exception stated that Brigham Young told Senator Trumbull that he would probably hear of some federal officials being put out of the territory; [^14] that Brigham Young had said that the "Mormons" would not obey the law of congress prohibiting polygamy, "because congress had no right to interfere with that matter." [^15]

282The Alta version of the interview represents President Young as giving evasive answers to Senator Trumbull's direct question; [^16] the Chicago press dispatch, however, more likely represents what President Young said, since it gives the reason for the answer—"congress had no right to interfere with that matter"—on the ground, of course, that it would be an act in violation of the constitutional provision forbidding congress to prohibit the free exercise of religion.

VISIT OF VICE PRESIDENT COLFAX TO SALT LAKE CITY

On the 3rd of October, 1869, Hon. Schuyler Colfax, now vice president of the United States, made his second visit to Salt Lake City. He was again accompanied by former Lieutenant Governor Bross, of Illinois, and Mr. Bowles of the Springfield (Mass.) Republican. The absence of Mr. Richardson, of the New York Tribune, who was with the party on its first visit, was expressly regretted by Mr. Colfax. The city council voted to tender the hospitality of the city to the distinguished visitors, and pursuant to that arrangement sent a committee of two of the council with carriages to Uintah Station to meet the party, while the mayor of the city, Hon. Daniel H. Wells, Hon. W. H. Hooper and others were appointed to act as a committee of reception on the arrival of the party at the Townsend House. These courtesies, however, were declined, ostensibly on the ground that "the party was traveling in a strictly private capacity;" [^17] but really because Mr. Colfax had seen published in the eastern papers a purported discourse by Brigham Young in which he was represented as saying "that the president and vice president of the United States were both gamblers and drunkards." [^18]

The vice president, while in Salt Lake City delivered a very frank speech in which he discussed the issues then existing between the federal government and the Church of the Latter-day Saints. The vice president rather loftily set aside the premises of the question on the side of the saints, by saying: "I do not concede that the institution you have established here [meaning the 'Mormon' marriage system], and which is condemned by law, is a question of religion;" and with the premises of the opposition thus set aside he proceeded to admonish them to obedience to the law; at the same time, however, avowing that he had "no strictures to utter" as to the "creed" of the "Mormons" "on any really religious question."

This contention was admirably answered by Elder John Taylor in his review of the vice president's speech, when he said:

"With all due reference, I do think that if Mr. Colfax had carefully examined our religious faith he would have arrived at other conclusions. In the absence of this I might ask, who constituted Mr. Colfax a judge of my religious faith? I think he has stated that 'The faith of every man is a matter between himself and God alone.' Mr. Colfax has a perfect right to state and feel that he does not believe in the revelation on which my religious faith is based, nor in my faith at all; but has he the right to dictate my religious faith? I think not; he does not consider it religion, but it is nevertheless mine. If a revelation from God makes no difference; I know it is. The Jews did not believe in Jesus but Mr. Colfax and I do; their unbelief did not alter the revelation. Marriage has from time immemorial, among civilized nations, been considered a religious ordinance. It was so considered by the Jews. It is looked upon, by the Catholic clergy, as one of their sacraments. It is so treated by the Greek church. The ministers of the Episcopal church say, in their marriage formula, 'What God has joined together, let not man put asunder;' and in some of the Protestant churches their members are disfellowshipped for marrying what are termed unbelievers. So I am in hopes, one of these times, should occasion require it, to call upon our friend, Mr. Colfax, to redeem his pledge. To defend for us our religious faith, with as much zeal as the right of every other denomination throughout the land." [^19]

JOHN TAYLOR'S FURTHER ANSWER TO THE VICE PRESIDENT

The speech of Mr. Colfax brought forth an able answer from Elder John Taylor, of the council of the apostles, which appeared in the New York Tribune and was widely copied in the eastern press, and to which Mr. Colfax replied in a more formal article in the New York Independent of the 2nd of December, 1869. To this Elder Taylor made a rejoinder; and so satisfied were the church authorities with the soundness of the principles on which Elder Taylor based his argument, and the skill with which he conducted it, that the speech of Mr. Colfax and the several pro et con papers that grew out of it, were gathered up and published in pamphlet form, under the title, The Mormon Question—The Taylor-Colfax Discussion.

MR. COLFAX AND RELATIONS WITH THE GODBEITES

Another item in connection with Mr. Colfax's second visit is of historic value. While he was in Salt Lake City the vice president was taken into the confidence of the Godbeite conspirators and informed of the intended "schism" in the "Mormon" church about to be inaugurated by the group of brilliant and supposedly influential men, [^20] by the insidious and secret methods agreed upon by Godbe and Harrison during their sojourn together in the eastern states, the previous summer, and as agreed to by their confidants, Kelsey, Lawrence, Tullidge, Stenhouse and Sherman, on their return to Utah.

286Mr. Colfax was doubtless gratified to find that there was so large a prospect of revolt against the authority of Brigham Young within the "Mormon" church; but it is equally certain that he would have been more pleased to have found those gentlemen who were promising the "schism," enlisted in a crusade inaugurated by the government than that they should occupy the position of a reform movement within the church. That Mr. Colfax contemplated a crusade by the federal government admits of no question. Riding with Mr. Stenhouse through the city during this second visit, and engaging in a confidential talk concerning "Mormon" affairs, the vice president put the pointed question to Mr. Stenhouse: "Will Brigham Young fight?"

286It is to be inferred from the whole tenor of the Colfax-Stenhouse conversation, as reported by the latter to Mr. Edward W. Tullidge, that if Brigham Young would fight the Grant administration, a "short shift" might be made of the "Mormon" question, as a different outcome from the contest with Buchanan's administration might be expected. [^21]

Undoubtedly Mr. Colfax felt chagrined that his suggestion made on the occasion of his first visit that a "revelation" be obtained prohibiting polygamy, had not been acted upon; and he was now determined that there should be a crusade which would break down the masterly influence of Brigham Young in Utah and compel obedience to the congressional bigamy laws; and to his influence in the early part of Grant's first administration was due, in large part, the bitter anti-"Mormon" crusade of that period, and the years immediately following. However, so far as Mr. Colfax was concerned his influence in the nation soon came to an end, not only as to the "Mormon" question but as to all other public questions—going down in the general maelstrom of public distrust and indignation against all those who were involved in the irregularities of the "Credit Mobilier of America" affair. [^22]

THE COMING TO UTAH OF DR. J. P. NEWMAN—UNITED STATES SENATE CHAPLAIN

Conflict over PolygamyHCAmong the prominent national characters who visited Utah in the summer of 1870 was the Rev. Dr. J. P. Newman of the Metropolitan Methodist church of Washington, D. C.—of which President Grant was a trustee and member. Dr. Newman was also chaplain of the United States senate. The recent efforts in congress to pass the Cullom bill, the purpose of which was to aid in making effective the anti-bigamy law of 1862, had aroused widespread discussion of the subject of polygamy in the press of the United States. Delegate Hooper's speech on the floor of the house of representatives, defending plural marriage as a religious institution of his constituents, having Bible sanction, as well as the sanction of the special revelation to their church; and, moreover, Bible warrant as the Bible was interpreted by very eminent Bible scholars, called forth much comment from the press of the country, and led Dr. Newman to feel that some answer to this Biblical argument should be made. Accordingly on the 25th of April he delivered an elaborate discourse at the Metropolitan Methodist Church on the subject of polygamy, in which he sought to maintain the Biblical condemnation of that form of marriage. Among those present were President and Mrs. Grant, Vice President Colfax, Chief Justice Chase, James G. Blaine, then speaker of the house of representatives, and numerous other high national officials. It was an occasion when Washington officialdom turned out to hear. The sermon in extenso, with a full description of official attendance, the psychological atmosphere, etc., was published in the New York Herald of 25th April. To this Washington sermon Elder Orson Pratt made an extended answer in a letter to Utah's delegate to congress, Mr. W. H. Hooper, which was published together with Dr. Newman's sermon in pamphlet form, issuing from the Deseret News press just upon the arrival of Dr. Newman in Salt Lake city. [^23]

Conflict over PolygamyHCA PUBLIC DEBATE ON POLYGAMY PROPOSED

Conflict over PolygamyHCA local paper, the Salt Lake Daily Telegraph, on the 3rd of May, had suggested in its columns that Dr. Newman's Washington sermon "should have been delivered in the tabernacle in Salt Lake City, with ten thousand Mormons to listen to it and then Elder Orson Pratt, or some other prominent Mormon should have had a hearing on the other side and the people allowed to decide." "Let us have a fair contest of peaceful argument, and let the best side win," said the Telegraph writer. "We will publish their notices in the Telegraph," he continued, "report their discourses as far as possible, use every influence in our power, if any is needed, to secure them the biggest halls and crowded congregations, and we are satisfied that every opportunity will be given them to conduct a campaign. * * * Come on and convert them (i. e. the Latter-day Saints) by the peaceful influences of the Bible, instead of using the means now proposed [special, hostile legislation]. Convince them by reason and scriptural argument, and no Cullom bill will be required."

Conflict over PolygamyHC289This suggestion of the Telegraph, by that time not a "Mormon" publication at all, [^24] Dr. Newman in Washington was pleased to interpret as a challenge to him to visit Utah and debate the question of polygamy, "with Brigham Young." Whereupon, and without further inquiry or arrangement, but not without certain trumpetings through press dispatches of his intentions, [^25] Dr. Newman started for Utah.

Conflict over PolygamyHC289The day following his arrival in Salt Lake City, the Doctor addressed a letter to Brigham Young (dated Aug. 6th), informing the president of his arrival, and stating that he was now "ready to hold a public debate" with President Young, "as the head of the Mormon church," on the question, "Does the Bible Sanction Polygamy." Naturally President Young having issued no challenge, and the Telegraph in no sense being his organ, or the organ of the Church of the Latter-day Saints, he disclaimed having issued a challenge, or being responsible for any issued by others; but extended to Dr. Newman an invitation to address the congregation in the tabernacle on Sunday—the above exchange of letters occurring on Saturday. This invitation was declined, as the Doctor claimed to have made other arrangements for speaking in the city on Sunday, viz., at Faust's Hall, where but very few, on account of the hall being a small and inconvenient place, had the opportunity of hearing the eminent minister.

Conflict over PolygamyHCEXCHANGE OF LETTERS: BRIGHAM YOUNG—DR. NEWMAN

Conflict over PolygamyHCAn exchange of acrimonious letters took place over this proposed debate, in which Dr. Newman added nothing to his reputation either in gentlemanly deportment, manifestation of Christian spirit, or skill in conducting a controversy. [^26] President Young in one of his letters to the Doctor said:

Conflict over PolygamyHC290"If you think you are capable of proving the doctrine of 'plurality of wives' unscriptural, tarry here as a missionary; we will furnish you the suitable place, the congregations, and plenty of our elders, any of whom will discuss with you on that or any other scriptural doctrine."

Conflict over PolygamyHC290This the Doctor resented as an "impertinent suggestion," and regarded it as a "cheap and safe attempt to avoid" the debate Dr. Newman had come to Utah to hold with Brigham Young. To bring matters to a head Dr. Newman issued a direct challenge to President Young to personally debate with him the question, "Does the Bible Sanction Polygamy," and the president accepted the challenge, but named John Taylor or Orson Pratt as his representatives in the debate, Dr. Newman to take his choice between them. Dr. Newman was highly displeased with this arrangement and wrote a sharp letter to President Young, saying that he had challenged "Brigham Young" to debate, not John Taylor or Orson Pratt. However, since Brigham Young had refused to debate with him, the Doctor consented to meet Orson Pratt in public discussion of the proposed question. It seemed probable at one time when arranging the preliminaries that the debate would not take place owing to the inability of the conferers to satisfactorily arrange the conditions of the debate. Whereupon President Young renewed his invitation to Dr. Newman, under date of Aug. 11th, in which, after noting what seemed to be the end of negotiations for the debate, the president said:

Conflict over PolygamyHC290"I take pleasure in again tendering you the use of either of the tabernacles in this city in which to deliver one or more lectures, as you may choose, upon the subject of plurality of wives commonly termed 'polygamy,' each lecture to be of such length as you may please, to be delivered at such hours in the daytime as you may appoint." [^27]

Conflict over PolygamyHC291"DOES THE BIBLE SANCTION POLYGAMY"—PRATT vs. NEWMAN

Conflict over PolygamyHC291It was finally arranged, however, for a public debate to be held between Dr. Newman and Orson Pratt. The question to be: "Does the Bible Sanction Polygamy?" Elder Orson Pratt to take the affirmative of the question. It was arranged for the debate to continue through three days, two hours each day, the time being equally divided between the speakers,—one hour each. "The Bible in the original and English tongues" to be "the only standard of authority in the debate." The discussion occurred on the 12th, 13th and 14th of June. The attendance on the first day was between three and four thousand; the second day, much larger, and on the third day, Sunday, it was estimated that the attendance was eleven thousand. [^28] A full report of the debate was given from day to day in the principal newspapers of Salt Lake City, and in the Deseret News current weekly impression, [^29] so that the "Mormon" people throughout Utah were immediately presented with the evidence and argument that could be adduced from the Bible against the institution they had accepted in faith and practice.

Conflict over PolygamyHCDr. Newman in his Washington sermon had made an effort to substitute a marginal rendering for the translation of the text of Leviticus xviii:18; so that whereas in the text it reads: "Neither shalt thou take a wife to her sister, to vex her," etc., it would be made to read—from the marginal rendering—"Neither shalt thou take one wife to another to vex her," etc. Accepting this marginal rendering Dr. Newman had in this passage the law of the Bible he could find nowhere else—"Neither shalt thou take one wife to another." Elder Pratt having observed the stress, that Dr. Newman laid upon this marginal rendering, hoped that he would introduce it in the debate in the tabernacle. Accordingly, he himself, to encourage the doctor and to give him confidence, made reference to an unimportant marginal passage which had the desired effect. The Doctor armed with the opinion of some modern Biblical scholars assumed the marginal rendering as expressing "the great constitutional law, before which all other laws relating to plural marriage were to be nullified and vanish away like smoke;" but Elder Pratt took up the Hebrew phrase, "ishah et ahotah," which in the text of the authorized version is translated "a wife to her sister," and maintained it as the proper, legitimate, literal rendering of each word, much to the surprise of Dr. Newman who was not aware that his "Mormon" opponent was acquainted with the Hebrew. With the collapsing of his great marginal law the rest of the Doctor's arguments fell with it. [^30]

Conflict over PolygamyHCQUESTION ON TIME LIMITS OF THE DEBATE

Conflict over PolygamyHCDr. Newman preferred that the debate be so conducted that the affirmative would occupy the whole time in one day's meeting, and the negative the next day's time, and so continue to the close of the debate. Elder Pratt preferred that the speakers occupy part of each day's meeting in half hour speeches, two speeches on each side a day, the debate "to be continued as long as desired by Dr. Newman." A one hour speech for each side per day was the compromise. The matter of Elder Pratt being willing to have the discussion continued as long as desired by Dr. Newman is mentioned here because the Doctor has said in discussing the preliminaries that he would like "nine hours to bring forth his arguments." Yet it was Dr. Newman that limited the discussion to three days and two hours to each session of the debate. Elder Pratt was willing for the debate to "continue as long as desired by Dr. Newman;" and in his second speech in the debate referred to the matter of time, saying: "Dr. Newman has said he would like nine hours to bring forth his arguments, and his reasoning for the benefit of the poor people of Utah. I wish he would not only take nine hours, but nine weeks and nine months, and be indeed a philanthropist and missionary in our midst." But notwithstanding all this in his closing speech of the debate, Dr. Newman sought to create the impression that he had been limited in time by his opponent. He said: "I regret very much that I have not time to notice all the points which have been brought forward. I desired to do so. I pleaded for more time: but time was denied us, I am therefore restsricted to one hour." This lapse of the Doctor in the matter of truth was rebuked by the Deseret News, editorially the day following the debate, where the above facts are set forth. [^31]

Conflict over PolygamyHCTHE DEBATERS RESPECTIVELY

Conflict over PolygamyHCThere can be no question that the weight of evidence and the force of argument in the debate was on the side of the affirmative, while in flourish of rhetoric and in eloquence of appeal to sentiment Dr. Newman doubtless excelled his opponent. To this flourish and to this appeal Elder Pratt paid but little attention; he adhered strictly to the task before him, namely, to prove that the Bible sanctioned polygamy. As to whether plurality of wives conformed best to modern ideas of the purpose of matrimony or not, that was beside the present issue; whether it was the most convenient and the most desirable system of marriage for all classes and conditions of men in modern times, was not the question. The plain, simple question for discussion was, "Does the Bible Sanction Polygamy?" and if the giving of laws by Jehovah, which under some circumstances and conditions enforced a plurality of wives upon God's people as a rule of conduct is a Bible truth—and it is; if divine legislation conserving the rights of both polygamous wives and their offspring can be cited from the Bible—and it can be; if blessing these unions and making them fruitful in direct answer to prayer is a Bible fact—and it is; if honoring with his favor and fellowship the offspring of polygamous unions finds Bible illustration—and it does; if owning and blessing as the special favorites and servants of Jehovah the men who practiced this system of marriage is the Bible-represented attitude of Jehovah towards these polygamists,—and it is; then, all this being true, there can be no question that the Bible sanctions this form of marriage. [^32]

Conflict over PolygamyHC294THE REASON FOR THE PRACTICE OF PLURAL MARRIAGE AMONG THE LATTER-DAY SAINTS

Conflict over PolygamyHC294And yet it was not because the Bible sanctioned polygamy that it was accepted as matter of faith and practice by the Latter-day Saints. On the contrary, it became a principle of faith and practice with them because God had revealed it to them through their Prophet as a true and righteous principle in itself, and permissible within certain limitations and conditions, and for specific purposes. The Latter-day Saints' appeal to the Bible for its sanction was merely for corroboration of the righteousness of the principle revealed to them in the New Dispensation of things God was unfolding to the world, and this they found. As confirming the truth and righteousness of the revelation they had received, the Bible was strong in its sanctions, and they could be assured that what God had sanctioned by so many and varied circumstances bespeaking his favor—noted above and expounded at length in the learned works cited,—could not be other than true and righteous.

Conflict over PolygamyHC295As for polygamy being at variance with the modern conceptions of the purpose of the wedded state, a menace to the sanctity of the home and the convenience and pleasures of life, elements of the question introduced by Dr. Newman that were foreign to the issue in his debate with Elder Pratt, they constitute another question.

Conflict over PolygamyHCAN ACADEMIC DISCUSSION OF THE PLURAL FEATURE OF THE SYSTEM

Conflict over PolygamyHCLatter-day Saints did not accept into their faith and practice the plural wife system idea that it would increase the comfort, or added to the ease of any one. From the first it was known that it would involve sacrifice, to make a large demand upon the faith, patience, hope, and charity of all who should attempt to carry out its requirements. Its introduction was not a call to ease or pleasure, but to religious duty; it was not an invitation to self-indulgence, but to self-conquest; its purpose was not earth-happiness, but earth-life discipline, undertaken in the interest of special advantages for succeeding generations of men. That purpose was to give to succeeding generations a superior fatherhood and motherhood, by enlarging the opportunities of men of high character, moral integrity, and spiritual development to become in larger measure the progenitors of the race. To give to women of like character and development a special opportunity to consecrate themselves to the high mission of motherhood. The new and everlasting covenant of marriage, was instituted for the fullness of God's glory. [^33] Under it "if any man espouse a virgin," to quote the law, "and desire to espouse another, and the first give her consent; and if he espouses the second, and they are virgins, and have vowed to no other man, then is he justified; he cannot commit adultery, for they are given unto him [i. e. under the law of God and by the authority of God's priesthood]; for they are given unto him to multiply and replenish the earth," according to God's commandment, and to fulfill the promise which was given by the Father, "before the foundation of the world, and for their exaltation in the eternal worlds, that they may bear the souls of men; for herein," said Jesus, through whom the revelation was given, "is the work of my Father continued, that he may be glorified." [^34] There is nothing here or elsewhere in the revelation promising ease or happiness or pleasure; there is nothing but an exalted motive presented for this marriage system,—the bearing of the souls of men, "replenishing the earth" with the race of men. Procreation of the race is the first and high purpose of the marriage institution, all else incidental; and procreation under conditions the most favorable to the welfare of the offspring, and hence to the race; first in giving in larger measure progenitors of high character—men who have given evidence of upright, temperate, virtuous lives; women, chaste, noble, and willing to consecrate their lives to the duty of motherhood, to this end sacrificing earthly pleasure, including the exclusive companionship of the husband promised in monogamous marriages. As some women against the promptings of natural inclinations of the social instincts, of the cravings for wedlock companionship, and the desire for offspring, will renounce the world and the noble office of motherhood itself, and retire into dismal retreats and spend their lives in prayer and meditation, only emerging into the world to render service of teaching the youth, visiting the needy, or nursing the sick; so plural wives among the Latter-day Saints, and first wives who consented to their husbands entering into these relations, accepted the institution from the highest moral and religious motives. [^35] First as being a commandment of God instituted "for their exaltation in the eternal worlds, that they may bear the souls of men;" and, second, that they might bear the souls of men under conditions that gave largest promise of improving the race and bringing forth the supermen who shall lead the way to that higher state of things for which the world is waiting; and which the first condition precedent to obtaining, is a consecrated fatherhood and motherhood, such as was contemplated in the plural marriage system of the Latter-day Saints. The first consideration in this marriage system was not exclusive companionship, pleasure, ease, temporal happiness; but offspring and their physical, moral, spiritual and intellectual welfare, in a word—race culture. This required self-discipline, always involving sacrifice of self, and living constantly in the truest and highest altruistic spirit. It was in the name of a divinely ordered species of eugenics [^36] that the Latter-day Saints accepted the revelation which included a plurality of wives.

Conflict over PolygamyHCIt was not to gratify the sex-lust of man that polygamy was instituted; nor to provide a better system of sex-relations than monogamous marriage with promiscuous sex indulgence tacitly allowed (i. e. prostitution). It is not enough to say that a plurality of wives is a better system, has more of justice in it, than monogamous marriage supplemented by a plurality of mistresses, or one wife and promiscuous indulgence by prostitution; for the efficient answer to all that will be found in the ready reply to the question, "Why have either?" Why not have monogamy, and insist upon strict continence within that relationship as the best adjustment of the sex-relations? Neither kept mistresses nor prostitution are a necessary addenda to monogamy,—"the necessary evil" of some sociological writers. Unless polygamy as taught under the New Dispensation of the gospel, and accepted by the Latter-day Saints, can be held as a better system, or at least as presenting advantages for the race, under possible, special conditions, over and above those possessed by monogamy at its best, and without reference to those abhorrent sex relations, which, while they often do exist in connection with monogamy, are not a necessary corollary of it, then "Mormon" polygamy has no right to existence.

Conflict over PolygamyHC298This superiority over monogamy at its best, or as at least affording advantages to the race not possible under universally enforced monogamy, can only be affirmed in the name of the species of the divinely appointed eugenics of the revelation on marriage referred to, by which a consecrated fatherhood and motherhood is provided for the race. To put the defense of Latter-day Saint polygamy on a less exalted plane than this—which is the plane where God's revelation puts it—is to debase the institution and make it indefensible at the bar of enlightened reason, or before moral and religious standards.

Conflict over PolygamyHCWhile this view sets forth procreation as the first purpose of marriage, it by no means ignores other purposes, namely, companionship, though it may place it upon a different basis from the companionship of monogamous marriage. On the part of the man it will not be exclusive; and for the wife it will not be uninterrupted. But for the man it will be a companionship more disciplinary than is possible in monogamy; and for woman a companionship of greater dignity, calling forth in the management of her household in larger measure and use the exercise of executive abilities, self-reliance, and self-control, leading to control over others in the domestic circle, that gives a queenly dignity to such a matron; and for both lifts the association of husband and wife out of the uxorious sentimentality that too often in monogamy renders that association half or wholly contemptible.

Conflict over PolygamyHC299Here it must be allowed that the plural wife system offers more likelihood of the attainment of such ideal and dignified companionship, and makes more probable the attainment of such ideal and dignified companionship, and makes more probable the consecration of woman to the holy office of motherhood than monogamy does, because of the radical difference in the natures of man and woman as touching these matters. A difference that it was reserved for a woman of the church, and one who had accepted in full its marriage system, to put into the most acceptable phraseology:

Conflict over PolygamyHC299"The duties and requirements of a woman, fulfilling her sphere of motherhood, absolutely demand certain periods of continence, which if not granted her through thoughtful solicitude for her welfare by her husband, or self-assumed, by virtue of the dignity of womanhood, or by the divine right of free agency, the principle of her life and health is encroached upon, and she is forced to perform her ever-increasing labors and duties upon a decreasing store of vitality. There is nothing in the economy or requirements of man's life which requires this abstinence beyond the temperate limit of his powers of vitality; and this to me is a proof unanswerable and prima facie on the spheres of manhood and womanhood, of the divinity, and I believe is a necessity, for the salvation of the human race, of the truth and divinity of plural marriage." [^37]

Conflict over PolygamyHCIt has already been stated in these pages [^38] that the Church of the Latter-day Saints has never stood as the advocate of indiscriminate or general practice of a plural wife system of marriage under mere human or legal sanctions; but on the contrary has held to a limited and specifically guarded practice under what they have held to be divine sanctions, restraints, and regulations. It was indeed a principle of religion to the Latter-day Saints, a holy sacrament; and with such restraints as the church imposed, and limited as a religious privilege and duty to persons of high character and approved lives, and living under the most sacred obligations to chastity—it doubtless would have resulted in accomplishing that which was designed by its introduction into the faith and practice of the church, viz., to enlarge the opportunity of superior men and women to devote themselves to the establishment of a consecrated fatherhood and motherhood within the church, although to accomplish it, those participating in the system would doubtless have to sacrifice many worldly advantages, personal ease, and temporal pleasures—yet it would have afforded the opportunity of producing from that consecrated fatherhood and motherhood the improved type of man the world needs to reveal the highest possibilities of the race, that the day of the super-man might come, and with him might come also the redemption and betterment of the race.

Conflict over PolygamyHC300Of course it will be understood that the foregoing statements and arguments are but an academic setting forth of the plural marriage system of the church, and are not intended in any sense as propaganda of it. The congress of the United States passed laws against polygamy as practiced by the church, while Utah was a territory, and the supreme court of the United States having passed upon and upheld the constitutionality of those laws, the church after contesting in the courts by constitutional means every phase of the law, until all the law points were settled, then yielded to the law and by official manifesto discontinued the practice of polygamous marriages (Oct., 1890). This for the reason that one of the articles of the "Mormon" faith declares:

Conflict over PolygamyHC300"We believe in being subject to kings, presidents, rulers, and magistrates, in obeying, honoring and sustaining the law."

Conflict over PolygamyHCTherefore, plural marriages were discontinued by the act of the church, while Utah was still a territory, and the responsibility for the discontinuance is with those who enacted and sustained the law against that principle of the faith of the Latter-day Saints. A constitutional provision forever prohibiting "polygamous or plural marriages" was required as a condition precedent to statehood for Utah, and was adopted by the state constitutional convention. So that polygamous marriages are forbidden in Utah by the law of the state, and are inhibited by the church everywhere. No plural marriages now [1930] receive her sanction. For the Official Declaration of President Wilford Woodruff discontinuing plural marriages see Doctrine and Covenants, following Section cxxxvi, edition of 1922, and all subsequent editions.

NOTES

"During the political campaign of 1872, great excitement followed the exposure of the so-called Credit Mobilier speculations. In the construction of the Union Pacific railroad it was found expedient to organize a corporation of contractors to do the work. Large profits were expected from the operations of the company, which was named 'The Credit Mobilier of America.' During the years 1867 and 1868, the chief promoter of this enterprise, Mr. Oakes Ames, a rich manufacturer and a representative in congress from Massachusetts, sold many shares of the stock to members of congress. As the fortunes of the company might be affected by the action of congress (although this was denied), the holding of stock by men whose votes might determine this action was naturally regarded as improper, to say the least. The fact that Ames did not demand cash payments for the stock so disposed of, but allowed the payments to be deferred until the earnings of the company should bring generous dividends to the shareholders, was cited as evidence that this was practically a gift of stock to each man who received it on those conditions. The publication of the facts, which were [said to be] vastly exaggerated and overcolored, added zest to the [presidential] canvass of 1872; and when the house of representatives in the following year took up the matter and ordered an investigation, the volume of political gossip was greatly increased. Letters and other documents were produced, and a popular saying which long survived was extracted from the proceedings. Ames had declared that in the distribution of Credit Mobilier stock he had placed it 'Where it would do the most good.' The house committee, after a long and patient examination, exculpated all the men who had been involved in the charges of corruption, but recommended that the stigma of 'absolute condemnation' be fixed upon James Brooks, of New York, a member of the house and a government director of the Union Pacific railroad, and upon Oakes Ames; the former was thus censured for 'the use of his position to procure the assignment of Credit Mobilier stock:' and Ames' offense was declared to be that of 'seeking to procure congressional attention to the affairs' of his corporation.

302The investigation blighted many reputations of men who had before that time stood high in public esteem. While the inquiry was in progress, popular interest was kept on the alert to see which of the prominent men in congress would next fall before the deadly influence of the famous 'little memorandum book' from which Mr. Ames refreshed his memory while under examination. The very name of his corporation became a byword and a hissing; and it sufficed to ruin any public man's fair fame to say truly of him that he was 'a Credit Mobilier statesman.' On the other hand, the divulging of facts which showed the enormous profits of this peculiar enterprise greatly whetted the popular appetite for speculation and to a considerable extent demoralized the people." [^39]

Schuyler Colfax was born March 23rd, 1823; and was the grandson of the last commander of Washington's life guard. He was elected in November, 1868, vice president of the United States. "In 1870 Mr. Colfax wrote a letter declaring his purpose to withdraw from public life at the close of his term as vice president. He was subsequently led to change this determination, and in the Republican national convention at Philadelphia in 1872, he was a candidate for the nomination as vice president and received 314 1/2 votes; 384 1/2 votes being given to Henry Wilson of Massachusetts, the latter was accordingly nominated on the first ballot." [^40]

302About the first of September, during the presidential campaign, charges of bribery and corruption in connection with the Union and Pacific Railroad, and its construction company, the "Credit Mobilier of America," were cast into the arena; and Mr. Colfax, being urged thereto by his many friends, made a speech at South Bend, Indiana, his home city, defending himself and others against these charges. Of this speech even his biographer, Mr. O. J. Hollister, a relative of the vice president's by marriage, (he was married to Mr. Colfax's half-sister), and the United States revenue collector for Utah, says: "In the light of subsequent events this speech was charged against the vice president as intentionally misleading, because it purported to make a personal explanation, and it did not make it a full one. By making it seem as if the personal explanation was the first instead of the merest incident of the speech, some color was given to the charge." [^41]

302Even his friend Samuel W. Bowles, editor of the Springfield (Mass.) Republican and companion to Mr. Colfax in both of his visits to Utah, bitterly denounced Colfax for this speech. [^42]

303In 1873 Mr. Colfax was implicated in the charges of corruption brought against members of congress who had received shares of the "Credit Mobilier of America," and was repeatedly examined before the congressional committee appointed to investigate the matter. A resolution directing the judiciary committee of the house of representatives to inquire if the evidence taken by the committee called for the impeachment of any officer of the government, brought forth the report, on Feb. 26, 1873, declaring that there was no ground for the impeachment of Mr. Colfax, inasmuch as the alleged offense of bribe taking, if committed at all, had been committed before he became vice president. This report was accepted, and nothing more done with the matter. [^43]

303And there the matter rests so far as the congressional investigation is concerned.

303It should be said, however, that the "resolution for impeachment" proceedings failed by the narrow margin of three votes; as the Washington Morning Post puts it—"a resolution for the impeachment of the bribed and perjured Colfax failed by a majority of three votes." [^44]

303The most incriminating circumstance against Mr. Colfax is thus stated by the New York Tribune: "The astounding developments in the Credit Mobilier investigation, make it necessary for the vice president to show, if he can, that he has not sworn falsely. The circumstances are these: Mr. Colfax denied that he had received a certain specific dividend of $1,200 on Credit Mobilier stock. Mr. Ames swore positively that he gave the vice president a check on the house sergeant at arms for that amount. The check, dated June 20, 1868, is produced; it was paid June 21. Mr. Colfax's bank account is examined and it is found that on June 22, 1868, he deposited the precise amount of $1,200 in bank notes; and, as if to emphasize the fact of the deposit, the whole amount of it was specified to be $1,968.63, of which all but $1,200 was in checks. The fatal sum stands by itself.

303We have not the heart to comment at length on this apparently utter and deplorable fall. We hope, for the sake of the pure name which Mr. Colfax has so long borne before the country—for the sake of the country itself we hope—that he may yet be able to break down this damning wall of circumstantial evidence which has slowly encircled him. The only way of escape is to prove that the $1,200 deposited on June 22, was received from some other source than the agent of the Credit Mobilier association." [^45]

Colfax "professes virtuous indignation at the statement of Ames," said the New York Herald correspondent, under date of 23rd of January, 1873, "and pronounces them 'infamous.' But it is known that tomorrow a respectable cashier in the office of the sergeant-at-arms, Moses Dillon is his name—will swear that he paid the check made payable to Schuyler Colfax." [^46]

304Then came the climax: "Mr. Ames deposed before the committee that he had paid to Mr. Colfax on a certain day $1,200 as dividends on Credit Mobilier stock held by Mr. Colfax; that unhappy gentleman replied under oath that he had never held a share of the stock, nor received a penny from Ames; and then was struck dumb by the production by the latter of an 'account book,' in which the payment was duly set down, and by evidence that on the day after the payment Mr. Colfax had deposited at his bankers the identical sum in question. It required several days for Mr. Colfax to invent his reply to this unexpected proof of his guilt; but at length he came forward with the lame story that by a remarkable and most unfortunate coincidence he had on the day named received from a person now dead, in an unregistered letter now destroyed, a present of $1,000, and that the remainder of the $1,200 he had received on the same day from his stepfather." [^47]

304"He is dead," said the Albany Times of the period, "and on his tombstone should be inscribed—'Died of too much Credit Mobilier.'" [^48]

304It is but just to Mr. Colfax to say that he denied the truth of the charges made against him, and his intimate friends have always regarded his character as irreproachable.

304On the other hand, his opponents during the winter of 1873—and some followed him with it to the close of his life—vehemently assailed him with these charges of corruption, and it cannot be denied but that they cast a shadow over the latter part of Mr. Colfax's life.

Footnotes

Young—Well—yes—we intend to.

Senator Trumbull—But may I say to him that you will do so?

Young—Yes, yes; so far as the laws are just, certainly." (Linn's Story of the Mormons, p. 556 and note.) The reputed answers are very unlike President Young.

There is no personal allusion whatever to either President Grant or Mr. Colfax in this, or as stated above, in any other discourse preached by Brigham Young during that year, but doubtless it was the language of the quotation above, and the language used in describing certain federal officials who had been sent to Utah—(see footnote 14 this chapter)—employed in this same discourse that was twisted and made to apply to the chief officers of the then federal administration.

"I pause to remark that if some strength accrues to Mormonism from its adjustment to the nature of man, some unsuspected strength also is won to it by its appeal to the nature of woman. The self-sacrifice in woman, the appeal is made to that. One knows not much of human life if he is ignorant that one of the dominating characteristics of woman is the power of self-sacrifice. If self-sacrifice in woman is continually in evidence in mothers, in wives of worthless husbands, in sisters, in religious communities, and in women giving up all in devotion to love, or duty, or religion, who wonders that the appeal to it, as in the matter of polygamy, strange as it seems, must be accounted an element of strength to Mormonism. As matter of fact, there were no more strenuous and determined upholders of polygamy than most of the Mormon women who were personally sufferers by it. To their nature it was calamity and hateful. To their spirit it was religious duty and a call for self-sacrifice. Therefore they were loyal to it, determined to live in it, and if need be, to die for it. Spirit, roused and active, evermore predominates over nature." (Reminiscences of a Missionary Bishop, 1906, second edition, pp. 307-8). Bishop Tuttle died April 17, 1923.

---
Notas:
[^1] The governor notes that General Wells signs himself "Lieutenant General, commanding the militia of Utah Territory;" and as the law of the United States provides for but one lieutenant general, and as the incumbent of that office is "The distinguished Philip H. Sheridan," the governor thinks—sarcastically—"that he will be pardoned for recognizing no other." On the question raised by Governor Shaffer that the laws of the United States provided for one lieutenant general; that General Sheridan fills that position; that Shaffer will recognize no other—Wells answered that the same law of congress which provides for but one lieutenant general provides for five major generals. Must we therefore conclude there shall be no major generals of militia in the states or territories? The same law provides that there should be eight brigadier generals, are we therefore to conclude that there are to be no brigadier generals in the militia of the states and territories? An act of congress approved July 28th, 1866, limiting the number of certain officers in the army, directed that there should be no new appointments in the adjutant general's department; if these laws respecting officers in the regular army are to be made applicable to militia officers in the territories, how will the governor reconcile this with his recent appointment of W. M. Johns as assistant adjutant general in the militia of Utah? Another law of congress passed in 1844 (section 2) provides that all general officers of the militia "in the territories shall be elected by the people, in such manner as the respective legislatures thereof shall provide." The Utah legislature of 1857, had provided by law that "the lieutenant general of the Utah militia shall be elected by the people," [^17] and Daniel Wells had been so elected—then how could Governor Shaffer appoint P. E. Connor to be major general of the Utah militia without a violation of both the law of congress—for which his excellency seems "to have such respect"—and the law of the territory? History of Salt Lake City, Tullidge, p. 480.
[^2] Under the Cullom bill as it passed the house the United States marshal was authorized to appoint a deputy in each of the judicial districts; the United States district attorney was authorized to appoint an assistant in each of said districts; the governor was made inspector of the jails and other prisons of the territory, to make rules for them, remove the wardens and keepers, and appoint others, "as often as, in his opinion, the public good shall require;" also by section 23 the governor was authorized to appoint all probate judges, justices of the peace, judges of all elections, notaries public; all sheriffs in said territory were to be appointed by the governor and were subject to removal by him. (See Cullom bill as it passed the house, in Deseret News, weekly, of March 30th, 1870). In view of the proposition to throw all the appointments into the hands of the governor, the number of expectant anti-"Mormon" men who had flocked to Utah was considerable.
[^3] Deseret News, weekly, Nov. 2nd, 1870.
[^4] The request to suspend the governor's proclamation forbidding the muster, drills, and inspection of the militia, permitting in the meantime the ordered annual muster to take place, in order to comply with certain laws of congress and of the territory, was to present the absurdity that the governor's proclamation could not be carried out unless he permitted the general to violate it. Relative to the request for the suspension of the governor's proclamation until the 20th of November, it had been made not to nullify the proclamation or the law, but that the fall musters might be completed—"they having [already] been held in some of the districts"—in order that the request of the war department made through the adjutant general's office at Washington, D. C., for the annual return of the militia of Utah territory, might be complied with. How this could be construed into an attempt to nullify the laws of congress, escapes the general's penetration. That there is any conflict between the laws of the territory and the laws of congress in this matter is incapable of proof. George A. Smith's Answers to Questions, p. 63. The incident is described in the New York World by one of the victims of the robbers, who gives high praise to the "Mormon" officers who captured the outlaws and recovered the booty. (See Millennial Star, vol. xxii, pp. 3-6).
[^5] Answers to Questions, p. 62. Also Deseret News of Nov. 2nd where it is said: "Since his [Governor Shaffer's] sojourn in our midst he has kept himself aloof, almost entirely, from the people, he being seldom seen in public on any occasion." The News also says that this was largely due to the governor's state of ill health.
[^6] "Mr. Wells" in effect asked the governor to aid him and his "turbulent associates" to convince their following that "Mr. Wells" and his associates were "more powerful than the federal government." The governor must "decline." To suspend the operation of his proclamation would be a greater dereliction of duty than not to have issued it. Without authority from the governor "Mr. Wells" in his "assumed capacity" of "lieutenant general" had called the militia to muster, and now virtually asked the governor to ratify the action. "Sir," said he, "I will not do anything in satisfaction of your officious and unwarranted assumption. By the provisions of the organic act, the governor is made the commander in chief of the militia of the territory," and so long as he (Shaffer) held that office a force so important as that of the militia shall not be wielded or controlled in disregard of his authority, "which by law, and by my obligation, it is my plain duty not only to assert, but, if possible, to maintain." The annual conference met in the tabernacle, in Salt Lake City, on the 6th of April, but after one session adjourned until the 5th of May. This action was taken owing to the gallery, then in course of erection in the tabernacle, not being completed, and the absence of President Young in the southern settlements.
[^7] Letter of George A. Smith to Honorable J. S. Hartis, under date of May 8th, 1870, History of Brigham Young, Ms., for 1870, pp. 834-5.
[^8] See Deseret News of May 11th, 1870, editorial, p. 162. The Minutes of the Conference are published in the same impression.
[^9] The incident and dialogue is published in the Salt Lake Herald of June 21st, 1870.
[^10] Ibid. "What is his [Shaffer's] purpose, do you suppose," asked Don Piatt of the Cincinnati Commercial: "To provoke a collision between the United States officials and the Mormons so as to justify a call of troops and force on a war." (Ibid).
[^11] It appears that a Mr. Crowe was appointed to be Utah's secretary, but he died the day following his appointment, and Mr. Vaughn was the next nominee. Delegate Hooper speaks of "Secretary Crowe" as a "galvanized rebel." He served as a colonel in the confederate army; but congress had removed his political disabilities. (See letter of Delegate Hooper to George A. Smith, in History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1870, p. 949).
[^12] Of course a military organization existed in Utah before 1852, from 1849 in fact; and afterwards, the provisional "State of Deseret" directed the organization of the Nauvoo Legion according to plans reported by Daniel H. Wells and Charles C. Rich. (See this History, chapter xc). But the act of 1852, was the organization effected under the authority of the territory of Utah.
[^13] The order complete will be found in Deseret News, weekly, for August 31st, 1870.
[^14] For the proclamation in full, see Salt Lake Herald of Sept. 17th, 1870.
[^15] Ibid, for the proclamation in full.
[^16] If there were no other evidence that this letter was written not only to influence, but to mislead the public mind outside of Utah, this inferred use of Brigham Young's official title in the church—"President" Brigham Young, or "Brigham Young, president of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints," would be proof sufficient; for the above use of it by Governor Shaffer is meaningless if he does not imply that the office of "president" means an usurpation of civil authority.
[^17] See Laws of Utah—from 1851 to 1857—published 1870, chapter cxxxvii, p. 190. Previous to this, the lieutenant general had been "elected by a majority of votes given of the commissioned officers of said legion, and commissioned by the governor." (See act approved Feb. 5th, 1852, Acts, Resolutions, etc., of the Legislative Assembly of Utah, 1852, p. 144). General Wells had been elected lieutenant general under this law, as well as later under the law requiring that such officer be elected by the people.
[^18] When it is remembered that Governor Shaffer himself was from Illinois the question receives additional point.
[^19] It was a strange attitude of mind on the part of Governor Shaffer that made criticism of federal officials, and questioning the Americanism of the territorial system, an offense; and reveals the effect of the governor's military training under General Butler at New Orleans. Commenting on the course of the governor in this militia matter the Elko Independent remarked: "Governor Shaffer served on Ben Butler's staff in the south and seems to imagine he is yet in New Orleans." (Copied into Salt Lake Herald, of Sept. 23rd, 1870).
[^20] The correspondence in extenso will be found in Deseret News, weekly, for the 2nd of Nov., 1870; also in Millennial Star, vol. xxxii, pp. 753-5; and 771-773.
[^21] See Compiled Laws of Utah, 1887, pp. 108-125. This congressional enactment became law without the approval of President Cleveland. The organization of the militia for the territory authorized by the Edmunds-Tucker Law, which provided that all the general officers of the militia should be appointed by the governor, by and with the consent of the council of the legislature, was never put into effect.
[^22] See this History, ch. xlii.
[^23] See this History, ch. cxxix.
[^24] The History of the Nauvoo Legion is written in detail by Major Richard W. Young, graduate of West Point and some time on the staff of General W. S. Hancock as acting judge advocate. His history of the legion consists of a serial of twelve numbers in The Contributor, 1888, vol. ix.
[^25] Salt Lake Herald of Sept. 24th, 1870, also Millennial Star, vol. xxxii, pp. 662-3.
[^26] Affidavit of Alderman William Miller Deseret News, weekly, of September 28 and Oct. 5th, 1870. All the affidavits covering this event,—sixteen in all—will be found in the same impressions of the News; also in Millennial Star, vol. xxxii, beginning at p. 63, et seq.
[^27] Ibid. Deposition of Thomas Fuller.
[^28] Deposition of Abram Holladay; also deposition of Ezra Oakley, Ibid.
[^29] Smoot's dispatch to the Salt Lake press, 23rd of Sept., Millennial Star, vol. xxxii, p. 663.
[^30] Deseret News, Oct. 5th, 1870, p. 408, where the letter of DeTrobriand will be found in full.
[^31] Subsequently an investigation was made of this outrage at the headquarters of the Department of the Platte; the responsibility for it was fixed upon the officers and soidiers of those companies present for duty at that date; and the amount of damages fixed upon by the mayor of Provo to the injured parties was ordered to be paid, the order to take effect immediately. (Condensed from the Omaha Herald, quoted in Millennial Star, vol. xxxii, p. 816).
[^32] See Deseret News, weekly, of Oct. 5th, 1870, where both letters will be found in extenso.
[^33] The Omaha Herald thus commented upon the circumstance: "The recent outrages of the United States soldiery upon the unoffending people of Provo, Utah, were the result of a drunken mob for which no respectable officer is in any degree responsible. Governor Shaffer seizes upon the opportunity to fix responsibility for it upon General De Trobriand for the double object of showing a regard for decency and to injure that excellent gentleman and soldier in public estimation. In the opinion of the Colfax missionaries the general is too much disposed to look with favor upon the merits of the Mormon people, and with contempt upon the latest raid upon their peace. This is the sweet milk in the cocoanut." (Omaha Herald of Oct. 1st, 1870). The Salt Lake Herald commenting on the correspondence said: "We have no need to defend General De Trobriand, who was the special object of the last attack by his excellency, Governor Shaffer. He is amply able to defend himself, but we arraign Governor Shaffer at the bar of the nation for flagrant abuse of his official position; and ask the president of the United States to remove from office a man who seeks persistently to drive a peaceable people into rebellion, and then to cover over his own acts endeavors to cast blame on an officer whose name is a synonym for bravery, efficiency, and gentlemanly bearing." (Salt Lake Herald of October 1st, 1870).
[^34] Woodruff's Journal, entry for Oct. 3rd, 1870.
[^35] Deseret News, weekly, of Oct. 12th, 1870.
[^36] The body of the governor was sent to Illinois for interment. He was given processional honors in conveying the body to the railroad depot for transit, under the auspices of the Masonic fraternity. Although the people of Utah were much offended at the course pursued by Governor Shaffer and had no reason to regard him as their friend, still flags were placed at half mast from the general cooperative store, from the Deseret News, and other buildings, and the principal stores and places of business were closed during the ceremonies. (Deseret News, weekly, of Nov. 2nd and 9th, 1870).
[^37] Romania B. Penrose, in a lecture before the Female Relief Society in Salt Lake City, excerpts of which were published in the Woman's Exponent, 1881, copied into Deseret News, weekly, of July 6th, 1881.
[^38] Chapter xlv, note 6.
[^39] Deseret News of Jan. 9th, 1867. "A similar dispatch was forwarded by Colonel C. A. Potter, who was ordered to retain troops until the regulars arrived." (Beadle's Life in Utah, 1870, p. 205).
[^40] History of United States, Bryant-Gay-Brooks, vol. v, pp. 436-7.
[^41] The American Cyclopeadia, vol. v, Art Colfax.
[^42] Life of Colfax, Hollister, pp. 384-5.
[^43] Ibid.
[^44] The American Cyclopedia of Biography, vol. v, Art Colfax, p. 54.
[^45] The Post article is copied into Millennial Star, vol. xxxv, pp. 219-21. See also Congressional Record 26th and 27th of February, 1873, for report respecting impeachment.
[^46] The Tribune article is quoted in Millennial Star, vol. xxxv, pp. 117-18.
[^47] The Herald article is reproduced in Millennial Star, vol. xxxv, pp. 117-8.
[^48] Morning Post, reproduced in Millennial Star, vol. xxxv, p. 220.
