B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 5 ( 1930)

327CHAPTER CXXXVII

327GOVERNOR SHAFFER'S COURSE IN UTAH—END OF THE NAUVOO LEGION—THE PROVO RIOTS

327GOVERNOR SHAFFER arrived in Salt Lake City on the 20th of March, 1870. It is not too much to say that he came prepossessed with great prejudice both against the people of Utah and the Latter-day Saint Church leaders. The large influence of President Brigham Young was a constant source of annoyance to the governors and other United States officials in Utah. It entered into common parlance that "so and so was governor of the territory, but Brigham Young was governor of the people." "Never after me, by G—d! shall it be said," boasted Shaffer, on receiving his appointment, "that Brigham Young is governor of Utah;" [^1] and he came to Utah determined to make this assertion good.

THE SEEKERS AFTER OFFICE

On arriving in Utah the governor was immediately surrounded by a horde of hungry office seekers, disappointed by the failure of the Cullom bill which would have placed nearly all the offices of the territory within the gift of the governor; [^2] and he would have supplied them with the much needed occupation to keep body and soul together. "The governor took quarters at the boarding house of William H. McKay, of whom he spoke 'as an old friend,'" says George A. Smith, counselor to President Young, also author of Answers to Questions on early Utah history, and so frequently quoted in these pages. The governor was most unfortunate in the selection of his headquarters; that this is true, and that the comments of Mr. Smith on the governor's course and surroundings are just, it is only necessary to show that the place was headquarters of a set of highway robbers, of whom the proprietor of the "boarding house" was chief. On the night of the 23rd of October, 1870, the stage coach from Pioche, Nevada, was robbed about four miles north of Chicken Creek (between Levan and Nephi) in Juab county. The treasury box of the Wells Fargo & Co., was broken open and emptied, the registered mail sack taken and the passengers robbed of about $1,500. Three men perpetrated the daring robbery. The matter being reported at Nephi the sheriff of Juab county, Mr. Cazier, organized a posse and the day following the robbery captured the perpetrators of it, who turned out to be William H. McKay, late proprietor of the "Revere House," where the governor made his headquarters; one St. Ledger, "a man about town," in Salt Lake City; and one Heath, formerly a United States soldier. "St. Ledger turned state's evidence, and told where they had hidden a part of the plunder, and it was recovered. As showing the zeal of Brigham Young in his efforts to put down and at once stop anything of the kind, I might mention that as soon as the facts of the robbery were made known in Salt Lake City his people were notified by telegraph for five hundred miles to turn out—young men and old men and dogs—and also to bring into requisition the services of the Indians to track the villains, but on no account to fail in apprehending them. The response was the immediate capture of the robbers." The money taken by the robbers was all recovered. [^3] The robbers were turned over to the United States officials. St. Ledger turned state's evidence, and was released; Heath escaped, and McKay was tried in the United States court, convicted and sentenced to five years imprisonment. This was the first mail coach robbery that occurred in the territory. [^4] The happy conclusion of the whole incident made it pretty clear that "Utah," as remarked by one of her prominent citizens, was "not a healthy place for road agents."

This McKay's "boarding house" became the headquarters of the "ring" during a great part of Shaffer's brief administration. There a hungry horde of office seekers surrounded his excellency so continuously that it was weeks before an "old citizen" could get an audience; and even then it was at a place, and in company, and under circumstances not calculated to give his excellency any correct understanding or appreciation of the actual conditions, wants, and situation of the people he had come to govern. [^5]

The governor attended the annual conference of the church, held that year from the 5th to the 9th of May. [^6] His excellency had received a formal invitation from President Young to attend and he was present on the stand at one of the meetings, and invited to address the people, but declined the honor. [^7]

This conference was notable for two things: the large attendance upon its sessions—it was estimated that 13,000 were present on Sunday the 7th; and for the absence of any criticism or comments upon the threatening attitude of the administration. "A spirit of serene calmness, of implicit faith in God was manifest in all the utterances from the stand. Our people have been often threatened," was the Deseret News comment upon that conference and of the likelihood of disagreeable occurrences happening, "but at no previous time has there been so universal a feeling of indifference respecting the machinations of the wicked as prevails now in this community." [^8]

THE EXECUTIVE IN CONFLICT WITH THE JUDICIARY

Soon after Governor Shaffer arrived in Utah, the question of commissioning some of the officers elected by the legislature previous to his arrival came up and he refused to commission them. Whereupon threats were made of suing out a writ of mandamus to force his action. Shaffer asked Chief Justice Wilson if he would issue such a writ. "Certainly," said the justice, "if a case were made out." "Well, now," exclaimed the governor, "I like that! I am sent here to regulate things and I am to be controlled by a judge." "I beg pardon, governor," answered Justice Wilson, "it strikes me you are to be controlled by law." [^9] The governor also undertook to prescribe the duties of the probate judges. "I instructed them," said Chief Justice Wilson, "to disregard his rules and consult the law as to their duties. Whereupon he swore to remove me, and removed I am." [^10] The removal of Judge Wilson occurred in July. This made way for the appointment of Judge James B. McKean. About the same time—July—the secretary of the territory, Mr. S. A. Mann, was removed and was succeeded by the appointment of Vernon H. Vaughn. [^11]

GOVERNOR SHAFFER AND THE UTAH MILITIA

The one event which more than all others made Shaffer's brief administration memorable occurred on the 15th of September. The Utah militia, under the title of the "Nauvoo Legion," for eighteen years, ever since its reorganization by the Utah legislature, by an act approved March 6th, 1852 [^12]—had met in annual musters; and in accordance with this custom Lieutenant General Daniel H. Wells, 16th of August, 1870, issued the usual order for a three days' muster "for the purpose of drill, inspection and camp duty." [^13] A month later, namely, on the 15th of September, Governor Shaffer, arbitrarily setting aside the territorial law governing the election of the lieutenant general of the Utah militia, and falsely citing the laws of the United States as authority for his action, appointed and commissioned P. E. Connor, major general of the militia of Utah territory, and Wm. Johns, colonel, and assistant adjutant general. [^14] On the same date he issued a second proclamation forbidding and prohibiting "all musters, drills, or gatherings of the militia, and all gatherings of any nature, kind or description of armed persons within the territory of Utah," except upon his orders, or by the orders of the United States marshal, should he need a posse comitatus to execute any order of the court, "and not otherwise." Also ordering that all arms, or munitions of war belonging to either the United States or the territory of Utah, now in possession of the Utah militia, be delivered to "Colonel Wm. M. Johns, assistant adjutant general;" and should the United States marshal need a posse comitatus to enforce any order, he must make the requisition of "General P. E. Connor," who by this proclamation was authorized to call out the militia for said purposes, and not otherwise. [^15]

332GENERAL D. H. WELLS vs. GOVERNOR SHAFFER

On the 20th of October General Wells addressed a communication to Governor Shaffer, referring to his proclamation, and calling attention to the fact that neither "the terms of his proclamation," "nor the laws of the territory, nor the laws of congress, requiring reports of the force and condition of the militia of the territories, could be complied with, and therefore respectfully asked for and in behalf of the militia of said territory that the governor suspend the operation of his proclamation until the 20th day of November." To this suggestion the governor made a very caustic reply, not only denying the request, but manifesting the bitterness of his hatred for the "Mormon" church leaders, altogether out of place in an official document. A few hours after the reply to his letter had been received by General Wells, the entire correspondence was in print. Which makes it clear that the answer was made especially with the view of its publication, and for the effect that it would have on public opinion outside the territory—it was written for consumption "abroad." The closing paragraph of the governor's letter expressed the hope that what he had written would be "sufficiently explicit to be fully understood, and supercede the necessity of any further communication on the subject." But here Governor Shaffer gave evidence of the fact that he did not understand the character or capacity of the man with whom he was dealing. Further direct personal communication with Governor Shaffer was of course ended by the latter's request that it be so; but there was left to General Wells an appeal to the same court that Governor Shaffer himself had appealed to by the publication of the entire correspondence, viz., the court of public opinion; and to that court General Wells addressed himself in a very effective open letter to the governor. As the correspondence marks in effect the end of the Nauvoo Legion, and since said legion has been so conspicuous at various times in the history of the Church of the Latter-day Saints, it is only proper that the main points of it be summarized.

SUMMARY OF GOVERNOR SHAFFER'S LETTER

GENERAL WELLS' ANSWER TO GOVERNOR SHAFFER

ULTIMATE DISORGANIZATION OF THE NAUVOO LEGION

It is not difficult to determine with whom abides the juster cause and the weight of argument in this correspondence; but, as already stated, the action of Governor Shaffer practically ended the existence of the Nauvoo Legion. A few other items followed, however, in connection with what is here set down that are of historical interest. Under date of 12th of November Daniel H. Wells—still in his capacity of lieutenant general, and ignoring the appointments made by Governor Shaffer (by then deceased)—issued General Orders No. 2, stating that so far as the general musters in various military districts had not already been held, as contemplated in General Orders No. 1, of August 16th—"they are hereby postponed until further orders." And that was the final order given to the legion by its lieutenant general; but congress later determined that it should also cease to exist by law, and accordingly, seventeen years later, in section 27 of what is known as the "Edmunds-Tucker Law," declared "that all laws passed by the so-called 'State of Deseret," and by the legislative assembly of the territory of Utah, for the organization of the militia thereof, or the creation of the 'Nauvoo Legion,' are hereby annulled and declared of no effect." [^21] And so the Nauvoo Legion ceased to exist in law as well as in fact. At the time it went out of existence the legion numbered about 13,000 men, most of whom were efficiently armed, drilled, and equipped, as required by law. Of officers, beside its lieutenant general, there were two major generals, nine brigadier generals, and twenty-five colonels with their respective staffs.

THE HONORABLE RECORD OF THE NAUVOO LEGION'S SERVICE

Their annual musters, drills, and inspections had continued through eighteen years, and reports and returns made to the authorities at Washington as required by the act of congress. The legion had been organized at Nauvoo as an "independent body" of the state militia of Illinois, under provisions in the Nauvoo charter, the purpose being to provide a means for the Latter-day Saints to perform such military duties as the law of the state required in a body under the direction of the mayor of Nauvoo—for the ordinance passed under the grant of power in the Nauvoo charter placed the legion at the disposal of the mayor of Nauvoo as well as of the governor of the state—an efficient force to protect the city against the constant threats of invasion from Missouri. [^22]

Necessarily the legion was under suspension during the years of the exodus from Illinois and the journey across the plains and mountains to Salt Lake valley; but the settlements effected in that and adjacent valleys, and in the midst of strong tribes of Indians, the need of a military organization was soon felt and naturally the legion as it existed in Nauvoo constituted the frame work of the western organization. This by legislative enactment by the provisional "State of Deseret;" and, as previously detailed, under the authority of that state the legion conducted three successful expeditions against the Indians; and later in the territorial days was a constant means of protection against Indian depredations, its readiness and efficiency being the guarantee of peace to the "Mormon" settlements—western outposts of American civilization. In the troubled years of 1857-8, the legion had successfully halted the approaching army of the United States, until the country could take the second, sober thought respecting Utah affairs, and settle by a Peace Commission what the government had undertaken to settle by an armed expedition. In the southern Indian wars in the years 1865-6-7—the legion rendered both the territory of Utah and the United States efficient service; for while United States troops in sufficient force to suppress the hostile Indians were stationed at Camp Douglas, within two miles of Salt Lake City, and both the Indian agents and the non-"Mormon" governor of the territory petitioned the United States army authorities for the service, they were unfeelingly told that the territorial militia—the Nauvoo Legion—must be depended upon to make the Indians behave. The result was that through three years the Nauvoo Legion conducted campaigns against hostile Indians and preserved the southern settlements of Utah from destruction, at a cost of more than one million five hundred dollars, for which the territory was never reimbursed. [^23] All in all the Latter-day Saints have the right to be proud of their Nauvoo Legion, it rendered high and efficient service to them as a community at crucial periods of their history, and really deserved a better fate than befell it—obliteration by unlawful territorial executive action, supplemented by congressional action, questionable in its justice. But subsequent events have proven that the need of a militia body for the special protection of Latter-day Saint communities, either from hostile Indian tribes or threatening, sectarian mobs, no longer existed, and so it was fitting that it should pass away, even if its obsequies were not all that could have been desired. [^24] It is gratifying now, however, to note that in the present—1930—order of events an effort is being made to connect all military units of the state of Utah back to the Nauvoo Legion, all which, however, will be considered in a future chapter.

340"THE PROVO RIOTS" BY UNITED STATES TROOPS OF THE REGULAR ARMY

The next event in Governor Shaffer's administration following this militia incident is what is known as the "Provo Riots." Carrying out the plans formulated at Washington for the suppression of "Mormon influence" in Utah, an additional military encampment was made near Provo, known as Camp Rawlins, named after the late secretary of war in the Grant cabinet. On the night of the 22nd of September, a party of about forty soldiers between the hours of twelve and two o'clock in the night made a raid upon the city of Provo. Before the rioters could be stayed they broke into the residence of City Alderman, William Miller, firing several shots into his bedroom, smashed in doors, and windows and took him prisoner. They broke in the doors and windows and tore down the signs of some of the stores on the principal business street of the town. They surrounded the residence of City Councilman A. F. McDonald, who was absent from home, and demolished every outside door and window of the first floor, sacked the house, scattering the furniture and bedding over the yards and sidewalks. Alderman E. F. Sheets' house received about the same treatment, and an effort was made to burn the church in the central portion of the town. "The raiders," said Mayor A. O. Smoot's telegraphic report to the Salt Lake press, "were armed with United States needle guns, with bayonets and revolvers, and during their rioting they captured several citizens, parading them through the streets, some of whom were severely beaten and bayoneted before they could make their escape." [^25] The rioters were quelled by the assembling of a number of citizens and the firing of a few shots, after which the soldiers fled in the direction of Camp Rawlins.

341"CAUSE" OF THE RIOTS

There was no justification for this procedure on the part of the rioters except the refusal of Alderman Miller to rent to the soldiers a hall for the purpose of holding a party; that some of the bishops of Provo had counseled their young men and young women not to associate with the soldiers of the camp; also that Councilman A. F. McDonald had refused to sell them whiskey. [^26] The spirit of the affair may be judged by the shouting and declarations made in the progress of the riot, preserved in the depositions of the citizens made at the time before the proper authorities. The rioters swore "they would use up the four 'white houses'—viz. McDonald's, Sheets', Mayor Smoot's, and Brigham Young's"; that they had come "to run this town"—Provo. "They shouted as they went along the streets 'come out you G—d d—d Mormons and Mountain Meadow Massacre-ers," and further using indecent language and threatening to kill the "Mormons" and take their women from them. [^27] They said the 'Mormons' had run this territory long enough, "that they [the "Mormons"] had not got volunteers in the territory now, but had Uncle Sam's men, who were going to run this town as they G—d d—d pleased. This had been Utah territory, but now it was Uncle Sam's territory, and they were going to run it, as they had men to back them." [^28] There was some shooting in the streets by the soldiers, and one of their number, by the name of Haws, during the evening, was shot in the shoulder.

Prompt action was taken by the military authorities at Camp Rawlins and Camp Douglas and from the headquarters of the Platte in making an investigation of the riots. Major Osborne, in command at Camp Rawlins, promptly expressed regret for the occurrence to Mayor Smoot. [^29] In the early morning following the night of the riot one of the perpetrators was in the hands of the city marshal, and several others on the same day were prisoners in the camp, "subject to any demand of the civil authorities." Indeed on the 24th, Major Osborne offered to turn over to the civil authorities all of the prisoners then in custody at the camp, but this offer was declined—for reasons to be stated later—and the party held by the city marshal was turned over to the military authorities for safekeeping.

COMMENDABLE PROMPTNESS OF ACTION BY UNITED STATES ARMY AUTHORITIES

As soon as the news of the riot was received at Salt Lake City, General R. De Trobriand at once telegraphed it to General Argur, commanding the Department of the Platte, with the memorandum that as Camp Rawlins was not under his (Trobriand's) command he could only forward the dispatch as received. The next evening General Trobriand was ordered from department headquarters to proceed to Provo to conduct an investigation of the disturbance. This order was promptly complied with and on the evening of the 25th of September the general had conferences with both Major Osborne and leading citizens of Provo, and continued for a day or two a concurrent investigation with Mayor Smoot and other civil authorities; and also conducted a court martial inquiry at Camp Rawlins. On the 26th General Trobriand renewed the offer of Major Osborne to turn over the men implicated in the riot to the civil authorities for trial and punishment; but this offer was again declined for the reason that a recent ruling by one of the United States judges for Utah had withdrawn criminal cases from the jurisdiction of the probate courts; and should the city of Provo or Utah county take charge of the prisoners, they would doubtless be immediately released on a writ of habeas corpus by the United States district court, so that an attempt to punish the rioters by the civil jurisdiction would be merely a farcical proceeding under the judicial regime then prevailing in Utah. Nor is this merely the current prejudiced "Mormon" view of the matter. General De Trobriand in his correspondence with Governor Shaffer, to be referred to presently, mentions the matter and strongly intimates his belief that the manifest desire of Governor Shaffer to have the rioters turned over to the civil authorities was for no other purpose than that they might be released by habeas corpus proceedings—to such a pass had judicial affairs come in Utah. The passage from De Trobriand on the point follows:

344"Perhaps you would like to know the cause of this persistent refusal of the civil authorities at Provo to take charge of the prisoners. Two reasons were explained to me: the first one that there is no jail in the city; the second that a legal decision of recent date having withdrawn the criminal cases from the jurisdiction of the probate court, the prisoners if taken in custody by the city marshal, would soon be released on a writ of habeas corpus. The insistence of your excellency to have the prisoners in the hands of the civil authorities at Provo could not be in prevision of such contingency. Oh! certainly not! Now you may see how the matter stands: you ask me solemnly to deliver up the prisoners to the civil authorities. The civil authorities persistently decline to take charge of them. What can we do? Keep them, of course, and for that I have another reason still more conclusive, and that is, that an order to that effect has been received from my department commander." [^30]

SHARP LETTERS BETWEEN GOVERNOR SHAFFER AND GENERAL R. DE TROBRIAND

The Provo incident resulted in a sharp exchange of letters between Governor Shaffer and General R. De Trobriand, commanding at Camp Douglas. After five days had passed from the time of the rioting, Governor Shaffer addressed a letter to General De Trobriand which was published in the Deseret Evening News, on the very day that the general returned from his Provo investigations, and which he saw for the first time when it appeared in the aforesaid paper. The governor announced that so far as he could learn no action had been taken on the part of the military to punish the soldiers, nor any report made public by the officers in command stating all the facts. The governor had waited these five days in the hope that General De Trobriand would take such action in the premises as would convince the citizens that the soldiery was stationed at Provo "to protect and not destroy." Not hearing from the military authorities on this subject, and "feeling that the outrage was one that should be followed by swift and certain punishment," he now demanded that all the offenders be given up to the civil authorities that he might see that they were properly tried and if convicted punished. The governor thus insisted because "much feeling exists in this community against the federal officers and soldiers growing out of this transaction, and that feeling is extended to all the federal officers." As governor he was sworn to execute the law, and in pursuance of that duty he would have as high regard "for the property and persons of Mormons as of any other class." The governor grew eloquent on this point. "In this case the perpetrators of the outrages are men employed by the government and paid for their services to be the guardians of the rights and liberties of those among whom they are stationed, coming here at the expense of the government to aid and assist the civil authorities in securing to all men their rights, in place of which they have taken it upon themselves to execute all manner of violence and mob law to satisfy their own individual and personal grievances. If the United States soldiery cannot fulfill the high object they were sent here for, then far better, for the sake of the credit of the nation and the American armies, we be let alone to ourselves."

GENERAL DE TROBRIAND'S ANSWER

In his reply General De Trobriand had the governor at his mercy: first in that the governor had made public the above named letter before it had reached the hands of the general, which of course would justify the general in replying in a like public manner; second, in that the letter was addressed to the wrong military commander, since Camp Rawlins was not under the jurisdiction of the general commanding at Camp Douglas, all posts in the Department of the Platte being independent from each other, their respective commanders communicating directly with department headquarters, hence Major Osborne and not General De Trobriand would have been the proper officer to complain to if any complaint was to be made; third, in that the supposed neglect of prompt investigation was on the part of his excellency instead of the military officers who, as already detailed, had been prompt to take action in the matter, although the governor seemed not to be aware of what had taken place in that kind, and General De Trobriand informed his excellency that he was under no obligation to keep him informed as to what was occurring in his (Shaffer's) territory. The general could refuse to deliver up the prisoners to the governor, because he had received orders from the department headquarters to keep them in military custody. [^31] Answering the governor's suggestion that if the United States soldiery could not fulfill the high object for which they were sent to Provo and to Utah—"to protect and not destroy"—"then better, far better, for the sake of the credit of the nation and the American armies, we be let alone to ourselves"—to this, and his answer presents the whole situation in Utah at that time, the general said:

"If it was not too much of curiosity, I would like to know if the real object of those who caused the 'United States soldiery,' as you say, to be sent to Provo, was not somewhat different from the high object so eloquently set forth by your excellency. But as any question on this subject would remain unanswered, I will only refer to your last words, (that) 'we be let alone to ourselves.' By all means, sir, if you wish it. You know by this time that we of the army are not of a meddling temper, we are no politicians; we don't belong to any ring; we have no interest in any clique, and we don't share in your spoils. Our personal ambition is generally limited to the honest and patriotic performance of our duties for our own satisfaction and the best interests of the government. Wherever we are ordered to go, we go, but we have no voice in the matter, and if we are sent to Provo, or anywhere else, it is not, as you are aware, on our application, but by the influential request of somebody else, generally in compliance with the demand of the governor.

To be let alone! Why, sir, the military itself, does not wish any better, if our soldiers were let alone instead of being poisoned physically with bad whiskey and morally with bad influences, there would be no troubles with them.

347That you be let alone to yourselves?—'you,' meaning of course, the people of this territory, including its governor, its churches, its militia, its legislature, its judiciary, its municipality, etc., etc.—would certainly be a great blessing to all, and I am happy to agree with you on that point. Then why not try it? and if the presence of the 'United States soldiery' interferes in any way with the harmonious workings of your 'happy family,' a single order from Washington may settle the question. Rest assured, sir, that in such a case we will all obey without hesitation or murmur, letting you alone to the full enjoyment of that popularity which so justly distinguishes your administration and surrounds your person in this territory of Utah." [^32]

347The general was severely criticised in some quarters for his letter to Governor Shaffer; but the blunders and injustice and hypocrisy of the governor's letter in which he sought to make it appear that he was the active man in guarding the rights of the people and the peace of Utah, and the general the inert one, readily suggests the circumstances that justified General De Trobriand's form of resentment of the injustice done to him by the governor's course. From the first the general had refused to be drawn into the political schemes and plots of the Utah anti-"Mormon" "ring," greatly to their annoyance, and they were bent upon doing all in their power to discredit him with the administration, and Governor Shaffer's published letter was doubtless a direct effort for the achievement of that end. [^33]

GENERAL SHERMAN AND PARTY IN UTAH

In the midst of these stirring events Generals Sherman and Schofield, and some members of their respective staffs arrived in Salt Lake City, from California and remained for several days. The party called upon President Young and several other church leaders at President Young's office. "Both parties," says Wilford Woodruff, who was present and journalized the visit, "were quite sociable." [^34] One evening during General Sherman's visit the band from Camp Douglas serenaded him and the crowd which gathered in front of the Townsend House clamored loudly for a speech; but neither the calls from the crowd nor the pleadings in a private interview could move the general to consent to make a speech, and most of the crowd dispersed.

348"HARD TIMES" SONG—THE GENERAL'S RESPONSE

About an hour afterwards—ten p. m.—the Parowan choir, then in attendance upon the semi-annual conference at Salt Lake City, went to the hotel and before its main entrance sang several pieces. Then the cry was again raised for a speech. "No, no," the general called from the veranda, "I would rather hear the girls sing." The choir then rendered very effectively "Hard Times Come Again No More." General Sherman could not resist the appeal in this heart-song of a people who had made it theirs by the "hard times" through which they had passed, and he came forward upon the veranda of the hotel "and in a few well chosen words acknowledged the compliment paid to him by the singers;" but he disclaimed all intention of making a speech. "He had heard that the singers were from Parowan; he did not know Parowan, only by having seen it on a map. He was gratified to behold the beautiful homes which the people, while facing difficulties and trials of the severest kind, had built up in the desert, and his sincere wish was that they might live to enjoy them, and that to them 'hard times would indeed come again no more.'" [^35]

DEATH OF GOVERNOR SHAFFER

But little else of importance happened during the administration of Governor Shaffer. The disease of which he was really dying when he received the appointment which sent him to Utah—consumption—demanded its toll of death as the autumn leaves fell, and on the last day of October the governor died. [^36]

349The most charitable view that can be taken of Governor Shaffer and his unfortunate term of office in Utah is that he was too much of a soldier to fit into the place of a civil office such as governor of a territory; for he sought to exercise the necessary arbitrary spirit of a military officer in exercising his duties as a civil governor. This, with the peevishness of ill health and his unfortunate anti-"Mormon" virus of bitter prejudice before his arrival in Utah, accounts for much in the career of Governor Shaffer in Utah.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See dispatch in the Deseret Evening News, weekly, of November 9th, 1870.
[^2] See Deseret News, weekly, of 16th of Nov., 1870, p. 478, which copies the Omaha Republican article mentioned above.
[^3] The Post article is quoted in full, Millennial Star, vol. xxxii, p. 760.
[^4] Ibid.
[^5] Springfield Republican of Jan. 27th, 1871; also Deseret News of Nov. 16th, 1870, p. 484.
[^6] Deseret News, weekly, of Nov. 16th, 1870.
[^7] Salt Lake Herald of Dec. 4th, 1870, vol. i, No. 150.
[^8] Deseret News, weekly, of Nov. 16th, 1870.
[^9] Impression of Jan. 27th, 1871; quoted also in Millennial Star, vol. xxxiii, p. 112.
[^10] Bancroft's History of Utah, pp. 661-2.
[^11] Their names were George M. Ottinger, for a long time chief of the fire department of Salt Lake City; Andrew Burt, for some time chief of police of Salt Lake City, and an efficient officer; Charles R. Savage, one of the most genial and inoffensive men that ever lived in the west, and for many years a member of the "Old Folks Committee," an organization which provides a free annual excursion and entertainment for the old folks of the community; James Fennemore, Archibald Livingston, Charles Livingston, W. G. Philips, and John C. Graham.
[^12] General George R. Maxwell was registrar of the land office. He was a Civil War veteran, from Michigan, many times wounded while in the service, therefore respected, despite his half-insane hatred of "Mormons" and all things "Mormon." A correspondent of the Cincinnati Commercial described him a little later as a man "with a strong, dissipated face, * * * looking as if he had overslept for a week and got up mad"—this, it is not unfair to say, was his habitual appearance. Maxwell entered the Union army when seventeen years of age, and at twenty-one was a brigadier general. During the war he had both legs broken, his right arm fractured, lost three fingers of his left hand by a saber cut, and had his collar bone broken by grape shot, besides several flesh wounds. (Wood's Recollections, Ms., pp. 39-40, quoted by Bancroft, History of Utah, p. 665, note).
[^13] The preliminary examination, the learned opinion of the court, the reception and treatment of the "rebel" officers at Camp Douglas and several editorials on this subject will be found in the Deseret News, weekly, of Nov. 30th and Dec. 7th, 1870; also in the Salt Lake Herald of the same period.
[^14] The Order—Special, No. 1—will be found in Millennial Star, vol. xxxiii, pp. 460-1.
[^15] The orders of Black including copies of former Governor Shaffer's proclamation will be found in Salt Lake Herald, daily, vol. ii, No. 21.
[^21] History of Salt Lake City, Tullidge, p. 505.
[^22] See this History, ch. xlii.
[^23] See this History, ch. cxxix.
[^24] The History of the Nauvoo Legion is written in detail by Major Richard W. Young, graduate of West Point and some time on the staff of General W. S. Hancock as acting judge advocate. His history of the legion consists of a serial of twelve numbers in The Contributor, 1888, vol. ix.
[^25] Salt Lake Herald of Sept. 24th, 1870, also Millennial Star, vol. xxxii, pp. 662-3.
[^26] Affidavit of Alderman William Miller Deseret News, weekly, of September 28 and Oct. 5th, 1870. All the affidavits covering this event,—sixteen in all—will be found in the same impressions of the News; also in Millennial Star, vol. xxxii, beginning at p. 63, et seq.
[^27] Ibid. Deposition of Thomas Fuller.
[^28] Deposition of Abram Holladay; also deposition of Ezra Oakley, Ibid.
[^29] Smoot's dispatch to the Salt Lake press, 23rd of Sept., Millennial Star, vol. xxxii, p. 663.
[^30] Deseret News, Oct. 5th, 1870, p. 408, where the letter of DeTrobriand will be found in full.
[^31] Subsequently an investigation was made of this outrage at the headquarters of the Department of the Platte; the responsibility for it was fixed upon the officers and soidiers of those companies present for duty at that date; and the amount of damages fixed upon by the mayor of Provo to the injured parties was ordered to be paid, the order to take effect immediately. (Condensed from the Omaha Herald, quoted in Millennial Star, vol. xxxii, p. 816).
[^32] See Deseret News, weekly, of Oct. 5th, 1870, where both letters will be found in extenso.
[^33] The Omaha Herald thus commented upon the circumstance: "The recent outrages of the United States soldiery upon the unoffending people of Provo, Utah, were the result of a drunken mob for which no respectable officer is in any degree responsible. Governor Shaffer seizes upon the opportunity to fix responsibility for it upon General De Trobriand for the double object of showing a regard for decency and to injure that excellent gentleman and soldier in public estimation. In the opinion of the Colfax missionaries the general is too much disposed to look with favor upon the merits of the Mormon people, and with contempt upon the latest raid upon their peace. This is the sweet milk in the cocoanut." (Omaha Herald of Oct. 1st, 1870). The Salt Lake Herald commenting on the correspondence said: "We have no need to defend General De Trobriand, who was the special object of the last attack by his excellency, Governor Shaffer. He is amply able to defend himself, but we arraign Governor Shaffer at the bar of the nation for flagrant abuse of his official position; and ask the president of the United States to remove from office a man who seeks persistently to drive a peaceable people into rebellion, and then to cover over his own acts endeavors to cast blame on an officer whose name is a synonym for bravery, efficiency, and gentlemanly bearing." (Salt Lake Herald of October 1st, 1870).
[^34] Woodruff's Journal, entry for Oct. 3rd, 1870.
[^35] Deseret News, weekly, of Oct. 12th, 1870.
[^36] The body of the governor was sent to Illinois for interment. He was given processional honors in conveying the body to the railroad depot for transit, under the auspices of the Masonic fraternity. Although the people of Utah were much offended at the course pursued by Governor Shaffer and had no reason to regard him as their friend, still flags were placed at half mast from the general cooperative store, from the Deseret News, and other buildings, and the principal stores and places of business were closed during the ceremonies. (Deseret News, weekly, of Nov. 2nd and 9th, 1870).
