B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 5 ( 1930)

350CHAPTER CXXXVIII

350WOULD-BE-GOVERNORS OF UTAH—"WOODEN-GUN REBELLION"—RIVAL CELEBRATIONS OF THE FOURTH OF JULY

350IT had been known for some time that Governor Shaffer could not last many months, and meantime a number of aspirants in Utah were waiting for his place. Quite a number of the Utah "ring" were willing to be considered as more than "receptive candidates;" and all were greatly annoyed by the sudden telegraphic appointment, on the very day of the Shaffer obsequies, of Vernon H. Vaughan to be governor of Utah. This created a vacancy in the secretaryship of the territory, and George S. Black, who had come to Utah in the capacity of private secretary to Governor Shaffer, was appointed to fill the vacancy at the same time that Vaughan was appointed to be governor. [^1]

A GROSS MISREPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE OF UTAH

On the evening of his appointment a band and a few friends called upon the newly appointed governor and serenaded him; and to the company Governor Vaughan made a brief speech in which he eulogized his predecessor and pledged himself to deal justly in the office to which he had been so suddenly appointed. As this took place on the evening of the day that processional honors had been paid to the late governor, in placing his body on the train for transit to Illinois, anti "Mormon" malice reported and it was published in the Omaha Republican, that—

"On the evening of the funeral ceremonies of the late governor, J. W. Shaffer, of Utah, and while his remains lay in his dwelling, surrounded by his family and mourning friends, (his house being the next house to the residence of the new governor, and both enclosed in the same yard), a large crowd of Mormons, headed by the Mormon brass band, marched up the street and filed into the yard, and with cheers and exultations serenaded the new governor, who came out and delivered to them a harangue, in which he promised to be their friend, and to see that they had all their rights and privileges." [^2]

351Each one of these statements is specifically denied by the News editorial, except the fact that a band that evening serenaded the governor, but it was after the departure of Shaffer's remains.

351The Omaha Herald suggested that the appointment of these two young men was merely temporary and made under the felt necessity of having executive officers on the ground to act immediately. And this was the view taken of the appointments throughout the country, and especially by the "ring" in Utah, and for a time there was quite a general speculation as to the next executive for Utah.

351The Chicago Post was particularly severe upon the appointment of Vaughan and gave the following description of him:

351"Vincent [Vernon H.] Vaughan is the new governor of Utah. His qualifications are as follows: He was a rebel throughout the war; (it will be remembered that he was from Alabama); engaged in a couple of duels after the war; his name is euphonious enough for a ten cent novel; his record is sufficiently like Brigham Young's to render him an easy prey to the latter; he is 'young' himself, and the United States government in Utah is in a fizzled condition. Perhaps it would have been as well not to appoint Vincent Vaughan, Esquire." [^3]

351The New York World had the following passage on the Utah governorship:

351"The Hon. John Covode passed through Chicago on Friday [Nov. 11], returning from California and Salt Lake. He says that the recent appointment of Vaughan as governor of Utah won't answer, because the position requires a man who is firm, sober, and dignified, and who will properly support the government and the judiciary, so ably represented there by Judge McKean. He thinks the appointment of John Covode would be the best appointment that could be made." [^4]

352Mr. Shelby M. Cullom, member of congress, he of the anti-"Mormon" Cullom bill fame, had been recently defeated for reelection from the eighth district of Illinois, and for a time his name was connected with the appointment to the Utah governorship. General Silas A. Strickland of Nebraska was also, for a time, prominently named for the place, but Senator Thayer, his principal supporter, failing of reelection, Strickland's name was withdrawn though supported by the Omaha Herald as well as by Senator Thayer. [^5] Press speculation and comment on Utah appointments about this time was widespread in the east. "There are several interested individuals who hope the appointment of Governor Vaughan is only a temporary one," said the Deseret News editorially. "We understand Mr. Cullom * * * hopes the appointment is only temporary. * * * He would like, we are told, to be governor of Utah." [^6] A Washington dispatch to the Salt Lake Herald dated December 3rd, said:

352"There is a strong feeling here against the confirmation of Vaughan as governor of Utah territory, and an effort will be made to induce the president to withdraw his name. The president is urged to adopt a firm policy towards the Mormons, and to force them into obedience to the United States laws. He is advised to appoint a man who will govern Utah with a stern hand, and in this connection certain prominent Pennsylvania politicians are endeavoring to secure the appointment of Shelby M. Cullom, at present chairman of the house committee on territories, and author of a very stringent anti-Mormon bill, introduced in the house last session. Appearances indicate that the president intends to yield to these suggestions, and withdraw Vaughan's name; and adopt a more stringent policy towards the Mormons." [^7]

Among the Utah "ringites" who hoped for the appointment was O. J. Hollister, collector of internal revenue for Utah, and brother-in-law of Vice President Colfax; also General P. E. Connor, who based his hopes upon President Grant's regard for military men. [^8] Finally, however, George L. Woods, whose four year term as governor of Oregon had recently ended, was appointed to fill the position. His appointment was made in January, but he did not take the oath of office until March 10th, and about six weeks later arrived in Salt Lake City. Woods was an active Republican in Oregon, and was chosen a Lincoln presidential elector from that state in 1864. In 1866 he was elected governor of Oregon, the term running four years. "Utah has never had a governor from whom we could reasonably hope for so much as from Governor Woods," said the Springfield (Mass). Republican. [^9] He was "a Missourian by birth," says Bancroft, "a pronounced anti-Mormon; * * * had accumulated and lost a considerable fortune. He was a man who, though by no means of the highest, purest, morality himself, was, it seems, exceedingly jealous for the morality of the nation." [^10]

353I have been at pains to write out the account of this scramble for federal appointments in Utah, and have sketched briefly the characters of the horde of office seekers for political positions in the territory that thronged the incoming of President Grant's administration, 1869-70, in order that I may call attention to the heavy political burdens that the Latter-day Saints—then comprising almost the entire population of Utah—had to bear, arising from this evil of withholding from them the American right of local self-government; and imposing upon them the "carpetbag" rule that is always a possibility, and nearly always a reality under the un-American territorial form of government. This evil, as seen clearly at this period, and more that shall befall the people, will remain to plague them yet through many years—for more than a quarter of a century, and even plague them more severly than in the period here treated.

353THE "WOODEN-GUN REBELLION"

It was during Governor Vaughan's brief administration that what is derisively called in our annals the "wooden-gun rebellion," occurred. The circumstances are these: The third regiment band of the Utah militia—Nauvoo Legion,—in anticipation of the fall musters had sent east for new instruments, and on their arrival, notwithstanding the interdiction of the late Governor Shaffer (if it was thought of at all) against all "musters, drills, or gatherings of the militia of the territory of Utah, and all gatherings of any nature, kind, or description of armed persons within the territory of Utah," except by his orders, invited the members of the regiment to assemble at the twentieth ward, Salt Lake City, school-house, to hear the band and accompany it by a drill. The regiment responded to this invitation of their band; they did not assemble by order of their colonel or other officers; but when assembled some of the latter took command and directed the movements of the several companies of the regiment in the drill. This on the 21st of November, 1870. Hostile and ultra anti-"Mormon" federal officials heard of this "drill in defiance of the late governor's prohibitions," and hastened to the scene, with the result that warrants were issued for the arrest of eight of the principal officers [^11] at the drill, on the charge of "treason and rebellion." At the preliminary hearing before Associate Justice C. M. Hawley, the two witnesses examined varied in their estimate of the number present. "One hundred" said the first witness, Mr. R. Keys; "three hundred," said Mr. Black, secretary of the territory.

It appears from the evidence that the men and officers were in uniform; that they carried arms; that they were drilling; that the drill was accompanied with martial music; that they carried an American flag; that from one to two hundred spectators were present, chiefly women and children; that the drill occurred between the hours of ten and twelve noon; that there was no drinking, nor rowdyism, nor profanity; at the end of the drill the companies marched off in different directions.

355The statute invoked for the arrest of these men was section 2 of an act passed by congress, "to suppress insurrection, to punish treason and rebellion, to seize and confiscate the property of rebels" and for other purposes, approved July 17th, 1862, and which reads as follows:

355"Sec. 2>>>>. And be it further enacted, That if any person shall hereafter incite, set on foot, assist, or engage in any rebellion or insurrection against the authority of the United States, or the laws thereof, or shall give aid or comfort thereto, or shall engage in, or give aid and comfort to any such existing rebellion or insurrection, and be convicted thereof, such person shall be punished by imprisonment for a period not exceeding ten years; or by a fine not exceeding ten thousand dollars, and by the liberation of all his slaves, if any he have; or by both of said punishments, at the discretion of the court."

355The prosecuting officer when reading this section of the statute and coming to the penalties prescribed halted at the word "dollars." To go on with the rest of the penalty, "and by the liberation of his slaves, if any he have," revealed only too clearly the absurdity of seeking to apply this statute to the above case; but the prosecutor concluded his argument, the court took the case under advisement and later gave an extended and "learned" opinion upon the case, and finally bound the militia officers over to await the action of the grand jury, fixing the bond in the case of higher grade officers at $5,000 and to the lesser grade at $2,000.

The "rebels" and "treasoners" during their preliminary hearings, and until admitted to bail were consigned by the United States marshal to the military authorities at Camp Douglas, where General Morrow, in the temporary absence of General R. De Trobriand, was in command. The general merely required that the "rebels" give their word of honor not to leave the precincts of the camp in a clandestine manner, whereupon the full liberty of the camp was accorded them, with the privilege of an occasional visit to the city if they desired it. The house of one of the officers was assigned to them as their "prison," and here they lived in contentment, their friends calling upon them at will. Many merchants on Main street, both "Mormon" and non-"Mormon," sent them all sorts of delicacies for their table, while the camp library, to which they were given free access, afforded them the pleasant enjoyment of reading. Finally they were admitted to bail to appear before the grand jury, but it can be readily understood that no grand jury would seriously consider such a case and the "rebels" were never indicted.

356During the preliminary examination Mr. Keys, one of the witnesses for the prosecution—of course no others were examined—stated that in conversation with Mr. Savage—one of the "rebel officers"—he had remarked upon the youthfulness of the "boys" composing the band. "Yes," answered Mr. Savage, "that band a year ago could not play a note." "There were a lot of boys with wooden guns present, and Mr. Savage said they were going to have a drill," said Mr. Keys. That fixed the title of this whole affair, it was henceforth episodical opera bouffe, and no incident of the serious historical drama being worked out in Utah.

Grave historians have tried to read into the absurd lines of it constitutional questions, and to have it regarded as a serious effort on the part of Utah military authorities to test the validity of a dead governor's (Shaffer's) decree as against the territorial militia law, and the constitutional right of the people to bear arms, and have "a well regulated militia for their protection." But no one knowing the lieutenant general of the legion and the personnel of his staff, can think that they would undertake a test of these questions in a manner so absurd. It was an informal gathering of militia men in uniform and with guns, it is true, but all living in one ward,—neighbors,—and met for a few hours amusement with a juvenile band, and with some boys present with wooden guns, doubtless to mimic the drill of the older men and to give a name to the episode—"wooden-gun rebellion;" and such it was, truly, in the sense of being harmless, and without design of rebellion, but made comical by the arrest of those peaceful men—the officers of the regiment. The desperate earnestness of the prosecuting attorney, General Maxwell, [^12] appointed for the occasion, in the temporary absence of the United States attorney; the long and learned opinion of the court, Judge Hawley, which was published in all its solemn length, and, literally, the yards of angry editorial written at the time, only add piquancy to the extravaganza. [^13]

357THE DIVIDED FOURTH OF JULY CELEBRATION OF 1871

In July following there occurred still another military episode which holds in crystallized form the petty tyranny of the times, and the injustice and annoyance forced upon the Latter-day Saints of Utah. As noted in these pages, from time to time, the Latter-day Saints, almost from the first year of their advent into the Salt Lake valley, not only in Salt Lake City, but throughout their settlements, had celebrated the anniversary of American independence. It was their intention to do so in Salt Lake City, as elsewhere throughout the territory, in this year of 1871, notwithstanding the many irritations to which they had been of late subjected by the newly arrived federal officials. Accordingly early in June the city council appointed the usual committee to make the arrangements for the celebration of the approaching anniversary. The committees of arrangements usually appointed by the city council had never made these celebrations exclusively "Mormon affairs," but had recognized the propriety of giving a chance to the citizens of the municipality, irrespective of church affiliation, an opportunity to participate in the celebration of the anniversary of this all-American's day—the American patriot's day of days. And so in this year of 1871 there was no likelihood that they would depart from this custom.

Early in June the non-"Mormon" residents of Salt Lake City took the matter in hand to formulate a celebration on their own account. Before much progress had been made on either side, however, it was proposed that a united celebration be held that would be more worthy the occasion than a divided effort could possibly be. Accordingly a committee from the non-"Mormon" citizens met with part of the committee appointed by the city councill to consider the feasibility of a united celebration. There was a free exchange of views, but the members from the city council's committee, not feeling authorized to enter into arrangements of a final nature, resolutions were drawn up, and signed by George L. Woods, governor of the territory, and George R. Maxwell, chairman and secretary respectively of the non-"Mormon" citizens' committee, asking the city council to authorize their present committee, or to appoint a new one, to make final arrangement for "a single, harmonious celebration of the coming fourth of July, irrespective of any and all action heretofore taken by either of the aforesaid committees." To this the city council made reply saying that according to custom the city council had appointed a committee of arrangements, "who were deemed by them ample in number and fully competent in ability for the occasion;" that considerable progress had been made in providing for the event "without any apparent want of wisdom or energy to provide for the entire community in its most liberal demands and in which all are invited to participate." It was therefore "resolved that it was unnecessary to set aside present arrangements."

359The non-"Mormons" were indignant, and so preparations were set on foot for a rival celebration. All the miners from outlying camps were invited to come to the "Gentile celebration" of the fourth of July in Salt Lake City. A like invitation was sent to the non-"Mormons" of Corinne, Ogden, and other places. Through the columns of the Salt Lake Tribune, which by now had come into existence, the non-"Mormons" announced their determination "to maintain their independence of priestly dictation" as well as to celebrate the fourth of July.

On the 22nd of June, Daniel H. Wells, in his capacity of lieutenant general of the Utah militia, ordered out the martial brass bands under their respective leaders; one company of artillery with ordnance to fire salutes; one company of cavalry; three companies of infantry. "The detail will perform such service during the day as may be assigned to it by the committee of arrangements. Good order is strictly enjoined. No fast riding is allowed within the limits of the city, by order," [^14] etc. Eight days later Territorial Secretary George A. Black, who during the temporary absence of Governor George L. Woods, was acting governor of the territory, forbade the carrying out of the order of General Wells, holding it to be in violation of the proclamation of the late Governor J. W. Shaffer; and further, he, George A. Black, "ordered and commanded" that "all persons except United States troops desist from participating in any military drill, muster, or parade of any kind, from and after this date, or until it shall be otherwise ordered or commanded by the governor," [^15] etc. In anticipation of resistance to his orders, the acting governor called upon General De Trobriand to be present in Salt Lake City with United States troops and to fire upon the companies of militia if they attempted to participate in the parade as directed to do by General Wells. [^16] General De Trobriand assured the acting governor that he would give the necessary order for the presence of the United States troops, that he would draw them up in line, and if the Utah militia attempted to join the parade he would call upon his troops to "take aim," but the order to fire must be given by the acting governor! After this Mr. Black did not appear so fixed in his determination to carry his orders to such extremes. More temperate councils prevailed on both sides. The companies of the militia ordered into the parade, save one, marched in the procession but without arms, the bands marched and played, and the artillery were out and fired salutes; United States troops from Camp Douglas were present, but only as spectators and the episode, which for a time threatened the peace of the occasion, and menaced even the peace of the territory, passed without violence, but left its record in the annals of the times to illustrate, as before remarked, the policy of petty tyranny practiced in Utah toward the Latter-day Saint community.

MISREPRESENTATION OF THE FOURTH OF JULY CELEBRATION

Correcting some misrepresentations of this incident made by a Salt Lake City correspondent to the New York Herald, an editorial in the Salt Lake Herald said:

360"There was no 'rebellion,' as there was no 'backing-down.' The militia were ordered out to celebrate the national anniversary, and they came. As the acting governor 'backed-down' and concluded to make no arrests on that day—generous man—(!) so, to avoid the appearance of trouble, the militia marched without their arms; but they marched in their allotted places except one company, whose commander failed to appear in time, though the men were on the ground. The artillery were out and fired their salutes. Why were they not arrested?" [^17]

360Governor Woods' representation of this episode or rather his misrepresentation of it, is as follows:

361"My first conflict with the church (?) occurred July 4th, 1871. The organic act of the territory made the governor commander in chief of the militia. The Mormon legislature, prior to that time, usurped that authority, and invested it in Daniel H. Wells, the third (officer) in the church. On July 1st, 1871, Wells issued an order as commander in chief to the militia of the territory to assemble at Salt Lake City July 4th to participate in the celebration. I resented this usurpation, and forbade them to assemble, but my prohibition was disregarded. Thereupon I ordered to the rendezvous three companies of infantry, one of cavalry, and a battery of artillery, [these were United States troops]; and dispersed them at the point of the bayonet. This practically ended the Nauvoo Legion." [^18]

The author quotes the above passage from Woods' Recollections, Ms. When it is considered that Governor George L. Woods was not in the territory when the incident of the militia marching in the 4th of July parade happened, and that such steps as were taken in the matter were taken by Secretary Black as acting governor, the "recollections" of Mr. Woods must be regarded as somewhat at fault. But this brief excerpt writes down the spirit of braggadocio of the officers sent to govern Utah in those days, and who irritated the people by the petty manifestations of their arrogance. The statement above that the "Mormon" legislature had usurped the authority of the governor of the territory as commander in chief of the militia, and vested it in Daniel H. Wells, or the lieutenant general of the militia, is utterly untrue; as is also a statement of Stenhouse, to the effect that the governors who succeeded Alfred Cumming had asked to be properly acknowledged commanders in chief of the militia, but the legislators, by purposed delay and circumlocution passed over session after session any action that would disturb the organization of the militia. [^19] The fact is that the law of 1857, in force up to the time of Shaffer, Black, Woods and Stenhouse, recognized the governor, as commander in chief by providing that, "The militia of the territory of Utah, under the governor of the territory as commander in chief, shall be commanded by a lieutenant general, formed into an independent military body," etc. [^20]

362Both parties held what each regarded as the very greatest celebration of the anniversary of the fourth of July ever held in the territory. The respective processions were augmented by processions from outside places, Ogden and the settlements of Davis county swelling the "Mormon" procession; while the mining camps and Corinne materially added to the features and to the length of the non-"Mormon" procession. Naturally, on account of having such great odds in population, the "Mormon" procession outclassed its rival. The public meetings were held in the "Mormon" tabernacle and the liberal institute respectively. The meeting in the tabernacle was not exclusively a "Mormon" affair; for while Elder Orson Pratt offered the invocation, and Elder David McKenzie read the Declaration of Independence, the time for speech making was about equally divided between George Q. Cannon and John T. Caine, (later and for many years delegate to congress), on the part of the "Mormons," and Mr. Alexander Majors, and the Hon. Tom Fitch, late of Nevada, on the part of the non-"Mormons." At the institute there was also a decidedly mixed list of speakers. General George R. Maxwell delivered the principal oration of the occasion, followed by Colonel Jocelyn and Judge Toohy, the latter from Corinne, and all out and out anti-"Mormons." They were alternated with such leaders of the "new movement," and gentlemen but recently prominent in the "Mormon" church, as Amasa M. Lyman, Wm. S. Godbe, E. L. T. Harrison. "Each side in their notable celebration," says Tullidge, "ventilated its own special views and sentiments; but the grand day passed off peaceably, especially considering that Acting Governor Black had ordered out United States troops to overawe the citizens." [^21]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Tullidge in History of Salt Lake City declares that the object of nominating a candidate for delegate to congress at this time was to send their candidate to Washington to contest the seat, and from time to time send one there to make such a contest whether victorious or not. "Indeed this party from its birth entertained the belief that congress would, upon some cause, give the seat to the anti-Mormon delegate, and that Utah never would be admitted as a state until the absolute political control was placed in their hands." (pp. 490-1).
[^2] Deseret News, weekly, of May 27th, 1868, p. 122.
[^3] See Deseret News, weekly, of Feb. 12th and 19th, 1868. In a spirit of mischief some one nominated a colored man commonly known as "Negro Cy," who received 6 votes. On incomplete returns Governor Durkee and Secretary Reed sent Delegate Hooper his certificate of election showing on those returns 15,179 votes, of which Hooper received 15,068, the other candidate—Negro Cy, 6; and McGrorty 105. The latter's votes came principally from the little mining town of Stockton in Tooele county.
[^4] Deseret News of Feb. 12th, 1868—"There were upwards of 2,200 votes in this [Salt Lake] county at the election of delegate to congress," said the News, commenting on the above; "out of that number 36 voted for McGrorty, we would not wonder if he should yet say that they had all been slaughtered and eaten."
[^5] Article in Deseret News of Feb. 12th, 1868, "A more ridiculous proceeding than this of McGrorty's we never heard of. He was looked upon as but little, if any better, than an insane man. He was so regarded almost universally. His present action confirms the idea."
[^6] See Hooper's answer in contest case under eleven specific denials of charges made by McGrorty Deseret News, weekly, of May 27th, 1868. Also, House Miscellaneous Documents, 40th Congress, 2nd Session, No. 35.
[^7] See Hooper's special dispatch to the Deseret News, of July 15th, weekly, 1868, p. 180.
[^8] See Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, ch. liv.
[^9] See returns given by Salt Lake Herald of August 4th, 1870. Tullidge puts the number of votes at 26,000 of which "Maxwell received but a few hundred." (Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, pp. 596-7. Ibid, p. 490).
[^10] Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, pp. 490-1 and 597.
[^11] Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, pp. 597-8. Mr. Tullidge, I believe stands practically alone in this view of the case, but quotes an unnamed writer who argues the matter at length, but without becoming convincing. This in The History of Salt Lake City, 1886. Turning to the same author's Life of Brigham Young, or Utah and Her Founders, 1877, one discovers the unnamed "writer" in the History of Salt Lake City, to be Mr. Tullidge himself. Life of Brigham Young, or Utah and Her Founders, pp. 437-8. In addition to Tullidge there is an article from the Territorial Enterprise, a western paper, quoted by the Salt Lake Tribune of Aug. 12th, 1872, in which it is said that "it was supposed to be the wish of Brigham Young" that Hooper should retire in order that a "Mormon" with several wives might be his successor, to ascertain how far the government can be made to go in recognition of the detestable practices of the "Mormons." All which was mere hostile Gentile supposition.
[^12] Salt Lake Daily Herald of Nov. 23rd, 1872, where Cannon's answer to Maxwell is given complete.
[^13] Salt Lake Herald of Nov. 23rd, 1872.
[^14] House Miscellaneous Documents, 43rd Congress, 1st Session, No. 49. House Committee Reports, 43rd Congress, 1st Session.
[^15] Mr. Baskin arrived in Utah in August, 1865. Baskin's Reminiscences, p. 5.
[^16] The candidates were J. Robinson Walker, Samuel Kahn, Wells Spicer, and C. C. Beckwith, well known and influential citizens. Because of their high character and permanent interest in Salt Lake City and Utah, they were expected to strongly appeal to conservative "Mormons" as well as to the Gentile population.
[^17] Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, p. 512.
[^18] History of Salt Lake City, pp. 590-1.
[^19] The matter of misrepresentation was as follows: Under the caption—"Brigham on the War Path," the paper said, "that Brigham Young arose and suspended the laws of the council without motion or vote," etc. This was untrue since President Young had requested the privilege of speaking, which was granted, and the rules were suspended by the council that he might do so. (See Deseret News, daily, of July 31st, 1872. The Tribune's account of the expulsion of its representatives will be found in the impression of that paper of Aug. 3rd, 1872).
[^20] Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, p. 592. Tullidge in a footnote, declares that he requested the appointment to go to the city council meeting as representative, but his request was denied by the management, the reason given being that his known "truthfulness and justice" would lead the city council to allow him to remain "as a member of the press, notwithstanding the expulsion of the paper of whose staff he was a member." "But harmony with the city council," Mr. Tullidge goes on to say, "fairness towards its administration, was just what the 'Liberals' wished to prevent. War, not justice, was their aim. That they did also project the movement against the city authorities, as stated by Mr. Salisbury, the very fact that the Tribune manager, local editor and foreman of the printing establishment were at the city hall to force the presence of the opposition press is very evident as the newspaper reports and the record of the council will substantiate. The explanation, too, why the '100 men' were not at their post was, it may be presumed, no fault of the agitators, but simply because certain well known conservative business men did not enthusiastically take the responsibility. Without these influential citizens Maxwell knew that his '100 men' would have been but an armed band of rioters." (Signed) "E. W. Tullidge, associate editor Tribune, 1872." (Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, p. 592, note). For the Deseret News account of the expulsion of the Tribune representatives from the city council meeting see the impression of Aug. 7th, weekly, p. 397.
[^21] History of Salt Lake City, pp. 592-593.
