B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 5 ( 1930)

363CHAPTER CXXXIX

363UTAH POLITICS—CONTESTED ELECTIONS OF DELEGATES TO CONGRESS—THE "G. L. U."-BEHAVIOR

363IT has already been noted that at the municipal election held in Salt Lake City in mid-February, 1870, that what was to be known as the "Liberal" or "anti-church" political party, had its origin in a coalition of the Godbeite schismatics and the Gentiles of Salt Lake City. In the following territorial election for delegate to congress the party determined upon putting a candidate in the field in the hope if not of electing him, then for the purpose of making a contest for the seat at Washington, where there would be at least a possibility of success in gaining the seat by a decision of the house influenced as it was likely to be by the popular prejudice against the Latter-day Saints. [^1] It was not altogether a forlorn hope, this proposed contest either. Once before the house of representatives had given attention to such a contest upon grounds so absurd, and by parties so contemptible, that any contest, however ridiculous, was bound to be entertained and reported upon and discussed at more or less learned length in the house, and would attract the attention of the country because of its connection with the "Mormon" people and their remarkable history.

363THE HOOPER-MCGRORTY CONTESTED ELECTION CASE—1867

The former case to which reference is here made was the McGrorty contest case for the seat held by Mr. Wm. H. Hooper, in 1867. McGrorty was for some time a small merchant in Salt Lake City, and at first very obsequious in his deportment towards the Latter-day Saints. According to the Deseret News he was a constant attendant upon their meetings, and loud in his repeated professions of sympathy and friendliness for them. [^2] Finding, however, that he could not long profitably play the hypocrite he came out in opposition to them and ran as an opposing candidate to Wm. H. Hooper in 1867, appealing especially to the anti-"Mormons" of Utah for their support. At the polls he received 105 votes, out of a total of 15,179, [^3] and on this showing at the polls he based his contest. The law required that a contestant give notice of contest thirty days after the election; but this McGrorty failed to do, for notice of his intended contest was not served for nearly a year after the election on the plea that he was afraid that the people of Salt Lake City would learn through the telegraph from Washington, that he had filed a contest "and his life would be in danger." [^4]

McGrorty's ground of contest was that of the upwards of 15,000 votes cast for Mr. Hooper, eight-tenths were by foreigners who had never been naturalized, and there were other irregularities in the elections such as one person presenting a list of voters names, all of whom were absent from the polls, but voted by this representative as "proxy;" that Captain Hooper had been voted for at the election as representative to congress from the provisional "State of Deseret"—for whose admission into the Union he was to ask—as well as for delegate to congress from the territory of Utah; and that Mr. Hooper in certain "endowment ceremonies," administered by the "Mormon" church, had taken an oath of hostility to the United States, "and is, therefore, not a proper person to be admitted to the congress of the United States." [^5]

365McGrorty was assisted by Mr. C. V. Waite,—formerly associate justice of the Utah supreme court—1862-3—in the preparation of his contest, which consisted of the above mentioned points with general charges of disloyalty against the whole "Mormon" population, also that they were alien to American principles and sentiments, and guilty of many crimes, among which were sundry alleged religious murders, or cases of "blood atonement." The house received this belated notice of contest notwithstanding all its absurdities and referred it to the committee on elections.

DELEGATE HOOPER'S DIGNIFIED ANSWER TO MCGRORTY'S CLAIMS—THE "ENDOWMENT OATH"

Mr. Hooper made formal answer to these charges, but further than a general denial he would not go. He held that the contestant was not rightfully "in court." He denied the truth of the allegations concerning the irregularities in the voting at the election, and the charge that eight-tenths of the votes were cast by aliens. The alleged occurrences of outrage cited by contestant occurred, by his own showing, from eight to fifteen years before; and "even if true—which is not admitted—as charged by contestant, they fall far below the number and degree of outrages which occur in all newly settled territories—and have no relation to the contest." One of the answers of Delegate Hooper is of especial interest, in view of the part it has taken in nearly all subsequent congressional contests against "Mormons" elected to the house and senate, namely, the allegation that Mr. Hooper had taken an oath in the course of a religious ritual known as the "endowment ceremonial," inconsistent with his duty of loyalty to the government. Mr. Hooper answered:

366"The sitting delegate * * * denies that he has ever at any time taken any oath which could in any manner interfere with his duties as a loyal, and law-abiding citizen of the United States; and he further states that to the best of his knowledge and belief, there is no oath taken or required to be taken by the people known as 'Mormons,' under any rule of their church, inconsistent with their duties as loyal and law-abiding citizens of the United States." [^6]

366Thus in this first contest, as in all subsequent contests, where this charge has been made, emphatic denial of it has been entered.

366On the 9th of July, 1868, the house committee on elections decided the contest in favor of Mr. Hooper, and so reported to the house, [^7] as before stated.

366Certainly if a contest could be had before the American house of representatives upon grounds so absurd as those on which McGrorty based his contest in 1868, nothing could be barred in the way of a contest under the intensified congressional and popular prejudice existing in 1870-71.

THE GENTILE CANDIDATE—THE "LIBERAL POLITICAL PARTY OF UTAH"

The person nominated by the Liberal party to make this contest in 1870 was General George R. Maxwell, United States registrar of the land office, all who were opposed to "despotism and tyranny in Utah," and who favored the separation of church and state; all who would stand for freedom, liberality, and progress, were urged to attend a convention to be held on the 16th of July, by the new party. The convention was held at Corinne, General P. E. Connor was elected chairman, and Mr. Maxwell was nominated by acclamation. Governor Shaffer's executive policy was endorsed; and before the close of the convention the organization was officially named the "Liberal Political Party of Utah." [^8]

367At the election more than 20,000 votes were cast. Maxwell received less than 1,500, half of which were alleged to be illegal, through repeating and allowing unqualified persons at Corinne to vote. [^9] Maxwell duly contested the election, conducting his case very much along the lines of McGrorty's plan, but charging Mr. Hooper with disloyalty in connection with the Buchanan's "Utah Expedition" troubles and the alleged endowment oath. He relied upon the intensity of the prejudice against the Latter-day Saints existing at the time for his success. [^10] But in this he was disappointed, and his contest was unsuccessful.

THE "PEOPLE'S PARTY:" GEORGE Q. CANNON, AN APOSTLE AND POLYGAMIST—ITS CANDIDATE

At the election of 1872 General Maxwell was again the Liberal party's candidate for delegate. Mr. Hooper early signified to his friends his intention not to be a candidate again, as his ten years of service had left him exhausted, and he determined upon taking a much needed rest. Whereupon George Q. Cannon, one of the twelve apostles of the church, was made the nominee of the People's party, a name which came very naturally into existence as representing the overwhelming numbers of the people of the territory who were opposed to the anti-"Mormon," or so-called "Liberal party." It has been urged that the selection of Mr. Cannon as the candidate for delegate to congress at this time arose from a determination on the part of the "Mormon" church leaders to have the "'Mormon' case in its entirety sent to Washington," and hence Mr. Cannon, "an apostle and a polygamist, was sent to congress." There is no reliable evidence for the statement, to say nothing of proof. [^11] It is mere fancy that reads into the events of those days such a conception. As a matter of fact there was less inclination in 1872 to press the question of polygamy upon the attention of congress or the country than at any other time, as we shall see later when considering another question. Mr. Cannon was not chosen delegate to thrust a polygamist into congress in defiance of public sentiment, but because he was undoubtedly by temperament and general character, by his grasp of public questions, and broad intelligence, by his tactfulness and his ability to make and hold friends, by his pleasing manner and cosmopolitan spirit, and, finally, by his knowledge of the west and the especial needs of his people—he was the very best man in the community at the time—Mr. Hooper eliminated—to represent Utah as delegate to congress; and having all the constitutional qualifications for the office, the people of Utah never doubted but he would be acceptable to congress, and never suspected that his advent at the capital would raise the question of polygamy in congress, and much less thrust that subject upon the attention of congress and the country.

THE ELECTION OF MR. CANNON AND THE CONTEST

In the election which took place on the 5th of August, George Q. Cannon received 20,969 votes; George R. Maxwell, 1,942. When the votes of the election were officially counted in the presence of Governor Woods and Secretary Black, General Maxwell, accompanied by Rev. Norman McLeod, read a protest against the certificate of election being given to Mr. Cannon, taking substantially the same ground that he did in contesting the seat of Delegate Hooper, two years before, excepting the charge of disloyalty in the "Buchanan Utah War." He added, however, charges of polygamy and polygamous living; and included the charge of disloyalty to the government by reason of taking the alleged disloyal endowment oath, as in the charges against Mr. Hooper, with this variation, that Mr. Cannon had also at a specific time and place—"15th day of May, 1848, at Nauvoo, Illinois"—taken an oath to obey Brigham Young or his successors, in all things, both temporal and spiritual. Mr. Cannon's answer to this allegation published in his formal denial of the Maxwell charges is as follows:

369"I deny that on the 15th day of May, 1848, at Nauvoo, Illinois, or at any other time or place, I took an oath or other obligation, to obey Brigham Young or his successors, in all things, or in anything, temporal or spiritual. I deny that at Nauvoo, or elsewhere, I ever took an oath, or other obligation of disloyalty to the United States, or that I ever, at any time or place, took an oath or other obligation to thwart or overthrow the government, and I utterly deny that I have ever taken any oath, affirmation, or other obligation, or made any declaration, inconsistent with my loyalty and allegiance to the United States, or obedience to the government and laws thereof." [^12]

369Maxwell also alleged that Cannon had conspired with Brigham Young and others to coerce voters under penalty of death to vote for Cannon in the election 1872. The nature of the charge may be judged by the answer made to it:

369"I deny," said Cannon's answer, "that the said voters, or any of them, were influenced by fear of Brigham Young, or any other person. I further deny that I was combined or confederated with said Young, or any other person or association, to influence the said election; or that I or any one on my behalf, or otherwise, did by duress, violence, or other coercion, compel each or any voter for me at said election to vote, under the penalty of death, or under any other penalty whatsoever." [^13]

It was pointed out by Mr. Cannon's representative, Mr. S. A. Mann, late secretary of Utah and acting governor, and Mr. John T. Caine—Mr. Cannon being absent in California—that the governor and secretary's duty in the premises was purely administrative, and required them to grant the certificate to the person receiving the greatest number of votes. The fact that congress had reserved to each house of congress, respectively, the right to determine the election and qualifications of its members deprived the governor and secretary of the territory of any judicial function in the case, or any option in the matter of issuing the certificate of election. The certificate was accordingly granted to the successful candidate, and Mr. Maxwell served notice of his intention to contest the election before the house of representatives at Washington.

At the opening of the congress—the forty-third—when the members were being sworn in General Maxwell induced Mr. Merriman of New York to make objection to Mr. Cannon taking the oath, by a resolution embodying in brief form the charges against the Utah delegate by the contestant for his seat, and alleging belief of probable cause of disqualification. As an objection of this character by a member of the house is sufficient to prevent a member-elect from being sworn in until the matter is disposed of, Mr. Cannon had to stand aside until the members were sworn in. Then the Merriman resolution was immediately taken up and discussed by leading members of the house, by both Republicans and Democrats. The prima facie right of Delegate Cannon to be sworn in was so clear that the vote to table Merriman's resolution was unanimous save for one vote, and Mr. Cannon was sworn in. Subsequently the house committee on elections disposed of the contest by reporting unanimously that Maxwell was not entitled to the seat and that George Q. Cannon was. Not satisfied with this, however, or fearing that they might be adjudged as being too friendly to "Mormonism" by admitting a "Mormon" to a seat in congress, a resolution by Mr. Hazelton of Wisconsin, appointing a committee to investigate the Maxwell charges against Mr. Cannon was passed and the committee made such progress that it finally adopted a resolution to "exclude" the delegate, but this conclusion was arrived at so near the end of the second session of the forty-third congress that it was never considered by the house. [^14]

371Mr. Cannon was reelected in 1874 to the 44th congress, —1875-77. Mr. R. N. Baskin, a prominent Gentile lawyer, active in all anti-"Mormon" movements of the period, [^15] was his opponent. Mr. Cannon received 22,260 votes, Mr. Baskin 4,513. The Liberal candidate was unsuccessful in the contest before the house of representatives, and Mr. Cannon by reelections continued as Utah's delegate to congress until 1882.

THE UTAH LOCAL ELECTIONS—"MORMON" AND GENTILE CONTESTS

The elections in Utah for local officers, territorial and municipal, no less than the elections for delegate to congress, were of interest and exhibit the intensity of the conflict waged for political control during this period. The coterie of federal appointees including the governor, secretaries, judges and minor officers fomented discord and organized opposition to the prevailing order of things as sustained by the majority of the people—the Latter-day Saints. In the territorial election of 1871, the Liberal or anti-church party, determined to put a ticket in the field in Salt Lake county for members of the council branch of the legislature, which up to this time had been exclusively "Mormon." While it was generally conceded that the ticket could not be elected, still it was confidently expected that such a showing would be made as to indicate an increasing opposition to "Mormon rule," and it was hoped that it would give strength to subsequent contests for the delegateship to congress. "We may not succeed in this election," commented General Maxwell, "but we shall poll a vote that will astonish them." [^16]

372A ratification meeting of the party was held in Salt Lake City, on the 22nd of July, and here it was discovered that the party made up of the Godbeite schismatics and the Gentiles of Salt Lake City and county was not altogether harmonious. The rabid speeches on the occasion of such extreme anti-"Mormons" as General Maxwell and Judge Toohy, the latter of Corinne, in which the domestic institutions of the "Mormon" people were assailed and their leaders threatened with unusual judicial harshness, not only as to prohibiting the extension of polygamy but in disrupting existing relations, could not be approved by the Godbeite leaders who were present; and the result was a very disorderly meeting, which hurriedly adjourned to stay the tide of dissension which had set in, and which threatened the disruption of the party then and there. The next morning the Salt Lake Herald declared that the Liberal party was dead—"disembowelled by its own hand." Mr. C. C. Beckwith immediately repudiated his nomination, and every effort by the Tribune and the conservative party leaders availed nothing to stay the dissension which had arisen by the unjustifiable assault made upon the "Mormon" people. "The coalition," writes Tullidge, "formed by ex-Mormon elders and radical Gentiles had been an utter failure." And this remark is justified by the showing made in the Salt Lake county election returns, which registered an average vote of about 4,700 for the People's party candidates; and an average vote of about 600 for the Liberal party candidates. [^17]

Political and Legal AffairsHCRISE OF THE "GENTILE LEAGUE OF UTAH"

Political and Legal AffairsHCThe failure of this coalition of ex-"Mormon" elders—Godbeites and Gentiles, to adhere in an opposition political party to the People's party is what doubtless led shortly after the aforesaid election to the formation of "The Gentile League of Utah." This was a secret organization having its membership in Salt Lake City and in the mining camps adjacent; and had for its purpose the breaking up of "Mormon theocracy." The fact of its existence and the avowal of its purpose, rest upon the testimony of those who are competent to know whereof they spake, since they were at the time of its organization connected with the staff of the Salt Lake Tribune, the organ of the anti-"Mormon" forces. These parties were Mr. Tullidge and Joseph Salisbury. The former in his History of Salt Lake City, writes:

Political and Legal AffairsHC373"Sometime after this [i. e. after a certain disruption in the editorial staff of the Salt Lake Tribune] a secret society was organized in the city and mining camps, known as the 'Gentile League of Utah.' Its mission was to break up 'Mormon theocracy.'"

Political and Legal AffairsHC373Mr. Tullidge represents that when some of Judge McKean's extreme judicial acts were overruled by the United States supreme court (of which more later), the work he had undertaken in the matter of suppressing "Mormon theocracy," had "to be done by the 'G. L. U.'s;' and they [i. e. anti-'Mormons'] did not hesitate to impress on the public mind that they were a semi-military organization. The radicals at their public meetings boldly boasted of this organization and its purposes; and Judge Haydon prophesied that the streets of Salt Lake City would run blood." [^18]

Political and Legal AffairsHC373For alleged "misrepresentations," of proceedings in the city council, published in the Salt Lake Tribune, and the paper refusing to make retraction and apology, the representatives of the Tribune were excluded from the council meetings; [^19] whereupon it was determined to force the attendance of the Tribune's representatives upon the city council by the use of the "Gentile League of Utah." Following is the reporter's (a Mr. Salisbury's) signed statement of the plan adopted:

Political and Legal AffairsHCTHE "G. L. U." IN ACTION

Political and Legal AffairsHC"I was afterwards directed by Mr. Fred T. Perris, manager of the paper, (Tribune) to attend at the next regular meeting of the council, and report as usual. I said, in answer, that I presumed the council would adopt parliamentary rules and close its doors; whereupon the manager informed me that General Geo. R. Maxwell had promised to be there with 100 men of the 'G. L. U.'s' and other secret orders, to force an entrance and insist on my taking the minutes;

Political and Legal AffairsHC374That, on the day previous to the meeting, I was in the editor's office writing, when General Maxwell came in and asked me if I was ready to go to the council the following evening. I replied, 'I shall go anyhow.' He intimated that he was ready, and the 'boys' would be there;

Political and Legal AffairsHC374That I understood the program to be that, if any hostile demonstration were made by the mayor and council, each of them would be immediately covered by a pair of pistols, in the hands of the 100 men present;

Political and Legal AffairsHC374And furthermore, that, if Brigham Young was present, he would be a special mark;

Political and Legal AffairsHC374That, for some reason, the project was abandoned;

Political and Legal AffairsHC374That myself, accompanied by Mr. F. T. Perris and Mr. Abrahams, went to said meeting, when the motion of the preceding council was confirmed and the Tribune men again expelled." [^20]

Political and Legal AffairsHCOn the 3rd of August, 1872, during the Cannon-Maxwell congressional campaign an outdoor meeting was held in front of the Salt Lake Hotel on Main street to ratify the nomination of the Liberal party's candidate. "Mormon theocracy" was the object of attack by all the speakers. Its leaders were brutally abused, its members denounced as "dupes," "serfs," "the downtrodden," and "geese." These verbal assaults produced great excitement in the crowd of listeners, most of whom were "Mormons," who resented by denials, hisses, yells, and groans the accusations so bitterly made. "Now came the business for the 'G. L. U.'s'," says Mr. Tullidge:

Political and Legal AffairsHCA "DARE" TO VIOLENCE

Political and Legal AffairsHC"They sprang to the front. They were headed by United States ex-Marshal Orr.

Political and Legal AffairsHC375Follow me 'G. L. U'.s' he cried to his armed troop.

Political and Legal AffairsHC375They dashed after him, revolvers in hand, and formed a half circle in front of the stand. Flourishing their weapons, they awed back the people, each waiting eagerly for the command to fire into the crowd.

Political and Legal AffairsHC375For the anxious space of five minutes, it was almost certain that Judge Haydon's prophecy would be fulfilled that night, and the streets of Salt Lake run with blood.

Political and Legal AffairsHC375The writer saw their weapons brandished above the heads of their foremost men, gleaming in the flickering light of the lamps, and heard the excited cries of men eager for the word to fire.

Political and Legal AffairsHC375The 'G. L. U.'s' went to that meeting anxious for the work of revolution, as the more speedy way of 'solving the Mormon problem;' and around the stand, where for a moment there seemed a favorable opportunity, this was strongly manifested.

Political and Legal AffairsHC375* * * That our city did not witness on this night a mournful tragedy is due alone to the fact that no weapons were drawn by any, excepting the Liberals." [^21]

Political and Legal AffairsHC375The street meeting on account of the frequent interruption's adjourned to the Liberal Institute where the speaking without further interruption was concluded. [^22]

Political and Legal AffairsHCANOTHER APPEAL FOR USE OF UNITED STATES TROOPS

Political and Legal AffairsHCOn the ground of this disturbance of the street meeting a strong appeal was made by the Tribune for the troops at Camp Douglas to be present at the polls the next day, but the appeal was in vain, and the election passed off without disturbance.

Political and Legal AffairsHC376It is charged by these same parties, Tullidge and Salisbury, that at a mass meeting held in front of the Walker House on Main street on the 12th of October, 1872, another plot was formed to bring into use the "G. L. U.'s" in the event of any disturbance of that meeting. The meeting was held to glorify the Republican success in the fall election in Pennsylvania, Ohio, Indiana, and Nebraska, foreshadowing the success of the Republican party in the reelection of Grant. And now the statement of Salisbury:

Political and Legal AffairsHC376"During the day it was whispered around that an organization had been effected and that prominent men of the city authorities would be watched by the armed members of the 'G. L. U.'s'. I subsequently learned that these were under the control of the chairman and that at his given signal the body was to move en mass.

Political and Legal AffairsHC376I soon discovered that the program was well arranged, and saw men known to me as 'G. L. U.'s' moving in the crowd in twos, with their hands upon their pistols, threatening those who dared utter the slightest murmur at the wanton denunciations against the Mormon leaders. It was at this meeting that the predictions uttered at the Liberal Institute and by Mr. Baskin in the Tribune office, were to have found fulfillment, but Associate Justice Strickland exposed the movement prematurely when at the first sound of an opposing voice he arose and proclaimed:

Political and Legal AffairsHC376'The first man who interrupts this meeting I will order shot! I mean what I say and say what I mean! * * * *'

Political and Legal AffairsHC376* * * I subsequently learned, from conversation among the radicals, that had there been any counter demonstration, the 'G. L. U.'s at a given signal would have fallen back to the sidewalk, in front of the Walker House, and that a volley from them, and others stationed in the windows above, would have fulfilled the prophecy of United States Attorney Baskin—'We'll have a hundred coffins at our next meeting!'" [^23]

Political and Legal AffairsHC377"BAYONET RULE" TO BE APPLIED IN UTAH ELECTIONS

Political and Legal AffairsHC377At the territorial election in August, 1874, at the time that Cannon and Baskin were rival candidates for the office of delegate to congress, another serious disruption of the peace of the territory for a time threatened. General George R. Maxwell was United States marshal for the territory at the time, and on the day of election he employed a large number of United States deputy marshals and sent them to the polls "to see that no citizen was hindered in freely casting his vote." This under the act of congress known as the "bayonet rule" or "force act," passed by congress—during the "reconstruction period"—for the states of the south recently in rebellion; and which granted to United States marshals and their deputies special powers on election days, when representatives and delegates to the national congress were to be elected. The Liberal or Gentile view of this law was that "the [local] civic authority was temporarily suspended;" that "United States' law had stepped in to run the city for one day." [^24] The People's party leaders and press, of course, took an entirely opposite view from this. The Deseret News, commenting upon this attempt to apply the "bayonet rule" designed for the southern states in the "reconstruction period" to Utah, said:

Political and Legal AffairsHC"The Liberals appear to have acted upon the assumption that, of all days in the year, on election day, the municipal authorities should vacate their offices, and let the peace of the city take care of itself. In support of such a ridiculous assumption we have never seen a particle of law or authority. The reconstruction or 'bayonet law' of congress under which United States marshals and their deputies are authorized to attend elections, specially for representatives or delegates to congress, and to arrest offenders against United States' laws was passed with special reference to the fifteenth amendment [of the national Constitution] and the suffrage rights of colored people, and was never intended to abolish local authority, neither does it." [^25]

Political and Legal AffairsHCRIOTING AT THE POLLS

Political and Legal AffairsHCThe local officers refused to abdicate their duties as peace officers, and the city police were present at the polling places to preserve order. The presence of the two classes of officers at the polls proved irritating, and at the polls of the 5th city precinct—which included the City Hall, and part of the business section of the city, where the Liberals had concentrated their forces—a serious riot threatened throughout the day. An attempt on the part of one of the city police to remove a man from the polls after his vote had been rejected by the judge of the election, and who, with his adherents, was obstructing the polls, led to resistance to his removal by some of the deputy marshals, and resulted in the arrest of the policeman, Officer Philips. This was followed by the arrest of a deputy marshal and counter arrests of other policemen. Late in the afternoon Mayor Wells appeared at the City Hall, and as he was entering the doorway a deputy United States marshal, J. M. Orr, said to be under the influence of liquor, seized him and pulled him onto the sidewalk. The crowd, which all day had surged about the polls, was by now excited and well-nigh unmanageable. In the struggle to free himself from his assailants and during the efforts of his friends to rescue him from the crowd the mayor was roughly handled, sustained some bruises, and his coat was torn to shreds. He was finally rescued by the police and safely conveyed into the City Hall and the entrance closed. A few minutes later he appeared upon the balcony and read the riot act to the turbulent crowd below, some of whom shouted "shoot him! shoot him!" As the crowd did not disperse at his request the mayor gave orders to the chief of police to disperse it by force, which he did promptly, with a detachment of the police force who acted vigorously, and at the expense of broken heads to those who resisted the orders to disperse. This action restored peace.

Political and Legal AffairsHC379For his part in trying to restore order the mayor was placed under arrest by the federal officers, as were other city officials, but admitted to bail, as also were the deputy marshals who had been placed under arrest by the city authorities. A few days later, however, when the election excitement had passed, all cases growing out of the election broils were dismissed by the respective courts having jurisdiction. [^26]

Political and Legal AffairsHCIn the election, as before stated, Mr. Cannon received 22,260 votes, Mr. Baskin 4,513 for delegates to congress; and in Salt Lake City votes for Mr. Cannon stood at the ratio of nearly four to one. This is mentioned to show that strong in their confidence to elect their candidate, Mr. Cannon, there was no likelihood of the "Mormon" party resorting to illegal means to accomplish their purpose, no probability that they would interfere with the voting of their opponents; and therefore there was no occasion for employing the "bayo net law" of congress in this election by sending deputy marshals to the polls, "to protect citizens while voting," or to keep the peace. But it might be greatly to the advantage of the prospective contestant of Mr. Cannon's seat, when the case should be taken before congress (for it was understood by Mr. Baskin and his friends that the seat would be contested by them, no matter how badly the Liberal party might be defeated at the polls) if that contestant could cite election riots and conflicts on a large scale between local "Mormon" officials and federal officers. And that, at the time, was the interpretation put upon the action of the Liberal leaders and the United States marshal. [^27] If this was the purpose of invoking the federal "bayonet law" of congress, at this Utah election, it failed in its purpose.

NOTE

Publishing in UtahHCTHE SALT LAKE TRIBUNE

Publishing in UtahHCThe Salt Lake Tribune was a culmination of other papers which accomplished a mission and passed away. Its original, undoubtedly, was the Valley Tan, whose offspring was the Vedette. The Mormon Tribune was but its parent in name. After the political coalition of 1870, which brought forward Henry W. Lawrence, as candidate for the office of mayor of Salt Lake City, on the ticket of the Liberal party, the common sense of the party quickly appreciated that the name "Mormon" Tribune must be resigned or another paper started in its stead. The transition to the Salt Lake Tribune was comparatively easy, yet scarcely was the change of name effected ere the new policy required that the editorial control should also change. This forced the retirement of Mr. E. L. T. Harrison, who was succeeded by Mr. Oscar G. Sawyer, who was brought on from the New York Herald staff to take the editorial charge.

Publishing in UtahHC380The first issue of the Salt Lake Daily Tribune was on the 15th of April, 1871. The names of W. S. Godbe and E. L. T. Harrison still stood at the head of the paper; William H. Sherman, business manager; Oscar G. Sawyer was introduced as the managing editor.

Publishing in UtahHC380The following is from the Prospectus of the Salt Lake Daily Tribune, under the caption "Our Program:"

Publishing in UtahHC380"The Daily Tribune will be a purely secular journal, devoted entirely to the presentation of news and to the development of the mineral and commercial interests of the territory. It will have no sectarian bias and will be the organ of no religious body whatever. The aim of the publishers will be to make it a newspaper in every sense of the word. * * * On political and social questions the policy of the paper will be to sustain the governmental institutions of the country. It will oppose all ecclesiastical interference in civil or legislative matters and advocate the exercise of a free ballot by the abolition of 'numbered tickets.' * * * As a journal the Tribune will know no such distinctions as 'Mormon' or 'Gentile' and where sectional feelings exist it will aim for their abolishment by the encouragement of charitable feelings and the promotion of a better acquaintance. * * *"

Publishing in UtahHCThe Salt Lake Tribune ran for a while under the editorial direction of Mr. Sawyer; with him were associated George W. Crouch and E. W. Tullidge, ex-"Mormon" elders, and a Mr. Slocum, a leading spiritualist from California. That such a strange combination could not possibly give unity of purpose or consistency of tone to the paper was soon evident, especially as a similar inharmony existed among the board of directors. The Tribune in fine, changed its character, or rather mixed its characters with every issue. This "incompatibility of journalism," as Mr. Sawyer explained to the public in his valedictory, which existed between him and the directors, forced him also to retire from his position as editor in chief, after which Mr. Fred T. Perris became manager, both in the editorial and business departments.

Publishing in UtahHC381The Salt Lake Tribune next passed into the hands of another management. Three experienced journalists from Kansas took the paper on trial, relieving the original Tribune publishing company of the heavy burden of their subsidies, which had hitherto sustained it, and soon afterwards that company itself became obsolete.

Publishing in UtahHC381Mr. George F. Prescott, Mr. Hamilton and Mr. Fred Lockley were each very able men in their several spheres. Prescott as manager of the paper sagaciously retained in his department George Reed, who had been assistant business manager both of the Utah Magazine and the Tribune from the beginning, thus retaining the local business acquaintance. "It was Mr. Fred Lockley, however, that gave the marked and pugnant anti-Mormon character to the Salt Lake Tribune, for which it has become famous in the Gentile mind, infamous in the Mormon mind. * * *

Publishing in UtahHC381* * * September 9th, 1883, the Salt Lake Daily Tribune passed into the hands of Mr. P. H. Lannan, and Judge C. C. Goodwin as business manager and principal editor, respectively." [^28] This ownership and editorship continued until the Tribune was purchased by Messrs. Thomas Kearns and David Keith, with whose heirs, organized into a publishing company its ownership remains until the present time—1930. and now is, an independent Republican newspaper.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See city ordinance in full, Deseret News, weekly, of Aug. 31st, 1870, sec. 2>>>>.
[^2] Violation of the ordinance subjected the offender to both fine "and forfeiture of license." (Ibid, sec. 9). Hence the "notwithstanding this" clause above.
[^3] Ibid, sec. 8>>>>>>>>>>>>>.
[^4] The account of the procedure in detail in Deseret News, weekly, of Aug. 31st, 1870, p. 354.
[^5] See Deseret News, weekly, of Nov. 9th, 1870, p. 465.
[^6] Clinton vs. Engelbrecht, 13 Wallace Reports, p. 434.
[^7] Baskin's Reminiscences The Englebrecht Case, ch. iv. Judge Wilson, who was not unfriendly to the "Mormon" people, as shown in preceding chapters, declared to Delegate Hooper in Washington that he had rendered this decision according to his best judgment, and had furnished the pro-"Mormon" lawyers "Brothers Stout and Snow," all his reasons for his rulings, that they might have every facility for carrying it up on appeal. (See Hooper's letter to George A. Smith, date of June 5th, 1870, History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1870, vol. i, p. 948-952).
[^8] See History of the Bench and Bar of Utah, 1913, pp. 28-29.
[^9] "Sandberg," said the judge, "satisfied the court that he is not, and Horsley failed to satisfy the court that he is, a man of good moral character, attached to the principles of the Constitution of the United States, and well disposed to the good order and happiness of the same. The duty of the court is plain. These applications for naturalization must be rejected." (The decision in full is found in Deseret News, weekly, for Oct. 19th, 1870, p. 436).
[^10] Review of Judge McKean's decision in the Sandberg-Horsley cases, by Judge Z. Snow, Deseret News, weekly, of Oct. 26th, 1870.
[^11] The ruling in full will be found in Deseret News, weekly, of March 8th, 1871.
[^12] See Deseret News, weekly, of Sept. 13th, 1871, where the court proceedings are given in full.
[^13] The men wanted were H. L. Davis and J. J. Baum. In the latter part of December, Baum had killed one Richard Brown, who had seduced and then refused to marry his niece, notwithstanding her pleadings with him to do so. It was not known at first who killed Brown. Harry L. Davis was accused of the crime; but during the inquest at Provo, when Davis was under examination, Baum entered the court room and confessed to the killing for the reason stated, and also for the further reason that Brown had threatened his life. The inquest court returned a verdict of justifiable homicide; and Baum and Davis were both released. A packed grand jury, however, got out an indictment against both Baum and Davis and their arrest was attempted as described in the text above. (See Deseret News, weekly, of Jan. 11th, 1871; also of 13th and 20th September, 1871; and Whitney's History of Utah, vol. ii, p. 592, note. Also Deseret News of Oct. 4th, 1871, where it is alleged that the death of Mrs. Davis was hastened by fright on account of the military "raid").
[^14] See Reminiscences of Early Utah, Baskin, p. 38. According to Mr. Baskin McKean read from United States statute a provision which authorized a district judge, in case of a vacancy in the office of district attorney, to appoint a person to exercise the duties of the vacant office until such vacancy should be filled. Baskin consented to accept the appointment. (Ibid). Mr. Baskin had been the assistant to Mr. Hempstead for some time previous to this.
[^15] Omaha Herald of Oct. 4th, 1871.
[^16] The Examiner article is copied into Deseret News of Oct. 25th, 1871.
[^17] The trial of the case appears in Utah Reports, for 1871. See also Baskin's Reminiscences, ch. v. It was a standing jest of the times that the pompous lecture given by the judge to Hawkins was greater punishment than the imprisonment and fine. (The speech of the judge will be found in the Deseret News, weekly, of Nov. 1st, 1871).
[^18] The indictment contained sixteen counts and charged as many offenses, extending from 1854, to the finding of the indictment in 1871.
[^19] Deseret News, weekly, of Oct. 18th, 1871, p. 436. Formal exception was taken by President Young's counsel to the prejudice-creating effect of this passage. (See signed communication in the Court Record, and Deseret News, weekly, of Oct. 8th, 1871).
[^20] See Millennial Star, vol. xxxiv, January, 1872, p. 28.
[^21] History of Salt Lake City, pp. 592-593.
[^22] See Deseret News account, impression of August 5th, daily, 1872, where a fair account is given, but no mention of the "G. L. U.'s" is made. At the conclusion the News says: "We regret the course taken by the few disorderly persons in the assemblage on Saturday night. Their object (i. e. of the Liberals) was unmistakably to excite the people by insulting their leaders and making disparaging remarks about their religion; but even under such circumstances it is to be regretted that any symptoms of disorder or confusion were manifested. Such persons [anti-'Mormons' of the meeting] are really beneath contempt."
[^23] Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, pp. 595-6. The statement is signed by Mr. Salisbury. "During remarks by Judge Toohy last night, some person in the crowd audibly gave him the lie, when Obed F. Strickland, associate justice of the supreme court of Utah, and judge of the first judicial district proclaimed that if any one created a disturbance—or words to that effect—he would order such person shot! Will it be believed that such language could fall from the lips of a sworn conservator of the peace and a federal judge, simply because of a verbal interruption of a speaker? It would not be thought of anywhere outside of Utah; and even here it was so glaring that Toohy could not help protesting against it." (See also Salt Lake Tribune of Aug. 3rd and 5th, 1872 and Salt Lake Herald of same dates).
[^24] "It was his [Mayor Wells'] duty," said the Salt Lake Tribune, "to know the provisions of the act of congress under which the election was held, and to know that the civic authority was temporarily suspended. United States law had stepped in to run this city for one day. The obtuse [Mayor] Wells couldn't understand this." (Salt Lake Tribune, August 5th, 1874). Two days later, commenting on the trials growing out of the election disturbances, the Tribune said: "Judge McBride * * * assumed that the mayor and police in their brutal and riotous demonstration at the polls throughout the day [day of election, Aug. 3rd] were acting in ignorance of the act of congress which suspended their functions as officers of the peace at the election. * * * But we do not see that this humane plea can help them any. The marshal's deputies were there commissioned and armed with full power to perform police duties; and the provisions of the act of congress relating to elections had been twice published in the Tribune, and attention called to the same in editorial comment." (Editorial in Salt Lake Tribune of Aug. 7th, 1874).
[^25] Deseret News, daily, Aug. 4th, 1874. It has been erroneously stated by some Utah writers that the law of congress respecting the employment of United States deputy marshals at elections for representatives and delegates to congress—in other words the "Enforcement Act," was subsequently declared to be unconstitutional by the United States Supreme Court, but the very opposite was the decision of that tribunal. (See the Habeas Corpus cases of Albert Siebold, et al, United States Supreme Court Reports, vol. c, 1879, p. 717, et seq).
[^26] For the sources of information concerning this incident see Salt Lake local papers, Deseret News; also Salt Lake Herald and Tribune from 3rd to 7th of August, 1874; also Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, ch. lxx.
[^27] See Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, ch. lxx; and the editorials of the Deseret News, daily, in its impressions of Aug. 3rd to Aug. 7th, 1874.
[^28] Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, appendix, p. 13.
