B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 5 ( 1930)

382CHAPTER CXL

382THE JUDICIAL CRUSADE OF 1870-1872—PROGRESS OF THE ANTI-"MORMON" CONSPIRACY—"A SYSTEM ON TRIAL IN THE PERSON OF BRIGHAM YOUNG"

382WE have now to deal with the judicial crusade in Utah, of which Judge James B. McKean was head and front, through more than four troubled years of Utah's history, 1870-1875.

JUDGE JAMES B. MCKEAN—THE LIQUOR CASE

Judge McKean was appointed chief justice of Utah's supreme court in July, 1870; and arrived in Salt Lake City on the 30th of August. He was assigned to the 3rd judicial district which included, it will be remembered, Salt Lake City. Three days before his arrival the liquor establishment of Paul Englebrecht, Christian Rehemke, and Frederick Lutz had been entered by the city police and the entire stock of liquors of the value of about $22,000 had been destroyed. As this case was finally disposed of by the United States supreme court, and is the one which overthrew the fanatical judicial procedure of Judge McKean's reign in Utah, it is necessary to set it forth somewhat in detail. And also it exhibits how aggravatingly the local authority was contemptuously defied by those who thought they could find special protection under the rulings of the federal courts.

The Englebrecht establishment was supposed to be a wholesale liquor concern; and under the city ordinance it was provided that a wholesale liquor license should not authorize any person to sell either spirituous or vinous, or fermented liquors in less quantity than ten gallons, or in original packages; and bottled liquors or wines only in original packages as imported and in no case to be drunk on the premises of parties so licensed. [^1] In disregard of this provision the Englebrecht concern sold at retail as well as wholesale, for which Englebrecht was arrested and fined three different times. Notwithstanding this, [^2] when he applied for the renewal of his wholesale license, about a month before the concern's stock was destroyed, the application was favorably acted upon. The 8th section of the city ordinance regulating the liquor traffic provided that the city council should determine the time for which the license should be given, the amount to be paid therefor, and should require bonds with security and determine the amount thereof for the due observance of the ordinance, etc. [^3] But after the city council signified its willingness to grant the license, Englebrecht refused to sign the bond required, which, of course, left him without a license, but notwithstanding he had no license, he continued to sell liquors both wholesale and retail in defiance of the city ordinance; for which, during the month of August, Englebrecht was several times arrested and on three occasions fined, but in each case he took an appeal, denying the city's jurisdiction. Concerning these appeals no decision had been reached, as the district court had not been in session since the appeals had been made.

PROVISIONS OF THE LAW

Section 7 of the city ordinance in relation to the liquor traffic provided that if any person having reasonable cause to believe that any house or place is established and kept for the purpose of selling or otherwise disposing of liquors, without a license from the city, and will make oath of the same, describing the place, and if upon investigation it shall so appear, the mayor or alderman before whom such complaint has been made may issue his warrant, directed to the city marshal, or any of his deputies, commanding him to enter said house or place and demolish all things found therein made use of in the sale of liquors, etc.; and to arrest the person or persons owning, keeping, or conducting said house or place, and bring them before the court; where, on conviction, the offender was subject to fine, or imprisonment or both. The above course was strictly followed in the procedure against Engelbrecht. A person made the required oath before Alderman Jeter Clinton. The order was issued to the city marshal, Mr. J. D. T. McAllister, who with the chief of police and a force of eighteen regular and special officers went to the Engelbrecht establishment and "quietly but sternly" proceeded with their duty. The whole stock of liquors was destroyed as before stated. [^4]

For this action Engelbrecht entered a civil suit against the officers for the recovery of a three-fold value of the property destroyed, under a territorial statute providing for treble damages when property was unlawfully, wilfully, and maliciously destroyed. During the progress of the case Judge McKean in ruling upon a demur of the plaintiffs to the answer of the defendants that their action in destroying the liquors of the Engelbrecht concern was not unlawful, or wilful, or malicious, but done in pursuance of legal authority, overruled that demur, so that if the defendants could establish absence of wilful malice it would reduce its offense to mere trespass, in which case the defendants could only be mulcted to the amount of actual damages, instead of treble damages. But when the trial jury, from which every "Mormon" had been excluded, either for cause or on peremptory challenge, [^5] brought in its verdict, it was for treble damages amounting to $59,063.25. On appealing the case to the territorial supreme court the judgment of the trial court was affirmed. An appeal was taken to the United States supreme court on a writ of error the defendants challenging the array of the jury in the third judicial district of the territory. "The controlling question raised by the challenge to the array," as the supreme court in its decision subsequently said, "is, whether the law of the territorial legislature, prescribing the mode of obtaining panels of grand and petit jurors, is obligatory upon the district courts of the territory." [^6]

THE RECORD OF THE CASE

The record of the case shows that the court originally directed a venire to be issued in conformity with this territorial law, and that a venire was issued accordingly, but not served or returned. The record also shows that under an order subsequently made an open venire was issued to the federal marshal, which was served and returned with a panel of eighteen petit jurors annexed. These jurors were summoned from the body of the county at the discretion of the United States marshal.

385The decision of the supreme court held that the act of the territorial legislature, presenting the mode of obtaining panels of grand and petit juries was obligatory upon the district courts of the territory; and therefore, since these laws of the territory had been set aside, not only in the Englebrecht case, but in many other criminal cases, under the McKean-Baskin regime, the Utah district court decisions were reversed, and the whole lawless procedure overturned; but the triumph of the cause of the people over the conspirators may not be clearly developed until the facts are considered which are presented in the chapter following this.

385As to the Englebrecht case itself, after it "was reversed, it was again tried and the plaintiff recovered a judgment. And as it was doubtful whether even the original cost of the liquor could be obtained on execution, the plaintiff accepted the offer of the defendant's attorney to pay the original cost of the property destroyed."

It is only proper to say that Chief Justice McKean on his arrival found that his associate justices Strickland and Hawley, who preceded him into the territory by nearly a year, had already decided that the probate courts had no jurisdiction in criminal cases, and had set aside as invalid the territorial law respecting the selection of grand juries; and Mr. Wilson, preceding Judge McKean in the office of chief justice, about the same time, had decided in the case of Orr vs. McAllister, that Mr. Orr, the United States marshal, was the proper executive officer of the district court, and that McAllister, who was territorial marshal, was not. [^7] It was not Judge McKean, then, who took the initiative in these several steps [^8] that did such violence to the laws of the territory, and the principles of local self-government; his part was acquiescing in, and emphasizing them in harmony with these decisions, until suddenly and effectively halted in his mad, judicial career by dismissal from office.

THE POLICY OF JUDGE MCKEAN IN THE NATURALIZATION OF ALIENS

In the September term—1870—of Judge McKean's court, he rendered an important ruling that indicated his policy with reference to the naturalization of alien "Mormons" in the cases of John C. Sandberg, a Swede, and William Horsley, an Englishman. In the pursuance of his inquiries the judge asked whether or not they believed the act of congress of 1862, relating to "bigamy," to be binding upon them. Sandberg in substance replied that he regarded it as right under the law of God for a man to have more than one wife at the same time; Horsley refused to answer the question. Neither of them had more than one wife, but the judge refused them naturalization, and rendered the aforesaid ruling in the case. [^9] It may be said in passing that there was no law cited by the judge which justified his specific inquiry as to the practically inoperative law of 1862 about "bigamy;" and there was nothing in the laws governing admission to citizenship that required "the applicant to be well disposed to any special law of congress, though such law may be supreme." "If it did," said a prominent lawyer of the period, "it would require of him that which is not required of any natural born citizen. Every natural born citizen, though he has not the right to disobey a law to the principles of which he feels opposed, has an inalienable right, which cannot be bought nor sold, nor surrendered, to oppose a principle in which he does not concur, provided that opposition does not amount to a resistance of the law. The very basis of civil liberty permits all citizens, native or naturalized, to have a voice and to cause their opinions, honestly entertained, to be heard in the councils, territorial, state, or national, and seek to have modified or repealed, any law to which they are opposed. [^10] It would seem anomalous to require the surrender of rights in an alien, in order to acquire citizenship, which are conceded to the native born citizen, and which would inevitably be the rights of the alien as soon as admitted to citizenship.

In January, 1871, three applications were made by men who upon inquiry of the court stated that they were polygamists, but that they had entered into that relation previous to the enactment of the special law of congress against bigamy in 1862, whereupon his honor in a ruling made upon their case declared that the "common law" was brought by the "Mormon" Pioneers to Salt Lake valley when they first entered it; that the "common law" held polygamy to be a crime; and therefore, the applicants for citizenship could not plead that since their plural marriages took place before the law of congress in 1862, that they were not lawbreakers; and being lawbreakers, and under this ruling of the judge, "these applications for naturalization must be denied." [^11] At the same time there is no principle or practice better established by authorities than "that there is no such thing as a 'common law' criminal offense under the laws of the United States." Under the practices of the federal courts of Utah, in this period, in the matter of naturalizing aliens, "no 'Mormon' need apply," might as well have been posted over the court entrance, unless he was willing to deny his religious faith.

THE TERRITORIAL PENITENTIARY PASSES INTO FEDERAL CONTROL

In August, 1871, control of the penitentiary, under an enactment of congress, January 10th, 1871, passed into the hands of the United States marshal, although it had been built, in part, by territorial funds and had always, up to that time, been under the control of the territorial marshal. United States Marshal Patrick would make only verbal demands for control of the institution to pass into his keeping, and the territorial warden, Mr. A. P. Rockwood, protested in writing to the surrender, both of the institution and of the prisoners who were engaged in labor and some of whom were kept in the city prison. For resisting the verbal orders of the marshal—acting under direction of Governor Woods—and insisting upon some written order from a court of jurisdiction in relation to one prisoner—Kilfoyle—serving a sentence for manslaughter and held at the city prison—suit was brought against City Marshal J. D. T. McAllister and Warden A. P. Rockwood for resisting an officer.

At the hearing before Judge Hawley the warden and city marshal were bound over to answer to the grand jury at the next term of the third judicial district. In the course of this hearing Acting United States Attorney Baskin interrupted to say that his way in taking possession of the prisoner Kilfoyle would have been to put the guns of Camp Douglas upon the city, blow open the City Hall and jail, and force possession of the prisoner with bayonets.

A "COURT" SCENE IN UTAH—1871

The incident, as reflecting the spirit of the times, is worthy of a more detailed presentation. Mr. Thomas Fitch was representing the defendants before the court and in the course of his defense, speaking of Warden Rockwood, he said:

389"All the defendant asked, as appears from the testimony, was an order of court. In his written protest, he says, 'I will surrender this convict on the order of some court of competent jurisdiction.' He deems himself invested by the legislature of the territory with certain duties and responsibilities; he has given bonds for the faithful performance of those duties and the discharge of those responsibilities. It is but little to ask, when he is called upon to divest himself of these responsibilities, and to cease to perform those duties, that he should do it on some demand more formal and some decision more binding than the construction of an act of congress made by the United States marshal. * * * However, we have perhaps cause to congratulate ourselves that the guns of the fort have not been turned on the city, and the City Hall surrounded with cavalry, infantry and artillery, and the warden compelled at the point of the bayonet to surrender his prisoner."

389Mr. Baskin—"That would have been my way to do it."

389Mr. Fitch—"I presume that Mr. Baskin would have knocked the City Hall and city jail down?"

389Mr. Baskin—"I would that!"

389Mr. Fitch—"The acting law officer of the United States informs us that he would have 'let loose the dogs of war' had his advice been followed and his wishes consulted. And why were they not? Where was all the power which with all the pomp and parade of war once interfered to prevent by arms a peaceful parade episode of the previous July? Was it asleep? ashamed? or afraid?"

389Governor Woods (who was seated on the right hand of Judge Hawley)—"Neither, my Lord!"

389Mr. Fitch—"I am assured by the executive of the territory of Utah, who honors us with his audience and encourages the prosecution with approving smiles, that my surmises are incorrect. The executive of the territory, who perhaps agrees with the opinion once expressed by the present president of the United States, that 'the justices of the supreme court are members of the governor's staff' and who deigns to give to your honor, as his staff officer, the benefit of his protecting presence, while at the same time he stands ready to answer questions of defendant's counsel, whether he be the party interrogated or no."

389The Court—"This discussion is becoming exciting and I shall not permit further remarks outside the case."

389Mr. Fitch—"I beg your honor's pardon,—but I have not traveled out of the proper line of argument, except to comment upon interruptions, made irregularly by Mr. Baskin, and improperly by Governor Woods." [^12]

390Such was the spirit of the times. Indeed there seemed to be a settled determination to appeal to and use the military power in civil affairs on the slightest provocation, or even without justification at all. Such was the case in the employment of a military cavalry posse of regular troops in a midnight attempt at Provo and Springville on the nights of 10th and 12th of September, 1871, to arrest parties indicted by the grand jury for murder. There was no justification for the employment of the military posse, there was no likelihood of resistance to the civil authorities, it was a wanton display of excessive power on the part of the United States marshal. It greatly alarmed the people of the two towns, and awakened widespread resentment among the people of the territory, to such an unwarranted employment of military force. [^13]

The federal officers in Utah were not all agreed as to the wisdom or the legality of the procedure invoked in Utah under this Shaffer-Woods-McKean regime. C. H. Hempstead, United States district attorney for Utah since 1868, refused longer to be connected with it. His resignation took place about the time of the opening of the September term of the third judicial district, and was accepted by Judge McKean who immediately appointed R. N. Baskin to discharge the duties of that office; [^14] and General George R. Maxwell acted as his assistant, both gentlemen were pronounced anti-"Mormons," and from them the McKean judicial policy could hope for strong support.

391PROGRESS OF THE ANTI-"MORMON" CONSPIRACY

391Considerable progress had now been made in the development of the evident conspiracy against "Mormon theocracy" in Utah. By Governor Shaffer's administrative act the commander of the Utah militia elected by the people according to the territorial law, had been set aside, and a new commander—P. E. Connor, of past anti-"Mormon" fame—had been illegally appointed by the governor in his stead; the probate courts had been stripped of their criminal jurisdiction—the courts of the people, in whose justice they had confidence; said courts were also, contrary to law, deprived of participation in the choosing of grand and petit jurors; the territorial marshal and territorial attorney had been rejected as officers in the federal courts in territorial cases; the juries, grand and petit, were to be selected by the United States marshal on open venire; it had evidently been determined that there would be no naturalization of "Mormon" aliens; the United States marshal would have charge of the penitentiary; the United States military—according to the recent Provo-Springville precedent—could be relied upon as a posse comitatus in aid of the regime.

In all this one cannot fail to see that the evident intention of the group of federal officials now in charge of affairs in Utah was to accomplish, without the sanctions of law, what the congress of the United States had refused to authorize when it denied passage to the outrageous Wade, Cragin, and Cullom bills. Congress had refused to pass these measures, which would have turned Utah over to the rapacity of the hungry pack patriotically anxious to despoil her. But what congress had refused to grant by special enactment, the conspirators determined to take by means of assumed powers, and by the wresting of the law to their own vicious purposes. And those purposes? Undoubtedly the overthrow of the "Mormon" leaders; the breaking down of the political power of the "Mormon" people—the people who had redeemed Utah from a desert waste and given it to civilization—these people who, under American principles, were entitled to the sacred and guaranteed rights of self-government, under the national Constitution and the organic law of the territory—were to be despoiled of their political heritage; and with them thus disposed of, or limited in their rights, the conspirators, McKean, Woods, Baskin, Maxwell, et al., were to bring Utah into the Union, themselves and associates to become the senators, representatives, governors, judges, etc.—in a word, become the ruling class in the new state, while the people of Utah would be blessed with the privilege of continuing to make the desert lands fruitful by their toil, and pay the taxes. Utah, under these bright prospects, looked like exceedingly "good picking" to the hungry horde of office-holding and office-hunting adventures who had now beset her.

392Let it not be thought that these are prejudiced "Mormon" views. The facts set forth in the foregoing paragraphs warrant the conclusions, and very many leading papers in the United States, east and west, charged the group of Utah and Washington conspirators with such designs. The Omaha Herald, for instance, in a leading editorial, speaking of this anti-"Mormon" conspiracy, said:

"This conspiracy began with the advent of the existing herd of federal mercenaries to Utah. It crystalized under the agitation of the Cullom bill which was drawn in Salt Lake. The object was to break down the political power of the people who had conquered Utah from a desert waste into a beautiful garden. This was necessary to enable these malignants to occupy, possess and control it. With the fall of the Mormon power McKean, Woods & Co. were to bring Utah into the Union as a state, and become senators of the United States, and heroes in a land already suffering from a surfeit of such. The Cullom bill failed. Far-fetched edicts of the law, promulgated through stump speeches from the bench, likewise failed. The scepter, not yet grasped, was departing. Something must be done. Criminal statutes must be invoked. Proofs of crimes other than that of polygamy must be secured. But before this is permitted, in pursuance of a deliberate plan, decisions must be promulgated whereby, under a thin disguise, Mormons, on account of their religious beliefs and practices, must be excluded from juries which would be thus necessarily constituted of their deadliest enemies—men who would do the known wish, if they did not obey the actual behests, of their desperate masters. And this is but a brief outline of a conspiracy which aims, at whatever cost, to destroy men and institutions in a territory whose civilizing and industrial achievements are the admiration of mankind." [^15]

393The following is from the San Francisco Examiner of about the same date:

393"The whole thing [i. e. the 'Mormon trouble'] is instigated by a 'ring' of Republican politicians, who are looking to the speedy admission of Utah as one of the states of the Union. These small fry, popinjay politicians, and would-be statesmen, know full well that they will have no show for promotion until the Mormon power is broken. Hence it is that they seek to create a civil war by means of packed juries, unprincipled judges and perjured witnesses. Of course, if they determine that no Mormon shall sit on a jury to try Young, as all were excluded from the grand jury, he will necessarily be convicted. Having the judge and marshal they can pack a jury to suit themselves. If they can send Brigham to prison, and induce the people to rise up and liberate him, and thus produce a conflict, Utah will be at once admitted as a state, and under the protection of federal bayonets, these mischief makers can have themselves elected senators, congressmen, etc., just as the thieving carpet-baggers did at the south. The whole affair is a disgrace to the American name. That a vile, little clique of corrupt politicians should be permitted to use the power of the government to embroil a peaceable community in civil strife, to gratify their personal greed for place and plunder, is an outrage upon decency, humanity, and justice." [^16]

THE STAGE SETTING FOR THE CONSPIRACY

In the several steps taken in the development of the conspiracy against "Mormon theocracy" the stage was exceedingly well set for what is immediately to follow.

Conflict over PolygamyHC394At the September term of court, 1871, a territorial law passed by the legislature in 1852, to punish "adultery," and "lewd and lascivious association" was invoked in the crusade against "Mormon" polygamy. Of course the territorial statute was not intended by the Utah legislators to apply to polygamy; and there was now (in 1871) on the statute books the congressional law especially passed against "bigamy," to meet supposed conditions in Utah; but it was thought that more successful prosecutions could be made under the territorial than under the congressional law, since under the latter the plural marriage as well as the first one had to be proven in order to conviction. Besides the penalties of the territorial law were more severe than those of the congressional enactment.

Conflict over PolygamyHC394The first victim of this new departure was one Thomas Hawkins. The territorial statute in question provided that "no prosecution for adultery can be commenced but on the complaint of the husband or wife." In the case of Hawkins, who had married a plural wife, under the sanctions of the "Mormon" church, the first wife entered complaint before the grand jury, and an indictment was found for violation of the act of the territory of 1852. On trial Hawkins was found guilty of "adultery" and sentenced to three years imprisonment and to pay a fine of $500. He appealed his case to the territorial supreme court, but not being able to give the bond of $20,000, demanded by the court, he was remanded to prison to await the time of hearing the appeal. [^17]

Conflict over PolygamyHCTHE INDICTMENT OF PRESIDENT YOUNG

Conflict over PolygamyHCThe grand jury at the same term of court indicted President Brigham Young, but under a different section of the law, viz, section 32>>>>>>; which provided that "if any man and woman, not being married to each other, lewdly and lasciviously associate and cohabit together * * * every such person so offending shall be punished by imprisonment not exceeding ten years, and not less than six months, and fined not more than one thousand, and not less than one hundred dollars, or both, at the discretion of the court." Setting aside then the fact of the marriage of Brigham Young to his plural wives, by sanction of the "Mormon" church, the "packed" grand jury found an indictment against him for "lewdly and lasciviously associating and cohabiting with women, not being married to them." [^18] On the second of October he was arrested upon this charge; and his arrest was followed quickly by the arrest of Daniel H. Wells, mayor of Salt Lake City, and President Young's second counselor; George Q. Cannon, editor the Deseret News, and Henry W. Lawrence, the last a leader in the late Godbeite movement.

Conflict over PolygamyHC395A motion to "quash" the indictment was made by President Young's counsel on the plea that the grand jury was not legal, not being impaneled as provided by law either of the territory or of the United States; and that the inclusion of sixteen counts in one indictment, not being different parts of one offense, nor different statements of the same offense, or in any wise connected with each other—were illegal. The judge overruled the motion. It was on that occasion that Judge McKean used phraseology that has become somewhat famous in Utah annals, and which confessed the true inwardness of this whole court procedure at that time, and proclaimed the "mission character" of Judge McKean's appointment:

395"A SYSTEM ON TRIAL"

Conflict over PolygamyHC"Let the counsel on both sides, and the court also, keep constantly in mind the uncommon character of this case. The supreme court of California has well said: 'Courts are bound to take notice of the political and social condition of the country which they politically rule.' It is therefore proper to say that while the case at bar is called The People versus Brigham Young, its other and real title is Federal Authority versus Polygamic Theocracy. The government of the United States, founded upon a writter Constitution, finds within its jurisdiction another government—claiming to come from God—imperiam in imperio—whose policy and practice in grave particulars, are at variance with its own. The one government arrests the other in the person of its chief, and arraigns it at his bar. A system is on trial in the person of Brigham Young. Let all concerned keep this fact steadily in view; and let that government rule without a rival which shall prove to be in the right." [^19]

Conflict over PolygamyHC396President Young was in court during the above hearing. When his counsel several days before had asked extension of time to prepare the case, and the fixing of bail—his client, however, was already nominally in charge of the United States marshal—the assistant prosecuting attorney, General Maxwell, objected. "He wanted the defendant to come into court to plead to the indictment. 'The people,' he said, 'demanded that Brigham Young should appear in court the same as anybody else.' The court granted the extension of time; * * * but said the bail could not be taken until the defendant pleaded to the indictment." So the defendant came into court to plead to the indictment; and such was the quiet and dignified bearing of the great Pioneer, that he won golden opinions from all who observed him that day.

Conflict over PolygamyHC396Not even the Salt Lake Tribune, notwithstanding its anti-"Mormon" bitterness, and the fact that it was backing with all its might the proceedings of the anti-"Mormon" "ring" of Utah, could withhold its praise. In an editorial commenting on the court procedure of the day before under the title, "Brigham Young in Court," the editorial said:

Conflict over PolygamyHC396"THE LION OF THE LORD" IN COURT

Conflict over PolygamyHC"It was a decidedly novel spectacle yesterday afternoon to see the 'Lion of the Lord' sitting in the court room waiting for the coming of his earthly judge to try him. * * * There can be no doubt that the president of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints made several very good points yesterday. His being there a quarter of an hour before Judge McKean, patiently waiting his coming, was very wisely arranged, and looked well on an occasion which opens a series of circumstances destined to form a chapter of history. His appearance in court, too, his quietude, and an altogether seeming absence of a spirit chafing with rage at being brought to trial, evidently made a good impression. If there was any malice against him before, the sight of Brigham Young, at least practically acknowledging the authority of the United States to try him, even for the highest crimes known in the law, and the respectful bearing which he put on, disarmed much of that malice. The moral effect of Brigham's appearance and the conviction of innocence which it produced, brought Major Hempstead to his defense, and he pleaded very powerfully in his behalf, occasionally throwing a spice of wit at the prosecution. The editor of the Vedette, [i. e. Major Hempstead—now President Young's counsel] who sought years ago to 'reconstruct and regenerate' Brother Brigham, yesterday afternoon, eloquently objected to the proposition to reconstruct and regenerate the prophet, and urged the indictment should be quashed. It is evident that President Young's thus coming into court, and his resolution to abide every trial, and contest the charges brought against him constitutionally, through his counsel, was the very wisest course he could have taken. It will divide people in his favor and bring many of the Gentiles to the help of Israel even as it has already brought two of their lawyers to the defense of the prophet. Perhaps there was more respect and sympathy felt for Brigham Young, when he left the court room, feeble and tottering from his recent sickness, having respectfully sat in the presence of his judge three-quarters of an hour, after bail had been taken, than ever there was before in the minds of the same men."

Conflict over PolygamyHC397The arrest of President Young in any event would have created a sensation throughout the United States; but the misrepresentations attendant upon its announcement greatly intensified the sensation. For example, following are the scare headlines in the New York Herald of Oct. 1st, telegraphed from Salt Lake City by Oscar S. Sawyer, managing editor of the Salt Lake Tribune. It is to be observed that since these scare headlines appear in the New York Herald on the first of October, a day before the arrest of Brigham Young, the Tribune managing editor was evidently in the confidence of the prosecution as to the intended arrest of Brigham Young:

SCARE HEADLINES OF EASTERN PRESS

"BRIGHAM YOUNG HAS BEEN INDICTED"

398"On several charges, and it is also said that he is likely to be tried the coming week on one of the indictments."

398"THE MORMONS ARMING"

398"The sale of muskets and ammunition continues, and it is reported that more arms than those bought at the recent government auction sale at Camp Douglas have been disposed of."

398"EXCITEMENT AMONG THE SAINTS"

398"The feeling of the Mormon people as reflected by the church organs, the News and Herald, is unmistakably rebellious and warlike. The News, the official organ for Brigham Young, is extremely bitter and offensive. It advocates—

OPEN RESISTANCE TO THE LAWS,

Conflict over PolygamyHCLibels United States officials, and endeavors in every way to incite the people to open rebellion. Under these influences many persons are sending off their wives and children to points where there will be no danger. The church organs are doing everything in their power to fire the Mormon heart, and the result cannot but be disastrous if the fanatical element is once aroused and fully loosed."

Conflict over PolygamyHC398All the parties arrested at this time were admitted to bail in the sum of $5,000 each; and President Young, as had become his custom in late years, took his departure for St. George on the 24th of October, to spend the winter; but it was soon reported, and much discussed through the press of the country at the time, that he had "fled from justice." Meantime the president was filling a rather extensive itinerary in the settlements of the Rio Virgin valley, holding many public meetings and enjoying the friendship and hospitality of the people, of which he wrote to Elder George Reynolds under date of December 11th, 1871. [^20]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The letter is published in full in Deseret News, weekly, of Nov. 8th, p. 464.
[^2] See Congressional Record of 1872, passim.
[^3] The minutes of the court's session are given in full in Deseret News, weekly, of Dec. 6th, 1871, p. 515.
[^4] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1871, vol. ii, p. 2051. President Young was accompanied by his first counselor, George A. Smith, William Rossiter, telegraph operator, R. T. Burton, Charles and A. F. McDonald, John Henry Smith, Amelia Young, and Bathsheba W. Smith, wife of George A. Smith. (Ibid).
[^5] Ibid, p. 2076.
[^6] President Smith was born August 11th, 1826, near Farmersville, Ontario. Canada. His father was a native of New England; and his mother, Mary Reed, was the daughter of Major Reed of the British army. President Smith died Jan. 16th, 1894.
[^7] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1871, vol. ii, pp. 2101-2.
[^8] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1871, p. 2120.
[^9] Ibid, p. 2153.
[^10] Ibid, p. 2158.
[^11] It was only over Sunday, however, that he was detained at the camp where he was more the guest of General Morrow than his prisoner, "at whose table he ate with the general and Mrs. Morrow, at whose respectful request the honored prisoner asked a blessing over the food." (Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, p. 546).
[^12] Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, p. 545.
[^13] See Beadle's Brigham Young's Destroying Angel, Being the Life, and Confession of "Bill" Hickman, 1872.
[^14] Reminiscences of Early Utah, by R. N. Baskin, ex-chief justice of the supreme court of Utah, June, 1914.
[^15] Baskin's Reminiscences, pp. 36, 37.
[^16] Ibid, pp. 37-38.
[^17] Ibid, p. 37.
[^18] The matter of securing troops to aid in these arrests evidently went beyond Douglas. A press dispatch from Washington, under date of Oct. 31st, said: "At the cabinet meeting today the subject of the Utah prosecutions was considered, was determined that if necessary more troops will be sent to that territory. It own that some of the Federal officers asked for troops to aid in making arrests, but this was considered to be inexpedient, unless resistance should render additional necessary." (See Deseret News of Nov. 1st, 1871).
[^19] Mr. Baskin represents that it was the Sunday night previous to his planned coup that President Young secretly left Salt Lake City (see Reminiscences, p. 55), whereas the president's letter to Elder Reynolds, written from St. George on the 11th of December, shows that previous to the 20th of November there had been an extensive itinerary performed along the line of settlements on the Rio Virgin. (See Millennial Star, vol. xxxiv, p. 28).
[^20] Although Mr. Baskin became the assistant district attorney by appointment from Washington, it soon became apparent that the district attorney and his assistant were not in harmony with each other, and Mr. Baskin resigned. (Reminiscences, p. 57).
