B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 5 ( 1930)

CHAPTER CXLI

"THE 'LIGHT' SAYS, RETURN"—A MIDWINTER JOURNEY FROM SOUTHERN UTAH—MCKEAN'S RULINGS OVERTURNED

QUITE unexpectedly, on the 20th of November, the very day on which it was said President Young started on his journey to the southern settlements, the prosecution called up the case of "The People vs. Brigham Young," Mr. Baskin saying that the prosecution was ready to proceed with the case. Defense asked for a postponement of the case to the March term "according to previous expectation." Mr. Baskin stated that from public rumor it was known that the defendant had gone outside the jurisdiction of the court and he should demand a showing and a forfeiture of his bond in case of his nonappearance. Mr. Hempstead, counsel for President Young, would be ready for trial whenever the court should set down the case. With the understanding of his counsel that a reasonable time would be granted for trial, the defendant had taken his usual winter journey to the south for the protection of his health against the severity of the northern climate. Mr. Baskin rebuked the counsel for so advising the defendant. Seven days later the court again took up the case, the prosecution insisting that they were entitled to the forfeiture of the bond; and the counsel for the defense asking that a reasonable time be given to bring defendant into court. Mr. Hempstead charged, though in negative form, that the prosecution by insisting upon the forfeiture of the bond only did it for the purpose of having it heralded abroad that Brigham Young had forfeited his bail and fled from justice. If the case could not be postponed until the March term, then the defense would ask for a day to be set as far in advance as possible. The court refused to declare the bond forfeited, but set the day of trial one week from that time—from the 27th of November, to the 4th of December. As it was practically impossible for the defendant to be brought from St. George by that time, the bond for all practical uses might as well have been declared forfeited. It was in vain that counsel for the defense pleaded the impossibility of having the defendant in court by that time, and asked for two weeks instead of one. The court's answer to such pleading was, "the day of the trial has been fixed for a week from today."

OBSERVERS OF THE TYRANNY OF THE COURT

Meantime things had been happening elsewhere. That afternoon when Judge McKean overruled the motion to quash the indictment against Brigham Young, and announced that a "system was on trial in the person of Brigham Young," United States Senator, Oliver P. Morton, of Indiana, and his party, which included the editor of the Indianapolis Journal, Mr. Fishback, the senator's social and political friend, were present. Under date of October 12th, and headed, "On The Pacific Road," Mr. Fishback wrote in his Journal the impressions upon the party of the McKean court proceedings as they witnessed them on the aforesaid afternoon. Excerpts follow:

400"After a full and free conference with the leading Mormons, federal officers and business men of Salt Lake City, we predict that a dreadful civil war will soon be raging in this fertile region, resulting in the loss of thousands of lives, the expenditure of millions of public treasure, and the complete devastation of one of the most beautiful and thriving regions on the continent, unless the administration interferes with the schemes of the petty lords of misrule, who are doing their utmost to bring it about.

400It is unfortunate for the nation that it is in the power of such men as Judge McKean and the deputy district attorneys, Maxwell and Baskin, to precipitate a collision between the federal authorities and the Mormons, in a contest in which the government occupies a false and untenable position. * * *

We are convinced that the pending prosecutions are conceived in folly, conducted in violation of law, and with an utter recklessness as to the grave results that must necessarily ensue. How does the matter stand? There is a vacancy in the office of United States district attorney for the territory of Utah. Judge McKean has appointed two lawyers, Maxwell and Baskin, to act as deputies. These deputies boast that they have instigated the prosecution and assume great credit for the disingenuous trickery by which they hope to force a conflict whose consequences they have not the capacity to measure or understand. It is much to the credit of President Grant's administration that these deputy prosecutors arrogate to themselves the entire credit of conceiving the disreputable trick to which they have resorted to effect their purpose." [^1]

401The Journal's "editorial correspondence" was widely quoted in the east, and did much to modify public opinion and call a halt upon the prevailing radicalism. It is also to be noted that in the consideration of Utah questions as they arose in the United States senate, in the following session of congress, Senator Morton, together with Senator Lyman Trumbull exerted their influence on the side of conservatism in dealing with Utah affairs. [^2]

A NEW UNITED STATES DISTRICT ATTORNEY FOR UTAH

Early in November, George C. Bates was appointed by President Grant to be United States district attorney for Utah, succeeding the unlawfully, but McKean-appointed R. N. Baskin. He arrived in Salt Lake City on the 30th of the same month. On the 4th of December, the day set for the trial of Brigham Young, and the defendant not being present in court, Mr. Bates moved the forfeiture of the bonds, the defense, of course, protesting. Judge McKean refused to grant the motion to forfeit the bond, and adjourned the court to the 9th of January, but not before Mr. Bates had served notice that on that date he would call up the case of "The People vs. Brigham Young," and press it for trial. [^3]

President Young, while visiting the settlements in the Rio Virgin valley, had, of course, been kept informed relative to the progress of things in the north, and the question arose as to the wisdom of his returning to Salt Lake City to face his enemies, for it was known, as will appear presently, that more formidable charges were to be met than the silly one of "lascivious cohabitation." There was a general feeling among the brethren that it would be best for him not to return to fall into the hands of his enemies, but the impression of the "Spirit" upon President Young's mind was that it would be best for him to return, and accordingly preparations were made to that end, and on the evening of the 17th of December (Sunday) after holding public meetings in St. George, the northward journey was begun. [^4]

THE WINTER JOURNEY—INCIDENTS ON THE WAY

The second day's journey brought them to Kanarra, in Iron county. Here they met the veteran life guard of the Prophet Joseph Smith, John D. Parker, "who wept like a child because President Young was going back to face his enemies in the court room, which he considered an act of madness." "This feeling was very general with all the people the party conversed with as they passed through the southern country," says the journalist of the party; "but President Young told the people that God would overrule all for the best good of Zion." [^5]

It is common knowledge to those who were closely associated with President Young in his career, that he was greatly influenced, and often against his own judgment, by what he called "the Light"; doubtless the inspiration of God to his mind. He would say when matters were up for consideration, "Brethren, the 'Light' says so and so," which was generally the end of argument. So now on this question of his returning to face his enemies, he had said "The 'Light' says, Brigham, return." The application of this guiding principle in the present instance is made upon the statement of William R. Smith, president of the Davis stake of Zion, to the author, President Young having related his experience in the above instance to William R. Smith. [^6]

403At Cedar, on the 20th of December, the President's party was met by Orrin P. Rockwell, Joseph A. Young, son of President Young, Orson Arnold—the one man wounded in the "Echo Canon War,"—it will be remembered; he came to act as President Young's teamster. Beaver was made by the 21st, and up to this time the weather had been mild. It was the intention of the party to make an evening drive to Cove Fort, but as the teams were being set to the vehicles a blinding snowstorm came on and the drive was abandoned. This proved fortunate, as Elder Musser who went on in the evening with the Pioche mail stage had to walk all the way facing a storm. Several times the road was lost. General Connor was a passenger on the coach, he expressed himself strongly against the prosecution of Brigham Young, and offered to sign bonds to the extent of $100,000 in favor of Brigham Young if he could be admitted to bail. [^7]

403The next day the president's party drove to Cove Fort. About a foot of snow had fallen in Wild Cat Pass, and in Pine Valley Mountains. Telegraph wires were down. At Cove Fort the party was joined by Culbert King and five others from Millard county, bringing fresh horses to break the road through the snow if needed. En route to Fillmore,—the old territorial capital—"through Dog valley, the storm was so fierce as to render it very difficult to see the animals or keep the road. Luckily, however, the wind was from the south; roads extremely muddy." The party learned at Fillmore that it had taken the stage 29 hours from Fillmore to Nephi—62 miles. Telegraph communication was interrupted north of Nephi. [^8]

404At Round valley the party picked up telegraphic communication with Salt Lake City, "ascertained the coast was clear; roads ahead muddy. Several brethren accompanied us temporarily supplying the places of some of the weaker animals with their fresh horses. President Young's horses were led." [^9]

404On the 26th President Young left the rest of his party and started from Nephi at 6:30 a. m., riding with Bishop John Sharp in an open buggy. The bishop had joined the party at Nephi. They faced a severe storm from Nephi to Payson, in Utah county; thence drove to Provo; and later to Draper, the terminus, at that time, of the Utah Southern Railroad. Here they were met by Daniel H. Wells and others, with a special train, which carried them to Salt Lake City, arriving at about 11:45 p. m. on the 26th of December. [^10] Such the journey of 350 miles in midwinter, which Utah's great Pioneer made at the age of seventy-one to face his enemies in a United States court!

THE FALSE CHARGE OF "MURDER"

It was not to meet the petty charge of "lascivious cohabitation" that this journey of President Young's was made; but, as already suggested, he had learned that there existed a more serious charge against him, that of "murder." In the previous November he had been jointly indicted with D. H. Wells, mayor of Salt Lake City, and others, for the "murder" of one Yates, during the "Echo Canon War." Mayor Wells. Hosea Stout, formerly attorney-general of the territory, and W. H. Kimball, had been arrested on the 28th of October, on the same charge. The mayor was sent a prisoner to Camp Douglas, where he was taken in charge of General Morrow. [^11] Two days later he was admitted to bail in the sum of $50,000. The prosecution resisted the mayor being admitted to bail, but to the surprise of the other officers of the court, and the large audience in attendance, Judge McKean admitted Mayor Wells to bail; and when the prosecuting attorney (Baskin) insisted on $500,000 as the bond, the court sharply answered—"No, the defendant will give bail in the sum of $50,000."

405The announcement by the judge that the prisoner [Wells] would be admitted to bail brought forth hearty applause in the court room, for nobody supposed that bail would be allowed in any sum. Indeed, the counsel for the defense thought it useless to make the application for it. "It was Mayor Wells himself who prompted Mr. Fitch to apply to the court of Judge McKean for a writ of habeas corpus to be brought before the court to be held to bail. Mr. Fitch said it would be in vain; Judge McKean would not grant the bail; but the mayor persisted in the inward prompting that "the Lord would interpose," and thus spurred by the faith and judgment of the prisoner, counselor Fitch sat down Saturday night and all day Sunday to his work and prepared one of the most masterly efforts of his life, which, strange to say, Judge McKean prevented in its delivery by granting the bail. The applause in the court room was as genuine as the surprise was great, from non-"Mormons" as well as "Mormons." [^12]

The other parties to the alleged crime were not admitted to bail. Acting United States District Attorney Baskin planned the indictment and arrest of Brigham Young on this charge of "murder," on the strength of the confessions of the notorious "Bill Hickman," who had confessed to some eighteen or twenty murders. [^13] In his recently published Reminiscences [^14] Mr. Baskin states that sometime before his appointment by Judge McKean, he had private interviews with Hickman, for whom warrants of arrest were out, and who, to him, made confession of a number of murders. Hickman at the request of Mr. Baskin consented to go before the grand jury, and Baskin handed to Major Hempstead the statement of the self-confessed murderer, with the announcement that Hickman was ready to go before the grand jury. [^15] It was at this point that Hempstead resigned and Baskin was appointed by McKean to fill the vacancy. [^16] By becoming acting United States district attorney, Mr. Baskin had the opportunity of doing what he had urged upon his predecessor to do, and hence the indictments for murder against Brigham Young et al., upon the confessions of Hickman, with alleged "statements of other persons to me [i. e. Baskin, which nowhere appear] tended to corroborate his confessions." [^17] This, as well as the cases of "lewd and lascivious cohabitation," was Mr. Baskin's work.

406Mr. Baskin knew that the indictment of Brigham Young would cause great excitement, and if a "collision occurred it would be at the time Brigham was arrested on the charge of murder." "To meet such a contingency," he writes, "the United States marshal had appointed about one hundred deputies, most of whom had been soldiers in the Civil War, and General De Trobriand, United States commander at Camp Douglas, had been ordered to furnish upon the request of the governor, a posse of soldiers to aid the marshal." [^18]

Finally the coup de main in the arrest of Brigham Young on the charge of "murder" was ordered for Monday, the 20th of November, but President Young by that time was in St. George, and the coup de main was a failure. [^19]

407It was this failure of the coup that was the cause of the irascibility of the acting district attorney when he called up the case of "lascivious cohabitation" against Brigham Young on the 20th of November, and insisted upon the forfeiture of his bond. He had been defeated in his larger plot against the man he had chosen for his judicial victim.

BRIGHAM YOUNG IN COURT

It was a dramatic incident when, in the afternoon of the 2nd of January, 1872, Brigham Young accompanied by his counsel, Messrs. Hempstead, Fitch, et al., and a large number of friends, walked into the court presided over by Judge McKean. His application through counsel for admission to bail was being considered when he and his friends entered the court room. A certificate of Dr. W. F. Anderson—stating that he was the attending physician of Brigham Young, and that confinement would in all probability prove fatal to him in the present feeble state of his health, and at 71 years of age—was read. The new prosecuting attorney, Mr. Bates, made no objection to bail being allowed. Mr. Baskin by now had been eliminated, [^20] hence Mr. Bates could say, as he did say, that "he stood there as the sole representative of the United States in this motion. He held that it was left to the discretion of the court as to whether bail be granted or not; bail, however, had been granted in instances 'equally important with this case,' and the district attorney referred to the cases of Aaron Burr, and Jefferson Davis. But if bail were granted, he should demand that it be in the sum of $500,000." The judge declined to admit the defendant to bail; but granted him the privilege of selecting one of his own houses, and placing it at the disposal of the United States marshal, if he should so elect, and defendant might be detained there under custody of the marshal until the time of trial. [^21] And this was done.

OTHER ARRESTS AND JUDICIARY DIFFICULTIES

In addition to the arrests already noted during this period, and under Baskin-Maxwell's excessive activity, a number of others, including some of the city officers—Alexander Burt, chief of police, and B. Y. Hampton, one of the force, being among the number—were arrested on a charge connecting them with the J. King Robinson murder. They were detained in the city prison at first, but afterward were removed to Camp Douglas. According to the statement of Mr. Bates published by the New York Herald's Washington correspondent under date of January 25th, about twenty prisoners were confined at Camp Douglas, at great expense to the government. [^22]

408Meantime the judicial crusade was meeting with insurmountable difficulties. The judges in Utah had declared the district courts to be United States courts, as well when trying cases under territorial statutes as when trying cases under federal statutes, and the United States a party to the cause; and that the proper offers of such courts were always the United States district attorney and the United States marshal. The department of justice at Washington, however, did not take this view of the case and when the bills for expense of these "United States courts" and their "officers" were presented, they were not allowed. [^23]

409Congress was appealed to, and asked to make a special appropriation to cover the expense of these courts, but congress is slow in such matters. [^24] United States marshal, Mr. M. T. Patrick, applied personally to the territorial auditor, William Clayton, for funds with which to pay court expenses, but that functionary after applying in writing to the attorney-general of the territory for instructions received a written opinion in which law authorities are cited at length to show that the territorial marshal alone was authorized to draw the warrants for these expenses, and his authority to do that limited to the expenses of territorial courts. Auditor Clayton answered accordingly. [^25] The indebtedness of the courts by this time amounted to $15,000; the greater part of which, owing to the anti-"Mormon" zeal of the United States marshal, Mr. M. T. Patrick, had been advanced by him. The rest was due to jurors and witnesses. [^26]

The only territorial officer authorized to direct the payment of court expenses—territorial marshal—the federal judges had ruled out of existence; [^27] and the territorial legislature could not be expected to pay the expenses of courts and their officers, when the federal judges in their decisions had anihilated them. A deadlock therefore had been brought about by the oversmartness of the federal crusaders, and Mr. Bates was compelled to ask—the United States attorney-general at Washington directing him to do so—for a continuance of the twenty odd cases then pending, to the March term, by which time it was hoped congress would have provided the necessary means for carrying on these prosecutions. [^28] In the preceding March term Judge McKean had been compelled to dismiss the grand and petit juries for the reason that there was no way in which payment of their per diem allowance could be made; and at the same time he stated that there was then on the docket of his court "awaiting trial, civil cases involving millions of dollars." To such a pass had the cunningly planned judicial crusade brought civil and criminal affairs in Utah.

410Judge McKean in an address to the grand jury had said: "The high priesthood of the so-called Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, who control the assembly, and all the officers of, or who are elected by, the assembly, refuse to permit the expenses of the United States courts to be paid unless they are allowed to control those courts." Marshal McAllister in the letter above cited (footnote 27) answered: "I alone have refused the funds for the payment of United States officers and expenses of the courts when doing United States business. If his honor wants to hold courts for territorial business he should order venires to be placed in my hands. I then will summon, according to law, by drawing from the ballot box of each county the names of jurors certified to by the clerk of the county; such jurors so drawn, lawful, good, and true men, can get their per diem, and the expenses of the courts paid." The marshal also said that he had always had funds—had then—to pay expenses of the district courts for the territory, and the assembly "allowed all my bills for 1869, something over four thousand six hundred dollars." [^29]

Judge McKean's address to the grand and petit jurors was a very bitter document, and fairly hisses with the malice and hatred this judge bore to the Church of the Latter-day Saints. All the embarrassment and hindrance to the "crusaders" against "Mormon theocracy," he charges to the "high priesthood of the so-called Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." [^30]

411The United States district attorney, Mr. Bates, expressed the hope, however, when describing the state of things judicial in Utah—and this in open court—that "the territorial legislature which meets today, will see the propriety on their own part, of providing funds in order that their leaders may be vindicated if unjustly accused, and punished if guilty, of the high crimes charged against them." [^31] The legislature remained obdurate to this and all other appeals upon the subject.

411About this time District Attorney Bates, at the request of the United States attorney-general at Washington, went to the capital to advise the department of justice with respect to conditions prevailing in Utah.

JUDICIAL DIRECTION FROM WASHINGTON REJECTED

Soon after his arrival in Washington, and after communication with the attorney-general, and by the latter's direction, Mr. Bates telegraphed to his deputy, James L. High, to move the third district court to admit to bail all the prisoners under arrest, and awaiting trial. Mr. High, relying on this authority, which he produced before the judge in chambers, made the motion for bail in each case—including, of course, President Young's. "In behalf of the government, and in the name of the attorney-general of the United States," said he, "I make this motion." The answer of the judge was—"I refuse to admit these prisoners to bail." In his ruling he declared that the granting of bail in these cases would establish a dangerous precedent; that there were reasons which could not "be made public why these prisoners could not be admitted to bail," and which he held Mr. Bates could not have communicated to the attorney-general. Indeed the judge openly and from the bench accused Mr. Bates with having made "serious misstatements," in other particulars, in regard to affairs in Utah. "I am placed here to decide under the laws all judicial questions that shall arise in this district court," said the judge, "and were I now to shrink, or swerve from a plain duty, it is not improbable that the irresponsible magistrate called 'judge lynch' would assume the seat which I would thereby have proved myself unworthy to hold." [^32] It is evident that the judge thought his position an heroic one.

412It was doubtless such representations as the one in the above paragraph, supplemented as they were by the influence which Rev. Newman still had with President Grant, that led to the request for the resignation of Attorney Bates; a request which that gentleman refused to comply with, however, on the ground that there were no charges brought against him. [^33]

412JUDGE McKEAN'S PROCEDURE OVERTHROWN

412Such were the conditions in Utah, judicially, when there came over the wires from Washington the message that the supreme court of the United States had reversed the decision of the supreme court of Utah in the Engelbrecht case. The dispatch thus summarized the decision:

412"Jury unlawfully drawn: summonses invalid; proceedings ordered dismissed. Decision unanimous. All indictments quashed."

412The decision was written by Mr. Chief Justice Chase and will be found in 13 Wallace Reports, pp. 659-63. The New York Tribune thus summarized the effect of the supreme court's decision:

"The effect of this decision is to make void all criminal proceedings in the territorial courts of Utah during the past year [eighteen months], and render necessary the immediate discharge of 138 prisoners who have been illegally held, at an expense of from $40,000 to $50,000, which there is no law to provide the payment of, and to affect in the same way all civil cases in which exceptions were taken to the legality of the juries. It is said that 20 or 30 of these civil cases have been appealed to the supreme court. The decision is considered as very damaging to the national administration, as Judge McKean was supported in the course he took by the president, though Attorney-General Williams was always of opinion that the proceedings in Utah were illegal. The prosecution of the Mormons was known to be a distinctly administration measure, set on foot by the advise of the Rev. Dr. J. P. Newman, after his return from Salt Lake, where he went to discuss polygamy with some of the prominent saints." [^34]

On April 20th, to counteract the lying press dispatches sent out from Salt Lake City, reporting great excitement, and representing that the "Mormons were turbulent and threatening," nine prominent non-"Mormons" in business and professional life joined in a dispatch to Delegate Hooper at Washington declaring there had been no excitement over the decision of the supreme court. "As all the citizens here know the aim of the press agent is to create excitement, or make it appear to exist, to provoke congressional action." Then the signatures. Shortly after this, special telegrams were sent to the San Francisco Chronicle and the New York Herald, from the crusaders, representing that the excitement in Salt Lake City was great, "bloodshed is imminent," etc. This brought forth a joint telegram signed by twenty-seven prominent Gentiles, among whom were Warren Hussey, First National Bank; Theo F. Tracy, Agt. Wells Fargo; B. M. DuRill, Pres., Salt Lake City National Bank; "saying that the aforesaid dispatches to the Herald and Chronicle were not true;" and in addition affirming that "life and property are today as secure in Utah as in any state or territory in the Union. * * * It is matter of deep regret amongst all classes of business men in this territory, that the special dispatches sent from this city to the east are for the most part inaccurate and intensely irrational." [^35]

414The comments of the press in condemnation of the course of Judge McKean and suggesting and demanding his release would make a volume. The Omaha Herald, which throughout had condemned the anti-"Mormon" regime, and stood up for the rights of the Latter-day Saints in Utah, could now indulge a little railery on the change which had come over the press of the country:

414"It would be amusing if it were not so utterly ridiculous and absurd, to see Chicago, and other papers, now that the highest tribunal in the land has exposed the wicked conspiracies and infamies of McKean & Co., in Utah, clamoring for his removal. After doing all they could to egg him on in his lawless course, now that he is crushed they affect the most empty indignation over his past course and present discomfiture." [^36]

THE VICTORY IN UTAH

The effect of the decision in Utah, though tremendous, was unattended by any excitement, or extravagant conduct whatever, the press dispatches of the period to the contrary notwithstanding. A great relief came to the territory, and to the Latter-day Saints especially. All the evil and malicious schemes of the crusaders against "Mormon theocracy" during the past two years were overthrown. The right of an American community to something like local self-government under the Constitution, and the organic act, and the laws, was maintained. They were not to be the helpless victims of scheming adventurers and worn-out political hacks sent into their midst as federal officers. The taunts of the latter and their jeers were at an end; their whole course was now decided to have been illegal.

At first there seems to have been a very frank willingness on the part of the Utah federal officials to accept the consequences of the supreme court's decision as affecting the release of prisoners. "Upon receipt of a certified copy of the decision of the supreme court," wrote Mr. James L. High, assistant United States attorney for Utah, to Judge Z. Snow, attorney-general of the territory, "I shall move the immediate discharge of all prisoners now in the custody of the United States marshal in this district." [^37] There seems, however, to have been some delay in carrying out this plan, and Brigham Young sought release by writ of habeas corpus before Elias Smith, probate judge of Salt Lake county; and on the 25th of April the court ordered his release. [^38] For some time in Utah the supreme court's favorable decision had been anticipated. It was expected that it would be delivered soon enough to bring about the release of President Young in time for him to attend, as a free man, the annual conference which began on the 6th of April. The conference was continued until the 9th, but the hoped-for decision was not made. An adjournment was taken to Sunday the 14th. The decision was not yet announced and adjournment of the conference was taken to Sunday the 21st. By this time the joyful announcement of the decision was made, but the prisoners were not immediately released, as had been the hope of the saints in the event of a reversal of the Utah court. Oh, "the laws' delays!" Oh, "the insolence of office!" The conference adjourned to meet on the 28th, then came the release by writ of habeas corpus, and the attendance of President Young at both the morning and afternoon sessions of the conference.

415President George A. Smith said "he had fully determined to adjourn conference from one Sunday to another until President Young could attend, if it had to be prolonged until next October." [^39]

416In the morning meeting President Young exchanged greetings and carried on a colloquy with the congregation, which responded as with one voice. This was his salutation:

416"A word to the Latter-day Saints: Good morning. (Congregation responded, 'Good morning'). How do you do? (Congregation replied, 'Very well'). How is your faith this morning? ('Strong in the Lord,' was the response.) How do you think I look after my long confinement? (Congregation replied, 'First rate'). I do not rise expecting to preach a discourse or sermon, or to lengthen out remarks, but I will say a few words to you. The gospel of the Son of God is most precious. My faith is not weakened in the gospel in the least. I will answer a few of the questions that probably many would like to ask of me. Many would like to know how I have felt the past winter, and so much of the spring as is now past. I have enjoyed myself exceedingly well. I have been blessed with an opportunity to rest; and you who are acquainted with me and my public speaking can discern at once, if you listen closely to my voice, it is weak to what it used to be, and I required rest. I feel well in body and better in mind. I have no complaint to make, no fault to find, no reflections to cast, for all that has been done has been directed and overruled by the wisdom of him who knows all things. As to my treatment through the winter, it has been very agreeable, very kind. My associate, my companion in tribulation [i. e. the officer detailed as his guard], I will say, has acted the gentleman as much as any man could. I have not one word, one lisp or beat of the heart to complain of him. He has been full of kindness, thoughtful, never intruding, always ready to hearken and, I think, in the future, will be perfectly willing to take the counsel of his prisoner. So much for Captain Isaac Evans. * * * I have no reflections to cast upon these courts. How much power, ability, or opportunity would I have to possess, do you think, if all were combined, to disgrace them as they have disgraced themselves? I have neither the power nor ability, consequently I have nothing to say with regard to their conduct. It is before the world, it is before the heavens continually." [^40]

416At the close of the afternoon session President Young closed the conference with an impressive, impromptu benediction, that, as showing the spirit and character of the man under the stress through which he had just passed, is worthy of place here:

BENEDICTION

"I bless you in the name of Jesus Christ, as apostles, with all that pertains to you; as high priests, as seventies, as elders, as bishops, as priests, teachers and deacons. I bless you in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ. I bless you, my brethren and sisters, you that are parents, also the children. I bless you as musicians, as a choir to make music for us, and those who play on instruments. And I bless you strangers, and say unto you, peace be to you, as well as to the saints, in good words, in good actions, in a good life to serve the Lord our God. I crave blessings upon the good everywhere, among all the nations, kindreds, tongues, peoples, sects and parties, wherever the honest and the pure in heart are found. God bless them, and I say peace to you from henceforth and for ever! Amen." [^41]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, p. 589.
[^2] See Washington correspondent of the Chicago Post under date of Jan. 29th, 1872. The correspondent states that from other sources than Mr. Bates he learned that "the chief trouble with Judge McKean is that he has a 'mission;'" that "he was at one time a Methodist preacher, and he seems to be unable to get out of his clerical harness, or separate old time denominational enthusiasm from his judicial duties." (The Chicago Post article is published in Deseret News, weekly, of March 13th, 1872, and in the Omaha Herald of 19th of June, 1872. See also article in Omaha Herald of 19th of June, 1872, published in Millennial Star, vol. xxxiv, p. 454; and article in New York Herald of April 26th, 1872; reproduced in News of May 8th).
[^3] "Mr. Bates," said the Deseret News, "in the discharges of his official duties," has conducted himself in a gentlemanly manner, and probably his chief offense to the 'ring' is that he never lent himself to their unworthy policy and purposes, but has endeavored to discharge the duties of his office in an even-handed, impartial way." (Deseret News, weekly, of Dec. 18th, 1872, p. 700).
[^4] The communication appears in full in the Millennial Star, vol. xxxv, pp. 241-3.
[^5] Salt Lake Herald of June 21st, 1873, commenting on the matter the Herald said: "He (Judge McKean) took occasion * * * to reflect on Mr. Bates' evidence, and so far tortured that evidence—according to his reported language and the reported testimony of Mr. Bates—that an impartial, unprejudiced person would be apt to think that the judge had been guilty of a deliberate misstatement." (Ibid; also Millennial Sar, vol. xxxv, p. 476).
[^6] These charges appear over the signature of the former district attorney in the Salt Lake Herald of July 20th, 1873. Much of the matter, nearly all—in Mr. Bates' signed article in the Salt Lake Herald of the 20th of July, appears also in a lengthy article by a special correspondent in Utah of the New York Sun, under date of Salt Lake City, July 23rd, 1873. I shall use both these articles in the condensed presentation of the subject in the text. The signed article of the Salt Lake Herald will be found in Millennial Star, vol. xxv, pp. 529-532. The Sun's correspondent's article Ibid, pp. 580-83; and 587-8.
[^7] And this refusal to call either grand or petit juries for investigation or trial of cases McKean persisted in to the scandal of the territory, up at least to Feb., 1874, as witness his own declaration to that effect in a communication to Colonel H. A. Morrow, commandant at Camp Douglas, under date of Feb. 6th, 1874. (Deseret News, weekly, of 11th of Feb. Also editorial of the News, Ibid, p. 25).
[^8] The Chicago Times article cited in the charges made by Mr. Bates in his above arraignment, is also published in the Millennial Star, vol. xxxv, pp. 481-4.
[^9] Record of the whole case is published in the semi-weekly Salt Lake Herald of April 19th, 1873, with names and dates in full.
[^10] The New York Sun paragraph here quoted is copied into the Millennial Star, vol. xxxv, p. 358.
[^11] "The gravest part of this, perhaps," comments the Sun's correspondent, "lies in the fact that justice is obstructed by McKean, who will not allow a grand jury to investigate such offenses, nor indeed any violations of law, in his district. The United States marshal is here, fully empowered to draw jurors; government is willing to pay for the six days of each term prescribed by law; the jury law of the territory is sustained by the decision of the supreme court, but no order for a grand jury issued from the clerk's office, and criminals go unwhipped of justice."
[^12] "This," says the Sun's correspondent, "implicates Maxwell, the registrar of the land office here; Overton, receiver of public moneys, and others; though it is alleged that Maxwell has been made a tool of and has not received his share of the plunder."
[^13] Ibid.
[^14] Sun's article in Millennial Star, vol. xxxv, pp. 580-589.
[^15] On this point see this History, chapter cxxix, where this charge of Mr. Bates is sustained by the facts of history as there developed.
[^16] Correspondence to New York Sun copied into Millennial Star, vol. xxxv, pp. 580-589.
[^17] History of the United States, Bryant-Gay-Brooks (Scribners), vol. v, pp. 438-442.
[^18] See Baskin's Reminiscences of Early Utah, ch. iv.
[^19] Mr. Baskin represents that it was the Sunday night previous to his planned coup that President Young secretly left Salt Lake City (see Reminiscences, p. 55), whereas the president's letter to Elder Reynolds, written from St. George on the 11th of December, shows that previous to the 20th of November there had been an extensive itinerary performed along the line of settlements on the Rio Virgin. (See Millennial Star, vol. xxxiv, p. 28).
[^20] Although Mr. Baskin became the assistant district attorney by appointment from Washington, it soon became apparent that the district attorney and his assistant were not in harmony with each other, and Mr. Baskin resigned. (Reminiscences, p. 57).
[^21] Proceedings of the court this case are published in Deseret News, weekly, of Jan. 10th, 1872, p. 599.
[^22] The Herald article is copied into Deseret News of Feb. 21st, 1872.
[^23] "The United States comptroller," said district attorney Bates, in a letter to Senator Lyman Trumbull, (Dec. 30th, 1871), "disregarding the ruling of our supreme court here [Utah] decides that all these offenses are against territorial laws, to be punished only in territorial courts, by territorial officers thereof, and that the United States treasury must not and shall not pay a penny of these costs. The result of which is that all jurors and witnesses' fees and contingent expenses of these courts for the last year are unpaid, and there is not now a cent to pay them either for the past or future." (Copied into Deseret News of Jan. 17th, 1872).
[^24] The whole correspondence and opinion as submitted to the legislature is published in Deseret News, weekly, of Feb. 7th, 1872.
[^25] This whole matter with the official correspondence between Mr. Bates and the department of justice, was by him, early in January, brought into the third district court, presented and made part of the Court Record. It is published in full in Deseret News, weekly, of Jan. 17th, 1872.
[^26] Ibid.
[^27] See letter of John D. T. McAllister, territorial marshal, under date of March 14, 1871.
[^28] The court proceedings in these matters will be found in Deseret News of Jan. 17th, 1872.
[^29] See Deseret News, weekly, of March 22nd, 1871, both for the judge's address to the jury and the marshal's letter.
[^30] Ibid.
[^31] Ibid.
[^32] The proceedings in chambers are published in full with the ruling in Deseret News, weekly, of Feb. 11th, 1872, p. 9.
[^33] "In this connection," said a Chicago dispatch of March 11th, 1872, to the Salt Lake Daily Herald, "it may be stated that Dr. Newman had an interview recently with the president; wherein the latter was urged to persist in the prosecution of the Mormons, as the country would not endorse any compromise with the anomalous condition of affairs in Utah. Dr. Newman ended by stating that Bates' resignation should be demanded both as a matter of policy and justice."
[^34] The New York Tribune article is copied in the Millennial Star, vol. xxxiv, pp. 297-8.
[^35] Both dispatches referred to above with the signatures will be found in Deseret News, weekly, the first in the impression of May 1st, 1872, p. 178; the second, in May 8th, p. 188.
[^36] Omaha Herald, copied into the Deseret News, weekly, of April 24th, 1872, p. 153.
[^37] The assistant attorney's letter and Judge Snow's answer will be found in Deseret News of May 1st, 1872.
[^38] The Court Record of the case is published in Deseret News, weekly, of May 1st, 1872. The other prisoners, held at Camp Douglas, were released by action of the third district court five days later. (Ibid).
[^39] Minutes of Conference, Deseret News, weekly, of May 22nd, 1872.
[^40] Minutes of the Conference in Deseret News, weekly, May 1st, 1872.
[^41] Minutes of the Conference, Deseret News, weekly, of May 1st, 1872.
