B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 5 ( 1930)

CHAPTER CXLII

JUDICIAL CRUSADE, 1872-1877—BATES-MCKEAN EMBROGLIO—OFFICIAL CORRUPTION AMONG UTAH FEDERAL OFFICIALS

THE natural order of things following the supreme court's decision would have been the retirement of Judge McKean, by resignation or removal; but notwithstanding efforts were made to bring about his removal President Grant still sustained him. Fidelity to friends, even when in the shadow of disgrace, was a virtue run to seed in the great general, then the president of the United States, and McKean's official life in Utah was prolonged for some time, to come later, however, to a more inglorious ending. Before the reversal he received by the decision of the supreme court in the Englebrecht case, Judge McKean had enjoyed special privileges in the matter of a hearing before the American people. Mr. Godbe had been induced by Mr. T. H. B. Stenhouse, who, as before noted, had been a member of the New York Herald staff, to import to Salt Lake City a Mr. Oscar G. Sawyer, also connected with the New York Herald staff, to take editorial management of the Mormon Tribune, organ of the schismatic "Mormon" elders led by Godbe, which soon after Sawyer's arrival dropped the prefix "Mormon" and became simply The Tribune, and bitterly anti-"Mormon." Mr. Sawyer was retained by the New York Herald as its Utah correspondent with well-nigh unlimited telegraphic space at his command. Mr. Sawyer could thus through that, at the time, prince of New York journals, practically control public opinion in the United States. According to the statement of Mr. Tullidge, in his History of Salt Lake City, at the time here referred to, was a member of the Tribune staff, and cognizant of all its affairs as being an associate with the founders of the Tribune,—according to Mr. Tullidge—it was the custom of Mr. Sawyer to allow Judge McKean to write editorials for the Tribune supporting his own court decisions. A few excerpts from Mr. Tullidge's statement is at this point enlightening:

THE "EDITOR" SUSTAINS THE "JUDGE:" THE RIGHT HAND WASHES THE LEFT

"It was a matter of great importance to Chief Justice McKean and the United States prosecuting attorneys, with such a program as they had designed to execute in 1871-2, to have the Salt Lake Tribune under their dictatorship and in their service, with the understanding, not only among journalists in the eastern and western states, but in the mind of President Grant and his cabinet, that the Salt Lake Tribune was the organ of the seceding Mormon elders and merchants. With this explanation, be it repeated, Chief Justice James B. McKean was permitted by the managing editor, Oscar G. Sawyer, to write editorials for the Salt Lake Tribune, sustaining his own decisions; while Sawyer, as shown in his telegrams to the New York Herald, relative to the arrest of Brigham Young and the alarming circumstances of the hour, could communicate the secrets of the grand jury room, and the business marked out by the judge and prosecuting attorneys for the coming week, his telegrams dated three days before the indictments were made known to the Salt Lake public and the arrests effected. With this power in their hands to create public opinion not only in Salt Lake City, where it would have been comparatively of little consequence, but in the eastern states, and in the sanctum of the White House, the judge and prosecution, who were arraigning 'Polygamic Theocracy' and trying 'a system in the person of Brigham Young,' held a most unlawful advantage." [^1]

The course of Mr. Sawyer in thus conducting the Tribune so wholly in the interests of the anti-"Mormon" party brought strong protest and mutiny in the editorial staff. A private meeting of the board of directors was called, and Mr. E. L. T. Harrison of the board charged that Mr. Sawyer had turned the Tribune in a new direction, and had given it other aims and purposes from those for which it was established; "but above all, he impeached the managing editor on the specific charge of having permitted Judge McKean to write editorials sustaining his own decisions. The conclusion of the matter was that Mr. Sawyer was permitted to resign because of "a journalistic incompatibility" existing between himself and the directors. This according to his editorial valedictory. But the true reasons for his resignation are found in the sustained charges by Mr. Harrison as above given.

420BATES-MCKEAN CONTROVERSY

After the severance of the relations of both Judge McKean and Mr. Sawyer from the Tribune, and the natural tendency to discredit the judge by the press of the country after the decision of the supreme court, he lost much of the advantage he had hitherto possessed. A fierce conflict arose between him and the district attorney, charges and counter-charges were made by both the judge and the district attorney; by the former from the bench as we have seen; and also in person at Washington; and by the district attorney through the press of the east. [^2] President Grant, as already stated, requested the resignation of Mr. Bates, which the latter declined to hand in because there were no charges preferred against him. This before the decision of the supreme court was rendered. After it was rendered, so clearly vindicating the district attorney's views, and so completely reversing Judge McKean's procedure, of course, that the Bates resignation could not be further pressed, nor could he be removed, at least not immediately. But the differences between the judge and the attorney increasing, and their antagonism growing in bitterness, the president on the 10th of December, 1872, removed Mr. Bates, and appointed Mr. William Carey, of Illinois, to be United States district attorney for Utah. [^3] This act severing the official relations of Judge McKean and Mr. Bates, now gave the latter larger freedom for criticism of which he made a most vigorous use.

ARRAIGNMENT OF PRESIDENT GRANT ON UTAH AFFAIRS

In a signed open letter to President Grant, which first appeared in the Salt Lake Herald, but summarized for the press dispatches, Mr. Bates after expressing high regard for the president, but deploring the ease with which he was imposed upon by corrupt politicians, says, in regard to this weakness of the president's as it affected Utah affairs:

421"Your entire administration of affairs in Utah, your special message to congress, and many of the most important appointments made by you here, have all been the result of misrepresentation, falsehood, and misunderstanding on your part of the real condition of affairs in this territory. * * *

421In other communications, soon to be made, in every instance accompanied by the evidence, I will demonstrate how other distinguished officers have bought their offices, how you were made a mere catspaw by corrupt senators and representatives, to send officers here whom you would not have trusted among your horse blankets in the executive stable." [^4]

421The purpose of this open letter was to defeat the appointment of one Wm. W. Mitchell of Michigan for associate justice in Utah. Mitchell was appointed, however January 9th, 1873; but was superceded in March following, and never was installed in his office. He threatened Bates with a suit for libel in the Michigan courts, for what the attorney had published in the open letter to Grant. Bates employed counsel and instructed them if suit was filed to enter his appearance. He volunteered to go from Salt Lake to Grand Rapids to meet the issue. Nothing came of it.

CORRUPTION IN FEDERAL UTAH OFFICIALS

McKean in rendering his decision in what was known as the Haskins mining case, undertook to discredit the former district attorney in the latter's charges of corruption in connection with the Utah federal appointments, made in his open letter to Grant. In his testimony in the aforesaid Haskins case Mr. Bates testified that "he knew nothing of the case now under examination, nor of any official corruption in the territory that would implicate any one in the case before the court;" whereupon, in rendering his decision, Judge McKean said that Mr. Bates had "caused telegrams and letters to be published in the papers that there had been official corruption;" but, when called upon he "confessed that he knew nothing about any official corruption whatever, of any official, whatever—in the matter." [^5] This attempt to discredit the veracity of the former district attorney brought on a crisis between the parties and Mr. Bates soon afterwards published serious and specific charges of corruption among the Utah federal officials. [^6]

422It is proper to consider at the outset the question which naturally arises and which Mr. Bates considers near the close of his charges, viz., why were not these charges brought before a grand jury for investigation, rather than committed to the press of the country? Mr. Bates replies:

"The answer is plain: because the clerk of the court here would not issue a venire demanded by me, and the court would not order it done. All this I reported to the [United States] attorney-general last fall. The names of the witnesses to prove the facts here charged, and of the officers against whom the accusations are laid, will be furnished to the United States district attorney whenever he will summon a grand jury to inquire into offenses against the laws of the United States; or to a committee appointed by congress to investigate into the matter involved."

423The New York Sun correspondent referred to put this situation as follows:

423"McKean has practically disregarded the supreme court decision, and has merely refused juries instead of impaneling them illegally." [^7]

423After reciting his own previous appointments by the general government to offices in California, and his appointment to Utah, Mr. Bates says in his signed charges:

423"Having entered upon the duties of the office, I found the court composed of three judges; against one of whom the Chicago Times has recently furnished the charge and evidence of bigamy; another of whom it is proven by the records of our court here, to have bought his office for a note yet unpaid, and whose whole judicial career was a grave scandal on temperance, justice, and morality; and lastly, the chief justice."

423Both Hawley and Strickland resigned in the winter of 1873, and were succeeded by the appointment of P. H. Emerson, of Michigan, 10th of March; and Jacob S. Bore man, of West Virginia, 20th of March.

FOR THE COMPLETENESS OF HISTORY

Relative to the serious charges against these Utah judicial officers it is due to the completeness of history that something more should be said; also that it should be known what kind of instrumentalities were employed to bring about the high "moral reform" sought to be impressed upon the Latter-day Saints of Utah; and, lastly, that the injustice might appear of denying to such a community as the people of Utah then was of the right of local self-government. Accordingly more of the details and evidence of these charges against the federal appointees sent to rule the people is here set down.

THE BIGAMY OF A GENTILE JUDGE

It was Judge Cyrus M. Hawley against whom the charge of bigamy was made. It is only due to Judge McKean to say that he was greatly shocked when he became aware that his associate in the Utah judiciary was charged with such a crime. The charge was first published in the Salt Lake Herald. Judge McKean, as he mounted the bench one morning saw it in the Herald lying on his desk. He read it through. It is said by the Chicago Times report that he was greatly enraged:

424"He sprang to his feet and shouted to the marshal to call in the grand jury. [He had by this time found it possible to have juries]. The official did as directed. The jurors took their places with respected awe in the chairs provided for them. The court then said, in substance: '* * * The Salt Lake Herald charges Judge Hawley with having more than one wife. It intimates that he is guilty of adultery and fornication. It insinuates that he is a fraud and a hypocrite, and that he does not provide for his family. This court must purify itself before it can try other people. You must now indict Judge Hawley for bigamy, or John T. Caine, editor of the Herald, for libel. You must now retire.'"

424Mr. Caine was promptly indicted for libel by the obedient jury, also Messrs. Sloan and Dunbar, editor and business manager respectively of the Herald, were included in the indictment; but the case never came to trial.

424A search was instituted among the records of the superior court of Cook county, Ill., by Mr. Caine. The transcript of a proceeding for a divorce was obtained, and a copy of an alleged decree. It was subjected to judicial criticism and inspection, and discovered to be irregular and fraudulent, and that it had not been obtained as the law prescribes; in short, that the defendant, Cornelia M. Hawley, was not legally divorced. Mrs. Hawley was also hunted up by the defendants. She consented to be present at the trial of the libel suit when it should come off, and to claim the immaculate judge as her husband.

"The result of this exposure of the domestic eccentricities of the pharisaical judge brought down upon his head the malediction of the entire opposition press of the country. Judge Hawley shortly afterward resigned and slunk away into obscurity." [^8]

A UTAH FEDERAL JUDGE PURCHASES HIS OFFICE

The associate justice of Utah charged with having purchased his office of associate justice on the Utah bench, and whose "judicial career was a grave scandal on justice and morality," was Judge Obed F. Strickland. The charges were notorious and true. The facts relative to his purchasing the judgeship are set forth in the Salt Lake Herald. At the time the commercial transaction occurred Thomas J. Drake held the office of associate justice of Utah, and had a little less than a year of unexpired term. Drake did not intend to ask for reappointment as he had become unsavory in Utah as set forth in previous chapters in this History. Under these circumstances Strickland, "sadly in need of an office," met Drake in Washington and in consideration of a note of hand for the amount of one year's salary—for which Drake had yet to serve one year—$2,800, Drake interested himself in Strickland's affairs and secured for him the appointment. "But alas for judicial honor! Once installed on the bench Strickland refused to honor the promissory note" (which was to be paid in four yearly installments), and Drake at the end of four years brought suit to collect it. Strickland "puts in an answer in the shape of a demur, to the effect that the contract is void on grounds of public policy." [^9] "Comment," said the Golden Era, of April 27th, after detailing the story—"comment on such a case is superfluous. Language fails to do justice to the subject." Of the transaction the New York Sun said:

"There can be no doubt that this note is void and worthless, for the reason that it was given for an immoral consideration, but it is valuable as showing the corruption which under Grant's administration extends from the executive departments and from congress, and carries its foul contagion into the judiciary. To Judge Sherman in Ohio, Judge Delahay in Kansas, and the drunken Judge Durell in Louisiana, is now to be added this Judge Strickland in Utah; and it also appears that Chief Justice Titus of Arizona was present while Strickland made his bargain with Drake, and approved of the corrupt transaction." [^10]

YET MORE SERIOUS CHARGES

Coming to other and more serious charges of corruption against these judges and other federal officials, I quote Mr. Bates' own language, as published in the New York Sun:

426"First—I aver that most grave charges of official corruption against two United States officials of Utah were preferred to the attorney-general by telegraph in 1871; the charges were in sitting in judgment in mining cases where they were themselves interested and that an order was issued to investigate the charges made, and if found true, to remove them both; but before the order was executed the Rev. Dr. Newman intervened at Long Branch, [where President Grant was temporarily residing] and the matter was dropped. The telegraphic charges were from a United States senator, and were on file a year ago in the department of justice, and are there now unless abstracted.

426The 'two United States officials' referred to, says the New York Sun's correspondent, in his comments upon this charge, were Judges McKean and Strickland. The latter had been 'located' by the alleged discoverer, in a valuable mining claim in Ophir district, East canon, known as the 'Silver Shield.' The same ground was claimed by other parties, as having been previously located by them in conformity with the district mining laws, as the 'Velocipede.' Strickland sold out his claim to McKean for a trifling sum, and when litigation arose between the Velocipede claimants and the Silver Shield claimants, Judge McKean being one of the latter, he politely turned over the hearing of the case to Judge Strickland, also a party interested; and all the litigation had in the matter was before Strickland, who had sold to McKean and was believed still to have an actual interest in the mine, or McKean, who had bought from Strickland. The result was a compromise by which the Velocipede claimants felt they were robbed of their just rights; but as there was no chance for an impartial trial they bit their lips, swore roundly, and accepted the alternative. Wm. M. Stewart, United States senator from Nevada, was the party that preferred the charge by telegraph, and instructions, it is understood, were given at the time for the removal of both, but ecclesiastical influence triumphed."

426Mr. Bates' indictment continues:—

"Second—I aver that large peculations of the mails and post office have occurred here since I came, in one instance, a package of $10,000 being lost; that time after time, money orders have been stolen, and yet no one has ever been prosecuted for these offenses. In one or more instances clerks detected in robbing the mail have been permitted to go, and crimes, if not actually condoned, have been overlooked." [^11]

427Third—I aver that large bodies of coal lands worth a heavy amount of money, not in market at all, have been illegitimately spirited away under false pretenses, and are now held against the United States as private property by a combination of those who bought them at one dollar and twenty-five cents per acre in fraud of the laws of the United States, and that even now this process of robbing the United States of its coal land is going on. [^12]

427Fourth—I aver and charge that the timber lands of Utah during the last eighteen months have been stripped, in utter violation of the laws of the United States and a circular published by me as United States district attorney, from the land department, and that no attempt has ever been made to enforce the laws of the United States against such trespasses upon the public lands.

427Fifth—I charge that a government official of Utah purloined from my desk, during my absence at the east, a public document belonging to the archives of the attorney-general's department, had it copied, then certified to by other officials, and then sold it to a New York newspaper for money.

427Sixth—I further charge and aver that in 1872 a corrupt bargain was made in this city between two of the leading officials of Utah, by which a large sum of money was to be, and was actually put in a bank in this city, and also a bond payable out of the products of a certain mine, whenever an injunction should be granted, and a receiver appointed by the other official in that case; that a retaining fee was paid to the person who was to manipulate the matter; that an argument was heard in the cause, the injunction and receiver refused, and thereupon a different arrangement was made. Is this official corruption in Utah?"

AMPLIFICATION OF THE SIXTH CHARGE

In full explanation of this sixth charge of Mr. Bates the correspondent for the New York Sun wrote his paper at the time as follows:

"The Flagstaff mine, Little Cottonwood, is held to be one of the richest in Utah, its shares being at present some thirty per cent premium in the London market. J. W. Haskins, of Vallejo, California, well known in the west as 'Prior Titles,' from his penchant for purchasing old mining titles and then laying claim to the property on the strength of them, in this way he preferred a claim to the Flagstaff mine, as he had done to the Emma. He sought an injunction against the Flagstaff Company and believed evidently that the shortest way to obtain it was by purchasing judicial and official influence. So he retained Governor Woods as an attorney in the case, paying him, if I am not mistaken, $635 as a retaining fee, with a promise of $5,000 more. It being understood that the governor has power to redistrict the federal judges when he deems it necessary, it was probably considered that such an influence might have its weight with the immaculate Strickland, who by a perverse decision might render himself liable to be sent to Beaver away in the southern part of the territory, where there was little civilization and where whiskey was dear and not very plenty at that time. Besides this, it is said that Haskins agreed to have $60,000 forthcoming in the event of a decision 'according to law and justice,' which meant the granting of the injunction. He accordingly deposited $10,000 in cash in one of the banks in town and a bond for $50,000 more to meet his obligation. But it is believed that the Flagstaff Company 'went him two better,' and, not troubling themselves with bonds, put up $62,000 in cash. I need scarcely say that Mr. Haskins failed to get his injunction. Shortly afterward Judge Strickland, from his very liberal salary of $3,000 a year, was able to purchase a handsome residence in Provo, at a cost of some $8,000, and other addenda requisite to maintain the dignity of a judge. This is the same judge who bought his position from his predecessor, T. J. Drake, of Michigan, giving his note for the price—$2,800—which is not yet paid—and who while judge, when on a drunken spree, went into a lager beer saloon in this town, impaneled a mock jury, and went through the formality of holding court with all imaginable drunken gravity, and to the infinite pleasure of the assembled crowd. He was never removed, but held the position until he resigned last winter." [^13]

THE CHARGE OF A SHAM TRIAL

Again Mr. Bates resumes his serious charges:

428"Seventh—I charge and aver that information was given to a late judge of the territory, to myself and many others of the citizens of Utah, by a leading agent of one of the largest and wealthiest firms in the United States, of a much graver offense against one of the United States officers, at that time, and the name of the informer, the character of the crime, and all the circumstances were given. This charge had reference to a case in court involving large sums of money, in which it was also said that a sham trial took place after the real issues had been first settled between the parties in the suit."

"In this accusation," says the Sun's correspondent, "we have perhaps the gravest of all. If your readers can imagine a private conference in the Astor House, New York, between one of the shrewdest of far western senators, a New England banker of notoriety as a keen mining speculator, and a Utah judge, whose record was even then tainted with corruption, in which future judicial decisions had to be considered, they may be able to arrive at a conclusion not far from correct. To publish detailed facts of the matter at present would defeat the ends of justice, but the people have a right to demand that the whole shamelessly corrupt transaction—of which the Brooklyn records will furnish part of the evidence—should be sifted to the bottom." [^14]

429"Eighth—I further charge that in the spring of 1872, by reason of illegitimate conduct on the part of one or both officers of the Indian department in this territory, the Indians were compelled to buy their food at enormous prices, were finally starved out, and so left their reservation, came down to the settlements, begged and roamed about, until an Indian was was imminent, and nothing but the wisdom and prudence of General Morrow and the keen sagacity and gallantry of General Ord prevented it." [^15]

429"Mr. Bates," says the Sun's correspondent, in his closing comments on the charges, "might have charged much more, and have fallen short of the facts," and adds:

429"The president has had the character of these officials laid before him; he is fully informed of their robberies and disregard of law or official obligations; but they remain here, as Casey does in Louisiana, and as scores of others do in various offices, held there by the influence of favorites or the strength of kinship, with the prospect of continuing in place as long as the president himself." [^16]

PRESIDENT GRANT'S LAXITY IN THE ADMINISTRATION OF CIVIL AFFAIRS

Again Mr. Bates:

"The second term of President Grant, it must be admitted," says a great history of the United States, "justified to some extent the evil prophecies of those who believed that the general's easy, good nature and his unacquaintance with civil affairs would open the gates to doubtful schemes and schemers. As time wore on, many of the rumors of alleged hidden scandals and official corruption were dispelled, but serious and unhappy disclosures did subsequently shock the people. Changes in the cabinet of President Grant also served to unsettle popular confidence in the administration and occasion much uneasiness as to the causes which underlay these goings and comings of the president's advisers." Then follows several pages detailing the many cabinet resignations that took place, many of which "were related to the public scandals of the day." Also a statement of the postal contract frauds; the whiskey ring robberies; the war department scandals and exposures; also the Indian service frauds, wherein both the government and its Indian wards were alike defrauded, leading to the Indian wars of 1873, which reached their culmination in the "Custer Massacre." [^17]

430President Grant's "easy good nature" in political affairs, his susceptibility to the influence of political friends, many of whom were evil-minded and corrupt, is notorious up to the point of being a national scandal, and is well sustained by history. This well known historical fact lends strong support to the accusing "open letter" of Mr. Bates to President Grant, charging corruption among the Utah Grant appointees, and the president's indifference when charges were made against them.

I am aware of the possibility of someone saying that the treatment of the overthrow of these disreputable federal officials of Utah given in this chapter should be based upon more substantial grounds than charges made by an opposing politician such as George C. Bates, ex-district attorney for Utah, and removed from office by action of President Grant. I should be inclined to admit the force of such criticism if it were not for the fact that the charges against these federal officers were sustained by something more than the charges of the aforesaid ex-district attorney for Utah, viz., what happened to these federal officials. In the case of Judges Hawley and Strickland, prompt resignation without investigation, under the fire of the charges. The failure of Woods to reappointment to be governor of Utah, notwithstanding he urgently sought the reappointment. The dismissal from office of both Judge McKean and Land Registrar Maxwell at the height of their aggressive career in Utah affairs, and that by President Grant, so bitterly prejudiced against the people and their leaders upon whom these men exercised their outrageous tyranny. All this sustains the charges of George C. Bates against the discredited federal officials, and convicts them of insufferable evil acts as clearly as if charged before a jury and found guilty. They have a saying in France that the only course for one to follow who is truly accused of crime is to confess or commit suicide; and suicide is confession. What happened to these charged Utah federal officials was somewhat like that "suicide" recommended by the French—it was equal to the establishment of guilt in their case.

It may be held, and it is, [^18] that this Poland enactment overrode the decision of the supreme court of the United States in the Engelbrecht case, which had settled the status of the district courts of Utah, and the methods of judicial procedure in them, and the right of the people to trial by a jury of their peers, fairly chosen and of the vicinage. And it may have to be conceded that this is true; that the procedure and decisions of the Utah federal judges though disapproved by the supreme court of the United States had now been approved by the enactments of congress, and that this and much other kindred legislation against Utah's people was subsequently even approved by the supreme court in the cases that went up to it on appeal from the territory. That too may have to be conceded; but this remains to the record of the American congress and to the record of the supreme court of the United States, so far as they gave their approval to that class of legislation, and that under the whip and spur and uninformed and misled public opinion respecting an unpopular people—this remains, the congress of the United States that passed such legislation, and the supreme court of the United States which, forsaking the principles that guided it in the decision overruling the injustice of federal officials in Utah in the Englebrecht case—both acted in violation of the high American principle of the constitutional right of the people to local self-government, and fair treatment under the law. And for the violation of that constitutional and righteous principle, I arraign both congress and the supreme court of the United States at the bar of history.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Appleton's Annual for 1871, p. 394. See also History of the United States, Bryant-Gay-Brooks, vol. v. p. 426. "The Chicago fire began on Sunday morning. October 8th, in a small wooden barn on De Koven street, in what is known as the western district of that city. A woman was milking a cow by the light of a small kerosene lamp which the animal kicked over and broke. The little flame then kindled spread rapidly, fanned by a strong westerly wind, raged all that night and the following day, and was not checked until 2.124 acres of city property had been burned. * * * This enormous devastation was accomplished in parts of the city which were representative of the whole. In the sheets of flame were destroyed great blocks of costly and ornate business houses, elegant private residences, and buildings of the United States, the county, and the local government. The same destructive flood swept away vast piles of lumber, extensive shops and factories, thousands of tons of coal, and the humble homes of working people and the poor. Structures of stone, brick, iron, or marble, erected in a belief that these were absolutely fireproof, were reduced to heaps of calcined material or warped and twisted metal. In the seething flames that seemed to lick the heavens, everything but the solid earth on which the city was built was utterly destroyed; and when the torrent of fire was finally stayed, acres of blackened debris, sullenly smoking in ruin, covered the site of two great divisions of Chicago." (Ibid).
[^2] This veto document is found in Deseret News, weekly, of Jan. 31st, 1872.
[^3] Full text of the report is in the legislative proceedings Deseret News, weekly, of Feb. 7th, 1872. The special committee, in contradiction of the governor's assertion that it had been "the uniform practice of congress to confer that power [i. e. the calling of a constitutional convention] through enabling acts," cited the case of Arkansas, admitted in 1836, previous to which an act had been passed by the territorial legislature, without the approbation of the governor, calling a convention to form a state Constitution preparatory to admission, a "measure taken without previous action of congress;" Michigan, admitted in the same year, took practically the same action, except that the governor united with the legislative council in that instance; and California was admitted in 1850 without an enabling act. (See Committee's Report, as above cited).
[^4] Joint Resolution will be found in Deseret News, weekly, of Feb. 7th, 1872.
[^5] See letter in History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1871, vol. ii, pp. 1991-9. The proposition was diplomatically introduced and elaborately discussed by Mr. Frank Fuller in the letter here cited. Mr. Fuller was the ex-secretary of the territory of Utah, having served under the brief governorships of Dawson and Harding, and twice acting governor by reason of these governors being absent from the territory. "I come to still another concession which, as I indicated to President Young, must be made," said he. "I allude to the prohibition of the future extension of polygamy." His plan contemplated that this measure should be forced into the Constitution by Gentiles and non-polygamous "Mormons" rather than by the "Mormon" people proffering to make a surrender of plural marriage.
[^6] Undoubtedly the church leaders were seriously considering this proposition. The fact that ex-Secretary Frank Fuller was in communication with both President Young and George A. Smith on the subject would indicate that (see letter previously cited note 5). The following statement occurs in the minutes of the School of the Prophets for the 9th of Dec., 1871. "President Wells talked on polygamy—would not think it strange if God would take that principle, back to himself for a season, through the wickedness of his people." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., for 1871, vol. ii, p. 1980). The "wickedness" referred to would doubtless mean general inability of the people to grasp the high intent of the principle of this marriage system. (See chapter cxxxv this History).
[^7] The delegates from Salt Lake county were nominated in a mass convention held for the purpose. When nominated and called upon for a speech, Mr. Thomas Fitch a "Gentile" who had recently removed into Utah from Nevada, said that he did not wish any one "to vote for him under a misapprehension." "He would endeavor, if elected, to help frame a Constitution that would assimilate the social and political life of Utah to that of all other states; and that would aid to render her institutions homogeneous with theirs." (Deseret News, weekly, of Feb. 7th, 1872, p. 9). That meant he would work for a Constitution prohibiting future polygamous marriages.
[^8] The list of all the delegates and their counties will be found in Deseret News, weekly, of Feb. 21st, 1872.
[^9] The speech in full in published in the Deseret News, weekly, of Feb. 28th, 1872.
[^10] The committee on ordinance that reported this clause consisted of George Q. Cannon, Joseph W. Young (nephew of President Young), John T. Caine, Abraham O. Smoot, Thomas Fitch, Franklin D. Richards, William Jennings, John Rowberry, and John Sharp.
[^11] The convention's proceedings are published in full in the Deseret News, weekly, of Feb. 21st, 28th, March 6th (in which number the Constitution also appears), and March 13th, 1872. Much of the convention proceedings is also reproduced in Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, chapters lxvi and lxvii. General E. M. Barnum was president of the convention.
[^12] The interview from the New York Tribune will be found in extenso Deseret News, weekly, of Jan. 29th, 1879.
[^13] Deseret News, weekly, of April 3rd, 1872. General Eli M. Barnum, Robert L. Campbell and Elias Smith were the board of canvassers.
[^14] Deseret News, weekly, of April 3rd and 10th, 1872.
[^15] The minutes of the convention, which are quite elaborate, are published in Deseret News, weekly, of April 10th, 1872. A series of resolutions in support of the Republican party was adopted, and the names of the delegates are published. Franklin D. Richards was temporary chairman and president of the convention. George A. Smith delivered an extended speech. Both "Mormon" and Gentiles were well represented in the convention. A central territorial committee was chosen of which John T. Caine, ex-governor, S. A. Mann, and Daniel H. Wells were members.
[^16] See Deseret News, weekly, of July 17th, 1872.
[^17] Ibid of July 31st, p. 380.
[^18] Deseret News for April 17th, 1872, p. 144.
