B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 5 ( 1930)

455CHAPTER CXLIV

455MISCELLANEOUS EVENTS 1872-1877: NATIONAL PARTY LINES—DECISION OF THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES ON POLYGAMY

455FOLLOWING closely the political and judicial events of the McKean period has excluded the consideration of a number of events running parallel with those considered, and which now demand attention.

THE CHICAGO FIRE

Prominent among these was a great national calamity which caused the people of Salt Lake City to stand together again for a moment,—as in the case of the assassination of President Abraham Lincoln—forget their animosities and unite in expressing sympathy with and giving aid to, those upon whom the calamity had fallen. These were the citizens of Chicago, and the calamity was the Chicago fire which began on the 8th and continued to the 10th of October, 1871. The loss was estimated at nearly $200,000,000 in property. Upward of 17,450 houses were burned, 98,500 persons were rendered homeless, and over 250 persons lost their lives. [^1] Throughout the land other cities responded to the cry of distress, and prompt relief was given to the sufferers from the great disaster. In this work Salt Lake City equalled both in promptness and in proportionate amount the foremost cities of the country. On the 10th of October—before the fire in Chicago had completed its ravages—Mayor Wells called a mass meeting of the citizens in the "Old Tabernacle" to convene at one o'clock the next day to raise funds in aid of the fire sufferers. The meeting was addressed by a number of prominent men both "Mormon" and non-"Mormon." The chairman of the meeting—Mayor Wells—announced that Brigham Young had authorized the statement that a benefit in aid of the Chicago sufferers would be given at the Salt Lake Theater one evening during the week, for which he gave free use of the house. Mrs. Lippincott—"Grace Greenwood"—a public lecturer and visitor in the city proposed giving a public lecture in aid of the sufferers in the "Old Tabernacle;" Brigham Young led the subscriptions by a gift of $1,000; quite a number of both non-"Mormon" and "Mormon" business men followed with donations of $500; Mayor Wells announced that he was authorized to give $1,500 in behalf of Salt Lake City. In all at this meeting $6,282 was raised.

In the evening another mass meeting was held in front of the Salt Lake House on Main street; John T. Caine called the meeting to order and Major C. H. Hempstead was elected chairman. Many addresses were made and more subscriptions were taken. The Masonic fraternity also opened a subscription. From all sources Salt Lake City promptly raised about $20,000 in aid of the Chicago fire sufferers, the larger portion of which came from the "Mormons," and that in the face of the fact that this call came upon them when their leading men, President Young, Mayor Wells and other leading brethren were being placed under arrest on trumped-up charges of "murder" and other crimes; and when Judge McKean was rendering some of the most outrageous of his decisions, and delivering anti-"Mormon" speeches from the bench. But then it was a real human cry for help that arose from the smouldering ruins of Chicago, and certainly less than "Christians" would the Latter-day Saints have been, had they not responded to that cry.

457Of this prompt response of the people of Salt Lake City, and emphasizing the unexpected generosity of the Latter-day Saints in the matter, Mrs. Lippincott—the proceeds from whose lectures amounted to $300 for the Chicago fire sufferers—thus wrote to the New York Herald, (her letter bears date of Oct. 12th):

PEN PICTURE OF BRIGHAM YOUNG

"In the 'Old Tabernacle' yesterday, we attended a mass meeting, called by the mayor, to raise money for the relief of the Chicago sufferers. Here we saw Brigham Young, and I must confess to a great surprise. I had heard many descriptions of his personal appearance, but I could not recognize the picture so often and elaborately painted. I did not see a common, gross-looking person, with rude manners, and a sinister, sensual countenance, but a well dressed, dignified old gentleman, with a pale, mild face, a clear grey eye, a pleasant smile, a courteous address, and withal a patriarchal, paternal air, which of course he comes rightly by. In short, I could see in his face or manner none of the profligate propensities, and the dark crimes charged against this mysterious, masterly, many-sided and many-wived man. The majority of the citizens of Salt Lake present on this occasion were 'Mormons,' some of them the very polygamists arraigned for trial, and it was a strange thing to see these men standing at bay, with 'the people of the United States' against them, giving generously to their enemies. * * * President Young gave in his thousand and the elders their five hundred each as quietly as the poor brethren and sisters their modest tribute of fractional currency. It is thought that Utah will raise at least $20,000. There is to me, I must acknowledge, in this prompt and liberal action of the Mormon people, something strange and touching. It is Hagar ministering to Sarah; it is Ishmael giving a brotherly lift to Isaac."

Political and Legal AffairsHCANOTHER EFFORT TO OBTAIN STATEHOOD

Political and Legal AffairsHCIn January, 1872, the legislature passed an act providing for the election of delegates to a convention to frame a Constitution and memorialize congress for the admission of Utah into the Union.

Political and Legal AffairsHCGovernor Woods refused to sign the bill because in his view it dealt with a matter that was not a rightful subject of legislation by the territory; and further held that an enabling act by congress was a necessary prerequisite to the calling of such a convention. [^2] The legislature appointed a special committee to express the sense of the house relative to the action of the governor; and its report held the governor's explanations for vetoing the bill as "unsound in reason, untrue in allegation and accusation, and a direct insult to the law-abiding people of Utah." [^3]

Political and Legal AffairsHC458The legislature passed a conjoint resolution, independent of the governor, providing for the election of delegates to a constitutional convention which were proportioned to the counties according to population, and appointing the 19th day of February, 1872, for the time of convening said convention. [^4]

Political and Legal AffairsHCThere were several reasons that conjoined in making the effort to secure statehood at this time opportune: First, it was urged upon the attention of the church leaders that there was sufficient uncertainty in the approaching presidential election (1872), to make it desirable to the Republican party, if it could be done "without abandoning any of its enunciated principles, or violating any of its distinct pledges," to admit some new states if the electoral votes of such states could be pledged to President Grant for a second term. Such in part was a suggestion made to the Latter-day Saint Church leaders in a letter to George A. Smith, under date of Dec. 11th, 1871. [^5] There was a policy much discussed at this time through the press of the country, which looked to the admission of Utah into the Union with a constitutional provision forbidding the contracting of plural marriages for the future, and thus ending the vexed "Mormon" question. Second, the radical course of Governors Shaffer and Woods, and the prosecutions of the McKean regime, had divided the Gentiles in Utah, and many of them were dissatisfied with the extreme radicalism of the period; and it was believed, and upon good grounds, that they would unite on such a plan for the admission of Utah as was proposed by Mr. Fuller, and many other friends of Utah both inside and outside of the territory; and not a few among the "near" leaders of the "Mormon" people favored such a step as was now proposed. [^6]

Political and Legal AffairsHCOut of the nineteen delegates elected from Salt Lake county nine were non-"Mormons;" [^7] though in the Salt Lake City election, held that same month, the People's (i. e. "Mormon") ticket was elected by an average vote of 4,500, as against an average vote of 550 for the Liberal party ticket. Of the non-"Mormons" elected General P. E. Connor resigned the nomination, not being a citizen of Utah, and S. Sharp Walker declined taking part in the convention, being 'opposed to the admission of Utah at the present time." [^8]

Political and Legal AffairsHCThe convention assembled on the 19th of February. No sooner was the convention organized than Judge Wm. Haydon of Salt Lake county moved its adjournment, sine die, for the reason that the people through the usual methods of petitions and mass meetings had not signified their desire for statehood; that the population was not sufficient under a recent law of congress; that Utah was not prepared to meet the burdens of statehood; that the present convention was called without the authority of law. Judge Haydon was answered by Colonel T. P. Akers and Colonel D. E. Buel, both non-"Mormons." On the second day Colonel Thomas Fitch made an extended argument against the Haydon motion and in favor of statehood for Utah, in which he made a scathing review of the McKean judicial regime in Utah. [^9] He was followed by Hon. Frank Fuller, General E. M. Barnum, and Mr. Hadley D. Johnson, all non-"Mormons," who opposed the motion to adjourn, and so too did George Q. Cannon. When the roll was called on the motion it was lost by a vote of 93 to 1; the one vote being given by Judge Haydon. The Constitution of Nevada was used as a basis for the Constitution to be then framed. The further procedure of this convention can be of no further interest to history, except as to its action in regard to polygamy as related to this effort for statehood. No direct effort was made by constitutional provision to prohibit in future polygamous marriages in the new state; though in Mr. Fitch's speech against Judge Haydon's motion to adjourn the convention sine die, a most earnest and able plea was made by that gentleman for the convention to adopt some measure of that kind, in order to secure statehood and avoid the continuance of a conflict that could have but one result—the overthrow of the practice.

Political and Legal AffairsHC461Strange to say, although there were many able men of the "Mormon" faith in the convention, men who disagreed with Mr. Fitch's position, none attempted to answer his elaborate and carefully prepared argument on that head. The only thing said of it on the "Mormon" side was by George Q. Cannon, who merely declared that he had been unconvinced by the speech of Mr. Fitch. But what the "Mormon" members would not attempt to do Judge Haydon in reply to Mr. Fitch did for them, he said:—

Political and Legal AffairsHC461"What will history write? What will the world say of a convention composed almost entirely of Latter-day Saints, among whom are six apostles and twenty bishops, ready and willing to sacrifice one of their divine ordinances for the sake of a state government? Hearken to the words of a Gentile, who is no enemy of yours, but who has every reason to be your friend, who has no favors to ask except those that one Christian may rightly demand of another. Stay where you are and bide your time! 'Learn to labor and to wait,' until a new ordinance shall manifest itself for your guidance."

Political and Legal AffairsHC461To this Mr. Fitch replied: "The difference between my colleague and myself may be briefly stated thus: I wish the people of Utah to give up McKean and polygamy, he desires the people of Utah to stand by polygamy and McKean." Which reply the convention greeted with applause. The argument of Judge Haydon was not sincere; it was a bit of irony only; he was using it because desirous of preserving the statu quo of Utah affairs.

Political and Legal AffairsHC461What was avoided in the convention by direct means for the discontinuance of polygamy in the proposed new state was attempted by indirection, viz., by submitting to congress the opportunity to prescribe the conditions on which Utah might be admitted into the Union, which conditions would be submitted to the vote of the people of Utah. This was provided for in the "Ordinance" of the proposed Constitution as follows:

Political and Legal AffairsHC462"We, the people of the territory of Utah, do ordain as follows: * * *

Political and Legal AffairsHC462V. That such terms, if any, as may be prescribed by congress as a condition of the admission of the said state into the Union, shall, if ratified by a majority vote of the people thereof, at such time and under such regulations as may be prescribed by this convention, thereupon be embraced within and constitute a part of this ordinance." [^10]

Political and Legal AffairsHC462This section was discussed on the 5th day—the convention ran through twelve days in all—under a motion to eliminate it, but the motion was lost. "Mormon" members were found on each side of the question. The venerable Orson Pratt was in favor of eliminating it; so, too, was Charles C. Rich, of Bear Lake county. George Q. Cannon favored its retention on the ground that the section "gave congress the opportunity to say what terms were required for the admission of Utah." [^11] It was expected, of course, that congress would insist upon a provision prohibiting polygamous marriages for the future, and this condition precedent to statehood, under "clause V" of the "Ordinance," would have been submitted to the vote of the people.

Political and Legal AffairsHCIt would appear from the passage of the above "clause V" that had congress but acted at that time, and prescribed the state constitutional inhibition of polygamous marriages as a condition precedent to statehood, the people would have ratified such a clause, and the question of polygamy would have been settled then (1872) instead of about a quarter of a century later, viz., 1896. But this was later denied by President John Taylor, and several other prominent elders, as being the object of the passage of the somewhat celebrated "clause" in the "Ordinance" of the Constitution. "Its object," said President Taylor, "was to obtain the views of congress and the conditions it would impose before admitting us as a state, and then lay them before the people." On the same occasion, Elder Charles W. Penrose, then editor of the Deseret News, said: "The entire proceedings [i. e. in the passage of 'clause V'] were intended merely to give congress a chance to admit us or show why we were not admitted." Both repudiated the idea that there was any intention to surrender the practice of plural marriage for statehood. This was developed in an interview between O. J. Hollister, collector of United States internal revenue for Utah, correspondent also of the New York Tribune. Mr. Hollister had sought the interview in his latter capacity. The date of it was January 13th, 1879. Seven days before, the supreme court of the United States had rendered its decision in the Reynolds polygamy case, and the New York Tribune, through its representative, was seeking to learn the attitude of the church authorities upon the decision. Incidentally Mr. Hollister brought up "clause V" of the ordinance of the Constitution of 1872, with the above result. [^12]

Political and Legal AffairsHC463After the adoption of the Constitution by the convention, George Q. Cannon, Thomas Fitch and Frank Fuller were elected to proceed to Washington to present it and also the Memorial adopted, urging the admission of Utah into the Union. Meantime the Constitution was submitted to a vote of the people, and at the same time a representative to congress was voted for from the prospective state. The vote on the Constitution was a total of 25,160 for it, and a total of 365 against it; and for representative to congress, Hon. Frank Fuller, 24,987; W. H. Hooper, 145; Mike Fuller, Tooele, 15. [^13]

Political and Legal AffairsHCMr. Barnum, president of the late constitutional convention, by proclamation convened the legislature of the "State of Deseret" on the 4th of April, which met accord H. Hooper and Thomas Fitch United States senators, and then adjourned "to meet again on the third Monday in the month succeeding that in which the 'State of Deseret' by act of congress and presidential proclamation should be admitted as a state into the Union." [^14]

Political and Legal AffairsHCATTEMPTS TO ORGANIZE THE PEOPLE OF UTAH ON NATIONAL PARTY LINES

Political and Legal AffairsHCThere was also an effort made in connection with this 1872 movement for statehood to organize the people of the territory on national party lines, and thus abolish their division into church and anti-church parties. The territorial Republican convention met in Salt Lake City on the 5th of April, to nominate delegates to the national Republican convention at Philadelphia. Hon. Frank Fuller and Hon. Thomas Fitch were named as delegates, and George A. Smith and Wm. Jennings as alternate members. [^15]

Political and Legal AffairsHCA Democratic mass convention was held in Salt Lake City on the 8th of April, 1872, which drafted resolutions declaring their principles and provided the machinery in a territorial central committee for the future guidance of the party's movements. Also this convention contemplated the appointing of three delegates to be sent to the national Democratic convention to meet at Cincinnati in July, but whether or not the delegates were chosen and sent to the convention is not stated in the minutes of the Utah convention. [^16] On the 13th of July, the national Democratic party having put in nomination Horace Greeley and B. Gratz Brown for president and vice president, a great Democratic ratification meeting was held in Salt Lake City. It was the greatest political gathering ever held in Salt Lake City up to that time. There were firing of cannons, and two bands of musicians were in attendance. The concourse outside the hall numbered four or five thousand. General E. M. Barnum was president of the meeting. There were thirty-two vice presidents chosen, among whom were W. H. Hooper, George Q. Cannon and a number of prominent non-"Mormons." The report of the meeting and the speeches cover two and a half full pages of the Deseret News. [^17] Fourteen days later the territorial convention made up of delegates from the various counties met in Salt Lake City for the purpose of announcing a platform of principles and nominating a delegate to congress. The third plank of the platform read:

Political and Legal AffairsHC465"Third—That in Utah as in the nation, ours is the party of conciliation, peace and progress, and that we condemn the unwise policy of the present administration towards the people of this territory.

Political and Legal AffairsHC465That we recognize the fact that the public sentiment of the nation, and our own best interests alike require that domestic institutions and local government here should be moulded to conform with those of all other American communities, but that this end may best be achieved by the exercise of that policy of justice, toleration, and magnanimity, to which our national party organization is everywhere pledged." [^18]

Political and Legal AffairsHCTwo candidates were placed in nomination before the convention, George Q. Cannon and Mr. J. P. Page. The former gentleman had received the nomination of the People's party (13th of July) and the question was raised as to whether he would accept the Democratic party's declaration on the subject of "domestic institutions" in Utah, as quoted in the resolution above, and meaning, of course, the abandonment of the plural marriage system of the Latter-day Saints. Mr. A. J. Faust placed Mr. Cannon in nomination, Mr. Charles W. Penrose seconded the nomination in a vigorous speech; but when asked if he would pledge Mr. Cannon to the platform just adopted, he replied that he was not authorized to speak in any way for Mr. Cannon. What Mr. Penrose refused to do, however, Mr. Faust did not hesitate to do. "I can pledge Mr. Cannon to anything that has been written there," said Mr. Faust, referring to the platform. Colonel Akers, who had raised the whole question, said:

Political and Legal AffairsHC466"I am ready [then] to support him. And I would like to state further that, as the gentleman who placed Mr. Cannon in nomination, has given this convention a pledge, on the part of Mr. Cannon, that he would adopt the platform, I wish it understood that he goes forth to the country as the candidate of this convention if he receive a majority of votes, announcing that the best interests of Utah require that its citizens array themselves under the banners of the great political parties of the country, also declaring that the formation of political organizations upon the basis of a difference in religious belief is opposed to the genius of our republican system; and declaring, finally, that the public sentiment of the nation, and our own best interests, alike require that domestic institutions and local government here should be moulded to conform to those of all American communities. That is what our candidate says; that is what the gentleman placing him in nomination pledges him to say, and, on that platform, I would as soon vote for George Q. Cannon as any man in Utah; and on that platform I will cast my vote for him. (Applause).

Political and Legal AffairsHC466It is understood that we will only consider him the candidate of the convention when he writes us a letter of acceptance." [^19]

Political and Legal AffairsHC466The convention then proceeded to ballot, with the result that Mr. Cannon received fifty votes, and Mr. Page twenty-three. The vote for Mr. Cannon was made unanimous.

Political and Legal AffairsHC466The anti-"Mormon" forces in Utah, and the anti-"Mormon" sentiment in the east, however, were too strong at that time to permit this effort to "conform conditions in Utah to those of all other American communities," to succeed.

Political and Legal AffairsHCFAILURE OF REPRESENTATION AT THE NATIONAL REPUBLICAN CONVENTION

Political and Legal AffairsHCWhen the Republican representatives to the national convention, Frank Fuller and George A. Smith, presented their credentials at the convention in Philadelphia, they were confronted by Messrs. Gould and Hollister, the former postmaster at Salt Lake City, and the latter collector of internal revenue at the same place, as rival delegates. They had been chosen by the anti-"Mormon" Republicans of Salt Lake City—chiefly a coterie of federal officeholders—and sustained their application in a paper presented to the convention which concluded with the following reference to their opponents:

Political and Legal AffairsHC467"We cannot see how the national Republican convention could recognize polygamy, by the admission of Smith and Fuller, without self-stultification; without placing a premium on disloyalty and quasi-rebellion; without doing great injustice to the loyal people of Utah, and outraging a sense of decency, as well as the true politics of the entire nation, without distinction as to party." [^20]

Political and Legal AffairsHC467The committee on credentials proposed to admit both delegations and divide the votes between them, but this compromise Messrs. Fuller and Smith declined, and left the convention, and Messrs. Gould and Hollister were seated. [^21]

Political and Legal AffairsHC467The Memorial and Constitution for Utah's admission to the Union were presented in both the senate and the house on the 2nd of April, and referred to the committee on territories in each house; but no further action was taken by congress, and the hopes of the people of Utah for state sovereignty, even with polygamy sacrificed, were disappointed.

INTERVIEW WITH PRESIDENT U. S. GRANT ON UTAH STATEHOOD

The attitude of both houses of congress, and of the country at large is well represented by the attitude of President Grant in the following anecdote in the Cincinnati Commercial from its Washington correspondent of the period. The interview appeared under the caption—

467"WASTED ARGUMENT"

467"Senator-elect Fitch, from the embryo 'State of Deseret,' called upon the president a few days ago to talk over Utah affairs. He found the president enjoying a cigar.

467'Mr. President,' said the colonel, 'I want to try and convince you of the advisability of admitting Utah into the sisterhood of states.'

467'I am unalterably opposed to the admission of Utah,' answered the president.

468'Yes, but you have been prejudiced against the people out there by unfair advisers,' said Fitch.

468'I am unalterably opposed to the admission of Utah,' was the reply.

468'But our population is sufficient; we have made a fair Constitution, and it would be a great relief to the people out there to get into the Union.'

468'I am unalterably opposed to the admission of Utah,' again replied the firm man.

468'Under any terms?'

468'Yes, upon any terms. At least they should not come in until they learn how to behave themselves.'

468'If you refer to polygamy, they will no doubt surrender that for the sake of admission and peace, although it is one of the doctrines of their church.'

468'And murder is one of the doctrines of the church, ain't it?'

468'No, indeed; there are less murders committed there than in any of the surrounding territories. As I said before, you have been very much misinformed about the true condition of affairs. You surely don't believe everything you hear against the Mormons?'

468'Where there is so much smoke there must be some fire,' answered the president.

468'Suppose we should say the same about all the lies told about you?'

468Silence and smoke.

468'By admitting us the troubles out there would be at an end.'

468Silence and smoke.

468'It is of the highest importance to the welfare of her people and the development of the rich resources of the territory that Utah be admitted.'

468Silence and smoke.

468'Is your mind, Mr. President, so firmly made up, that whatever arguments might be addressed to you would be useless?'

468'I am unalterably opposed to the admission of Utah,' replied our firm president, and the charming interview ended." [^22]

Conflict over PolygamyHCTHE REYNOLDS POLYGAMY TEST CASE—THE FIRST TRIAL

Conflict over PolygamyHCTo this period belongs the Reynolds polygamy case which finally led to the submission of the congressional law of 1862 to the supreme court of the United States.

Conflict over PolygamyHCFor some time there had been a desire on both sides of the polygamy controversy to have the pronouncement of the supreme court of the United States upon this law. After the supreme court's decision in the Engelbrecht case, and while yet in the east, District Attorney George C. Bates announced it as his intention to indict a number of leading "Mormons," with their consent and approval, for the violation of the bigamy law of 1862, in order to test the constitutionality of that law. This he also represented met with the approval of President Grant. [^23] But before this program could be carried out Mr. Bates was superseded in office. In October, 1874, however, George Reynolds, private secretary of Brigham Young, and a man noted for the strict integrity and uprightness of his life, was indicted for violation of the bigamy law of 1862. Hearing of his indictment he voluntarily appeared in court, and gave bail in a bond of $2,500. Upon this indictment he was tried and convicted, being sentenced to one year's imprisonment and to pay a fine of $500.

Conflict over PolygamyHC469An appeal was taken to the supreme court of the territory and the case was dismissed on the ground that the grand jury which found the indictment was an illegal body. This was one of the voluntary cases referred to above by United States District Attorney Bates, in which the defendant was a willing party in order to have the case tested in the supreme court of the United States. [^24]

Conflict over PolygamyHCTHE SECOND TRIAL ON THE REYNOLDS CASE

Conflict over PolygamyHCThe dismissal of the Reynolds case by the territorial supreme court took place on June 19th, 1875. On the 30th October of the same year, Mr. Reynolds was a second time indicted, and tried before the third district court, found guilty and sentenced to two years' imprisonment at hard labor,— and to pay a fine of $500. In this second trial, for some unknown cause (unless it be assigned to the increasing intensity of the anti-"Mormon" spirit—both in Utah and throughout the United States), the prosecution grew vindictive towards Mr. Reynolds, as indicated in doubling the term of imprisonment and adding to the sentence "hard labor." The nature of the trial throughout also indicates a different relationship of the prosecution and defense. [^25] One incident of difference is the fact that in the first trial the plural wife, Amelia Jane Schofield Reynolds, testified to her marriage with George Reynolds, and completed the prosecution's chain of evidence; in the second trial she avoided service of subpoena, and her testimony at the first trial was taken over into the record of the second by the testimony of officers of the court. Mr. Baskin in his Reminiscences (pp. 61-72) very vehemently denies the statement of Whitney in the latter's History of Utah, as to the existence of an understanding that the Reynolds case was merely a test case to ascertain the constitutionality of the law of 1862, Mr. Baskin saying that:

Conflict over PolygamyHC470"If such an agreement had been entered into, and Reynolds in pursuance thereof, as alleged, had furnished the evidence upon which he was convicted, his heavy sentence was a glaring outrage. * * * If any such 'arrangement' had been made, for Mr. Carey [the district attorney prosecuting the case], or myself (if I had, as alleged, been his assistant in the trial), to have remained silent and failed to interpose an objection to the sentence, would have been dishonorable in the extreme."

Conflict over PolygamyHC470Both writers fail to note the different status that existed between the first and second trial of Mr. Reynolds. Undoubtedly Mr. Reynolds was a willing subject under the first trial to test the constitutionality of the law; and equally certain is it that in the second trial he was no such willing subject, and fought the case as hard as the circumstances would admit of, because of the evidently changed attitude of the prosecution.

Conflict over PolygamyHC471THE DECISION OF THE SUPREME COURT ON THE ANTI-POLYGAMY LAW OF 1862

Conflict over PolygamyHC471An appeal was taken to the supreme court of the territory which affirmed the decision of the lower court, July 6th, 1876. The case was then appealed to the supreme court of the United States which rendered a decision on January 6th, 1879, sustaining the constitutionality of the congressional law of 1862. [^26]

Conflict over PolygamyHC471A review of the case or any adequate discussion of the questions involved may not be indulged here. Let it be sufficient to say that the supreme court held that it was "within the legitimate scope of the power of every civil government to determine whether polygamy or monogamy shall be the law of social life under its domain;" that the statute under consideration was "within the legislative power of congress." This, of course, asserted the right of congress to legislate for the territories; and, from the nature of this 1862 legislation, to legislate for them in all cases whatsoever. This is nowhere expressly granted or fairly implied in the Constitution of the United States; and when not so expressly granted or fairly implied, then constitutionally non-existent; and clearly the action of congress and of the supreme court was violative of the community right of local self-government. [^27]

Conflict over PolygamyHCThe legislative powers of congress admitted, as claimed by the court, of course, "the only question which remains is, whether those who make polygamy a part of their religion are excepted from the operation of the statute. If they are, then those who do not make polygamy a part of their religious belief may be found guilty and punished, while those who do must be acquitted and go free. This would be introducing a new element into criminal law. Laws are made for the government of actions, and, while they cannot interfere with mere religious belief and opinions, 'they may with practices.'"

Conflict over PolygamyHC472The statement is "smart" rather than profound; for it takes no account of the difference in the nature of things in themselves. The court's reasoning would lead to the denial of the right of belief in and the free exercise (practice) of religion in this respect, because some would practice it without having in their consciousness the existence of a religious principle or conviction; therefore those who would practice it from religious motives, as their religion, must be denied the right of doing so; that is, must be denied the free exercise of the constitutionally guaranteed freedom of religion. It is beside the question to assume, as we must believe the court did assume, that the legislation they were confirming as right and constitutional was aimed at common "bigamy" with its deceits and injustice and cruelties and universally condemned by the laws of civilized nations. The error of the court consisted in failing to differentiate between the "bigamy" of what we may call the "common law bigamy," and the religious plural marriage system of the Latter-day Saint Church. That differentiation is necessary to the clearness that will make it appear how one may reasonably be regarded as religion and the other worthily classed as a crime. [^28]

Conflict over PolygamyHCTHE COURT'S ILLUSTRATIONS

Conflict over PolygamyHCThe illustrations by which the court sustained its reasonings were "trite" and "shop worn" through excessive use by Colfax, Newman, et al, long before they were dignified by being made the phraseology of the supreme court of the United States. Following is a sample of these illustrations:

Conflict over PolygamyHC"Suppose one religiously believed that human sacrifices were a necessary part of religious worship, would it be seriously contended that the civil government under which he lived could not interfere to prevent a sacrifice? Or, if a wife religiously believed it was her duty to burn herself upon the funeral pile of her dead husband, would it be beyond the power of the civil government to prevent her carrying her belief into practice? * * * To permit this, would be to make the professed doctrines of religious belief superior to the law of the land, and, in effect, to permit every citizen to become a law unto himself."

Conflict over PolygamyHC473The weakness of the argument of the court consists in the comparison of things that are altogether dissimilar. What had plural marriage of the Latter-day Saints in common with the sacrifice of human life or the suttee of India? Mr. John Taylor, when Vice President Colfax ten years before had presented the same line of reasoning as here followed by the supreme court, met the argument in the following pointed manner:

Conflict over PolygamyHC473"The burning of Hindoo widows was considered a religious rite by the Hindoos. The British were horrified at the practice, and suppressed it. The Mormons believe polygamy to be a religious rite. The American nation consider it a scandal and that they ought to put it down. * * * The British suppressed the suttee in India, and therefore we must be equally moral and suppress polygamy in the United States. Hold! not so fast; let us state facts as they are and remove the dust. The British suppressed the suttee, but tolerated eighty-three millions of polygamists in India. The suppression of the suttee and that of polygamy are two very different things. If the British are indeed to be our examplars, congress had better wait until polygamy is suppressed in India. But it is absurd to compare the suttee to polygamy; one is murder and the destruction of life, the other is national economy and the increase and perpetuation of life. Suttee ranks truly with infanticide, both of which are destructive of human life. Polygamy is salvation compared with either, and tends even more than monogamy to increase and perpetuate the human race." [^29]

Conflict over PolygamyHCThe supreme court, however, if it did not have the greater force of logic in the case, it did have the strength of national authority back of it, supported by the sentiment and prejudice of the country, and its decision announced the law of the land, until that law is changed; and subsequently, as will be seen in its proper place, after legally testing every possible phase arising out of the controversy, in the courts, the Church of the Latter-day Saints submitted to the court's decision as the law of the land. [^30]

A SECOND APOSTOLIC MISSION TO PALESTINE

The purely religious movements of this period in the church as related to foreign activities, was the mission of Elder George A. Smith, second counselor to President Young, and a party of prominent Latter-day Saints, to Palestine. [^31] The purpose of the mission is stated in the letter of appointment to President George A. Smith, signed by President Brigham Young and Daniel H. Wells.

474"As you are about to start on an extensive tour through Europe and Asia Minor, where you will doubtless be brought in contact with men of position and influence in society, we desire that you observe closely what openings now exist, or where they may be effected, for the introduction of the gospel into the various countries you shall visit.

474When you get to the land of Palestine, we wish you to dedicate and consecrate that land to the Lord, that it may be blessed with fruitfulness, preparatory to the return of the Jews, in fulfilment of prophecy and the accomplishment of the purposes of our heavenly Father." [^32]

474This, it will be remembered, was the second apostolic mission to the Holy Land for the same purpose, i. e. dedication of the land preparatory to the return of the Jews, the first being that of Elder Orson Hyde, of the apostles' quorum—1840-41. [^33]

Without difficulty the party arrived safely in Palestine in the following March, and on the second of that month on the Mount of Olives held solemn worship and dedicatory services. [^34] En route eastward President Smith and some members of his party had an interview with M. Thiers, president of France. The mission returned to Salt Lake City in June, 1873.

475In connection with this far eastern mission may also be mentioned the missionary visit of the veteran apostle of the church, Elder Erastus Snow, to England and Scandinavia. In these countries it will be remembered Elder Snow founded a successful mission in 1850.

A MISSION OPENED IN MEXICO

In the latter part of this period a mission was opened in the Republic of Mexico. The elders constituting it were called at the general conference of the church, October, 1875. These were Daniel Jones, Anthony W. Ivins, Ammon M. Tenny, James Z. Stewart, Helaman Pratt, Robert H. Smith and Wiley C. Jones. [^35] Later there was added to this mission Meliton G. Trejo, of whom more later. The mission crossed the Rio Grande at El Paso, Texas, to Ciudad Juarez, Mexico, and there began their labors on the 7th of January, 1876. Three months later the mission extended its activities to the city of Chihuahua, the capital of the state of Chihuahua. Select passages from the Book of Mormon relating to the promises and blessings of God yet to be realized by the native races of America, translated by Elder Trejo into the Spanish language were distributed among the people; [^36] a very succesful public meeting was held in Chihuahua—five hundred in attendance—besides many private interviews had with the people and city and state officials. The mission returned to the United States in April of the same year. The following year Elders Louis Garff and Meliton G. Trejo opened a mission in Sonora, Mexico, and baptized five persons in Hermosillo, the capital of Sonora; and in May of the same year, Elders Helaman Pratt and George Ferry commenced a mission among the Yaquis Indians of Sonora, but not much progress could be made with these very warlike people. [^37] Later, viz., in 1879, a mission under the direction of Moses Thatcher was begun in the City of Mexico, which led to a somewhat extensive work being opened in that region of the country and the settlement of "Mormon" colonies from Utah in the northern part of the Mexican republic, [^38] the events of which, however, belong to a later period of this History.

Colonization EffortsHCCOLONIZATION IN ARIZONA

Colonization EffortsHCIn 1873 a colonization movement was undertaken for the establishment of settlements along the Little Colorado river in northern Arizona. The first company in this enterprise, led by Horton D. Haight, one of the veteran plains captains of an earlier period, failed to find any suitable country for planting a settlement and returned to Utah the same year. [^39]

Colonization EffortsHCTwo years later, namely in February, 1876, a second colonization company was organized under the leadership of Major Lot Smith, of "Echo Canon War" fame. This company followed the same general direction of the colony of two years before, but by extending their explorations further up the Little Colorado than the first party went, they found a region of country suitable for settlement, mainly between what is now the railroad station of Winslow and Holbrook, on the Santa Fe line of railroad. The settlements then formed afterwards constituted the Little Colorado stake of Zion; they were Brigham City, formerly Ballinger; Sunset, St. Joseph, and Taylor, the last on Silver Creek, a tributary of the Little Colorado.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] COMMENTS ON THE PERSONAL APPEARANCE, CHARACTER AND LIFE'S WORK OF BRIGHAM YOUNG Smith's Dictionary of the Bible, Art, "Gideon," vol. ii, p. 921. The passage which brings forth the comment is as follows: "And Gideon had three score and ten sons of his body begotten: for he had many wives." (Book of Judges, ch. viii; 30).
[^2] EXCERPTS OF REMARKS OF CHURCH LEADERS AT THE FUNERAL SERVICES OF BRIGHAM YOUNG Biographical sketch of Thomas Leiper Kane, by George Q. Cannon in Juvenile Instructor, vol. xix, p. 24 et seq. There has been much speculation as to whether Colonel Thomas L. Kane was ever really a member of the Latter-day Saint Church or not. The records of the St. George temple disclose the fact that on the 25th of April, 1884, George Q. Cannon, doubtless the closest friend of Colonel Kane after Brigham Young, was baptized for him and also received the endowments for him on the same occasion; so that it seems clear that Colonel Kane was never a member of the church during his lifetime.
[^3] See the New York Herald, quoted in Deseret News, weekly, of Sept. 8th, 1869.
[^4] See Senator T. H. Benton's speech at St. Louis in giving welcome to Doniphan's command on its return from Mexico, in July, 1847. (Doniphan's Expedition, Hughes, ch. xxii).
[^5] In 1852 General Doniphan's name had been prominently mentioned in Washington for the position of governor of Utah to succeed Brigham Young, with whom at that time, there was some dissatisfaction owing to the misrepresentations made by the "run-a-way judges" of that period. (See History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1852, p. 32, quoting a letter from Ezra T. Benson, then in the east, which mentions the eastern discussion of Doniphan as a probable successor of Brigham Young as governor of Utah).
[^6] An account of President Grant's visit will be found in Deseret News, weekly, of Oct. 6th, 1875. and in Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, ch. lxxiii.
[^7] History of Utah, vol. iii, p. 116, note.
[^8] Tullidge's Quarterly Magazine, July, 1881, pp. 662-3.
[^9] For resolution of the city council invitations, etc., and story of the visit see Deseret News, weekly, of Oct. 6th, and current impressions of Salt Lake Herald and Tribune.
[^10] See Minutes of General Conference for April, 1873, published in Millennial Star, vol. xxxv, Nos. 18, 19. President Young in choosing five other counselors announced that "He had now two counselors to aid him as president of the church; he had the privilege of having seven brethren to assist him in this capacity." (Ibid, p. 290-2. See also signed communication by Brigham Young in New York Herald of April 16th, 1873). In a conference assembled in committee of the whole church, Joseph Smith, the Prophet, after being sustained as the president of the church, had his two counselors, Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams sustained as counselors, after which he also put in nomination Oliver Cowdery, Joseph Smith, Sen., Hyrum Smith, and John Smith, his uncle, to be his counselors. "These last four," say the minutes of the meeting, "together with the first three, are to be considered the heads of the church." The sustaining vote was carried unanimously. (History of the Church, Period I, vol. ii, p. 509).
[^11] Their names will be found in Millennial Star, vol. xxxv, p. 292.
[^12] See Conference Minutes for Oct., 1875, Millennial Star, vol. xxxvii, p. 734.
[^13] Viz., June 25th, 1875. Manti is in San Pete county, over two hundred miles south of Salt Lake City. "The spot known as 'Manti Stone Quarry' had been reserved for the purpose. The spot so designated is the termination or point of a hill, which in turn appears as the spur of a low range of hills, marked by the outcrop of a well stratified and evenly bedded deposit of oolite."
[^14] See Millennial Star, vol, xxxix. No. 24.
[^15] House of the Lord, pp. 216-219. (Telmage).
[^16] Remarks of Geo. Q. Cannon. Obsequies of President Brigham Young, pp. 25-6, also Desert News, weekly, Sept. 5th, 1877.
[^17] Obituary in Deseret News, daily, of Aug. 30th, 1877.
[^18] Obsequies of Brigham Young, pamphlet, pp. 25-26.
[^19] See Notes on Brigham Young, end of this chapter.
[^20] Bancroft's History of Utah, pp. 201-203-204.
[^21] This was John Hyde, Jun., author of Mormonism: Its Leaders and Designs, 1857. Hyde was an apostate "Mormon Elder."
[^22] Burton's City of the Saints, chapter v, pp. 239-240.
[^23] Obsequies of President Brigham Young, pamphlet, pp. 18-29, now rare.
[^24] This is evident from the voluntary appearance of the defendant in court on hearing that he was indicted (Deseret News, weekly, of Oct. 28th, 1874), and all the circumstances of the trial, in which nearly all the witnesses were from Mr. Reynolds' family and high church officials and willing to testify. (Deseret News, weekly, of April 7th, 1875, where court proceedings are published, pp. 145 and 152).
[^25] See Record of the Trial published in Deseret News, weekly, of Dec. 15th, 1875.
[^26] The decision is published in 98 United States Reports, 145.
[^27] See the elaborate argument of Judge Jeremiah S. Black, attorney-general in President Buchanan's administration, in his argument before the judiciary committee of the house of representatives Feb. 1st, 1883. It was conceded at the time of its delivery to be a masterpiece of forensic literature.
[^28] See treatise on this head in this History, chapter xlv, where the distinction is set forth at some length, and treated with becoming emphasis.
[^29] The Mormon Question, Taylor-Colfax Discussion, p. 23. George Q. Cannon wrote an elaborate review of the decision of the supreme court in the Reynolds case, 1879: in which he said, speaking of the decision as a whole: "I venture to say that no constitutional lawyer—and in fact no layman who has given the questions involved in this case any consideration whatever—who takes pride in the reputation of the court, can help having a feeling of regret in reading the decision. It is superficial, careless and immature. It reads more like the plea of an advocate than the well-considered, thoroughly weighed and ripe decision of great judges upon an important and long agitated constitutional question."
[^30] See the Woodruff Manifesto of 1890, in which it is said: "In as much as laws have been enacted by congress forbidding plural marriages, which laws have been pronounced constitutional by the court of last resort, I hereby declare my intention to submit to those laws, and to use my influence with the members of the church over which I preside to have them do likewise." [Signed] "Wilford Woodruff, President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." (Deseret News, weekly of October 4th, 1890; also Doctrine and Covenants, "Official Declaration," following sec. cxxxvi, current edition, 1930).
[^31] The party consisted of Elder George A. Smith of the council of the first presidency, Elders Lorenzo Snow and Albert Carrington of the council of the twelve apostles, Elders Feramorz Little, Paul A. Schettler, Thomas W. Jennings, Eliza R. Snow, and Miss. Clara A. Little.
[^32] Copy of the letter dated at Salt Lake City 15th Oct., 1872, will be found in Autobiography of Lorenzo Snow, 1884, Supplement, p. 496.
[^33] See this History, chapter xlii.
[^34] Millennial Star, vol. xxxv, p. 201. The journey of the party extended to all points of interest in the Holy Land. After leaving Jerusalem on the 5th of March, "they journeyed northward, visiting the ancient sites of Shiloh, Shechem (now Nablous), Samaria, Nazareth, Cana, Tiberias, by the sea of Galilee, Bethsaida, Capernaum, Dan and Cesarea Philippi, at the foot of Mount Hermon, and arrived in Damascus, Syria, March 15th. From that city the journey was continued over the mountains of Lebanon to Beyrout, where they embarked on a steamer for Constantinople, Turkey, arriving there April 1st." (Millennial Star, vol. xxxv, p. 232).
[^35] See excerpt of a letter from James Z. Stewart, under date of 9th Jan., in Deseret News, weekly, of Jan. 26th, 1876, p. 825.
[^36] These fragments were called "Trozos Selectos," and about five hundred copies were sent to the prominent men in the principal cities of Mexico.
[^37] See Jenson's Chronology Introduction for the year 1877, also under date of May 30th, same year.
[^38] See biography of Moses Thatcher in Latter-day Saints Biographical Encyclopedia, Jenson, pp. 127-136.
[^39] The company went by way of Kanab, southern Utah; thence to the Colorado river which they crossed at Lee's Ferry, near the mouth of Paria (the orthography sometimes given is Pahreah) a small stream from the northwest. From Lee's Ferry they bore southeasterly to Mohave Springs, thence down the Mohave or Moencopie Wash to the Little Colorado. At this point an exploring party was formed and leaving the main encampment, went up to the Little Colorado from sixty to eighty miles. One hundred and twenty miles in all was traveled by the party, and it was absent from the main encampment eight days; but finding no country suited for settlement returned to the main encampment and thence to Utah. (See letter of Henry Holmes to F. D. Richards for these movements. Millennial Star, vol. xxxv, pp. 532-5). While encamped on the Little Colorado the expedition sent two men back to Kanab to report from that point by telegraph to Brigham Young, and ask instructions; they could get no reply: and after their return to the main encampment the decision was made by the expedition to return to Utah.
