B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 5 ( 1930)

499CHAPTER CXLVI

499THE CLOSING YEARS OF BRIGHAM YOUNG'S LIFE—KANE—DONIPHAN—PRESIDENT U. S. GRANT—DEATH OF THE GREAT PIONEER

499WE have come now to the last years in the life of Brigham Young. Judged by the vexatious lawsuits projected against him in those days; the schemes for special legislation by the Utah "ring," the judicial crusade led by Judge McKean and his associates—it might be thought that those days would be full of trouble and yield little of the joy of life to the great Pioneer. This would be to judge wrongfully; for it is but truth to say that the closing years of President Young's life were as happy as any of his career. As Bible commentators say of Gideon, judge in Israel, highly favored of the Lord by many divinely wrought signs and wonders to convince him that he was called of God to deliver Israel from the Medianites—"We see Gideon in peaceful possession of his well-earned honors, and surrounded by the dignity of a numerous household." [^1] So with Brigham Young. And besides, his association with the great body of his people was very considerable, and very pleasant. It became his custom in these years to visit annually the settlements northward during the summer months, preaching to them, directing their colonizing movements and development; and in the winter, to visit the southern settlements for a like purpose, usually spending several months in rest and recreation in the Rio Virgin valley settlements, but chiefly at St. George, where the first temple built in the Rocky Mountains by the Latter-day Saints was now approaching completion.

PRESIDENT YOUNG AMONG HIS PEOPLE

Salt Lake City might be and was a hot-bed of anti-"Mormon" forces, but the settlements both north and south knew little and cared less about them. They were "Mormon" settlements; and but little affected by the strife of political intrigues, and the plots of "judges with a mission." Their people had one devotion—the New Dispensation of the gospel—the building up of Zion. Brigham Young, to them, was God's prophet; they were glad to have him in their midst. Few men have been better loved. They hung upon his words as the very counsel of God to them; their hands were stretched out to him, and their hearts were in them. It would be a dull nature that would not be moved to joy in the midst of such circumstances.

CONTACT WITH OLD FRIENDS—GENERAL THOMAS L. KANE'S VISIT

Then renewal of his early friendships came to bless these closing years. In November, 1872, "Colonel," now General, Thomas L. Kane, accompanied by his wife and two sons, came to visit Utah and the great Pioneer. All spent several months of that winter at St. George. General Kane was now a scarred veteran of the Civil War, in which he had seen hard service. At the beginning of the war he tendered his services to the government and organized what is known in the war annals of our country as the "Bucktail Regiment," from among the hunters, trappers and lumbermen of north-west Pennsylvania. The regiment was one of the noted war units from that state. Its leader was several times wounded. At Gettysburg he commanded a brigade. After this battle, suffering from both wounds and sickness, he was obliged to withdraw from active service. For bravery on the field he was brevetted major general, a high honor, doubtless, but scarcely commensurate with his brave service. [^2] After the war General Kane had established his home in the mountain district of northern Pennsylvania, McKane county—near a village which was named for him—"Kane." He had built an elegant home in the midst of his estate of several thousand acres, and lived much in the style of a baron of the feudal ages, being held in the highest esteem by the surrounding populace.

501During his summer vacation of 1869, President Grant and a party of friends spent some time at the Kane home as the guests of General and Mrs. Kane. General Kane added Senator Don Cameron to the party. The host, knowing the wish of President Grant to rest and be undisturbed, called to his assistance a detachment of his old "Bucktail Retainers," and gave them instructions to allow no one on that part of the estate near the mansion unless they were invited guests, or had special permission. And under these arrangements for his comfort "the president," said the New York Herald correspondent of the party, "threw off his usual reserve, and exhibited a vivacity of manner and freedom of conversation which would probably have surprised some people." In addition to the outdoor pleasures of horseback riding over the estate and surrounding mountain and forest country, 2,500 feet above sea level, and the hunting and fishing, the interior of the home was made attractive both by the good taste of its inmates and from the fact of its possessing many curiosities left to General Kane by his brother, Elisha Kent Kane, the arctic explorer. Speaking of the host of the presidential party, in that summer of 1869, the New York Herald correspondent said: "He is monarch of all he surveys. He is the soul of refinement, and wields a powerful influence over the people of the neighborhood. It would almost seem that they were the retainers of a baron of 'ye ancient days,' than fellow citizens of a distinguished and enterprising land owner." [^3] Such was Thomas L. Kane, heart-friend of Brigham Young, and of the Latter-day Saints.

502The winter spent in St. George by General Kane in the midst of a grateful people, whose interests he had served in the hour of their severest trial, sweetened by personal intercourse with many of the Latter-day Saint Church leaders, must have been especially gratifying to General Kane, and a joy to President Young in what was now the evening of both their lives.

GENERAL ALEXANDER W. DONIPHAN'S VISIT TO UTAH AND TO BRIGHAM YOUNG

In May, 1874, another old-time friend visited Utah, and spent some time with President Young. This was no other than General Alexander W. Doniphan, who at the crisis at Far West, in 1838, had doubtless saved the life of the Prophet Joseph Smith through his own insubordination, by refusing to execute the order of General Clark who ordered him to shoot Joseph Smith and six of his associates—all high church officials—in the public square at Far West. General Doniphan not only refused to execute the order but denounced it as cold-blooded murder, and threatened to withdraw his brigade from the state forces if the order was persisted in. He had also rendered some service to the Mormon Battalion at Santa Fe, when the battalion was en march to the Pacific coast. General Doniphan, it will be remembered, rendered notable service in the war with Mexico, having become the hero of the battle of Brazito and Sacramento; and with his command had performed one of the most wonderful invading war marches of history. [^4] Naturally General Doniphan was a welcome guest in Salt Lake City, and of Brigham Young, since his coming would suggest all the distance that had been traversed, and all the history that had been made, between Far West and Salt Lake City—all the achievements between 1838-1874. [^5]

THE MEETING IN UTAH OF PRESIDENT GRANT AND PRESIDENT YOUNG

Speaking of prominent visitors to Utah, during this period, it should be stated that President U. S. Grant visited Salt Lake City early in October, 1875, and a meeting took place between the president of the Church of the Latter-day Saints, and the president of the United States. President Grant's party arrived at Ogden on the morning of the 3rd of October. He had already been met at the mouth of Echo canon by the governor of the territory (then George B. Emery) and a number of other federal officials, who boarded the presidential train to escort him to the capital. At Ogden a special train from Salt Lake City bearing the city council's committee of welcome, and a large number of prominent citizens—among them President Brigham Young, and many other church authorities—met the presidential party. The city authorities the previous day had telegraphed to President Grant and party, extending to them an invitation to become the guests of the city, but previous to receiving this invitation President Grant had accepted the invitation to be the guest of Governor Emery and other federal officials of the territory. The special train of the city's committee and their friends was attached to the president's train, and en route for Salt Lake the city officials were introduced by delegate George Q. Cannon to President Grant and to the members of his party. As Brigham Young was introduced to the president both gentlemen uncovered, and Brigham Young said:

503"President Grant, this is the first time I have ever seen a president of my country."

President Grant nodded and after a few inquiries and compliments, Brigham Young was introduced to Mrs. Grant and other ladies of the party in the president's car, with whom half an hour was spent in pleasant conversation, chiefly between Mrs. Grant and Brigham Young.

504In Salt Lake City the Sunday School children—the arrival of President Grant's party was on Sunday—were drawn up on each side of South Temple street, from the depot to Temple Square, and they gave the presidential party a hearty but decorous greeting.

504"The president and Mrs. Grant and Governor Emery rode in an open barouche behind four handsome greys." The president as he passed along the children-lined street waved his hat to them and received back salutations from the crowds. The presidential party was lodged at the Walker House on Main street. In the afternoon of the day of his arrival the president was introduced by Governor Emery to the great crowd which gathered about the hotel; and during the afternoon also he personally received calls from many city, military and territorial officials and other leading citizens. From the hotel there were carriage drives to all points of interest, including the Latter-day Saint tabernacle and the temple, the latter then in course of erection. Camp Douglas was visited, but by special request of the president the cannon salute in honor of his presence was omitted. The following day the party left the city but not before the ladies of Salt Lake had festooned with flowers the president's special car. Prominent among the floral embellishments being the word "WELCOME," neatly executed in flowers. U. S. Grant was the first president of the United States to visit Utah. [^6]

INCIDENTS PLEASANT AND UNPLEASANT IN PRESIDENT GRANT'S VISIT

In the account of the visit of President Grant to Salt Lake and to Utah it is stated that as President Grant was driven through the lines of Sunday School children, he inquired of Governor Emery whose children they were, and was answered, "Mormon children." "For several moments the president was silent," says Tullidge, "and then he murmured, in a tone of self-reproach, 'I have been deceived!'" Tullidge, who tells the incident, gives no authority for this statement; but O. F. Whitney, author of a History of Utah, states that the remark was made to Governor Emery, who repeated it to him (Whitney). [^7] Tullidge also says that Mrs. Grant attended an organ recital at the tabernacle and was much moved by what she saw and heard, saying to ex-Delegate Hooper, "Oh, I wish I could do something for these good Mormon people." En route for the depot on the day of leaving, the presidential party called at the home of William Jennings, and for an hour partook of the hospitality of "Devereux House," [^8] name of the mansion home of the Jennings'.

Unfortunately there was an unpleasant rivalry in the matter of receiving and entertaining the presidential party. Naturally initiative and leadership in the matter belonged to the governor and the federal officers of the territory. But something was due to the city officials and the people; for the president properly was to be the guest of the city as well as of the territory. But this seems to have been ignored by Governor Emery, whose plans took no account of the city authorities, being exclusively "Mormon," and without giving opportunity for cooperation he invited the presidential party to accept the hospitality of the territory through himself and the federal officers, which invitation, reaching the president first, was accepted; and which, of course, made it impossible for him to accept the later-received invitation to become the guest of Salt Lake City. The resolutions passed by the city council for the reception and entertainment of the president's party, as also for a place in the special train chartered to meet the distinguished visitors at Ogden, extended participation in all this to all "the civil and military officers of the government, the officers of the territory, and the city, and to other citizens." [^9]

506During these closing years of President Young's life, to relieve himself of some of the burdens of his office, he increased the number of his counselors, by choosing five brethren to stand in that relationship to him, viz., Lorenzo Snow, Brigham Young, Jun., Albert Carrington, John W. Young, and George Q. Cannon. He also resigned to George A. Smith the office of trustee-in-trust of the church—the treasurership of the church; also he resigned as president of the Deseret National Bank, of Salt Lake City, and president of Zion's Cooperative Mercantile Institution. [^10] George A. Smith, as trustee-in-trust, was given twelve assistants from among the prominent business men of the church. [^11] George A. Smith, however, only lived about two years after his appointment—he died, September 1st, 1875—and at the October conference following, Brigham Young was again sustained as trustee-in-trust." [^12] A year later John W. Young, son of President Young, was sustained as the first counselor in the first presidency in place of George A. Smith, demised.

Construction and Dedication of Other Temples in UtahHCCOMPLETION OF THE ST. GEORGE TEMPLE

Construction and Dedication of Other Temples in UtahHCDuring the years 1875-6 the work on the St. George temple was hastened by calling workmen from the north to engage in its completion. By the first of January, 1877, the lower part of the temple was made ready and was dedicated on that date, under the direction of President Young in the presence of about 1,200 people. By April the whole structure was ready for dedication and accordingly the annual conference of the church was appointed to convene at that place, and on the sixth of April the whole structure was dedicated, Daniel H. Wells offering the dedicatory prayer. The presidency of the church and most of the apostles were present, and very many prominent elders and a large number of the Latter-day Saints from the northern settlements were there. After the dedication of this first temple, completed in the Rocky Mountains, by the church, President Young, when returning northward, dedicated the site of the Manti temple—which had been previously chosen [^13]—April 25th, President Brigham Young himself offering the dedicatory prayer. [^14] Less than a month later, May 17th, he directed the dedication of the site of the Logan temple, the, venerable apostle, Orson Pratt, offering the dedicatory prayer; and John W. Young and Daniel H. Wells breaking the soil for the foundation. President Young delivered a brief address. [^15] Thus Brigham Young began the four temples so far erected in Utah, and lived to see the completion, and the dedication of one, the St. George temple.

507In the last months of his life President Young was led to set in order the existing stakes of Zion,—usually by effecting a reorganization of them—and also to organize many new stakes. [^16]

"He released all of the twelve from presiding over local places," says Elder George Q. Cannon: "Brother C. C. Rich, Brother Brigham Young, Junior, Brother Lorenzo Snow and Brother Franklin D. Richards, in the north; Brother Orson Hyde and Brother Erastus Snow in the south; all were released from presiding over the stakes of Zion, and were told by the president that their mission had a larger field than a stake of Zion. He set the priesthood in order as it had never been since the first organization of the church upon the earth. He defined the duties of the apostles, he defined the duties of the seventies, he defined the duties of the high priests, the duties of the elders and those of the lesser priesthood, with plainness and distinctness and power—the power of God—in a way that it is left on record in such unmistakable language that no one need err who has the Spirit of God resting down upon him."

508This work of setting in order the stakes of Zion began at the general conference at St. George, and was continued through all the settlements as the leading apostles and elders of the church were returning northward. Twenty stakes in all were thus organized or set in order by President Young's direction during the summer, of which Bear Lake stake was the last, August 25th, 1877.

508The stakes thus organized and reorganized were the following: April 7th—St. George stake (organized); April 17th and 18th—Kanab stake; April 23rd—Panguitch stake; May 12th and 13th—Salt Lake Stake; May 21st—Cache stake; May 25th and 26th—Weber stake (reorganized); June 17th—Davis stake; June 24th and 25th—Tooele stake; July 1st—Juab stake (reorganized); July 1st—Morgan stake; July 4th—San Pete stake; July 8th and 9th—Summit stake; July 14th and 15th—Wasatch stake; July 15th—Sevier stake (reorganized); July 21st and 22nd—Millard stake (reorganized); July 25th and 26th—Beaver stake (reorganized); July 29th—Parowan stake; August 19th—Box Elder stake; August 25th and 26th—Bear Lake stake (reorganized).

Box Elder stake was organized on the 19th of August. President Young being in attendance and participating in the organization. This was to mark the close of his public ministry. He returned to his home in Salt Lake City, and on the 23rd of August was seized with the illness which six days later proved fatal. He died of cholera morbus on the afternoon of August 29th, 1877, surrounded by his family and friends.

DEATH OF THE GREAT PIONEER A PEACEFUL ENDING

Peaceful indeed was his demise. [^17] Among President Young's last words were expressions of his gratitude for being so well cared for and having his family near him—"You are all so good," he said. "The last words he uttered, that were distinctly understood," says the bedside chronicle, were—

509"Joseph, Joseph, Joseph!"

509Other remarks relating to "Joseph" were expressed, but in a manner that was not comprehended. They gave evidence, however, that his mind was occupied with thoughts of his predecessor, the Prophet Joseph Smith.

509"His departure was like the falling asleep of a little infant," said George Q. Cannon, who was at his bedside when death came. "No tremor, no contortions; but as peaceful and as quiet, as still as if it were indeed the most gentle slumber." [^18]

On the 1st of September the remains were carried to the tabernacle in Temple Square where they were viewed, that day, by about 6,000 people. On the second of September the funeral services were held, but before they began the great concourse of people who had gathered, by teams as well as by trains from the surrounding settlements, were permitted to pass by the bier and look upon their prophet leader. From early morning until half past eleven o'clock a continuous stream of living humanity passed through the tabernacle to view the mortal remains of the man who for thirty-three years had led Israel. By actual count 18,000 persons of all classes and ages and degrees visited the tabernacle while the body was lying in state, manifesting the greatest decorum and respect. Several thousand were not counted owing to their taking their seats without passing out of the building where the count was made at the exits by the recording officers. It is estimated that in all 25,000 people thus took their last farewell of the honored dead.

PROCESSIONAL HONOR FOR PRESIDENT YOUNG

The funeral services were simple but impressive. The processional honors were the most elaborate and largest attended of any such procession up to this time—1930—held in Salt Lake City.

THE PROCESSION

Tenth Ward Band.

510Glee Club.

510Tabernacle Choir.

510Press Reporters.

510Salt Lake City Council.

510President Young's Employees.

510President Joseph Young, Bishop Phineas H. Young, Bishop Lorenzo D. Young and Elder Edward Young. (President Brigham Young's Brothers).

THE BODY

Borne by Clerks and Workmen of Deceased, with nine of the Twelve Apostles and the Presiding Bishop as Pall Bearers.

510Immediately following the body, the Counselors of President Brigham Young.

510The Family and Relatives.

510Patriarch of the Church.

510First Seven Presidents of the Seventies.

510Presidency and High Council of Salt Lake Stake of Zion.

511Visiting Presidents, their Counselors and the High Councils of Various Stakes of Zion.

511Bishops and their Counselors.

511High Priests

511Elders

511Lesser Priesthood.

511Seventies

511The General Public.

511Ropes, outside of which dense crowds formed, were stretched along the line of the procession to a point a little east of the Eagle Gate, and all the eminences in view of the route were filled with spectators, many of whom could not refrain from tears. President Young's private cemetery is situated on First Avenue, a short distance north of the Eagle Gate, then eastward half a block. It commanded, when chosen, a splendid view of the city and the valley south and west from which it is now shut in by surrounding buildings. In the southeast corner of this burial ground a stone vault was made under the personal superintendence of his son, John W. Young, and in strict accordance with his departed father's instructions. It is of cut stone, dowelled and bolted with steel. Its dimensions are 7 feet 11 inches long, 4 feet wide, and 3 feet 3 inches high. It is laid in cement, and the inside is cemented and whitened. Here the remains of the revered president of the church are deposited.

ESTIMATE OF THE CHARACTER AND WORK OF BRIGHAM YOUNG

A volume would not suffice for a collection of the newspaper and magazine comments upon the life and character of Brigham Young published immediately after his death. He had been a world character for more than thirty years. He was viewed so variously, and did a work so unique, that all the world paused for a moment to say something of this man and his life's achievements. It is astonishing, too, how much of that comment is favorable, and even of high praise both for his achievements and for his character. Others were bitter in their arraignment of him. Some of their bitterness, as is the case with most bitterness, came of unreasoning prejudice. [^19]

512To say that Brigham Young had in him limitations, that he erred at times in judgment, or was unsatisfactory in some details of personal bearing or nature, is but to say that Brigham Young was human. But after all is said, that may in truth be said, in the way of detraction; nay, even after malice has had its fling, this must be allowed, and it will be the unchangeable verdict of history:—

Brigham Young by the death of Joseph Smith was called to the leadership of a people sorely distraught, and environed by difficulties that threatened their very existence as a community. To him it was given to quiet their fears, to arouse their faith in their own divine mission and their destiny. He, under God, led them in an exodus from Illinois that, as relating to one people, having a common purpose in view, and that purpose community preservation, has not its parallel in modern history. Twenty thousand of these exiles, but poorly furnished for a journey through a wilderness, he organized into industrial columns, and taught them how to be self-sustaining on a march of thirteen hundred miles, and chiefly through a wilderness. Arriving at their destination, in the midst of the Rocky Mountains, he made treaties with the tribes of red men, and planted colonies from Salmon river in the north (Idaho), to the headwaters of the Little Colorado in southeastern Arizona, and all through the mountain valleys of Utah between these north and south limits, covering an extent of eight hundred miles. He sent forth the message of the New Dispensation of the gospel to many lands, and gathered people from nearly all the nations of the earth to a modern Zion, where he taught them the art of being self-sustaining, until truly the Latter-day Saints, in fulfillment of Joseph Smith's prediction, became a great and mighty people—a permanent community, in the midst of the Rocky Mountains.

These achievements write down Brigham Young in history as the Greatest Pioneer and Colonizer of modern times—an Empire Founder; and place him easily among the first score of great Americans.

NOTES

The world's estimate of Brigham Young may well be considered as summarized in the following quotations:

513Bancroft: Commenting upon the manner in which Brigham Young had moved up into his place as leader of the Church of the Latter-day Saints, after the martyrdom of Joseph Smith, Mr. H. H. Bancroft the Historian remarks:

513"Something more than oratory was necessary to win in this instance (i. e. to succeed Joseph Smith in the leadership of the Church of the Latter-day Saints); and of that something, with great joy in his heart, Brigham found himself in possession. It was the combination of qualities which we find present primarily in all great men, in all leaders of men—intellectual force, mental superiority, united with personal magnetism, and physique enough to give weight to will and opinion; for Brigham Young was assuredly a great man, if by greatness we mean one who is superior to others in strength and skill, moral, intellectual, or physical. The secret of this man's power—a power that within a few years made itself felt throughout the world—was this: he was a sincere man, or if an imposter, he was one who first imposed upon himself. He was not a hypocrite; knave, in the ordinary sense of the term, he was not; though he has been a thousand times called both. If he was a bad man, he was still a great man, and the evil that he did was done with honest purpose. He possessed great administrative ability; he was far-seeing, with a keen insight into human nature, and a thorough knowledge of the good and evil qualities of men, of their virtues and frailties. * * *

* * * To whatsoever Brigham applied himself he directed his whole strength, provided his whole strength was necessary to the accomplishment of his purpose. There were others in the field against him, aspirants for the late Prophet's place, besides Sidney [Rigdon]; but directing his efforts only against the most powerful of them, the president of the twelve summoned the quorum and the people, as we have seen, crushed Rigdon and his adherents by one of the master strokes which he was now learning, declared the revelations of Rigdon to be of the devil, and himself elected without a dissenting voice. * * * Henceforth none dared to gainsay his authority; he became not only the leader of the Mormons, but their dictator; holding authority for a time president of the twelve apostles, and finally in the capacity of the first presidency, being made president, of the whole church in December, 1847." * * *

Personal Appearance: "In stature he was a little above medium height; in frame well-knit and compact, though in later years rotund and portly; in carriage somewhat stately; presence imposing, even at that time, and later much more so; face clean shaven now [1844], but afterward lengthened by full beard except about the mouth; features all good, regular, well formed, sharp, and smiling, and wearing an expression of self-efficiency, bordering on the supercilious, which later in life changed to a look of subdued sagacity which he could not conceal; deep-set, gray eyes, cold, stern, and of uncertain expression, lips thin and compressed, and a forehead broad and massive—his appearance was that of a self-reliant and strong-willed man, of one born to be master of himself and many others. In manner and address he was easy and void of affectation, deliberate in speech, conveying his original and suggestive ideas in apt though homely phrase. When in council he was cool and imperturbable, slow to decide, and in no haste to act; but when the time for action came he worked with an energy that was satisfied only with success." [^20]

Burton, British army captain, and author of City of the Saints: Altogether the prophet's appearance [1860] was that of a gentleman farmer in New England—in fact, such as he is: his father was an agriculturist and revolutionary soldier, who settled 'down East.' He is a well preserved man; a fact which some attribute to his habit of sleeping, as the Citizen Proudhon so strongly advises, in solitude. His manner is at once affable and impressive, simple and courteous: his want of pre-tension contrasts favorably with certain pseudo-prophets that I have been, each and every of whom holds himself to be a 'Logos' without claim save a semi-maniacal self-esteem. He shows no signs of dogmatism, bigotry, or fanaticism, and never once entered—with me at least—upon the subject of religion. He impresses a stranger with a certain sense of power; his followers are, of course, wholly fascinated by his superior strength of brain. It is commonly said there is only one chief in Great Salt Lake City, and that is 'Brigham.' His temper is even and placid; his manner is cold—in fact, like his face, somewhat bloodless; but he is neither morose nor methodistic, and, where occasion requires, he can use all the weapons of ridicule to direful effect, and 'speak a bit of his mind' in a style which no one forgets. He often reproves his erring followers in purposely violent language, making the terrors of a scolding the punishment in lieu of hanging for a stolen horse or cow. His powers of observation are intuitively strong, and his friends declare him to be gifted with an excellent memory and a perfect judgment of character. If he dislikes a stranger at the first interview, he never sees him again. Of his temperance and sobriety there is but one opinion. His life is ascetic: his favorite food is baked potatoes with a little buttermilk, and his drink water; he disapproves, as do all strict Mormons, of spirituous liquors, and never touches anything stronger than a glass of thin lager beer, moreover, he abstains from tobacco. Mr. Hyde [^21] has accused him of habitual intemperance: he is, as his appearance shows, rather disposed to abstinence than to the reverse. Of his education I can not speak: 'men, not books—deeds, not words,' has ever been his motto; he probably has, as Mr. Randolph said of Mr. Johnston, 'a mind uncorrupted by books.' * * * Yet he converses with ease and correctness, has neither snuffle nor pompousness, and speaks as an authority upon certain subjects; such as agriculture and stock-breeding. He assumes no airs of extra sanctimoniousness, and has the plain, simple manners of honesty. His followers deem him an angel of light, his foes a goblin damned: he is, I presume, neither one nor the other. I can not pronounce about his scrupulousness: all the world over, the sincerest religious belief and the practice of devotion are sometimes compatible not only with the most disorderly life, but with the most terrible crimes; for mankind mostly believes that

'Il est avec le ciel des accommodements.'

515He has been called hypocrite, swindler, forger, murderer. No one looks it less. The best authorities—from those who accuse Mr. Joseph Smith of the most heartless deception, to those who believe that he began as an impostor and ended as a prophet—find in Mr. Brigham Young 'an earnest, obstinate egotistic enthusiasm, fanned by persecution and inflamed by bloodshed.' He is the St. Paul of the New Dispensation: true and sincere, he gave point, and energy, and consistency to the somewhat disjointed, turbulent, and unforeseeing fanaticism of Mr. Joseph Smith; and if he has not been able to create, he has shown himself great in controlling circumstances. Finally, there is a total absence of pretension in his manner, and he has been so long used to power that he cares nothing for its display. The arts by which he rules the heterogeneous mass of conflicting elements are indomitable will, profound secrecy, and uncommon astuteness.

515Such is his excellency President Brigham Young, 'painter and glazier'—his earliest craft—prophet, revelator, * * * and seer; the man who is revered as king or kaiser, pope or pontiff never was; who, like the 'Old Man of the Mountain,' by holding up his hand could cause the death of any one within his reach; who, governing as well as reigning, long stood up to fight with the sword of the Lord, and with his few hundred guerrillas, against the then mighty power of the United States; who has outwitted all diplomacy opposed to him; and, finally, who made a treaty of peace with the president of the Great Republic as though he had wielded the combined power of France, Russia, and England." [^22]

Daniel H. Wells: "I arise with an aching heart, but cannot let pass this opportunity of paying at least a tribute of respect to our departed friend and brother, who has just stepped behind the veil. I can only say, let the silent tear fall that it may give relief to the troubled heart; for we have lost our counselor, our friend, our president; a friend to God, a friend to his saints, a friend to the church and a friend to humanity.

516I have no desire or wish to multiply words, feeling that it is rather a time to mourn. Good-by Brother Brigham, until the morning of the resurrection day, when thy spirit and body shall be reunited, and thou shalt inherit immortality, eternal lives and everlasting glory, and thy lifelong companions who will soon follow after, will meet thee in peace and joy.

516May God bless the Latter-day Saints, and may the consolations of the holy gospel, the hope of the glorious resurrection and redemption wrought out by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, pervade every heart to the consoling thereof, is my prayer in the name of Jesus. Amen."

516Wilford Woodruff: "I do not suppose there was ever a man breathed the breath of life who, in the short space of forty-five years, has done so much towards the establishment of the government and kingdom of God, as our beloved president [Brigham Young]. His life has been before many of you for several years, and to some from the commencement of his labors in this church. He felt the weight of this dispensation resting upon him; he certainly has been true and faithful unto death, and he is prepared to receive a crown of life. * * * It is said that 'blessings brighten as they take their flight.' I have often felt in listening to the glorious principles of President Young, that the people here heard him so much that they hardly prized the beauty and the extent of the results and virtues of his teachings. * * * He has been true and faithful to the end and therefore all is well with him."

516Erastus Snow: "President Young needs no monument to perpetuate his name and character more than that which he himself by his own works and virtues has reared in the hearts of his people. And his testimony is such as will be in force to all the world, and his fame, in connection with that of the Prophet Joseph Smith, is known among all nations, kindreds, tongues and people. This latter-day work is not the work of a few years in mortality; our priesthood is everlasting, 'without beginning of days or end of years,' the labors of which reach forward through time into eternity and continue forever. * * * Brother Brigham, having done a great, a glorious work in the flesh, now joins his labors with those of the spirit world and is welcomed back again from this mission of mortality; receives the joyous welcome of the Father and the Son, and the greetings of apostles and prophets, of Joseph and his brethren who have gone before him, all welcoming him back again from earth; he joins with them in the more extensive labors of the priesthood, and the redemption of the hosts of the dead and their preparations for the resurrection day.

It is a great joy and comfort to know that he had the privilege of living to complete one temple and to see it dedicated, and that he super-intended the setting in order of the priesthood and the ordinances for the redemption of the dead, as well as for the exaltation of the living. It was one of the greatest objects of his life, something that he greatly desired to see done before he should pass away. Was he our leader? Yes; in one sense, and that only as we are in the habit of using that term. For thirty-three years, since the death of the Prophet Joseph, he has been our earthly head; and yet he was not our leader, except in the earthly sense; for the Lord wrought in him and through him and by him as our earthly leader."

George Q. Cannon: "Naturally he was a man of indomitable courage, of an unyielding will; and he could not submit even to the conqueror Death without struggling against him. This was characteristic of his nature. * * * His value has not been properly estimated by the Latter-day Saints. * * * I have been much with him. I look upon this association as the greatest privilege of my life, to have heard his counsels and to witness his life as I have. And in contemplating that life, it seems to me perfect. In my eyes and to my feelings he was as perfect a man as could be in mortality. He certainly never uttered any counsel or gave any instruction or taught any doctrine which I do not endorse with all my heart. This I believe to be the case with thousands upon thousands of the Latter-day Saints, notwithstanding our laxity in doing the will of God in all things as we should have done. * * * He has been the brain, the eye, the ear, the mouth and hand for the entire people of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. From the greatest details connected with the organization of this church down to the smallest minutiae connected with the work, he has left upon it the impress of his great mind. From the organizations of the church, and the construction of temples; the building of tabernacles; from the creation of a provisional state government and a territorial government, down to the small matter of directing the shape of these seats upon which we sit this day; upon all these things, as well as upon all the settlements of the territory, the impress of his genius is apparent. Nothing was too small for his mind; nothing was too large. His mind was of that character that it could grasp the greatest subjects, and yet it had the capacity to descend to the minutest details. This was evident in all his counsels and associations with the saints; he had the power, that wonderful faculty which God gave him and with which he was inspired."

John Taylor: "Today is a solemn day for Israel. We have before us the body of the man who has led us for the last thirty-three years. Thirty-three years ago I was with and witnessed the departure of our first president Joseph Smith. Both of these presidents had the faith and confidence of the saints of the Most High, and the guidance and direction of the Lord. And the feelings of the people as exhibited here, the gathering together of this priesthood and the saints which I see before me today, is evidence of the respect and kindness that beat in every heart and throb through every pulse; and it is gratifying to know that the same feelings prevail throughout the length and breadth of this territory. As has been said, his name and his fame are known among all people, and a knowledge of these events has spread to the uttermost bounds of the everlasting hills. All nations have heard of it, and all peoples are interested in these events that are now surrounding us. Not only us and them but the 'Gods in the eternal worlds. The former president, Joseph Smith, and this our late president, Brigham Young, meet again face to face in the eternal worlds. Both have triumphed, both have overcome. * * * The work we are engaged in is not the work of man. Joseph Smith did not originate it, neither did Brigham Young, nor the twelve nor any mortal man. It emanated from God, he is its author, his eye is over us, he is watching every movement and every transaction that transpires now, and that has transpired ever since the commencement, and will continue so to do. It is he that has been our Grand Leader, these others now departed have been our brethren, appointed to lead and guide us, under his direction, in the paths of life. And although we mourn the loss of our departed friend, a brother and a president, and although the feelings of our hearts sympathize with his family and friends yet at the same time there are principles greater and grander than any personal interest, or any individuality associated with these matters. It is a heavenly interest, the building up of Zion, the establishment of the Kingdom of God and the rolling forth of his purposes upon the earth. And while Brother Joseph and Brother Brigham sleep, yet both of them live, and both of them as they operated in time, will operate in eternity in behalf of the whole of Israel and the consummation of our Father's purposes. These are things in which the Gods are interested; and all the priesthood, and apostles and prophets and men of God that have ever breathed, are also interested with us." [^23]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The question of succession of presiding councils, and the principle upon which the quorum of the twelve apostles succeeds to the presidency of the church until the first presidency is reestablished is discussed at length in this History, chapter lxiv.
[^2] Elder Orson Hyde was ordained an apostle on the 15th of Feb., 1835; and Orson Pratt on the 26th of April, of the same year. (See History of the Church, Period I, vol. ii, chapter xiii). John Taylor was ordained an apostle on the 19th of December, 1838. (Life of John Taylor, 1892, p. 64).
[^3] History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, pp. 167-8 and note.
[^4] History of the Church, Period I, vol. iv, pp. 255-6, also Millennial Star, vol. xx, p. 423, cf., letter of Orson Pratt and Joseph F. Smith, Millennial Star, vol. xl, Nos. 49-50—1878; and Succession in the Priesthood, John Taylor, 1881, pp. 18-20. The Prophet Joseph held, in the passage here cited from the Star, that Elder Pratt "had not been cut off legally" from the quorum of the twelve, as there was not a quorum (i. e. majority) present when his case came before the council. The Prophet rebaptized Orson Pratt, however, and ordained him to his former standing in the quorum of the twelve, (Ibid. See also Succession in the Priesthood, a discourse, by President John Taylor, Oct. 7th, 1881, pamphlet, p. 19).
[^5] Succession in the Priesthood, Taylor, p. 16.
[^6] For account of first ordinations into this quorum see chapter xxx, this History; also History of the Church, Period I, vol. ii, chapter xiii, cf.; Taylor's Succession in Priesthood, pamphlet.
[^7] Succession in the Presidency, pamphlet, John Taylor, 1881, pp. 16, 17.
[^8] Journal of Wilford Woodruff, entry for Sept. 4th, 1877; also History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1877, vol. iii, p. 2903.
[^9] The epistle was published in Deseret News, daily, Sept. 10th, 1877. It will also be found complete in Millennial Star, vol. xxxix, pp. 680-4.
[^10] Conference Minutes of October, 1877, Millennial Star, vol. xxxix, p. 725 et seq.
[^11] Life of John Taylor, pp. 339-40.
[^12] Answer of John Taylor in suit of Brigham Young's Heirs per Attorneys Richards, Williams et al, Deseret News, weekly, of July 2nd, 1879.
[^13] Ibid.
[^14] There were but seven out of the large number of President Young's heirs who entered into this litigation, and in justice to those who would not become parties to it, the names of these seven are given: Elizabeth Y. Ellsworth, Vilate Y. Decker, Louisa W. Y. Ferguson, Dora Young, Ernest I. Young, Marinda H. Y. Conrad, Emmeline A. Young. (From signatures on settlement, published in Deseret News, weekly, of Oct. 8th, 1879).
[^15] See Deseret News for summary of the legal document, weekly, impression of June 18th, 1879.
[^16] Ibid.
[^17] Judge Boreman's decision published in full in Deseret News, weekly, of Aug. 6th, 1879.
[^18] Cannon's Topics of the Times, in Juvenile Instructor, vol. xix, p. 23.
[^19] Deseret News, weekly, of Aug. 13th, 1879, where the decision complete will be found.
[^20] Cannon's Topics of the Times, Juvenile Instructor, vol. xix, p. 23.
[^21] See Deseret News, weekly, for Aug. 13, 1879, where the Court Record of entrance of the suit, and of the court's orders for a stay of proceedings, etc., will be found.
[^22] Court Record in Deseret News, weekly, of Sept. 10th.
[^23] Ibid, Oct. 8th; p. 569.
