B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 5 ( 1930)

519CHAPTER CXLVII

519A PERIOD OF APOSTOLIC PRESIDENCY 1877-1880: SETTLEMENT OF THE NEW TRUSTEE-IN-TRUST WITH BRIGHAM YOUNG'S ESTATE—FOREIGN MISSION WORK OF THE CHURCH

519WITH the demise of Brigham Young the twelve apostles again became the presiding quorum of the church as it did at the death of Joseph Smith, the first Prophet and president of the church. [^1]

SENIORITY OF STANDING AMONG THE TWELVE

Elder John Taylor was the president of the quorum of apostles at the demise of President Young not really by virtue of seniority of ordination, but because of seniority of standing by reason of an uninterrupted membership in the quorum since his ordination, which operated in such manner as to make his standing equivalent to seniority of ordination. Both Orson Hyde and Orson Pratt had been ordained into the quorum of the apostles before Elder Taylor; [^2] but both had temporarily lost their standing in that quorum; the former in October, 1838, for joining with Thomas B. Marsh in misrepresenting conditions in Far West, Missouri; [^3] and the latter for "neglect of duty," in the summer of 1843, and for some misunderstanding had with the Prophet Joseph Smith on the subject of plural marriage. Elder Pratt had been misled respecting that subject by the false statements of the apostate element at Nauvoo. [^4] Both these brethren, were reinstated in the quorum upon their repentance and reconciliation with their brethren, but when the matter was investigated by the council of the twelve, a few years previous to the death of President Young, it was held that Elders Hyde and Pratt, having once lost their standing in the quorum, when they were restored, it was as the juniors to all "those who remained in the quorum when they left it." [^5]

520Elder Wilford Woodruff for some years was also regarded as outranking Elder Taylor in the quorum of the twelve, owing to the fact that Elder Woodruff was the older man. This idea that seniority of age determined the rank of standing in the quorum obtained doubtless for the reason that when the quorum was first organized in February, 1835, the members took their place not in the order in which they were ordained, but according to age. Thus Thomas B. Marsh, who was the last but one ordained at that time became the president of the quorum, because he was the oldest man in the group of twelve ordained; and that was held to be proper in the formation of the quorum; but after that the principle of precedence in the quorum was held to rest upon seniority of ordination. [^6]

THE SETTLEMENT OF JOHN TAYLOR'S STATUS IN THE QUORUM AGREED UPON

The relationship of John Taylor and Wilford Woodruff in the council of the twelve, it will be observed, as well as the relations of Elders Hyde and Pratt to John Taylor, were settled some years before the death of President Brigham Young. The settlement of this relationship among the brethren of the quorum was taken up at the instance of George A. Smith. President Taylor's narrative of it at the priesthood meeting of the general conference of October, 1881, is as follows:

521"Some ten or twelve years ago, Brother George A. Smith drew my attention to this matter [i. e. to the relative positions of Elders Woodruff, Hyde and Pratt to John Taylor in the quorum of apostles], I think it was soon after he was appointed as counselor in the first presidency; and he asked me if I had noticed the impropriety of the arrangement. He stated at the same time that these brethren [Orson Hyde and Orson Pratt] having been dropped from the quorum could not assume the position that they before had in the quorum; but that all those who remained in the quorum when they had left it must necessarily take the precedence of them in the quorum. He stated, at the same time, that these questions might become very serious ones, in case of change of circumstances arising from death or otherwise; remarking also, that I stood before them in the quorum. I told him that I was aware of that, and of the correctness of the position assumed by him, and had been for years, but that I did not choose to agitate or bring up a question of that kind. Furthermore, I stated, that, personally, I cared nothing about the matter, and, moreover, I entertained a very high esteem for both the parties named; while, at the same time, I could not help but see, with him, that complications might hereafter arise unless the matter were adjusted. Sometime after, in San Pete, in June, 1875, President Young brought up the subject of seniority, and stated that John Taylor was the man that stood next to him; and that where he was not, John Taylor presided. He also made the statement, that Brother Hyde and Brother Pratt were not in their right positions in the quorum. Upon this statement I assumed the position indicated.

521Thus our positions at that time seemed to be fully defined; and what had been spoken of by Elder George A. Smith, without any action of mine, was carried out by President Young; and from that time to the death of President Young I occupied the senior position in the quorum, and occupying that position—which was thoroughly understood by the quorum of the twelve—on the death of President Young, the twelve assumed the presidency, and I was their president, it placed me in the position of president of the church; or, as expressed in our conference meeting: 'As president of the quorum of twelve apostles; as one of the twelve apostles, and of the presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.'" [^7]

ACTIVITIES OF THE CHURCH PROVIDED FOR AND CONTINUED

The obsequies of President Young took place on the 2nd of September, 1877; on the 4th, ten of the twelve apostles—Orson Pratt and Joseph F. Smith being absent on a mission in England—met with the counselors of the late president, viz., John W. Young and Daniel H. Wells. At that meeting it was agreed that the twelve apostles should take their place as the presiding quorum of the church, in the absence of a first presidency, and bear off the kingdom as they did at the death of Joseph Smith. It was also voted to sustain John Taylor as the president of the twelve apostles. "John W. Young and Daniel H. Wells voted with us," writes Wilford Woodruff, whose account is here followed, "and they are to stand as counselors to the twelve as they did to President Brigham Young." [^8] To facilitate the transaction of business, President John Taylor, assisted by John W. Young, Daniel H. Wells and George Q. Cannon, were sustained as an administrative committee to attend to the business connected with the building of the temples, the public works, and other church affairs of a financial character. Word was sent to the two absent apostles in England to return to the headquarters of the church—Salt Lake City. They arrived on the 27th of September.

522On the 10th of September a general epistle was issued to the church "in all the world," informing the saints of these several actions; also justifying the twelve in assuming the functions of the presidency of the church at the demise of the late President Brigham Young, by reference to underlying principles of church government, and principles laid down by the Prophet Joseph Smith. Instructions were given with reference to carrying on the work on the temples in course of construction. Appointments were made for the quarterly conferences of the stakes of Zion—which hereafter were to be held regularly—and admonition was given to faithfulness in respect of all the duties devolving upon Latter-day Saints. [^9]

On the 17th of September the corner stones of the Logan temple were laid under the direction of the apostles and participated in by very many other general and local authorities of the church, and many thousands of the people from the northern settlements of Utah and from Idaho. Graceful and loving tribute was paid to the memory of the late President Brigham Young, under whose direction the temple site had been dedicated and the work begun; but confidence in the perpetuation of the great latter-day work of the Lord was the keynote of the occasion, and assurance was given that there was to be no halting in the progress of that work.

PRESS COMMENT—"MORMONISM" MAY SURVIVE THE DEATH OF BRIGHAM YOUNG

It is interesting to note here that in many instances, in speaking of this period, the press comment throughout the United States was to the effect that "Mormonism" would doubtless survive notwithstanding the demise of the late Brigham Young. The press had profited by the blunder of the press of a previous generation, which predicted the failure of "Mormonism" with the death of its founder—Under God—always be it remembered—Joseph Smith.

523The several acts of the quorum of the twelve apostles—assuming the functions of the presiding quorum of the church, and their several administrative acts—were heartily and unanimously approved by the next general conference of the church—October, 1877—which unanimously sustained the quorum of the twelve as the presiding quorum of the church. This vote was presented to each quorum separately, for which purpose the quorums were grouped individually on the main floor of the great tabernacle, Salt Lake City; and after the several motions had been voted upon by the quorums separately, they were submitted to the quorums and to the body of the people en mass and sustained by the congregation and priesthood quorums—numbering over ten thousand—rising to their feet, and indicating their acceptance of what had been done by the solemn uplifting of right hands. The exact formula was:—

524"John Taylor as president of the quorum of the twelve apostles, as one of the twelve apostles, and of the presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

524As members of the quorum of the twelve apostles—John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, Orson Hyde, Orson Pratt, Charles C. Rich, Lorenzo Snow, Erastus Snow, Franklin D. Richards, George Q. Cannon, Brigham Young, Joseph F. Smith, and Albert Carrington.

524Counselors to the twelve apostles—John W. Young and Daniel H. Wells.

524The twelve apostles as the presiding quorum and authority of the church, and as prophets, seers, and revelators.

524President Taylor made a motion that J. W. Young and Daniel H. Wells be sustained as prophets, seers, and revelators, to act with the twelve as their counselors, in that capacity. The whole congregation sustained the motion." [^10]

524The order in which the quorums voted was as follows:

524"The general authorities of the church were voted for by each quorum of the priesthood rising on their feet, and raising their right hands in the following order: First,—The twelve apostles. Second—the patriarchs, presidents of stakes and their counselors, and the high councils. Third—High Priests. Fourth—Seventies. Fifth—Elders. Sixth—Bishops and counselors. Seventh—Priests, Teachers and Deacons. Eighth—Presidency of all the quorums. Ninth—the entire congregation. Elsewhere the writer has ventured to say: 'Nothing can be more solemn and impressive than the voting of the quorums of the priesthood, when they meet to act as a general assembly of quorums.'" [^11]

524The council of the twelve apostles continued its presidency of the church a little more than three years, up to the general semi-annual conference of the church held in October, 1880, when the regular council of the first presidency was reorganized, with John Taylor as president, and George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith as his first and second counselors respectively.

THE CHURCH UNDER THE PRESIDENCY OF THE TWELVE—SETTLEMENT OF BRIGHAM YOUNG'S ESTATE

During the three years' presidency of the council of the twelve the affairs of the church quite generally were prosperous. Some difficulty arose, however, in the matter of settling the estate of the late President Brigham Young. Some claims were made by a number of the late president's heirs respecting the possession of property that President Young held for the church as trustee-in-trust. It was alleged by them that President Young died seized of an estate valued at two and a half millions of dollars. This, however, was denied by his executors, and also by President John Taylor, who affirmed per contra that the property to which Brigham Young held the legal right or title was not worth over $1,626,000; and further they affirmed, that much of said estate was held by the testator in trust for the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and that Brigham Young was largely indebted at the time of his death "and justly owed to said church over $1,000,000." President John Taylor, who succeeded Brigham Young as trustee-in-trust for the church, and the administrators of President Young's estate, Messrs. George Q. Cannon, Brigham Young, Jun., and Albert Carrington, grouped the property of the estate into three classes as follows:

"First. A class of property known to belong to said church, and which he [Brigham Young] held and recognized as its property.

Second. A class of property which he held and claimed as belonging to himself individually, and disconnected from the church and in which it had no interest.

Third. A class of property which once belonged to the church but the legal title to which he had afterward acquired, such property was therefore regarded as uncertain." [^12]

"In the settlement of the liabilities of the estate to the church," declares President Taylor, in a court document, "and in separating its property from his [President Young's] individual property, this dubious and uncertain class of property was all given to his estate as part and parcel thereof, and such only was claimed as church property about which there was no doubt or uncertainty." [^13] In addition to this, according to the statement of the administrators, a credit of $300,000 was secured by them from the trustee-in-trust to the estate of the late president for his services to the church. Notwithstanding these advantageous concessions to the estate the dissatisfied heirs entered suit against the administrators of the estate and also against President Taylor. [^14] The former they charged with having "grossly neglected and violated their duties," and also had "wilfully wasted and converted a large portion of President Young's estate to the amount of $1,200,000; the $200,000 it was charged they had appropriated to their own use as compensation for their services as administrators, and other expenses of administration, and the one million dollars they had allowed to fraudulent claims against the estate made by the trustee-in-trust of the 'Mormon' church." They also included in their suit against the administrators complaints against President John Taylor et al as receiving certain portions of property that had been conveyed to them from the estate in trust for the church. An injunction was prayed for against the executors, restraining them from further performance of their duties; and against the trustee-in-trust of the church forbidding him to dispose of any of the property assigned to him; and also praying for the appointment of receivers to whom the administrators and the trustee-in-trust of the church would be required to deliver up all moneys, property and assets under their control until the final hearing; and for a reasonable allowance from the funds of the estate to pay the expenses of the suit brought by these dissatisfied heirs. It was asked further that, as a final judgment, "all the transfers and conveyances made by the administrators be declared illegal and void; that the property be returned to the estate, and that the executors be required to render an account of their administration, to make good all they have wasted or illegally disposed of, and that a trustee or trustees be appointed in the place of the executors to settle and distribute said estate to the beneficiaries thereof." [^15]

ILLEGAL PROCEEDINGS OF THE COURTS

Judge Emerson, in whose court the above questions were considered—third district court—granted the application for an injunction and the appointment of receivers. W. S. McCornick, a prominent banker of Salt Lake City, and Mr. Shaughnessy, United States marshal, at the time, were appointed the receivers. [^16] Some properties which had been turned over to the trustee-in-trust by the administrators of the Brigham Young estate—which transfers had been made under the sanctions of the probate court having jurisdiction at the time the receivers were appointed—had been disposed of by the trustees to other parties, so that the said properties were beyond the control of both the administrators and the trustee-in-trust, and consequently when these properties were demanded by the receivers the trustee-in-trust and the administrators were required to do that which it was impossible for them to do. The receivers, however, charged that the trustee-in-trust and the executors were in contempt of court, and Judge Emerson issued process against the several parties, but on examination held that the defendants had violated no mandate of the court and therefore were not in contempt. Later, Judge Jacob S. Boreman, a very bitter anti-"Mormon," temporarily occupying the bench of the third judicial district, the charge of contempt was a second time made against the trustee-in-trust and the executors with the result that Judge Boreman found them in contempt of the orders of the court, and "therefore it was ordered and adjudged" that the executors "be committed to prison until they complied with the orders of the court;" and that "John Taylor be committed to prison until he complied with the same order." [^17]

528It was finally arranged, however, in the case of President John Taylor that he give a bond with satisfactory securities covering the amount required to be turned over to the receivers instead of the property itself. The amount of the bond was $200,000. With this the plaintiffs in open court expressed their satisfaction and the court ordered his discharge from the sentence of contempt. A similar settlement could have been made in the case of the executors, but they preferred to endure imprisonment rather than to give additional bonds to those they were already under for the faithful performance of their duties as executors of the estate. Their bonds as executors amounted to $300,000; and the additional bond required to secure them from imprisonment for the alleged contempt was $150,000 more. "We felt," wrote George Q. Cannon, "that this attempt to get additional bonds was nothing more or less than a plot to levy blackmail; and therefore we preferred to submit to imprisonment for contempt rather than to lend ourselves to the scheme by asking our friends to give bonds for us." [^18] The imprisonment of the executors extended from August the 4th to the 28th of the same month when they were released from detention, the decision of Judge Boreman in committing them to prison being reversed by the supreme court of the territory—"reversed for want of jurisdiction," was the decision of the supreme court, Judge Boreman dissenting.

528"It was at this juncture," Mr. Cannon adds, following the quotation in the text, "that I received the following message from General Thomas L. Kane: 'I will be your bail for $150,000 if your court will accept me'."

The announcement of the decision of the court, in "general terms," as explained by Chief Justice Hunter, to be followed by a more complete summary later, is a severe condemnation of the evidently prejudiced course of Judge Boreman. That he had grossly departed from uniform court procedure in adjudging the executors and President John Taylor guilty of contempt of court is evidenced from the following passage in the decision:

529"Uniformity of opinion of what is the law, strengthens the arms of justice, and enables those who have its administration in hand to act with promptness and reasonable certainty, and when the quality of uniformity is found, it would perhaps be doing a wrong at this late day to make a new departure. The power of the court to punish for an alleged contempt, though undoubted, is in its nature, arbitrary, and its exercise is not to be upheld except under the circumstances and in the manner prescribed by law. It is essential to the validity of proceedings in contempt, subjecting a party to fine and imprisonment, that they show a case in point of jurisdiction within the provisions of the law by which such proceedings are authorized, for mere presumption and intendments are not to be indulged in their support." [^19]

529This is really a declaration that Judge Boreman had acted on mere presumptions and outside of his jurisdiction. "In other words," as the News commented at the time, "that through his haste and ignorance and extra judicial proceeding, the executors have suffered false imprisonment, they never were in contempt of court, and therefore their punishment was illegal as well as unjust." [^20]

SETTLEMENT BY MUTUAL AGREEMENT

A counter suit was instituted against the executors and heirs of the late Brigham Young by the trustee-in-trust of the Church of the Latter-day Saints. This on the 7th of August, 1879. Hearing on a motion to dismiss the case was postponed until the 2nd of September, or as soon thereafter as the court could hear the arguments. [^21] The case was accordingly presented to the court in the early days of September, and on the 4th Judge Hunter took it under advisement. [^22] The case was dismissed October 4th, at plaintiff's cost, [^23] without coming to judgment of the court on account of the whole case coming to a settlement by mutual agreement of all the litigants; the decree of the court making the settlement being entered on the same day as the dismissal of the church suit against the executors. By the terms of the compromise settlement of the whole suit, the litigant heirs received the sum of $75,000; and agreed to withdraw all charges and claims on which the suit was planted. By this decree the executors of the estate were exonerated from charges preferred against them. The statement rests upon the following passage found in the Decree of the Court signed by Chief Justice John A. Hunter:

530"It is considered, adjudged and decreed that the aforesaid accounts of said executors, and the matters and things therein contained, be, and the same are hereby ratified and confirmed as to all the parties, and that the allegations of the complaint of waste, conversion and misappropriation of the property and assets of said estate of the testator, Brigham Young, deceased, are not sustained in any respect. That all the actings and doings of said executors, or any of them in the administration of said estate as executors or trustees, as shown by said accounts, be, and the same are hereby ratified, and confirmed, and all the issues in this action are found and adjudged in favor of the defendants, George Q. Cannon, Albert Carrington and Brigham Young, executors as aforesaid; John Taylor, John Sharp, Edward Hunter, Horace S. Eldredge, George Goddard, Leonard W. Hardy, Theodore McKean, Joseph C. Kingsbury and Angus M. Cannon.

530That the deeds of conveyance and transfer of property, real and personal, by said executors to John Taylor, trustee-in-trust for the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, whether as of property held by said testator in trust for said church, or in liquidation of an account presented by said John Taylor, trustee-in-trust for said church against the estate of said testator for nine hundred and ninety-nine thousand six hundred and thirty-two ($999,632) dollars, approved by said executors and the probate judge of Salt Lake county, Utah territory, April 10th, 1878, less three hundred thousand dollars credit for the services of said testator to said church, be, and the same are hereby ratified and confirmed." [^24]

The receivers were discharged, returning to the parties previously holding the same, all the property taken possession of by them. President John Taylor was discharged from his bond, and all further action was barred against the parties defendant in the suit. All the other heirs to the estate of the late President Brigham Young appeared with the executors and the trustee-in-trust as defendants, and both plaintiffs and defendants, by mutual consent agreed to this permanent settlement of the whole litigation. [^25]

531This suit was a very vexatious affair, founded on no just claims, and evidently began by agitators who hoped to profit by the litigation. On the part of the other heirs, the trustee-in-trust, and the executors, the $75,000 granted to the dissatisfied heirs was allowed in the interest of the estate, since the cost of the litigation threatened to far exceed that sum if the case was continued in the courts; and also the compromise was made in the interests of the peace of the large number of heirs, and all other parties immediately concerned, and of the public, which was agitated by these suits and counter suits; and naturally so, since the whole Latter-day Saint community had an interest in the church properties that would be affected by the decisions and orders of the court.

531After the decree of the court for the settlement was entered, President Taylor presented the settlement before the general semi-annual conference of the church which began its sessions two days after the decree was made, "and the settlement was endorsed by a unanimous vote." [^26]

FORWARD MOVEMENT IN THE MISSIONS

The work in the foreign missions was vigorously prosecuted during the three years of the apostolic presidency. Elder William Budge succeeded Joseph F. Smith, of the council of the apostles, in the presidency of the European Mission; and he was ably assisted by such elders as Henry W. Naisbitt and John Nicholson, in the publishing department; Charles W. Nibley in the business office, and an exceptionally strong corps of elders from Utah in the various conferences of the British Isles, in the Scandinavian and other European missions. In this period—1878—the Book of Mormon was translated into, and published in the Swedish language, at Copenhagen. The translation was the work of August W. Carlson. [^27] During the three years of the apostles' presidency of the church 5,194 persons emigrated from the European missions for Utah.

IMPORTANT HISTORICAL MISSION ORSON PRATT AND JOSEPH F. SMITH

Elders Orson Pratt and Joseph F. Smith of the council of the apostles' quorum were appointed to a mission in the eastern states. In the itinerary of their journey eastward they visited many of the old locations where the church made history in the early years of its existence, including Independence, Jackson county, Missouri, the place of the future City of Zion upon the western hemisphere, the building of which, in contemplation, filled so large a place in the aspirations of the saints in the early years of the New Dispensation.

Elder Orson Pratt was among the elders who had visited this place in 1831, having traveled on foot from Kirtland, Ohio, in company with his brother Parley P. Pratt, preaching en route as they found opportunity. He was then but twenty years of age, now, he was 67 years old. A great change had come to that section of the country. The "Temple Lot" which the Prophet Joseph had dedicated in 1831 was covered with timber, now scarcely a tree or a stump was standing, and time and again the place had been war-swept during the war between the states. [^28] Some years before the visit of Elders Pratt and Smith a Mr. William Eaton had purchased a homestead south of the temple site, and on a portion of the original temple grounds, as purchased by Bishop Edward Partridge (which was said to have been 53 acres). For this homestead Mr. Eaton paid $18, including a neat frame cottage. He also purchased one or two lots covering the temple site for which he paid $500. These lots he had deeded to the trustee-in-trust of the "Reorganized Church." Mr. John Scott, of Plano, Ill., informed the visiting brethren that the Whitmers held the tax titles to these lots. Mr. Eaton had married the widow of John E. Page; Page at one time was a member of the council of the twelve apostles. Elders Pratt and Smith paid Mrs. Eaton a visit and were kindly received. Also they visited Wm. E. McLellin, a member of the council of the twelve when that quorum was first organized in 1835, but long since separated from the church, though still professing faith in the Book of Mormon and some of the principles of the gospel. In all there were about 70 families gathered in and about Independence who were members of the "Reorganized Church," and who were "waiting" for the redemption of Zion.

533THE PRATT-SMITH INTERVIEW WITH DAVID WHITMER

Elders Pratt and Smith also visited Richmond where they had a long interview with David Whitmer, one of the three witnesses to the Book of Mormon. He and Orson Pratt, of course, were well acquainted. The now aged witness (73 years old) repeated in great detail the circumstances attending upon his viewing the plates from which the Book of Mormon was written; of the visitation and appearance of the Angel Moroni to the witnesses, when showing to them the plates. Elders Pratt and Smith examined the printer's copy of the Book of Mormon manuscript, made from the original manuscript by Oliver Cowdery, and which printer's copy Cowdery had left in the keeping of David Whitmer at the time of his death at Richmond, twenty-eight years before. Inquiries concerning the safekeeping of the manuscript were carefully made and Mr. Whitmer was sounded with reference to his willingness to part with it and have it deposited in the archives of the church for safekeeping. This suggestion he declined to consider.

534PRATT-SMITH-WHITMER INTERVIEW ON THE BOOK OF MORMON MANUSCRIPTS

534Joseph F. Smith: "What will be done with them (i. e. the Mss.), at your death?" [Throughout the conversation the printer's manuscript is spoken of as being plural, it is left unchanged].

534David Whitmer: "I will leave them to my nephew, David Whitmer, son of my brother, Jacob, and my name-sake."

534Orson Pratt: "Would you not part with them to a purchaser?"

534David Whitmer: "No. Oliver charged me to keep them, and Joseph said my father's house should keep the records. I consider these things sacred, and would not part with nor barter them for money."

534Joseph F. Smith: "We would not offer you money in the light of bartering for the Mss., but we would like to see them preserved in some manner where they would be safe from casualties and from the caprices of men, in some institution that will not die as man does."

534"That is all right," said Mr. Whitmer, but he did not change his determination not to part with the Mss.; but related the circumstances of its preservation during a cyclone which wrecked his house a year before, and of being preserved in a trunk even from being discolored when all things else in the trunk turned mouldy while the family were camping in a tent following the cyclone.

Mr. Whitmer was under the impression that the Ms. he had was the one written by Oliver Cowdery from the dictation of Joseph Smith, as he translated it from the plates and therefore the original English Ms. In this, of course, he was mistaken; as already set forth in this History (Ch. xiii), a special copy was made for the printer by Oliver Cowdery from the original Ms., and this printer's copy was the one that Oliver Cowdery left with David Whitmer, and which he held in almost superstitious regard. Elder Joseph F. Smith on the occasion of the visit referred to in the text above, while examining the Ms. found the names of the eleven witnesses—the three and the eight—were written in the hand writing of Oliver Cowdery. "When the question was asked Mr. Whitmer," writes Joseph F. Smith, "if he and the other witnesses did, or did not sign the testimonies themselves, Mr. Whitmer replied, 'each signed his own name.' 'Then where are the original signatures?' 'I don't know, I suppose Oliver copied them, but this I know is an exact copy." Someone suggested that he, being the last one left of the eleven witnesses, ought to certify to this copy. Lawyer D. Whitmer (Jacob's son) suggested that he had better reflect about it first and be very cautious.

535Joseph F. Smith suggested that perhaps there were two manuscripts, but Mr. Whitmer replied that, according to the best of his knowledge, there never was but the one copy. "Herein of course he is evidently uninformed." [^29]

535Far West, Caldwell county, Missouri, was also visited by the brethren. This was the birthplace of Elder Smith. Here had resided for many years, and up to the time of his death,—July, 1878—John Whitmer, formerly the historian of the church. The visiting brethren called at his home but were ungraciously received by his son, Jacob Whitmer, and his daughter, who had married a Mr. Johnson. Elder Pratt made some inquiries about the history John Whitmer had kept in the early days of the church—1831-1838; and which in the spring of 1838, when leaving the church, he refused to surrender, [^30] but the ungracious son of John Whitmer, of whom Elder Pratt made his inquiries, either could not or would not give him any information. [^31]

CONVERSATION WITH JACOB WHITMER

Orson Pratt (to Jacob Whitmer, son of John Whitmer): "Your father was once the historian of the church, and I am the present historian; we are anxious to preserve all the items of history we can, we would therefore like to see the Ms. your father kept, and if possible, to make satisfactory arrangements with you, to purchase the same, provided there is anything in the Ms. which we have not already published. I suppose you are aware that the History of the Church has already been published."

Jacob Whitmer: "We've got no history here, all father's papers have gone to Richmond long ago."

Orson Pratt: "We had a very pleasant interview with your uncle, David, at Richmond. We arrived there last Friday, and remained two days, he showed us the Ms. of the Book of Mormon, but said nothing about having any other papers."

Jacob Whitmer: "We have got no papers here."

THE CALL AT PLANO, ILLINOIS

These apostle missionaries also visited Plano, Illinois, the headquarters of the "Reorganized Church," but the president, Mr. Joseph Smith, eldest son of the Prophet Joseph Smith, was absent. The purpose of this visit to Plano appears to have been to obtain some information concerning the Ms. of the "translation of the Bible—Old and New Testament," made by Joseph Smith, the Prophet, 1831-1833, at Kirtland, the alleged Ms. of which was in possession of his son, Joseph Smith. Mr. Smith not being at home they failed to obtain the privilege of examining the Ms., but were invited to address a prayer meeting held at Plano, an opportunity of which they availed themselves to correct a number of errors which the "reorganized" following entertained. The testimony of Elder Pratt on this occasion is very important, because he could speak as an authority with reference to the subjects he treated, being a participant in the incidents referred to, and for that reason his remarks are here set down:

537"Mr. Dille, the presiding officer of the meeting, came to us and urged us to occupy the time. He said, 'this is a prayer meeting, and I have no right to change it, but many have expressed a wish to hear you and we would like very much for you to accept our invitation.' Elder Pratt replied, 'If it is the wish of all, I have no objections.' Mr. Dille then called a vote which was unanimous, and after the meeting was opened we were invited to the stand. Elder Pratt then gave a plain, simple narration of his early experience in the church, relating many interesting incidents connected with its rise; explained the circumstances under which several revelations were received by Joseph, the Prophet, and the manner in which he received them, he being present on several occasions of the kind. Declared that sometimes Joseph used a seer stone when inquiring of the Lord, and receiving revelation, but that he was so thoroughly endowed with the inspiration of the Almighty, and the spirit of revelation that he oftener received them without any instrument, or other means than the operation of the spirit upon his mind. Referred to the testimony which he received of the truth of the great latter-day work while as yet a boy. Testified that these things were not matters of belief only with him, but of actual knowledge. He explained the circumstances connected with the coming forth of the revelation of plural marriage. Refuted the statement and belief of those present that Brigham Young was the author of that revelation; showed that Joseph Smith the Prophet, had not only commenced the practice of that principle himself and taught it to others, before President Young and the twelve had returned from their missions in Europe, in 1841, but that Joseph actually received revelation upon that principle as early as 1831. He said, 'Lyman Johnson, who was very familiar with Joseph at this early date, Joseph living at his father's house, and who was also very intimate with me, we having traveled on several missions together, told me himself that Joseph had made known to him as early as 1831, that plural marriage was a correct principle. Joseph declared to Lyman that God had revealed it to him, but that the time had not come to teach or practice it in the church, but that the time would come.' To this statement Elder Pratt bore his testimony. He cited several instances of Joseph having had wives sealed to him, one at least as early as April 5th, 1841, which was sometime prior to the return of the twelve from England. Referred to his own trial in regard to this matter in Nauvoo, and said it was because he got his information from a wicked source, from those disaffected, but as soon as he learned the truth he was satisfied." [^32]

538From Plano the missionaries visited Kirtland and the temple, thence to the Hill Cumorah and New York City, whence they returned to Utah. At the semi-annual general conference of the church held in Salt Lake City both Elders Pratt and Smith made reference to their late mission to the eastern states; and Elder Smith explained that the purpose of the mission was to obtain, if possible, "some dates and facts that pertained to the early history of the church, which, for the want of more correct records in that early date were lacking." The result of their investigations, however, had been disappointing: "they found no one who could give them any information, or who knew as much as ourselves on these matters." [^33]

538In December of the same year Orson Pratt was sent to England to get out stereotype plates of the Book of Mormon and of the Doctrine and Covenants. Both books were changed into the paragraphing that has ever since been followed, and the works were copiously annotated and cross referenced. This work Elder Pratt accomplished within a year, returning to Utah in September, 1879.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "And the hope is expressed that when the 'Mormons' understand that there is only one obstacle to the accomplishment of their desires, they may be induced to remove it."
[^2] Boston Watchman, impression of Sept. 5th, 1878. The Deseret News commenting on the "New Campaign" said in its impression of Oct. 2nd, 1878: "The latest scheme for the disintegration of the system which has outlived and triumphed over all those forces and agencies, contains more of the elements of subtlety and craft than any that have preceded it. And, therefore, it is fraught with greater danger. It should be watched, exposed and counteracted; it is designed by the same persistent enemy—the 'evil one,' but it comes in skillfully planned disguise. Its voice is gentle and it is clad in sheep's clothing. But the wolf is under the apparel of peace, all the same, and the object in view is destruction."
[^3] The Address, Memorial and Circular to the ministers will be found complete in Deseret News of Nov. 13th, 1878, Mrs. S. A. Cook presided at the meeting, and Mrs. M. M. Bane acted as secretary of the meeting.
[^4] The proceedings of the meeting in full together with the resolutions and supporting speeches will be found in Deseret News of Nov. 20th, 1878; also in part in the Millennial Star, vol. xl, No. 51, pp. 815-816, et seq—the resolutions are omitted in the Star's account of the meeting.
[^5] For record of the examination of witnesses before United States commissioner, etc., see Deseret News, weekly, of Oct. 30th and Nov. 6th; and for the testimony at the trial, see full Court Record in Deseret News of May 7th, 1879.
[^6] See Salt Lake Herald of Nov. 5th, 1878.
[^7] For statement in full see Salt Lake Herald of Nov. 5th, 1878, and Deseret News, weekly, Nov. 13, 1878. For her testimony in the Miles trial repudiating her affidavit see Deseret News of May 7th, 1879. In the course of her affidavit Miss Owen, (Mrs. Miles) had said: "My husband has never informed me that he has another wife, and outside my own suspicion I have no knowledge that he has one. I have heard him most emphatically deny that he married the girls of whom I was jealous. I am deeply sorry that my suspicions should have induced me to have taken a course whereby I have brought upon my brethren and sisters, my husband and myself unmerited odium, and my only desire in writing this is to acquaint the public with the facts of the case and leave them to judge for themselves concerning the issue."
[^8] "In all my life," said Judge Tilford, council for defendant, in his address in the case, "I never saw a trial in which the defendant had not a single friend or acquaintance or fellow believer upon the jury until the present time." District Attorney J. H. Beatty, in presenting the case to the jury for the prosecution, said: "We are here to try the case, to decide the issue between the Mormon church and the United States government." To this Judge Tilford replied: "My friend, Mr. Beatty made the remark that the issue was between the government on the one side, and polygamy and the church on the other. But I am satisfied that you will not accede to that view. The only issue before you, gentlemen, is whether John H. Miles is guilty as charged." (For all above see Deseret News, 1879, p. 221 and Salt Lake Herald, Nov. 5th, 1878).
[^9] On this point the syllabus of the case said:
[^10] Hand Book on Mormonism, pp. 23-30; and for declared authorship, p. 96.
[^11] See Whitney's History of Utah, vol. iii, pp. 75 and 560.
[^12] Of this class of witnesses were John Taylor, president of the church: Joseph F. Smith, counselor in the first presidency; Daniel H. Wells, counselor to the quorum of the twelve apostles; Angus M. Cannon, president of the Salt Lake stake of Zion. Private Secretary to the First Presidency George Reynolds, was also called, but by this time being himself under conviction for polygamy he was not allowed to testify.
[^13] "Last October [1878] when the Miles case was before Commissioner Sprague, the district attorney (P. T. Van Zile) made the boast that he would yet cause all the rites of the endowment house to be exposed in open court." (Deseret News, weekly, May 7th, 1879). The Wells case was doubtless the effort of the attorney to carry out his boast, but he failed.
[^14] Court proceedings in Deseret News, weekly, of 7th May, 1879.
[^15] Ibid, p. 217.
[^16] Deseret News, weekly, of May 14th, 1879. The quotations above are but excerpts from the speeches. They appear in full in the News, cited.
[^17] Deseret News, weekly of May 7th, p. 217. The tabernacle proceedings in full will be found in Deseret News, weekly, of May 14th, 1879.
[^18] Charges current in the anti-"Mormon" press of the times to the effect that the United States flag was "dishonored and trailed in the dust," were utterly groundless. The incident held to justify such a charge, the author of this History witnessed. He was among the horsemen of the procession, riding by the side of Mr. George Cleveland's open carriage. A young man occupied the front seat with Mr. Cleveland—who was driving—holding and waving semi-horizontally, occasionally, a rather large American flag. A man driving by in a buggy shouted—"This is the first time I ever saw my country's flag dishonored." He was white with rage. "You never saw it more honored," shouted back Mr. Cleveland. Whereupon the young man with the flag waved it more vigorously than ever. But it never touched the ground, much less was it trailed in the dust.
[^19] The Evarts Circular Letter complete will be found in Deseret News, of Oct. 8th, 1879; and in Millennial Star, vol. xli, pp. 638-40.
[^20] New York Sun, quoted in Deseret News, weekly, of Oct. 15th, 1879, p. 582. The New York Graphic treated the circular to this bit of doggerel:
[^21] London Times of Aug. 12th, 1879. Very many comments from the press of the United States and England will be found in Deseret News current impressions of August-September, 1879.
[^22] Millennial Star, vol. xli, pp. 600-602.
[^23] Copied into Millennial Star, vol. xli, pp. 681-2.
[^24] Said of those who "fight against Zion," which in this case is the New Dispensation of the gospel, cf., Isaiah, ch. xxix, where the passage is found, with Book of Mormon—II Nephi, ch. xxvii.
[^25] See note 24.
[^26] New York Tribune of Sept. 27th, 1880.
[^27] Deseret News, weekly, of Dec. 1st, 1880, after quoting New York papers, the News editorially said: "The tirade of mingled calumny, invective and brutality delivered by Dr. Talmage in the Brooklyn Tabernacle, as reported in the New York Express and other papers, seems to delight a certain class of persons laying claim to the title of Christians. * * * The New York Herald seems to be delighted with the way in which Talmage 'went for the wicked Mormons,' to use its own elegant phraseology, but thinks there are difficulties in the way of breaking up the Mormons, to which Talmage has not obtained the key." (Deseret News of Oct. 20, 1880).
[^28] See Messages and Papers of the Presidents, vol. vii, p. 606.
[^29] Christian Advocate, quoted in Deseret News, weekly, of Dec. 24>, 1879; and the Cincinnati Times, Ibid.
[^30] The Sun article is copied into the Deseret News, weekly, of October 13, 1880.
[^31] Pratt-Smith Report, Millennial Star, vol. xl, p. 786. This Whitmer Ms, was afterwards copied by Elder Andrew Jenson, 1893, and the copy is now on file in the Historian's Office in Salt Lake City. It is principally a collection of detached notes and dates, with little attempt at organization; and of no special consequence except that it represents all the "history" that John Whitmer had written; and the church knows there is nothing he had that she does not possess.
[^32] Pratt-Smith Signed Report, Millennial Star, vol. xl, Nos. 49, 50.
[^33] Minutes of Conference, Millennial Star, vol. xl, p. 676, et seq.
