B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 5 ( 1930)

539CHAPTER CXLVIII

539THE ANTI-"MORMON" CRUSADE, 1877-1880

Conflict over PolygamyHC539DURING this apostolic period there began that wide spread and fierce agitation of the "Mormon" question in America which was to result finally in the special acts of congress which seemed to have for their object the utter destruction of the church. In some respects the agitation was to be projected along new lines. The Boston Watchman, a paper published in the interests of the Baptist church, outlined the new anti-"Mormon" campaign as follows:

OUTLINE

"The first proposed point in the new campaign is to prevent the admission of Utah as a state until polygamy is abandoned. [^1]

539The second is to induce congress to repeal the law making women in Utah voters.

539The third is to induce congress to disfranchise every man and woman living in polygamous marriage. And if this is not sufficient 'to defeat the political views' of the Mormons, 'to disfranchise the offspring of all unlawful wives.'

539The fourth is to rescue the public schools from the control of the Mormons, and to insist upon the establishment of free schools and prohibit the teaching of denominational sentiments in them." [^2]

Conflict over PolygamyHCIn November—the 7th—of the same year, a public mass meeting of non-"Mormon" women, about two hundred in attendance, convened in the Congregational Church at Salt Lake City and drew up an address to Mrs. Rutherford B. Hayes—wife of the president of the United States—"and the women of the United States." The address made a scathing arraignment of the alleged evils of polygamy, deplored its practice in the name of religion, and also that a polygamist with four wives—George Q. Cannon—was permitted to sit in congress. The call was made upon the "Christian women of the United States to join in urging congress to empower its courts to arrest the further progress of this evil, and to delay the admission of Utah into statehood until this was accomplished." Congress was memorialized to the above effect, and a circular letter to the clergy asking that the address to Mrs. Hayes and the women of the United States be read to their congregations and then presented to their respective congregations for the signatures of the ladies, after which they were asked to forward the same to the congressman of their district for presentation to the national congress. [^3]

Conflict over PolygamyHC540There was a counter demonstration by the women of the Church of the Latter-day Saints, held on the 16th of the same month, in the Salt Lake Theater, at which there was a very large attendance—2,000—the building being packed to its capacity. The nature of the protest against the interference proposed in the new campaign in Utah may be judged by the preamble and the first resolution of the series adopted at the meeting and enthusiastically sustained by many impromptu speeches made on the occasion:

PREAMBLE AND RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED BY THE WOMEN OF THE CHURCH

Conflict over PolygamyHC"Whereas, We women of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, have been misjudged by, and misrepresented to the nation, by those in our midst of our own sex, in regard to our most sacred rights—the rights which pertain to the holy relations of wifehood and motherhood, we do hereby earnestly, solemnly and emphatically declare our true sentiments, and invite a thorough and impartial investigation of our cause; Wherefore:

Conflict over PolygamyHCFirst, Resolved, That we, women of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and loyal American citizens, claim the right guaranteed by the Constitution, that 'congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion or prohibiting the free exercise thereof;' a right which we seek to exercise, not to the injury of others, but within the pale of peace and justice, of life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness, according to the dictates of our own consciences." [^4]

Conflict over PolygamyHC541This cause of the church was taken up in many other parts of the territory of Utah, where a similar course as to meetings and resolutions was taken as in Salt Lake City.

Conflict over PolygamyHC541The general agitation referred to at the opening of this chapter, went on through the year 1878; scarcely a newspaper in the United States but what devoted more or less space to the subject of "Mormonism," and the prevailing tone was one of bitterness. The same agitation continued through 1879.

Conflict over PolygamyHCTHE MILES POLYGAMY CASE

Conflict over PolygamyHCOne of the contributing causes to this sustained newspaper agitation was the notorious "Miles Polygamy Case," that in its various hearings, trials, and appeals, reaching at last the supreme court of the United States, ran a course of about three years. The arrest of John H. Miles on the charge of polygamy took place on the 25th of October, 1878, in Salt Lake City. A hearing was immediately had before United States Commissioner Sprague, who adjudged the evidence to be sufficient to establish the probable guilt of the defendant, and therefore held him under bonds in the sum of $1,500 to await the action of the grand jury. [^5] In due course Miles was indicted by the grand jury, and the case came to trial on the 28th of April, 1879.

Conflict over PolygamyHCThe complaining witness before the United States commissioner, in the preliminary examination, had been Edward C. Brand; but the real complainant was Carrie Owen, first wife of the defendant, prompted thereto by her jealousy of Emily Spencer, whom she suspected of being the plural wife of Miles. Her course was very sensational, and the anti-"Mormon" press and United States' officials made the most of it. At one stage of the proceedings before the commissioner a habeas corpus proceeding was begun before Judge Schaeffer, the allegation being made that Carrie Owen was being unlawfully held by John H. Miles and Angus M. Cannon, but those gentlemen in their answer disclaimed any right or intention to restrain her, and the matter was dropped. It was also charged that having left the house of Mr. Cannon, where a wedding reception was given in her honor, she was forcibly dragged back to it. It was even charged that she had been decoyed from her home in London, brought to Utah "rushed through an unnatural ceremony with two other women, taken to the house of Angus M. Cannon (a friend of Miles) and there cruelly outraged in the name of religion." All these charges and many others Carrie Owen Miles emphatically denied in a signed statement to which she made affidavit, the same being published in the press of Salt Lake City. [^6] She became reconciled to her husband after the preliminary hearing before the commissioner and went with him to St. George during the winter of 1878-9. But by the time the Miles case came to trial in April she was again violently opposed to him and testified against him even more directly than at the preliminary hearing, repudiating as untrue the affidavit she had published exonerating the church and Miles from any wrong towards herself; saying that she wrote the affidavit as Miles dictated it, since making such a statement, and certifying it by affidavit, was the only terms on which Miles would become reconciled with her. [^7] The trial jury —anti-"Mormon" throughout [^8]—quickly brought in a verdict of "guilty" as charged. Sentence was deferred pending a hearing of a motion for a new trial, which hearing was had on the 2nd day of June following. The motion was overruled the same day, and Miles was sentenced to pay a fine of $100 and to serve five years imprisonment. An appeal was taken to the supreme court of the territory which confirmed the action of the trial court. An appeal was taken to the supreme court of the United States, which reversed the decision of the territorial supreme court, April 4th, 1881, remanding the case for a rehearing which was never had, the United States district attorney holding that it would be impossible to prove the marriage of Miles with Emily Spencer, the alleged first wife.

Conflict over PolygamyHCThe conviction of Miles rested primarily upon the testimony of Carrie Owen, and as her marriage to Miles was the only marriage proven—the fact of it was admitted by defendant, and he offered proof of it—it was held that she was incompetent as a witness in the case since a husband or wife under the statutes of Utah at that time could not testify against each other. All other errors pleaded were set aside, but on the error of the trial court admitting in evidence the testimony of Carrie Owen Miles to prove another marriage, and the trial judge instructing the jury that they might consider her testimony, erred; and on that ground the United States supreme court reversed the action of the Utah courts, [^9] as already stated.

Conflict over PolygamyHC544John H. Miles and Carrie Owen Miles separated as man and wife. The woman accepted a clerkship position in one of the government offices at Washington. In 1881, during the anti-"Mormon" agitation of that period, she made an alleged expose of the endowment ceremonies published in the Hand Book of Mormonism, edited by J. M. Conyer, 1882. [^10] Later she is heard of as appearing in conjunction with Kate Field and other anti-"Mormons" before a congressional committee considering the Edmunds-Tucker Law—1886-7; after that, oblivion. [^11]

Conflict over PolygamyHCA greater sensation in Utah and throughout the United States than the Miles case itself was an incident of the trial resulting in a brief imprisonment of Daniel H. Wells, for alleged contempt of court. Mr. Wells, with several other prominent church officials, [^12] was a witness in the Miles case. And it was the theory of the prosecution that Mr. Wells had performed the ceremony of marriage in the case of Miles and his wives—both Emily Spencer and Carrie Owen. The one thing needful to the success of the prosecution was to prove the marriage of the defendant Miles with Emily Spencer, the alleged first wife, the marriage with the Owen woman being admitted by the defendant. One of the points of evidence the prosecution sought to introduce was that in the marriage ceremonies performed in the endowment house—a house then used pending the completion of a temple, the proper place for such ceremonies—parties to be married wore certain endowment robes, caps, veils, aprons, etc., and that Emily Spencer had been seen in the endowment house wearing this alleged apparel on the day of her supposed marriage. Mr. Wells had testified that he was acquainted with Miles, but did not remember to have seen him or Emily Spencer at the endowment house on the date of the alleged wedding, although he was at the endowment house, and believed he had performed marriage ceremonies that day. At this point he was questioned as to the endowment clothing worn at the wedding ceremony, and witness declined to answer. The court instructed the witness with regard to his privileges, and the grounds on which he might refuse to answer. As he persisted in his refusal to answer, and the prosecution insisted upon the question, [^13] Mr. Wells was committed to the care of the United States marshal, with instructions that he appear the next day to show cause why he should not be committed for contempt of court.

THE WELLS "CONTEMPT" INCIDENT

Conflict over PolygamyHCThe following day Mr. Wells with his attorney appeared in court and expressed a willingness "to answer the question if possible." Such answers as he gave, however, were not satisfactory. The prosecution put the question in a slightly different form: "Do they [the parties to be married] wear a green apron at marriages in the endowment house?" Mr. Wells declined to answer, stating that he was under a sacred obligation to preserve secret the things he was now required to reveal. Then this passage followed between the prosecuting attorney and the witness:

Conflict over PolygamyHC546"Attorney Van Zile: Then we are to understand that you have taken an oath not to reveal what takes place in the endowment house?

Conflict over PolygamyHC546Witness: I did not say so. I said a sacred obligation. I considered it as sacred as any oath taken in a court of justice.

Conflict over PolygamyHC546The Court: Said the witness had not purged himself of contempt but was again in contempt.

Conflict over PolygamyHC546Witness: I consider any person who reveals the sacred ceremonies of the endowment house a falsifier and a perjurer; and it has been and is a principle of my life never to betray a friend, my religion, my country, or my God. It seems to me that this is sufficient reason why I should not be held in contempt." [^14]

Conflict over PolygamyHC546The court again held that the witness had not purged himself of contempt and sentenced him to pay a fine of $100, and to imprisonment for two days. Mr. Wells was immediately taken to the penitentiary by United States Marshal Shaughnessy, where a room was allotted to him [^15] and he was kindly treated. The heroic answer of Mr. Wells made a strong appeal to his immediate ecclesiastical associates and to the Latter-day Saint community, and a public demonstration was quickly planned, to be carried out at the expiration of his brief imprisonment, as an expression of admiration for the stand he had taken in maintaining a high personal privilege—the right, according to a solemn obligation, to keep sacred and not reveal religious rites and ceremonies with associated paraphernalia. Accordingly notice was given through the press in Salt Lake City and by special messengers to the surrounding settlements near enough to participate in the proceedings, that such a demonstration would be given to "General Wells"—to drop back to his title in the Nauvoo Legion and the "Echo Canon War" period—consisting of a great procession to meet him on his release from prison and accompany him to the tabernacle in Salt Lake City, where a special program of music and speeches would be held in his honor.

DEMONSTRATION IN HONOR OF "GENERAL WELLS"

The response to this call for a demonstration was spontaneous, enthusiastic, and large. Trains from both north and south came laden with presidents of stakes, high councilors, bishops and other leading men, mayors and city councilors, with several bands of music from Bear Lake, Cache, Boxelder, Weber, Davis, Utah and Juab counties. The procession met General Wells midway from the city to the penitentiary, at the farm home of his friend, Colonel R. T. Burton, where the general had spent the night after his release from prison the previous evening. President John Taylor on meeting with General Wells, rose in the barouche in which he had driven from the city, and in the presence of an ever increasing throng of carriages, horsemen, and people on foot, thus addressed him:

547"President Wells, In behalf of the community who feel outraged by the treatment you have received, I propose to present to you the confidence, the respect, the honor and the esteem of the people whose hearts, feelings and affections are with you.

547We do not come here to interfere with any matters pertaining to the action of courts; we leave an intelligent public to act upon that matter, and to judge according to their wisdom and discretion. But we have come to exhibit to you our esteem and to show you that whilst you are true to your friends, your principles, your country, and your God, that your friends are equally true to you. * * * We have come, General Wells, to wipe away a stain sought to be placed upon you by the bigoted, unreflecting, and thoughtless; and this demonstration is the spontaneous impulse and action of a generous, patriotic, kind-hearted and friendly people. For this purpose we have assembled here today; and in behalf of this whole community, I tender to you our sincere regards and our most heartfelt sympathy."

547To this the general answered:

"I will simply say that I should feel exceedingly sorry for myself if I felt, for a single moment, that any of my friends supposed or could entertain the idea that I could do otherwise than I have done, I would be sorry for myself to feel, or to even think for a moment, that I could swerve from my integrity to the covenant which I have had the privilege, yes, the inestimable privilege, of making with my God. I can well afford to suffer bonds, fines, and imprisonment, and even death if necessary—which by the way has no terrors for me—but to forfeit my fellowship with you, my brethren, or a single particle of that confidence which is reposed in me by the people of God, through violating the sacred and holy covenants we have entered into, I could not afford. That would indeed be a source of sorrow and regret, not only through time but for all eternity." [^16]

General Wells entered the carriage occupied by President Taylor, Feramorz Little, mayor of Salt Lake City, Angus M. Cannon, president of the Salt Lake stake of Zion, and Edward Hunter, presiding bishop of the church. The barouche was drawn by four white horses and led the procession of carriages and horsemen in a brisk trot to East Temple, or Main street. On this street for several blocks were formed the Sunday Schools of the city, Female Relief Societies, Improvement Associations, the city fire brigade, en regalia, quorum organizations of the priesthood, Scandinavian and German citizens, "and a vast concourse of people, some on the streets and others filling the balconies and standing on the roofs of the stores and houses." Most of the principal stores were closed and hundreds of flags, banners, mottoes, and streamers on which appropriate sentiments were emblazoned were displayed. "The enthusiasm of the populace was immense, and the appearance of General Wells was greeted with deafening cheers, as the procession moved at a walk up East Temple street." From lateral streets there streamed into the procession as per the orders of the committee in charge a constantly increasing number of carriages; after these came a long line of women and children on foot, followed by a long line of wagons three abreast, "and too numerous to count." "Ten thousand persons took part in the procession and fully fifteen thousand more were spectators." The great tabernacle was crowded to its capacity, and thousands were unable to gain admission. Seven bands of music sat with and accompanied the great tabernacle choir. The speeches and addresses were spirited and patriotic. Around the gallery of the tabernacle were arranged the mottoes and streamers carried in the procession. Some of these were striking in their sentiments. The spirit of all, and there were many of them, may be judged by the following:

"If courts compel men to dishonor and forswear themselves, how can they expect perjurers to give truth in evidence?"

549"We honor the law and its just administration, but we despise petty tyranny."

549"We will teach our children to be true to their country and their God; but to perjure themselves, never! No, never!"

GOD'S LAW

"Thou shalt not forswear thyself; but shall perform unto the Lord thine oaths."

MODERN LAW

"Thou shalt forswear thyself, or go to prison."

549"When Freemasons, Oddfellows, and others are compelled to make their secrets public, it will be time enough to practice on 'Mormons'; try the others first."

549"Prisons are made for thieves, vagabonds, and lawbreakers; not for honorable men; when used for such purposes, we honor the prisoner more than the persecutor."

549"Honor to the man who is true to his religion and his God, and who cannot be overawed by judicial tyrants."

549"While we contend for religious liberty, we do not rebel against the government."

549"The rights of conscience we never submitted, we could not submit, we are answerable for them to our God."—Thomas Jefferson. [^17]

549The American flag was everywhere in evidence, flags carried by the people and festooned in the stand and gallery draperies, and everywhere honored. [^18]

550And thus did the Latter-day Saints seek to honor one who had made it the principle of his life, "never," to quote his own words—

550"Never to betray a friend, my religion, my country, or my God."

550"EVARTS' FOLLY"

During the year 1879 the anti-"Mormon" agitation was enlivened by the action of Mr. Wm. M. Evarts, secretary of state in President Hayes' cabinet, in sending an official circular letter of instruction to the diplomatic officers of the United States in various European countries—especially in England, Germany, Norway, Sweden, and Denmark—alleging that annual statistics of immigration into the United States, showed that large numbers from various countries of Europe came to America with the avowed purpose of joining the "Mormon" community in Utah; that the system of polygamy prevalent in the community of Utah was largely based upon and promoted by these accessions from Europe; that polygamy, or "Mormon" plural marriage, was pronounced by the laws of the United States to be a crime against the statutes of the country, and punishable as such. The secretary of state held that under whatever specious guise the subject might be presented by those engaged in the movement "to swell the numbers of the law-defying Mormons of Utah," their action could not be regarded otherwise than a deliberate attempt to bring persons to the United States with the intent of violating their laws expressly punishable as penitentiary offenses. No friendly power, the secretary said, would knowingly lend its aid, even indirectly, to attempts made within its borders against the laws and government wherewith it is at peace. It was not doubted, therefore, that when the attention of the several governments wherein the work of the "Mormon" proselyting was going on was called to this subject, said government would take such steps as would "be compatible with its laws and usages to check the organization of these criminal enterprises by agents then operating beyond the reach of the law of the United States; and to prevent the departure of those proposing to come to the United States as violators of the law by engaging in such criminal enterprises by whomsoever instigated."

551United States ministers were instructed to present the subject of this circular letter to the respective governments to which they were accredited, and to "urge earnest attention to it in the interest not merely of a faithful execution of the laws of the United States, but of the peace, good order and morality which are cultivated and sought to be promoted by all civilized countries." They were further instructed to fortify their representations on the subject by the citation of any facts which might come to their notice concerning the "Mormon" emigration from the country to which they were accredited. And to this end the consular officers in their jurisdiction had been instructed to communicate such information as they might be able to discover. "Your timely protest," said the circular to the ministers, "in cases where the probable departure of Mormon emigrants is reported or known to you, would probably prove a weighty auxiliary to the general representation you are instructed to make." Also the ministers were authorized, at their discretion to use the press in their respective jurisdictions in calling attention to the determination of the United States government, to enforce the law and eradicate the institution of polygamy. [^19]

REACTION OF THE COUNTRY TO SECRETARY EVARTS' FOLLY

The action of the secretary subjected him to a storm of ridicule in the press of the country, and even in foreign lands. The general tone of American comment is perhaps best reflected in the comments of the New York Sun when publishing the text of the circular:

"It is now easy to understand why Mr. Evarts' department has been reluctant to make the circular public. For such a request as Mr. Evarts makes of foreign powers, he can probably show precedents in the diplomatic correspondence of Phillip II, and Cardinal Granville. The nineteenth century's conception of international law has been entirely overlooked in the preparation of this remarkable paper. Now let Mr. Evarts instruct his diplomatic agents abroad to ask the foreign powers—as a favor and a friendly act toward the United States—to hang any of their subjects who may become murderers after their arrival in this country. The foreign powers are said to have been astonished by Mr. Evarts' circular. They had reason to be amazed." [^20]

552The spirit of the British comment may be judged from an editorial in the London Times written upon receiving a telegraphic summary of the circular letter.

"Emigration commissioners may distribute tracts at the outports, just as they supervise the cabin accommodation for emigrants; but how are we to curtail the freedom of action of men and women who have contravened no law? We cannot, of course, pretend to speak with absolute precision of the powers and authorities sanctioned by the Constitution of the United States, yet we may venture to say that it is not at once plain by what means the United States government could undertake to prohibit the landing of Mormon converts in the ports of the Atlantic. * * * We are not likely to extirpate the errors thus willingly embraced by the adoption of any measures that savor of persecution. Mormonism is more likely to die out than to be crushed out. * * * If the United States government had determined to prohibit the landing of any Mormon proselytes in New York, or their passage across the Canadian frontier at Detroit, it would be necessary to declare the profession of Mormonism to be an offense in itself, and to institute a kind of inquisition of the religious opinions of immigrants. It is scarcely conceivable that legislation should go this length, and yet it must proceed to this extremity if it is to be sufficient for the purpose in view. And, whatever may be done by the United States congress, it is quite unconceivable that our parliament should take any action to confer on the executive government a power of interfering with Mormon emigrants. These deluded people have offended against no law of ours, and no law could be suggested as likely to pass that could extend to them." [^21]

ACTION OF THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT ON THE EVARTS APPEAL

At Liverpool, Mr. George Ramsden, agent for Guion and Co., shippers,—with whom the church had transacted its immigration business for many years—arranged for an interview between Mr. Packard, United States consul at Liverpool, and Elders John Nicholson and Francis Cope—Elder William Budge, president of the European Mission, being absent at the time. The probable effect of Secretary Evarts' circular was quite thoroughly discussed. It was pointed out by Mr. Nicholson that "the people who emigrate to Utah had formed no polygamic marital connections, probably had not the slightest idea of entering into that relation, besides the certainty that great numbers of them never would. "Therefore they were neither lawless in point of fact nor intention," said Elder Nicholson; "consequently we cannot but view any attempt to stop them going to Utah as unwarranted by law, right, or precedent. Such action would necessarily have to be founded upon the frail basis of a supposition regarding the possible intention of the parties against whom it would be directed."

553The following dialogue took place between the elder and the consul:

553"Elder N.—Supposing you learned that a party of our people were about to leave this port, what course would you take, as directed in your instructions?

553Consul.—I should acquaint the legation at London, that the British authorities might be asked to interfere with the departure of the company. I should also duplicate the information to the secretary of state, of the United States.

553Elder N.—In the event of a refusal of the British authorities to act, do you think the United States government would prevent the people from landing at New York.

553Consul.—No. The mere supposition of such action is unreasonable. There is no existing law that would warrant such a course." [^22]

554About a month later the consul at Liverpool was informed from the Latter-day Saint shipping office of the intended departure of a shipload of Latter-day Saints. Mr. Packard informed the American legation at London, which in turn laid the matter before the British government, and Mr. Cross, home secretary of Great Britain, directed the chief police officers of London and Liverpool,—and perhaps also of other cities—to publish the following notice:

NOTICE TO EMIGRANTS AND EMIGRATION AGENTS

"Whereas, there is reason to believe that a system of solicitation extensively prevails to induce persons to emigrate from Great Britain to the United States, for the purpose of joining the Mormon community at Salt Lake, in the territory of Utah, this notice is to warn all persons that the law of the United States prohibits the practice of polygamy existing in the Mormon community, and renders any person who engages therein liable to a heavy fine and long period of imprisonment.

554J. J. Greig, Head Constable.

554Central Police Office, Liverpool, 18th October, 1879." [^23]

554"THE WISDOM OF THEIR WISE MEN SHALL PERISH" [^24]—

554This was all that was done. Indeed, according to a very foolish and a very inadequate explanation of his circular letter, all that Mr. Evarts expected to be done!

"Mr. Secretary Evarts was interrogated recently, at Washington, regarding the intent of his circular. The honorable gentleman protested that the purport of that remarkable document had been greatly misunderstood. He asserted it was not proposed to check, or stop the Mormon emigration. The circular was merely issued that the governments of those countries from which the ranks of the Mormon church are said to be recruited, might be induced to warn their citizens that there is a law of the United States for the punishment of polygamy, and that it is the determination of the United States government to enforce it." If this statement is compared with the circular itself, or even with those excerpts of it quoted in this chapter, it will be seen that Mr. Evarts attempted very much more than to get such notice served upon Latter-day Saint emigrants. His explanation of the intended scope of his instructions to the American foreign legations, was not likely to inspire respect for Mr. Secretary Evarts' veracity; for the explanation is manifestly untrue.

555Thus Mr. Secretary Evarts' mountain labored, and after severe pains brought forth this puny mouse, and diplomatic Europe was laughing at the spectacle the American state department was making of itself.

555"AND THE UNDERSTANDING OF THEIR PRUDENT MEN SHALL BE HID" [^25]

555Still more ludicrous than the state department of the government was the American "Christian pulpit made, about a year later, by the sensational anti-'Mormon' suggestions and recommendations of Rev. DeWitt Talmage." At the Brooklyn Tabernacle on the 26th of November, after making most sensational statements against the Latter-day Saints in Utah, he said:

"Then I say away with it [i. e. 'Mormonism']. Moral persuasion first, if possible; but moral persuasion, I tell you, will not accomplish it. They have declared over and over again that they will let their city go down under the bombshell before they will surrender polygamy, and I tell you that Mormonism will never be destroyed until it is destroyed by the guns of the United States government. It would not be war. I hate war. It would be national police duty, executing law against polygamy. * * * If there be any truth in the transmigration of souls, I hope that the soul of Andrew Jackson will get into the body of some of our presidents, and make a proclamation that within thirty days all these Mormons must decide upon one wife, or go to jail, or quit the country. Then have congress make provision for the carrying out of this order. If the Mormons submit to the law, all right. If not, then send out troops of the United States government, and let them make the Mormon tabernacle their military headquarters, and with cannon of the biggest bore thunder into them the seventh commandment." [^26]

556There was much more to the same effect, but this represents the general tenor of the discourse. Two weeks before, in announcing an anti-"Mormon" lecture in his church during the week, he said: "God will smite this nation to destruction if Mormonism is not driven out. It is the archenemy of the nation and is gaining strength every day." [^27]

RADICALISM OF REV. JOSEPH COOK

Scarcely less radical than Rev. DeWitt Talmage was the Rev. Joseph Cook; who in Boston, as the former in Brooklyn, vented his bitter spleen against the Church of the Latter-day Saints, calling upon his hearers to "strike at the Upas tree" which was then "shedding down its poison on a territory larger than New England." "Strike," said he, "where President Hayes tells you to let the ax fall [i. e. take away the political power of the church which encourages and sustains polygamy, and govern the territory by a commission], [^28] and this Upas tree, which now is the curse of the whole basin region, will drop as a compost heap, and give you there, ultimately, purity and wealth." [^29]

556Comment on this radicalism was various; but generally it was condemned by the leading newspapers of the country. The New York Sun, for example, said:

557"Talmage now calls loudly on the president about to be elected to blow up a great community because their ideas of marriage differ from his. He does not propose to set about the work of converting them to better ways, but would march an army against them, and 'with cannon of the biggest bore thunder into them the seventh commandment.' * * * We can't give up the shooting. The seventh commandment must be fired into the Mormons. But what good can even the Decalogue do a polygamist when he has to be blown to pieces in order to have it fired into him? The gospel was first preached among polygamists? Did its founder direct that men should give up all their wives except one or take the alternative of being cut to pieces? Even the seventh commandment, which Talmage would blow into the Mormons with the biggest guns, was uttered amid the thunders of Sinai to a polygamous people, and from that day to this the world has gone on in the practice, the spread of purer and higher ideas of marriage coming out as a slow development and affecting only a part of the great races on the globe.

557Moreover, if we accept Talmage's bloody and violent method in lieu of the benign method of persuasion, and example, of love, kindness, and charity preached by Christ, we must lay in guns of the biggest bore by the hundred gross. While we are sending a battery to the Mormon tabernacle, we must be getting ready one for Talmage's tabernacle also, and there will be thunder all around.

557We imagine, therefore, that President Hancock—[the general, it will be remembered, was but the nominee for the presidency at the time, and was defeated by Garfield] will hesitate about adopting this Christian preacher's plan for blowing the Decalogue into our citizens from the cannon's mouth." [^30]

Footnotes

"It is only in cases where the first marriage is not controverted, or has been duly established by other evidence, that the second wife is allowed to testify; and she can then be a witness to the second marriage, and not to the first.

The plaintiff in error, lastly, claims that the court erred in allowing Caroline Owen, the second wife, to give evidence against him touching his marriage with Emily Spencer, the alleged first wife; and in charging the jury they might consider her testimony, if they found from all the evidence in the case that she was a second and plural wife. This assignment of error, we think, is well founded. * * *

For the error indicated the judgment of the supreme court of the territory of Utah must be reversed." (United States Supreme Court Reports, complete edition, book xxvi, pp. 481-485).

MR. EVARTS ANTI-MORMON LETTER TO THE DIPLOMATIC OFFICERS ABROAD I want you to see That every-ee Man who migrates To the United States Has no more than one wife To trouble his life; For it's not a good plan For a single man To marry and carry A harem With him; For I've promised some ladies O'er a cup of Bohea To stop import of Mormons From over the sea.

---
Notas:
[^1] History of the Southern States Mission, in the Southern Star, vol. i, p. 1.
[^2] On April 6th President Boyle reported eleven elders in the field,—a number who had been previously engaged in the south had been honorably released to return home—five organized branches with a membership of 215, and a scattering membership of 60, being a total membership of 275. (History of the Southern States Mission, in Southern Star, vol. i, p. 9).
[^3] "John Morgan * * * was the son of Gerrard Morgan and Ann Eliza Hamilton, and was born Aug. 8, 1842, at Greensburg, Decatur county, Indiana. During the war of the Rebellion, which broke out when he was eighteen years of age, he joined the Union army, and served with honor and distinction, participating in several of the most important battles. Coming to Utah at the close of the war, he was soon engaged as an instructor in the university, when that institution was conducted in the Council House, Salt Lake City. Later, he established the 'Morgan Commercial College,' on First South street, in a building located where the Morgan (now Colonial) Hotel stands. Having become converted to 'Mormonism,' he was baptized by Robert Campbell, Nov. 26, 1867, in Salt Lake City, and ordained an elder by Wm. H. Folsom, Oct. 23, 1868." (Latter-day Saints Biographical Encyclopedia, Jenson, 1901, p. 204). Elder Morgan served as president of the Southern States Mission for thirteen years, during which time he gave brilliant service in church propaganda. He was well acquainted with the people of the south whom, during his service in the Union army, he learned to esteem; and gave more than thrice the number of years to teaching them the truths of the gospel than he had served in the army to maintain the Union. A very close personal friendship with John Morgan may warrant the writer in saying that of the men engaged in the work of propaganda under the authority of the New Dispensation, none was more suited to the work, and but few were more successful than he. He was a man of a high sense of honor; of broad charity; keen of intellect, gentlemanly and polished in his manners, and brave to the point of reckless daring. He came of a stock noted for desperate courage, being a nephew of the noted confederate leader "Morgan the Raider," and uncle and nephew fought each other up and down the Lebanon and Murfreesboro pike for several weeks during the war. He was ordained a member of the first council of the seventy in October, 1884, a position he held and honored up to the time of his death, which occurred ten years later.
[^4] History of the Southern States Mission, Southern Star, vol. i, p. 58.
[^5] Southern Star, vol. i, p. 67.
[^6] It was afterwards learned that Clawson's assailant was Ben Clark, a Baptist deacon, Clawson's statement, Deseret News, weekly, of Aug. 6th, 1879.
[^7] One of the mob said: "You see we have got your brethren. As soon as we dispose of their case we purpose attending to you. 'The Lord is with them, and my prayers are forever for them,' replied Mary, the tones of her voice evincing deep emotion. She then went on her way." (Southern Star, of Jan. 21, 1899, p. 59).
[^8] History of Southern States Mission, in Southern Star, vol. i, p. 59. The account was written by Elder John Nicholson, long the associate editor of the Deseret News. Another version of this incident is that Standing had a pistol in his hands when calling on the mob to "surrender." (See account of the trial of the murderers, special correspondent of the New York Herald, copied into the Deseret News, weekly, 20th August, 1879, p. 457). The same impression seems to have possessed the mind of the News man, who wrote an editorial account of the event soon after the tragedy. (See Deseret News, weekly, of Aug. 6th, 1879, pp. 428-9). Elder Clawson, however, notwithstanding "the possession-of-a-pistol-version," inststs that if his companion had a pistol he did not see it, and did not know of his having one, and saw none lying near him when raising his head from the dust, to place the murdered man's hat under his head. (This to the author as late as February, 1915).
[^9] The theory is advanced by the historian of this incident, Mr. John Nicholson, at the time associate editor of the Deseret News, that this fiendish act was done by the mob in order to make the separate members of it equally responsible for the crime. "It is not unusual for men who commit a common crime, to enter into compacts to stand by each other for mutual protection against the just reward of their deeds. It is likely therefore that those men agreed to stand upon an undoubted common ground in regard to the murder of Joseph Standing, and to make the obligation and understanding complete. each actually fired into the person of the victim." (Southern Star, vol. i, p. 67).
[^10] Deseret News, weekly, of Aug. 6, 1879, p. 429.
[^11] Southern Star, vol. i, p. 90.
[^12] Under the charge of Judge McCutchen. the acquittal of the accused was a foregone conclusion from the first. "His honor charged the jury that if two or more persons combine to do an unlawful act, not having as its object the destruction of human life, and in the commission of such an act one of those engaged in the act goes beyond the purpose and intention and commits a homicide, he alone is guilty of that offense, and the others in the party are not guilty of homicide in any of its degrees, either as principals or accessories." (Chattanooga Daily Times, account of the Standing trial, copied into the Deseret News, weekly, of Nov. 5th. 1879). "Public opinion is against the Mormons, and public sympathy with the prisoners," was the Times' closing sentence of its account of the trial.
[^13] Deseret News, weekly, Oct. 22, of same year. Elder Clawson, Standing's companion, was afterwards chosen one of the twelve apostles of the church—1889; later, Oct. 4th, 1901, he was chosen a member of the first presidency, being made a counselor to President Lorenzo Snow, to succeed George Q. Cannon; but President Snow dying six days later, Elder Clawson was never ordained to this office, and returned to his place in the council of the twelve apostles. (Latter-day Saints Biographical Encyclopedia, Jenson, pp. 174-8).
[^14] See II Nephi, ch. xxviii:2-14 and Mormon, viii.
[^15] Ibid, p. 217.
[^16] Deseret News, weekly, of May 14th, 1879. The quotations above are but excerpts from the speeches. They appear in full in the News, cited.
[^17] Deseret News, weekly of May 7th, p. 217. The tabernacle proceedings in full will be found in Deseret News, weekly, of May 14th, 1879.
[^18] Charges current in the anti-"Mormon" press of the times to the effect that the United States flag was "dishonored and trailed in the dust," were utterly groundless. The incident held to justify such a charge, the author of this History witnessed. He was among the horsemen of the procession, riding by the side of Mr. George Cleveland's open carriage. A young man occupied the front seat with Mr. Cleveland—who was driving—holding and waving semi-horizontally, occasionally, a rather large American flag. A man driving by in a buggy shouted—"This is the first time I ever saw my country's flag dishonored." He was white with rage. "You never saw it more honored," shouted back Mr. Cleveland. Whereupon the young man with the flag waved it more vigorously than ever. But it never touched the ground, much less was it trailed in the dust.
[^19] The Evarts Circular Letter complete will be found in Deseret News, of Oct. 8th, 1879; and in Millennial Star, vol. xli, pp. 638-40.
[^20] New York Sun, quoted in Deseret News, weekly, of Oct. 15th, 1879, p. 582. The New York Graphic treated the circular to this bit of doggerel:
[^21] London Times of Aug. 12th, 1879. Very many comments from the press of the United States and England will be found in Deseret News current impressions of August-September, 1879.
[^22] Millennial Star, vol. xli, pp. 600-602.
[^23] Copied into Millennial Star, vol. xli, pp. 681-2.
[^24] Said of those who "fight against Zion," which in this case is the New Dispensation of the gospel, cf., Isaiah, ch. xxix, where the passage is found, with Book of Mormon—II Nephi, ch. xxvii.
[^25] See note 24.
[^26] New York Tribune of Sept. 27th, 1880.
[^27] Deseret News, weekly, of Dec. 1st, 1880, after quoting New York papers, the News editorially said: "The tirade of mingled calumny, invective and brutality delivered by Dr. Talmage in the Brooklyn Tabernacle, as reported in the New York Express and other papers, seems to delight a certain class of persons laying claim to the title of Christians. * * * The New York Herald seems to be delighted with the way in which Talmage 'went for the wicked Mormons,' to use its own elegant phraseology, but thinks there are difficulties in the way of breaking up the Mormons, to which Talmage has not obtained the key." (Deseret News of Oct. 20, 1880).
[^28] See Messages and Papers of the Presidents, vol. vii, p. 606.
[^29] Christian Advocate, quoted in Deseret News, weekly, of Dec. 24>, 1879; and the Cincinnati Times, Ibid.
[^30] The Sun article is copied into the Deseret News, weekly, of October 13, 1880.
