B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 5 ( 1930)

558CHAPTER CXLIX

558THE MARTYRDOM OF JOSEPH STANDING IN THE STATE OF GEORGIA

558ONE of the incidents which grew out of the very widespread and bitter anti-"Mormon" crusade in the United States, described in the preceding chapter, was the killing of Elder Joseph Standing, near Varnell Station, Whitfield county, in the state of Georgia, on the 21st of July, 1879. A brief statement concerning the work of the church in the south, properly precedes the narrative of the incident.

558POST-WAR ORGANIZATION OF THE SOUTHERN STATES MISSION

Just before the war between the states began, the missionary elders of the church in the southern states, and as many of the Latter-day Saints as could be induced to accompany them, left the south for Utah; and it was not until several years after the close of the war that the mission was again opened. There had been some individual work done in various parts of the south after the close of the war and before the year 1875, yet it was not until that year that an effort to organize the Southern States Mission was made. During this year Henry G. Boyle, from one of the Arizona settlements—Pima, Graham county, established a branch at Shady Grove, Hickman county, Tennessee, "at which the initial move looking to establishing permanent headquarters was begun." [^1] At the October conference in Salt Lake City, 1875, seven elders were called on missions to the southern states, including in the number Joseph Standing, from Hampton's station on Bear river, Box Elder county, Utah; and John Morgan, of Salt Lake City. This group of seven elders reported to Elder Boyle, and at their first meeting they elected him to be their president. This election was ratified by the general authorities at the October conference of the church in 1876, at which time Elder Boyle was set apart as president of the mission. Elder Boyle returned to the south afterwards, accompanied by twelve additional elders, and the work was opened in various districts of Tennessee, Arkansas, Alabama, Georgia, Mississippi and Virginia, where the interest became great and baptisms quite frequent. [^2]

559It was during these years that emigration of Latter-day Saints began from the southern states to the "Mormon" settlements in Arizona and in the San Luis valley, Colorado. In January, 1878, Elder John Morgan was appointed to succeed Elder Henry G. Boyle as president of the mission, [^3] and at once inaugurated a vigorous propaganda throughout all the southern states. Scores of elders were called from Utah to labor in the mission which resulted in a large ingathering of converts, and the organizing of many branches and conference districts of the church in the south.

560This success of the church propaganda in the southern states produced much comment throughout the press of the country, and was apparently a source of annoyance to the sectarian churches, and resulted in a great amount of the anti-"Mormon" literature of the period being circulated in all parts of the south, that tended to create the impression among the people that the Church of the Latter-day Saints was outlawed, and her representatives the legitimate objects of mob violence, all too prevalent in the south at that time. "The government of the United States is against you," said one of the mob, when young Joseph Standing expostulated with them on the lawlessness of impending violence, "and there is no law in Georgia for Mormons." [^4] This condition as it developed in Whitfield county, where Elder Standing was laboring, became a matter of correspondence between his excellency, Governor Colquitt, of Georgia, and Elder Standing about a month before the tragedy. This correspondence shows an intelligent comprehension of the rights possessed by himself and his brethren, and of the saints in Georgia under the law; and gives evidence of clear thinking and courage on the part of Standing, then but twenty-six years of age. The correspondence is here given in full:

STANDING'S LETTER TO GOVERNOR COLQUITT

"Van Zant Store,

560Fannin County, Ga.,

560June 12th, 1879.

560Dear Sir:—As an elder of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, commonly called 'Mormons,' I take this occasion to address a few lines to you as the highest officer of the state.

560I have recently received several letters from members of our denomination residing at Varnell Station, Whitfield county, informing me that elders of my profession have been obliged at times to flee for their lives as armed men to the number of forty and fifty have come out against them, and have also on various occasions entered their houses in search of said elders.

I am fully aware, dear sir, that the popular prejudice is very much against the 'Mormons' and that there are minor officers who have apparently winked at the condition of affairs above referred to. But I am also aware that the laws of Georgia are strictly opposed to lawlessness and extend to her citizens the right to worship God according to the dictates of conscience.

561History, however, repeats itself, and the laws, where prejudice exists, are not always executed with impartiality.

561A word or line from the governor would undoubtedly have the desired effect. Ministers of the gospel could then travel without fear of being stoned or shot and the houses of the saints would not be entered in defiance of all good law and order.

561Your kind attention to this matter will be duly appreciated by your humble and obedient servant,

561[Signed] "Joseph Standing,"

561Presiding Elder of the Georgia Conference.

561To His Excellency, Governor Colquitt, Atlanta, Ga."

GOVERNOR COLQUITT'S ANSWER TO STANDING'S LETTER

"Atlanta, Ga., June 21st, 1879.

561Mr. Joseph Standing, Van Zant Store, Ga.:

561Dear Sir:—In reply to your letter of the 12th inst., the governor directs me to say that your statement is entirely correct, that 'the laws of Georgia are strictly opposed to all lawlessness, and extending to her citizens the right of worshipping God according to the dictates of conscience.'

561Under the provisions of our state Constitution, the reformation of religious faith or of opinion, on any subject cannot legitimately be the object of legislation and no human authority can interfere with the right to worship God according to the requirements of conscience. So long as the conduct of men shall conform to the law, they cannot be molested, and even for non-conformity thereto they can be interfered with only as the law may direct. No individual or combination of individuals can assume to vindicate the law. Courts and juries are instituted for that purpose, and to them alone is committed the office of legally ascertaining the perpetrations of crime, and of awarding punishment therefor.

561The governor regrets to hear the report you give from Whitfield county. He will instruct the state prosecuting attorney for that district to inquire into the matter, and if the report be true, to prosecute the offenders. I am sir,

561Very respectfully yours,

561J. W. Warren, [^5]

561Secretary Executive Department."

THE SEIZURE OF ELDERS STANDING AND CLAWSON

So far as known Governor Colquitt never fulfilled his promise to instruct the prosecuting officer of Whitfield county to make an inquiry into the alleged lawless conditions obtaining there previous to the Standing tragedy; but he soon had the painful evidence of the fact of the lawlessness thrust upon him by the unlawful killing of his young correspondent. Elder Standing and his companion, Elder Rudger Clawson, the latter twenty-two years of age, were en route from their field of labor in Whitfield county to a conference to be held in Rome, Georgia, and arrived in the vicinity of Varnell Station, where a few families in the church resided, about nine o'clock on the evening of the 20th of July. They found the saints in such a state of fear at the murderous threats that had been made of late against the elders and themselves, that they were afraid to give them lodgings, and the two brethren found it necessary to walk about a mile and a half further on, where they were received by a friendly non-"Mormon" by the name of Henry Holston, and given lodgings for the night. Here they were again informed of the many and bitter threats of mobbing, whipping and even killing the elders that were made in the neighborhood. The next morning the young missionaries concluded to pay a brief visit to the family they had called upon the night before, and where they had left their handgrips containing their books and clothing. The fear of having the elders at their residence had not left this household with the passing of the night, and the stay of the brethren was brief. Returning to Mr. Holston's they encountered a mob of twelve men, part of whom were mounted. These roughly took them from the highway some distance into the dense wood through which the road passed. When first taken in charge young Standing asked to know by what authority they were molested and taken from the public highway; and if their captors had a warrant for their arrest they would like to see it. "We'll show you by what authority we act," was the answer of one of the leaders. As they were marched through the woods Elder Standing labored under great stress of feeling, and expostulated with the mob against any intended violence. His remonstrance and appeals seemed to anger his captors rather than to soften their hearts. Elder Clawson was assaulted on the march and knocked to his hands and knees by a blow dealt him from behind by one of the band; [^6] a second assault, this time with a heavy club, was arrested by one of the mob. At last a spring of water in a glade of the forest was reached where the mob halted and here a desultory conversation took place occupying fully an hour, during which time the vilest accusations were made against the Church of the Latter-day Saints, and beastly talk and jest on the part of the mob which but revealed the depravity of their own hearts. Standing from the first of this adventure had been consumed by a burning thirst, occasioned by the stress of the excitement under which he labored; and by permission of his captors was allowed to get a drink from the spring, though he feared he would be shot while drinking.

THE MURDER OF JOSEPH STANDING

While the main part of the mob with their victims were en route for the spring three of the number on horseback had made a detour, either for the purpose of bringing into the mob more of their following, or to reconnoiter for the purpose of seeing if any move was set on foot by the friends of the elders to effect their rescue; for while en route to the spring two persons had passed them, one, a man of the name of Jonathan Owensby; the other, a young girl, Mary Hamlin, the daughter of a widow in the neighborhood, and who, when seeing the mob pass her house, sent her daughter to intercept the elders and warn them of their danger. When Mary Hamlin met them they were already in the hands of their enemies, but she had seen and recognized the men composing the mob. [^7] After an absence of an hour the horsemen rejoined their associates at the spring. On riding up one who seemed to be the leader said, "Follow us." At this juncture, according to the statement of Elder Rudger Clawson, Elder Standing suddenly "leaped to his feet with a bound * * * brought his two hands together with a sudden slap and shouted in a loud, clear, resolute voice—"surrender!" [^8] On the instant one of the mob seated on the left of Standing rose to his feet and fired into the elder's face, the latter reeled and fell without a groan. Instinctively the thought of Standing's companion, Elder Clawson, was of flight, when someone said—"shoot that man!" Clawson turning quickly faced the mob, and folding his arms, exlaimed —"shoot!" His coolness and resignation seemed to awe the mob, and they lowered their guns. Walking over to his companion, who after falling had turned over so that he lay face upward, he examined the wound, and found that the ball had entered the left eye, putting it out, ranged upward and came out on the forehead. While thus engaged one of the mob drew near and said: "This is terrible, that he should have killed himself in such a manner!" "Yes, it is terrible," replied young Clawson. The ingenious mobber was evidently suggesting the theory of suicide as a way out of the murder for himself and companions.

Elder Clawson was permitted by the mob at his own earnest solicitation to go after help to care for the body. He first called at the home of Henry Holston and asked him to care for the body while he mounted a horse and rode to Catoosa springs for the coroner, from which point he telegraphed the sad news of the murder to Salt Lake City and to Governor Colquitt. He returned the same evening to Mr. Holston's accompanied by the coroner. Meantime Mr. Holston had gone to the scene of the tragedy, and on examining the wound found that young Standing was not yet dead, though he was unconscious. Parties of the mob, he discovered, were still prowling in the vicinity, watching all that might take place. Holston constructed a shade of tree boughs to shelter the body from the hot rays of the July sun, and not being able to do any more that would be helpful, he returned home.

565On the arrival of the coroner, Elder Clawson, Mr. Holston, and several other people living in the neighborhood, went to the scene of the murder. It was discovered that after the kind offices of Mr. Holston had been performed, members of the mob must have returned and fired about twenty shots into the body, chiefly into one side of the face and neck which was literally "riddled with bullets," fired at so close a range as to powder-burn the wounds. [^9] An inquest was held over the dead elder's body and a verdict rendered which appeared in the Independent Head Light of Dalton, the shire town of Whitfield county, Georgia:

CORONER'S VERDICT

"We the jury sitting upon inquest over the dead body of Joseph Standing, having heard all the evidence in the premises, and having made examination of the dead body, find that the deceased came to his death by gun and pistol shots, or both, inflicted upon the head and neck of deceased, said wounds consisting of 20 shots or more from guns or pistols in the hands of David D. Nations, Jasper N. Nations, A. S. Smith, David Smith, Benj. Clark, Wm. Nations, Andrew Bradley, James Fawcett, Hugh Blair, Joseph Nations, Jefferson Hunter, and Mack McClure; and in view of the above stated facts, we, the jury, do hereby recommend that the coroner of said county do issue a warrant for the arrest of the above named parties forthwith." [^10]

FUNERAL OBSEQUIES AT SALT LAKE CITY

After some difficulty Elder Clawson succeeded in getting the body to Salt Lake City, where a special service in the Salt Lake tabernacle for the departed elder was held in the presence of ten thousand people, followed by processional honors to the city cemetery. Soon afterwards a neat monument of Italian marble was erected over his remains by the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Associations of the church, of which organization Elder Standing was a member. On it is inscribed his name, time of birth, also the place and manner of his death, with the following lines written by Orson F. Whitney, then a bishop in the church, later one of the twelve apostles:

JOSEPH STANDING

"Beneath this stone, by friendship's hand is lain The martyred form of one, untimely slain, A servant of the Lord, whose works revealed The love of truth for which his doom was sealed. Where foes beset—when but a single friend Stood true, nor shunned his comrade's cruel end— Deep in the shades of ill-starred Georgia's wood, Fair freedom's soil was crimsoned with his blood. Our brother rests beneath his native sod, His murderers are in the hands of God. Weep, weep for them, not him whose silent dust Here waits the resurrection of the just." [^11]

Three of the murderers, viz., Jasper N. Nations, Andrew Bradley, and Hugh Blair, were soon arrested, being found just over the line in the state of Tennessee, whither they had fled for safety. On being returned to Georgia they were released on furnishing bail in the sum of $5,000 each. The grand jury found indictments against Jasper N. Nations for murder, one against Bradley for manslaughter, and against Blair for riot. Elder Clawson who had accompanied the body of Elder Standing to Utah returned to attend the trial, which was held at Dalton, the shire town of Whitfield county. John Morgan, president of the Southern States Mission, was also present. Jasper N. Nations was first tried, and the others immediately afterwards. After a trial which ran through three days, one of the most sensational ever held in northern Georgia, all three were acquitted. The charge against Bradley, since there was no hope of convicting him of manslaughter after Jasper N. Nations was acquitted of murder, was changed to riot, and both he and Blair were tried on that charge, but both were acquitted. [^12]

"The old, old story. Verdict, not guilty!" Such the melancholy message which President John Morgan telegraphed to the Deseret News at the close of Jasper N. Nation's trial, on the evening of October 19th, 1879. [^13]

567And so the message runs through the trial of all those who have been the murderers of all the martyrs of the church, as well in the case of those already related in this History as others yet to be mentioned. "Not guilty!" It is fitting that it should be so, since God is to avenge in his own way and time the blood of his saints and his servants, which is to cry from the ground to God for vengeance in the New Dispensation, [^14] clearly foreshadowing the fact that men would not avenge it.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See Minutes of Conference for October, 1879, in Milleninal Star, vol. xli, p. 708; also—for Thatcher's statement—Minutes of Jubilee Conference. April, 1880, in Ibid, vol. xlii, p. 274.
[^2] See this History, chapter cxliv.
[^3] The Contributor, vol. i, p. 145.
[^4] For the above information respecting the opening of the Latter-day Saint mission in the City of Mexico, see Biographical Sketch of Moses Thatcher in Latter-day Saints Biographical Encyclopedia, Jenson, vol. i, 1901 edition. art. Moses Thatchers' pp. 127-136.
[^5] See Thatchers' account of his mission in April Conference Minutes, 1880, preliminary meeting in the Assembly Hall, Millennial Star, vol. xlii. p. 274.
[^6] When the attacks in El Monitor appeared, Elder Trejo, who had been confident "that those speaking his native tongue would never stoop to villify the 'Mormons' as others had done in the United States and Europe," was so incensed that he was for hunting down "Juvenal" and administering physical punishment. But he was restrained by counsel given in the interest of patience and moderation. "When finally the 'retraction' was secured, and the article favorable to the Latter-day Saints was published, he was quick to admit that what had been gained by patient endurance was more favorable to the cause than any physical chastisement given by him to the offending writer could possibly have produced." (From Thatcher's Biographical Sketch in Latter-day Saints Biographical Encyclopedia, Jenson, vol. i, p. 132).
[^7] Latter-day Saints Biographical Encyclopedia, Jenson, art. Moses Thatcher, p. 133.
[^8] A press dispatch noted the departure of Elder Thatcher from Mexico, saying: "The Mormon elder, Thatcher, returned to the United States somewhat disappointed in his mission. The Mexican government will protect Mormons in their worship, but not in polygamy." (This appeared in the New Orleans papers on the 15th of Feb., and is in the Salt Lake Daily Herald of 17th of February). As Moses Thatcher made no attempt to get toleration of polygamy by the Mexican government, the dispatch was in that respect false.
[^9] Latter-day Saints Biographical Encyclopedia, pp. 133-4. Naturally Mr. Biebuyck was disappointed, "and in a few days later departed for San Francisco, thence to New York and Europe. During his stay in Salt Lake City he was a part of the time the guest of President Taylor, who was much pleased with his frank manners, unassuming deportment and general understanding of men and things." (Ibid).
[^10] Each set contained a Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, Pearl of Great Price, Parley P. Pratt's Key to Theology and Voice of Warning; Spencer's Letters, Hymn Book, a Bound Book of Miscellaneous Pamphlets, George Q. Cannon's My First Mission, Jaques' Catechism and A String of Pearls, the latter a miscellaneous collection of Latter-day Saint experiences in spiritual things, intended to be faith promoting. This gift of books was "handsomely acknowledged" by both institutions.
[^11] See vol. ii of The Contributor, beginning with the April number, extending through five numbers: and vol. xliii of the Millennial Star, p. 353, et seq.
[^12] Vol. iii, p. 99, et seq.
[^13] Millennial Star, vol. xlii, p. 31.
[^14] These distinctions of "north" and "south" in the Methodist church arose from the American war between the states, which not only divided the union of states but the Methodist and other churches into "north" and "south."
