B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 5 ( 1930)

568CHAPTER CL

568ELDER MOSES THATCHER'S MISSION TO THE CITY OF MEXICO

568IT was during the period of apostolic presidency from 1877 to 1880, that a successful mission was opened in the City of Mexico, under the direction of Elder Moses Thatcher of the council of the twelve apostles, and leading subsequently to the colonization in northern Mexico of Latter-day Saints both from Arizona and Utah settlements. The work began in the following manner.

OPENING OF THE WORK OF THE NEW DISPENSATION IN THE CITY OF MEXICO

President John Taylor received a number of letters from a Dr. Rhodacanaty, a resident of the City of Mexico, making inquiry concerning the doctrines of the Church of the Latter-day Saints. A number of the church works were sent in response to these inquiries and through them a score of people became interested in the work and believed in it so far as they could understand it from books. This in the autumn of 1878. A year later—at the October conference—Elder Thatcher of Logan, Utah, James Z. Stewart, of Draper, Utah, and Meliton G. Trejo, of San Pedro, were called to open the mission in the City of Mexico. Elders Stewart and Trejo will be recognized as being members of the first mission to Mexico, in 1876. [^1]

568When called at the October conference, 1879, the place of their mission was not named, except by these words—"For places to be designated." Elder Thatcher was joined by Elder Stewart in Chicago, and by Elder Trejo in New Orleans, this arrangement was adopted in order to keep the destination of the mission from being known for a time, lest efforts might be inaugurated to thwart its purposes.

569This second mission really grew out of the first to the republic, since it was through one of the pamphlets containing translations from the Book of Mormon by Elder Trejo that fell into the hands of Dr. Rhodacanaty that led to his correspondence with President John Taylor, and that to this second mission to Mexico. The circumstance stands as related by Elder Thatcher in the minutes of the Jubilee Conference—preliminary meetings to that conference—as follows:

569"Elder Thatcher related the incident which gave rise to his mission; how a teacher in the Presbyterian college in the City of Mexico [this Dr. Rhodacanaty], who spoke several languages, becoming interested in a socialist scheme for the benefit of the poor, prayed for light from the Lord on this matter, and dreamed that a person brought him a book which he was to read; how a boy came to him next day and presented to him a book, which he prevailed upon him to buy after several refusals, and which proved to be that part of the Book of Mormon that had been translated into Spanish; and how the teacher was thus led to learn the truth and correspond with President Taylor, and finally come into the church, consequent upon the opening of the mission, by which a branch of twenty members had been organized in the City of Mexico." [^2]

A BRANCH OF THE CHURCH IN THE CITY OF MEXICO

The mission entered Mexico via Vera Cruz, arriving at the capital city on the 16th of November. The brethren found Dr. Platino C. Rhodacanaty, President Taylor's correspondent, a Greek on the paternal side, and Mexican on the maternal. He was an educated and cultured gentleman, and had been publishing a monthly periodical called Voz del Desierto in which he was setting forth the principles of the New Dispensation. Four days after the arrival of the mission in the City of Mexico, Elder Thatcher baptized Dr. Rhodacanaty and one Silviano Arteaga, the latter was said to be a pure Aztec. Two days later six other male members were added to the church, and on the 23rd of November a branch was organized of which Dr. Rhodacanaty was made president, with Silviano Arteaga and Jose Ybarola as counselors, all three were ordained elders in the priesthood.

ELDER THATCHER'S CONTACT WITH MEXICO'S OFFICIALS

Through the American minister, Mr. Foster, to whose receptions he was invited, Elder Thatcher was able to meet some of the leading men of the City of Mexico and of the republic. Among these was the learned Ygnacio M. Altamirano, of pure Aztec lineage, and one of the judges of the supreme court of the republic, a writer and orator of eminence, and to whom Elder Thatcher dedicated his Tribute to the Memory of Montezuma, written at Chapultepec, [^3] during the elder's stay in Mexico. Through William Pritchard, an English newspaper man and magazine writer, Elder Thatcher received an introduction to Signor Vicente Garcia Torres, the proprietor of El Monitor Republicano, which opened its columns for some favorable articles, and corrected some slanderous and inaccurate ones previously published. Through General Alan G. Greenwood, of Roanoke, Virginia, who fought on the side of the south in the war between the states, Elder Thatcher secured interviews with Senor Sarate, minister of foreign affairs, M. Fernandez Leal, minister of public works and of colonization, and Senor Don Carlos Pacheco, minister of war. Minister Leal had visited Utah and spoke in high praise of the "Mormons" as colonizers, and as such would welcome them to Mexico should any of them choose to make their home in the republic. Minister Pacheco, was generally known as the hero of Puebla, for there he lost a leg and an arm while heading an assault upon that city during the "French Intervention." This distinguished general voluntarily tendered to Elder Thatcher letters of introduction and recommendation to the executives of the various states of the republic should he desire to visit them. Elder Thatcher later had an extended interview with Senor Ignacio Mariscal, for many years the accredited representative of the Mexican government at the capital of the United States, now minister of foreign affairs in the Mexican government, who was well acquainted with Utah affairs, and esteemed one of the ablest men of the Mexican cabinet. The organ of the government noted all these interviews. [^4]

OPPOSITION

The work of the mission met with some opposition. The New York Sun published a press dispatch respecting the mission of Elder Thatcher, falsely stating that he was sent to Mexico to purchase lands "for the colonization of the Mormons." [^5] This occasioned considerable comment by the press in the City of Mexico; and while most of that comment was favorable the Two Republics, under the captions "Filibusterism," the "Spread of Mormonism," and "Yankee Diplomacy," made a violent attack upon the Church of the Latter-day Saints. In El Monitor Republicano, one of the most influential papers of Mexico, also appeared a scurrilous editorial, and other articles about Utah saints. Through the columns of El Tribuna, Elder Thatcher effectually replied to the writers in the Two Republics and if his answers did not change the unfriendly attitude of that paper, they did result in making its publishers less reckless in their subsequent statements. The opposition of El Monitor Republicano was overcome in an unusual manner. Elders Thatcher and Trejo obtained an interview with its wealthy proprietor, Signor Vicente Garcia Torres. This gentleman wrote for his paper under the nom de plume of "Francrido;" his son used that of "Alcestes;" and a third person that of "Juvenal." This last person was one Senor Enrique Chavara, and his article was the most offensive. But after the interview with the elders above mentioned he published in the following Sunday's impression of El Monitor Republicano a retraction of his first article and gave a most excellent account of the sobriety and industry and morality of the "Mormon" people. [^6] This newspaper controversy concerning the Latter-day Saints and their faith was on the whole favorable to the mission. By the close of the year 1879, sixteen people had been baptized, and added to the little branch previously organized; and in January following, Parley P. Pratt's Voice of Warning, that little classic of the New Dispensation literature, suitable as an introduction to God's great latter-day work in any country of the world, was translated into the Spanish language by Elders Stewart and Trejo, and placed in the hands of the printers.

COLONIZATION IN MEXICO PROPOSED

Meantime the friendly relations between the prominent government officials and the mission to Mexico continued. Through the before mentioned Mr. Pritchard, Elder Thatcher became acquainted with Mr. Emelio Biebuyck, a Belgian gentleman of influence in Mexico, who had a large colonization contract with the government. He was in Utah as early as 1854-5, at the time Colonel Steptoe and his command were stationed in the territory, and visited Utah twice afterwards. He had formed a personal acquaintance with President Brigham Young and was well informed on Utah affairs. Knowing the value of the Latter-day Saints as colonists, by actual contact with their settlements, Mr. Biebuyck was anxious to establish colonies of them in Mexico and offered special inducements in the matter of purchasing lands, securing for stated periods exemptions from certain taxes, and free entry from tariff duty of teams, wagons, agricultural implements, provisions, etc., during the founding of the colonies. This subject was so pressed upon Elder Thatcher that after much prayer, and deliberation with his brethren, "and feeling strongly impressed that the success of the mission in planting the gospel in Mexico largely depended on 'Mormon' colonization in that country, and the careful, judicious gathering thereto of native saints for care and instruction," it was finally decided that Elder Thatcher should return to Utah, that Mr. Biebuyck should also go, and they together present this colonization proposition to President John Taylor and the full council of the apostles. Before going, however, Elder Thatcher arranged for the payment of publishing the Voice of Warning; also with the assistance of Elders Stewart and Trejo, he dedicated the land of Mexico, "to the end that the gospel might be spread among her people. They besought the Lord to rid the nation of revolutionary elements and the disposition to shed blood; to break the shackles from the bodies and minds of the poor Lamanites, that they might be free in the law of Christ. And that, as the coming of the Spanish conqueror foreshadowed their bondage, so might the gospel foreshadow their deliverance; that as the first overcame them with the sword, so might the proclamation of divine truth subdue and soften their hearts." [^7]

This accomplished, Elder James Z. Stewart was left in charge of the mission, and Elder Thatcher departed from the City of Mexico on the 4th of February, 1880, and arrived in Salt Lake City on the 22nd, ten days in advance of Mr. Biebuyck. [^8] Together they laid before the council of the apostles the advantages of colonizing in Mexico. After careful consideration of the subject in all its bearings the council of apostles concluded that "the colonization of Latter-day Saints in Mexico at that time, even under the generous concessions of the contract proposed, would be premature. Mr. Biebuyck's offer was therefore declined." [^9]

PUBLICATIONS IN THE MEXICAN MISSION

The course of Elder Thatcher in leaving the Mexican Mission, temporarily, to lay the colonization propositions of Mr. Biebuyck before the council of the apostles, was approved by the council; but in November following he returned to the City of Mexico, arriving there on the 5th of December, accompanied by Elder Feramorz L. Young. Elder Thatcher took with him and presented to the Mexican Geographical Society and to the National Museum a set of church works bound in full gilt Morroco. [^10] During his absence the Spanish translation of the Voice of Warning had been widely circulated; and soon after his return a 4,000 edition of Elder John Nicholson's Means of Escape, a missionary treatise on the gospel, was issued in Spanish and circulated. This was followed by a thirty-two page treatise on the Divine Origin of the Book of Mormon, written in English and then translated into the Spanish and published in that language. The treatise was also published in English in the Contributor, the organ of the Young Men's Improvement Associations of the church, and reproduced in England in the Millennial Star. [^11] It is a consideration of the external evidences of the truth of the Nephite record drawn chiefly from the native writers on Mexican antiquities, Lord Kingsborough's Mexican Antiquities, and the later work of Baldwin, Charney, Professor John I. Short, and others, showing agreement between the native traditions respecting migrations, colonization movements, and religion, and the Book of Mormon account of these things among the ancient inhabitants of the American continents. Elder Thatcher also wrote a treatise on Mormon Polgamy and Christian Monogamy Compared. This was also translated into the Spanish language and published. The English version appeared in the Contributor. [^12] Elder Stewart had written a treatise on the Coming of the Messiah, several thousand copies of which were widely distributed.

575There was also a complete translation of the Book of Mormon into the Spanish language under the supervision of Elder Thatcher, the conjoint work of Elders Trejo and Stewart, though the work was not published until 1886.

575Elder Meliton G. Trejo was a very interesting character; and as his experience illustrates the manner in which men have quite frequently been brought into contact with the New Dispensation, that is, by spiritual direction, it is here summarized: Meliton G. Trejo was a native of Castile, Spain, and formerly a lieutenant in the Spanish army. In youth he was unsettled as to religion, "being unable to find any system that conformed to that delineated in the Bible." While in the army he heard a brother officer in the army make a remark regarding the saints in the Rocky Mountains in America, and was seized with an unconquerable desire to visit them. Inspired with this feeling he petitioned the Spanish authorities for the privilege of accompanying a military expedition destined for the Philippine Islands, which was granted. This action on his part was prompted by the hope that an opportunity would present itself to enable him to leave the Islands, and go to Utah.

Opportunities for temporal prosperity sprang up around him and had the effect of almost obliterating his desire to go to the gathering place of the saints. However, he was stricken down with great physical prostration, which revived again the feeling about going to Utah, regarding which he asked the Lord to direct him. In a dream he was shown that he must obey the impression with which he had been so strongly inspired. In consequence, obtaining leave of absence, he took steamer for San Francisco, and thence to Salt Lake City.

576Arrived in the "City of the Saints," he was in a peculiar situation, for being well educated, he was able to read English but could not speak it. One of the brethren, named Blanchard, a Frenchman, who could speak the Spanish language, was impressed in a singular way, to go to the hotel where Brother Trejo was stopping. Learning the curious circumstances that led to his being in Utah, he introduced him to the late President Brigham Young and others. After investigating the principles of the gospel, Brother Trejo was convinced of the divinity of their origin and was baptized and confirmed a member of the church, a few months after his arrival in Salt Lake City. [^13] The rest of his career so far as it relates to the history of the church is incorporated in this chapter.

ORGANIZATION OF THE OZUMBA BRANCH—OPPOSITION

Meantime a number of baptisms had been administered in addition to those already noted as taking place in the City of Mexico—sixty-one by August, 1881—and a branch of the church was organized at Ozumba at the base of Popocatepetl in addition to the one organized in the capital of the republic. Ozumba is about forty miles southeasterly from the city of Mexico. Opposition to the work manifested itself by the appearance of anti-"Mormon" articles in two monthly Protestant publications, El Abogado Christiano, the illustrated organ of the Methodist church north; and Evangelista Mexicano, organ of the Methodist church south. [^14] To these articles Elder Thatcher made answer through the daily secular press of the city.

ELDER THATCHER'S RELEASE—DEATH OF FERAMORZ YOUNG

In August, 1881, Elder Thatcher was released to return home, [^15] and on the 15th of September accompanied by Fernando A. Lara, a native Mexican brother, and Elder Feramorz L. Young, whose health was failing him, he left Mexico, via Vera Cruz, for Utah. En route, while crossing the Gulf of Mexico, Elder Young died of typhoid fever, and as there were no means of preserving the body in that climate, he was buried at sea, on the 28th of September, off the coast of Florida, in latitude 27 degrees nine minutes and in longitude 29 degrees 47 minutes. [^16]

The vessel—the Knickerbocker, bound for New York, was stopped for about twenty minutes for the burial, and a brief service held by Elder Thatcher, who explained to the assembled passengers who the young man was, his parentage, and his mission; the uprightness of his life, and bore testimony to the truth of the New Dispensation of the gospel, whereof Feramorz L. Young was a faithful messenger. Of his young companion, at the October conference in Salt Lake City, where he related the above circumstances connected with the death and burial of his companion, Elder Thatcher said of him: "Feramorz Young had lived a pure life. He was pure as mortal could be. He had never yielded to temptation; strong drink had never passed his lips; tobacco in any form had never been used by him; he never had used a blasphemous word in his life; he was humble, he was pure, he lived and learned how to die. Feramorz L. Young was as well prepared to pass behind the veil as any young man the speaker had ever known in Israel, and he had never complained that God chose to call him."

578Three months before the departure of Elder Thatcher for Utah, Elder August H. F. Wilcken arrived in the city of Mexico, and on the departure of the apostle was placed in charge of the work, being the only elder from Utah left in the mission. Subsequently, however, he was joined by other elders, and though the force from Utah was never large, the mission was continued under various presidents until 1888; and by June, 1889, all the Utah elders were withdrawn from the republic. [^17]

The mission was reopened in June, 1901, by Elder John Henry Smith, of the council of the twelve apostles, assisted by Elders Anthony W. Ivins, and Henry Eyring, both of the presidency of the Juarez stake of Zion, which by this time had been organized in the state of Chihuahua, in northern Mexico. With them came Elder Ammon M. Tenney who had been called upon a mission to Mexico. Such native saints as could be found in the state of Morelos were assembled in Cuernavaca the state capital of Morelos, where a meeting was held, and Elder Tenny set apart as president of the mission. The visiting party of brethren before leaving the City of Mexico had an interview with President Diaz, and to him was explained the nature of the mission just reopened and what it hoped to accomplish for the people. "President Diaz expressed great satisfaction, and wished the brethren success. He sent by the brethren warm greetings to President Snow" [^18]—i. e. to Lorenzo Snow, then the president of the church. On the evening of the interview, June 17th, the visitors started on their return to their homes, and Elder Tenney took up his labors in which he was fairly successful. The force of missionaries from Utah and the "Mormon" colonies in northern Mexico, steadily increased, until by September they numbered eleven; and two years later these were increased to twenty. [^19] The work in Mexico continued to flourish under a succession of faithful presidents, [^20] until the revolutions and counter revolutions beginning in 1911-12 made it necessary for the missionaries to be withdrawn on account of the bitterness prevailing against the United States and all her citizens in Mexico.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See this History, ch. lxxv.
[^2] Jenson's Church Chronology, 1880, p. 100.
[^3] These were Pima, Thatcher, Graham, and Curtis. The respective bishops were Joseph K. Rogers, John M. Moody, Jorgen Jorgensen, and Moses M. Curtis. (Jenson's Church Chronology, 1883, p. 112).
[^4] See Latter-day Saints Biographical Encyclopedia, p. 364, Biographical Sketch of Christopher Layton. Jenson's Church Chronology, p. 111. The St. Joseph Stake now [1930] includes seventeen bishops' wards. The settlements in the San Pedro valley were [1917], attached to the California Mission.
[^5] Alexander F. McDonald was made president, Henry C. Rogers and Charles I. Robinson, counselors.
[^6] The settlements were—Brigham City (formerly Ballinger), George Lake, bishop; Sunset (later abandoned, the railroad station of Winslow arose on the opposite side of the river), Levi M. Savage, bishop; St. Joseph, (formerly Allen) John Bushman, bishop; Taylor, a branch, with John Kartchner as presiding elder. (See Jenson's Church Chronology, 1878, p. 101).
[^7] See letters from President John Taylor under date of 27th Nov., 1878, Letter Impression Book xxx, pp. 287-291, also Jenson's Church Chronology, 1878, p. 103.
[^8] See History of East Arizona Stake, Joseph Fish, Ms. copy on file, Historian's Office, pp. 55 to 76. The president of the Eastern Arizona stake of Zion was Jesse N. Smith, cousin of the Prophet Joseph Smith; he had for counselors Lorenzo H. Hatch and Oscar Man—exact date of the organization not obtainable, (See Biographical Sketch of Jesse N. Smith, Latter-day Saints Biographical Encyclopedia, pp. 322).
[^9] Jenson's Church Chronology, date of 23rd July, 1887. At present [1930] the wards of the St. John stake are: Alpine, Eagar, Nutrioso, St. Johns, Vernon; and Ramah and Luna over the line in New Mexico.
[^10] See Jenson's Church Chronology, date of Dec. 18th, 1887.
[^11] See History of Eastern Arizona Stake of Zion, Fish, Ms.
[^12] The first company of members of the church from the southern states that went to Colorado, was organized at Scottsboro, Alabama, and numbered eighty souls, in all. They were from Alabama and Georgia, and left for the west under the leadership of Elders John Morgan, James T. Lisombee and Thomas E. Murphy, on the 21st of November, 1877. They went as far as Pueblo, Colorado, where they went into winter quarters. (History of the Southern States Mission, Southern Star, vol. i, p. 9). In May of the following year the company moved into San Luis valley, and began their settlement as stated in the text. (Jenson's Church Chronology, 1878, p. 101). Among those who went from southern Utah to assist in the settlement of the San Luis valley was Hans Jensen, who became the first presiding elder over the forming settlements; also John Allen and Soren E. Berthelsen, they, too, were from San Pete, and became counselors to Elder Hansen. Later came Silas S. Smith and seven of his sons with their families; John C. Dalton and others from Iron county.
[^13] Jenson's Church Chronology, 1883, p. 112. The settlements constituting this stake are Manassa, Richfield, and Sanford.
[^14] Settlements in the Bear River valley, Idaho, Paris, St. Charles, had been founded as already described, chapter cxxvii, this History, as early as 1864.
[^15] For dates of organization and first officers see Jenson's Church Chronology.
[^16] See Latter-day Saint Biographical Encyclopedia, Art. Moses Thatcher, p. 134.
[^17] Jenson's Church Chronology, 1887, p. 152.
[^18] The Star Valley stake is composed of the following wards: Afton North, Afton South, Auburn, Bedford, Etna, Fairview, Freedom, Grover, Osmond, Smoot, Thayne.
[^19] Edward Bunker was made bishop of the first settlement, Wm. Branch of the second.
[^20] Jenson's Church Chronology, 1880, p. 106.
